DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12255Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding:Summary of a Workshop58 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-12188-0 | DOI 10.17226/12255Carol Arenberg and Greg Pearson, Editors; National Academy of EngineeringInformation and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding:  Summary of a Workshop   
 
  
   July 2008   
 
 
 Carol Arenberg and Greg Pearson, Editors 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ii  NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS      500 Fifth Street, N.W.      Washington, DC 20001  NOTICE:  This publication has been reviewed according to procedures approved by a National Academy of Engineering report revi
ew process.  Publication of signed work signifies that it is judged a competent and useful contribution worthy of public consideration, but it does not imply 
endorsement of conclusions or recommendations 
by the National Academy of Engineering.  The interpretations and conclusions in such publications are those of the auth
ors and do not purport to represent the views of the council, officers, or staff of the National Academy of Engineering.   
 This study was supported by Contract No. IOP-07-191 between the National Academy of Sciences 
and the United States Institute of Peace and by 
a grant from Google, Inc.  Any opinions, findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations ex
pressed in this publication are t
hose of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.  
International Standard Book 
Number 13:   978-0-309-12188-0 
International Standard Book Number 10:   0-309-12188-4 

 
Copies of this report are available online from the National Academies Press:  http://www.nap.edu. 
 
Copyright 2008 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved. 
 
Printed in the United States of America 

 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. iii The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating so
ciety of distinguished scholars engaged in 
scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general 
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by th
e Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it t
o advise the federal government on scientific 
and technical matters.  Dr. 
Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of 
Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a 
parallel organization of outstandi
ng engineers.  It is autonomous in its administ
ration and in the selection of its members, sh
aring with the National Academy of Sciences
 the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of 
Engineering also sponsors engineering prog
rams aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and 
recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the Na
tional Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the Na
tional Academy of Sciences to s
ecure the services of eminent 
members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health
 of the public.  The Institute 
acts 
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal
 government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medica
l care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg i
s president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Scie
nces in 1916 to associate the broad community 
of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 
furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  
Functioning in accordance with general polic
ies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communitie
s.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies 

and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the 
National Research Council. 
 http://www.nationalacademies.org 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. iv  
 STEERING COMMITTEE FOR  NAE WORKSHOP ON THE USE OF INFORMATION and COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY IN PEACEBUILDING  
 
 
 
JOHN H. (JACK) GIBBONS, 
chair, Resource Strategies, The Plains, Virginia VINTON G. CERF, Google, Inc., Herndon, Virginia JANE HOLL LUTE, United Nations, New York, New York 

RAJ REDDY, Carnegie Mellon Univ
ersity, Pittsburg, Pennsylvania PATRICIA POWERS THOMSON, U.S. In
stitute of Peace, Washington, D.C. 
 
 Project Staff GREG PEARSON, Senior Program Officer
, National Academy of Engineering  JACQUELINE MARTIN, Senior Awards Assist
ant, National Academy of Engineering  
CAROL ARENBERG, Senior Editor, National Academy of Engineering  
ANTWUAN WALLACE, Christine Mirzayan Science & Technology Policy Graduate Fellow,  
National Academy of Engineering 
 
   Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vPreface  On December 14, 2007, the National Academy of
 Engineering (NAE) U.S. held one-day workshop (see agenda, Appendix A) to consider how informati
on and communication technology (ICT) can contribute to peacebuilding. 
 People representing a variety of organizations 
and backgrounds attended (see list of attendees, Appendix B).     The workshop opened with an introd
uctory talk on conflict in the 21st century, which was  followed by two panels.  The first panel examined 
successful cases of ICT use in peacebuilding; the second addressed the ICT-related challenges and opportunities faced by those working in zones of conflict.  Designated respondents provided comment on each panel, and there was also 
general discussion.  The meeting concluded with
 a plenary session on next steps and possible collaboration.  This report, prepared by NAE staff, follows the same format as the workshop.  
    The project was funded by the U.S. Institute 
of Peace with additional support provided by 
Google, Inc.  The planning of the workshop was substantially aided by the volunteer services of the workshop steering committee. 
 
 
         Jack Gibbons, 
chair          Steering Committee for NAE  
          Workshop on the Use of ICT in  

          Peacebuilding 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viAcknowledgments  This report has been reviewed, in draft fo
rm, by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the National 
Academies.  The purpose of this independent revi
ew process is to provide candid and critical comments to assist the committee and NAE in ma
king its published reports as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institu
tional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 
responsiveness to the study charge.  The reviewers™ comments and the draft manuscript remain 
confidential to protect the integrity of the deliber
ative process.  We wish to thank the following 
individuals for their reviews of this report: 
 George Bugliarello, Polytechnic University 
Vint Cerf, Google, Inc. 
Deborah Estrin, University of California, Los Angeles 
Jack Gibbons, Resource Strategies 
Arthur K. Reilly, Cisco Systems, Inc. 

Colin Rule, eBay and PayPal 
Trish Thomson, U.S. Institute of Peace 

 Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive
 comments and suggestions, 
they were neither asked to endorse the views expressed in the report nor did they see the final draft of the report before its public release.  The review was overseen by Louis J. Lanzerotti, 
New Jersey Institute of Technology, who was appointed by NAE to ensure that an independent examination of this report was carried out in acco
rdance with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered.  Res
ponsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the editors and the NAE. 

 In addition to the reviewers, the committee wish
es to thank the project staff.  Jacqueline Martin managed the committee™s lo
gistical and administrative n
eeds, making sure the workshop ran efficiently and smoothly.  NAE senior editor 
Carol R. Arenberg wrote much of the summary.  
Senior program officer Greg Pearson manage
d the project from start to finish.   Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viiContents Overview           1 
 Key Issues, 1  Practitioner Needs, 2 
 Next Steps, 3 
  Conflict in the 21
st Century         3 
 Drivers of Conflict, 4  Enablers of Conflict, 4 
 ICT in Peacebuilding, 5 

  Panel 1:  ICT in the Cause of Peace       5 
The Use of Mobile Phones in Election Monitoring, 6 
GIS and Participatory 3-D Modeling in Land-Use Negotiation, 8 The Role of Civil Society and ICT in Peacebuilding, 12 

Comments by Respondents, 14 
 Panel 2:  In the Field:  Challe
nges and Opportunities     20 
Preventive and Crisis Diplomacy, 20 
Strategic Gaming for Civil Resistance, 23 

Peacekeeping and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding, 25 

Comments by Respondents, 27 

 Discussion about Next Steps         30 

 
Final Comments          33 
 Appendixes            
A  Workshop Agenda, 35 
B  Attendee List, 37 
C  Terms of Reference, 40 
D  Statement by Alan Kay, 42 
E  Backgrounder on International Conflict, 45 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viii  
  
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1OVERVIEW 
 On December 14, 2007, the National Academy 
of Engineering (NAE) convened a group of experts in diverse fields to consider the role of information and comm
unication technology (ICT) in promoting peace and conflict resolution.   Th
e one-day workshop was designed to consider current and emerging technologies and strategies
 for employing them in conflict management 
and diplomacy.  It also aimed to explore how orga
nizations with a role in promoting peace, like 
the U.S. Institute of Peace, can most effec
tively leverage technology in carrying out their 
missions.  (The full terms of reference for the project appear at Appendix C.)  
   The workshop™s presentations and discussions 
surfaced a number of key issues, illuminated 
certain practitioner needs, and suggested possible next steps.  
  Key Issues   Participants acknowledged that
 ICT can be used for both good and ill.  It can facilitate positive dialogue but also hate speech. It can 
mobilize nonviolent protestors but also violent 
mobs. It can be used to fight corruption but also to facilitate it.  It can help peacekeepers locate 

refugees but also do the same for their persecutors.  Those who would use ICT in the cause of 

peace need to be cognizant of the risks as well as the benefits. 
  Just as the decision to fight is made by indivi
duals, so too is the decision to make peace. 
Workshop participants recognized 
that ICT will not by itself end c
onflict, but it can enable more 
effective peacebuilding.    Participants emphasized the importance of edu
cation, in particular the need to educate the young.  Teaching children that there are nonviolent 
ways to deal with conflict is a good step 
toward a more peaceful world. IC
T can facilitate that teaching. 
  Participants warned about the unintended cons
equences of using ICT.  Simply giving people more information does not necessarily lead to predictable or positive results.  As people become 
more informed, they may become more motivated
 to change their circumstances and to do so violently.  Similarly, ICT can help a society incr
ease its wealth, but competition for that wealth 

may also increase, possibly leading to conflict. 
  Engaging the ICT industry in peacebuildi
ng efforts will require a ﬁself-interested 
commercial market.ﬂ The private s
ector will only become involved 
if they see that a long-term 
investment in peacebuilding will pay off. 

 Practitioner Needs  During the course of the meeting, participants
 identified a number of ways that ICT could enable peacebuilding (Table 1).  
Some ideas were very specific, while others were much broader.  
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2For presentation purposes, the table is divided into four separate categories.  However, a number 
of these ideas cut across categories. 
 
TABLE 1  Examples of Practitioner Needs 

 General: ICT that supports
  Resiliency to misuse (e
.g., robust data security)  Interoperability between different peacebuilding entities 
 Training and education (e.g., games, simulations) 
Peacemaking: ICT that supports
  Face-to-face dialogues (e.g., interactive virtual meetings, wide-band teleconferencing) 
 Mapmaking and border analysis, particularly
 for conflicts driven or exacerbated by border disputes  Monitoring (e.g., peace agreement implementa
tion, human rights viol
ations, corruption)  Story-telling, sharing narratives  Reducing misperceptions about the capabilities or intentions of  ﬁthe otherﬂ Peacekeeping: ICT that supports  Locating and tracking fighters™ movements (e.g., drones) 
 Increasing peacekeepers™ ability to 
see in extreme weather conditions 
 Making peacekeeping forces appear larger than they are 
 Detecting mines  Locating refugees  Tracking the flow of arms and illicit trade in natural resources 
 Breaking down language barriers  Preserving evidence of mass atrocities 
Prevention: ICT that supports  Advanced warning of nascent conflicts through predictive analysis and modeling 
 Giving disenfranchised or repressed people a voice  Preventing the rise of, or the violent actions of, extremists 
 Reducing competition for resources, includ
ing food, water, territory, and mineral 
resources  Mitigating environmental degradation and climate change, which may exacerbate 

conflicts over water and food Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3 Building healthy states that can deal with conflict through nonviolent means (e.g., good 
governance, rule of law, sustainable economies, social well-being) 
  Next Steps  There was significant interest among workshop pa
rticipants in continuing to explore the intersection of peacebuilding and ICT, and in mo
bilizing ICT companies in the cause of peace. 
CONFLICT IN THE 21ST CENTURY 
 John H. (Jack) Gibbons, chair of the Nati
onal Academy of Engineering (NAE) workshop 
steering committee, welcomed the group and in
troduced the first speaker, Richard Solomon, 
president of the U.S. Institute of Peace (USIP) an
d former assistant secretary of state for East 
Asia and Pacific Affairs.  Dr. Solomon began by describing the history and Congressional mandate of USIP and his hopes for the workshop. 
  USIP was created by Congress in the mid-1980s as an independent institution ﬁto strengthen 
our national capacity to deal with international conflicts without resorting to violence.ﬂ  At first 
the organization™s efforts centered on research, but after the cold war, the group began to send people into zones of conflict around the world to work directly on conflict resolution projects, initially in the Balkans and now in over a dozen regions.   Dr. Solomon showed a graphic illustrating 
the phases of conflict managementŠconflict 
prevention, crisis response, peacemaking, peacekeepi
ng, and post-conflict stabilization and state 
building (see Figure 1).  As he explained, the methods of pr
eventing, managing, and resolving 
conflicts vary depending on their phase and local circumstances. 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4All rights reserved. Please do not reproduce without appropriately citing the 
United States Institute of Peace
Conflict 
Prevention:                  
-State-Building              
-Int™l Systems
Core Conflict 
Management Skills
Conflict Prevention: 
Crisis Response
Post Conflict:    
-Stabilization    
-State-Building
Peacemaking
Peacekeeping
ceasefire
confrontation
peace 
agreement
outbreak of 

violence
rising tension
sporadic 

violence
decreasing 

tension
 Peace is always unstable, he said, and conflic
t seems inherent in the human condition.  
However, conflict that spills over into violence has enormous human and material costs.  
Therefore, the most important goal of USIP is to 
help manage conflicts so they do not degenerate 
into violence. Drivers of Conflict  Unlike most conflicts during the World War II 
and cold war eras, conflicts today are being driven by new actors and new factors: religious ex
tremism; social instab
ility and failing states; 
economic and social disparities resulting from rapid developm
ent (e.g., in China and India); competition for resources, most obviously for petr
oleum and water, but also for diamonds, drugs, 

and other resources; weak international organizations resulting from the disintegration of 
superpowers (e.g., the Soviet Union) and col
onial empires; and competition for weapons, 
particularly nuclear weapons, as international controls over proliferation become less effective. 
 Enablers of Conflict  Dr. Solomon pointed out the distinction betw
een drivers and enablers of conflict.  For example, a person may be motivated by religion to attack unbelievers, but he or she may be 

enabled by access to the Internet, an airplane, or 
a missile.  An attacker must have both, and an 
effective prevention strategy must address both the 
drivers and the enablers.  Take, for example, 
Figure 1  ﬁCurve of conflictﬂ illustrating the 
phases of conflict (below curve) and corresponding third-party interventions (above curve). 
 Source:  U.S. Institute of Peace. 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5nuclear weapons.  In the 20th century through deterrence and nonproliferation strategies, nuclear weapons were more or less inaccessible to many 
groups.  Today, we have people who are willing to die on behalf of their beliefs and who have more opportunities to acquire nuclear weapons, and so we must come up with new preventive strategies. 
 ICT in Peacebuilding  One role for ICT in peacebuilding is what US
IP has termed ﬁvirtual diplomacy.ﬂ  The first 

step in the process is to build a network of
 communitiesŠperhaps an electronic networkŠthat 

can coordinate responses to humanitarian cris
es.  The network might well involve other 
organizations that have not worked together in the past.  For example, using the Internet, USIP 

was able to develop some measure of collaboration in the Balkans among the military, the U.S. 

State Department, and humanitarian assistance orga
nizations, as well as between the leaderships 
of various religious groups.   In addition, USIP has encouraged use of the In
ternet to create virtual societies, such as among members of the Cambodian diaspora.  Dr
. Solomon worked with Prince Sihanouk on the 
peace agreement after the genocide there and help
ed create a global community of Cambodian 
émigrés.  These virtual societie
s not only reinforce people™s sense of empowerment, but they can 
also create the conditions for civil resistance, because information sharing increases transparency about world events and improves situational awareness in areas of conflict.  For example, the 
people who brought down Philippine President Fe
rdinand Marcos, and subsequently Erap 
Estrada, coordinated their actions largely through cell phones.  This is just one example, Dr. 

Solomon said, of how technology can change political dynamics. 
  But, he continued, technology can cut two ways.  The enemies of peace and promoters of 

conflict have also learned to use the Intern
et to communicate globall
y, spread propaganda, indoctrinate people, raise funds, and coordinate action.  Thus assessing ways to use ICT in the 
service of peacebuilding is a majo
r focus of the work of USIP.   After a decade of work on virtual diplom
acy, USIP developed a conceptual basis for 
thinking about the interplay between ICT and conflict, and the organization now wants to pursue follow-on activities.  A major goal of the workshop, 
he said, was to gain insights into how USIP can use technologies, such as ce
ll phones and computer imagery, mo
re effectively and in a more 
intellectually disciplined way.  The organization hopes to coordinate future collaborative projects 
with NAE and groups in other communities to
 pool ideas and energy, which will lead to 
innovations in using technologies to manage conflict and promote peace. 
PANEL 1 
ICT IN THE CAUSE OF PEACE 
 The first panel highlighted three case studies 
of the use of ICT in peacebuilding.  The first 
examined the use of cell phones and text messaging 
in election monitoring; the second explored 
the use of geographic information systems for 
managing land-use conflicts; and the third Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6presented a variety of web-based approaches for sharing in
formation among civil groups 
engaged in peacebuilding activities. 
 The Use of Mobile Phones in Election Monitoring 
 Christopher Spence is director of technol
ogy strategy and programs for the National 
Democratic Institute for International Affairs 
(NDI), an international, nonprofit, nonpartisan 
organization funded largely by the U.S. governme
nt, with additional support from foreign 

governments.  NDI provides assistance to govern
ments, legislatures, civic groups, women™s 
groups, political parties, and other partners by developing programming to promote the creation 
of stable environments and peaceful transitions
 to democratic government.  NDI operates on the 
premise that democratic societies tend to 
be less conflict prone than other societies.   Mr. Spence opened his talk by noting that us
ing technology for peace has a lot of promise 
but few realized applications so far.  NDI, he said, recognizes that every political system has the potential to become unstable and that conflict is
 inherent in political life.  The organization works toward channeling those conflicts in a po
sitive, nonviolent direction.  One of the problems 
NDI tries to address is weak institutional cap
acity, by pinpointing weaknesses and directing its 
intervention toward shoring up those critical links in the democratic chain. 
  Election monitoring is one component in build
ing a democratic assistance program, because 
elections are milestones in buildi
ng democracies.  However, every el
ection has a critical point at which it can go either well or badly.  NDI™s approach in tense political environments is to take 
the ﬁright kind of actionﬂ when something goes bad (e.g., cheating in an election) to keep the process moving forward and not let it deteriorate into violence.  
  One effective way of monitoring elections is 
to send out members of civic groups, who have 
been trained to observe and report specific information, to provi
de domestic oversight of their 
own elections.  These groups must be nonpartisan and must have established their credibility so 

they will be considered reliable sources of information. 
  In the pre-election period, monitors note viol
ent incidents in the political environment, how 
the political parties are portrayed in the media, 
and how voter registration is conducted.  In many 
of the countries where NDI works, there are inte
rnally displaced people who typically have not 
participated in an election before
.  It is important that monitors
 make a list of these people and 
deliver it to the polling stations to ensure that these people will be eligible to vote.  NDI creates 
programs for auditing voter rolls to
 make sure they are accurate. 
  
 On election day, hundreds or even thousands of 
observers head to polling places noting such things as voter turnout and whether any voters have been disenfra
nchised.  They also observe how the election itself is conducted.  Are officials following the rules and allowing people to participate?  Are all of the vot
es being counted?  Are 
the ballot boxes being stuffed?  Observers 
then text message the answers to key questions
 via their cell phonesŠsay, related to voter turnout at nine, eleven, and one o™clock.  The numbers go directly into a central data base or repository.  Text messaging is a rapid, 
reliable, and accessible reporting tool. 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 7 After the election, monitoring programs asse
ss the results by using ﬁquick countsﬂ or parallel vote tabulations (PVTs)Šmuch like exit polling in the United States.  A PVT is a statistical random sampling of pollin
g stations throughout a country or
 region that can be used to project an accurate result.  In addition, the public statements by
 the monitoring group(s) must be 
credible so that when they confirm, or contest,
 the election result, they 
have the public trust.  ﬁThe overall objective is to keep democracy m
oving forward and not to stir up more conflict,ﬂ 
Mr. Spence said.   Mr. Spence gave an example of how this ki
nd of monitoring works.  The first time an 
estimate-based reporting system was used wa
s in 2006 in an independence referendum in Montenegro, when a group called the Center for a Democratic Transition (CDT) deployed 
hundreds of observers.  One of the most importa
nt measures was voter turnout, because there 
was a 50-percent threshold requirement for the elec
tion to be legitimate. 
 At about one o™clock, CDT monitors were able to confirm that the 
threshold had been met, and the media announced 
that the election was ﬁfor real.ﬂ   
  After the polls closed, the vot
e was still too close to call.  When CDT confirmed that the 
election was in fact too close to call, the public
 was persuaded to await the official result.  
Because CDT was a legitimate watchdog group, their word had a stabilizing effect (even though 

another group had made an incorrect projection ea
rlier in the day).  In the end, the referendum 
passed by just 2,000 votes, within 0.5 percent of CDT™s projection. 
  Text messaging in an election-monitoring contex
t has two dividends, Mr. Spence said.  First, it provides accurate, reliable, public statements quickly enough 
to have a political effect.  As long as the monitoring group has the public trust, text message
s increase confidence in the election results and reinforce the 
integrity of the process.  Second, text messages provide real-
time reporting of incidents, such 
as violations of electoral law,
 for example if a polling station 
doesn™t have election materials on time and opens la
te.  Observers report that back to the center, 
then go to the election officials 
and try to remedy the situation,
 which can reduce the potential 
for conflict.  This is especially 
important if a violation, either acci
dental or deliberate, occurs in 
an ethnic minority area or a minority opposition area. 

 Discussion   One listener noted that the kind of monito
ring described by Mr. Spence could only be done in a country in which the government had agreed 
to the monitoring.  Another added that in some 
situations, if people are organized to express themselves this
 way, the government might object 
strongly.     
 Mr. Spence answered that, in a 
typical situation, electoral administrators 
have the ability to credential nongovernmental organi
zations (NGOs) to monitor an election.  So even if the 
government doesn™t really want monitoring, ther
e is usually enough international pressure to 
force them to agree.  However, he admitted that
 monitoring can be a politically sensitive issue. 
  
 Another listener noted that as independe
nt monitoring becomes accepted as a way of 
ensuring the credibility of an election, the pressure on a government to allow it increases.  He 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8then described the situation in the Philippines in 1986, when an independent monitoring 
organization was crucial to the ouster of President Marcos.    Mr. Spence cautioned that text-messaging techno
logy itself could be used for good or ill.  Obviously, a dictator might obj
ect to putting this technology in the hands of people, but a government might also object, depending on the 
goals of the group wielding the technology.  NDI, he said, promotes democratic values (s
uch as transparency, accountability, and citizens having a voice in their representation), not necessarily a certain kind of democratic system. 
 GIS and Participatory 3-D Modeling in Land-Use Negotiation  Giacomo Rambaldi is a senior programme 
coordinator of the Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA), an 
organization based in the Netherlands. CTA is active in development, particularly in areas of
 Africa and Southeast Asia where few people have access to the Internet or high-tech devices.  Th
e organization, Mr. Rambaldi said, works in the 

context of ﬁself-determination, 
indigenous people . . . claiming ri
ghts over land and resources, resource planning and management, collaborati
ve research, management and evaluation of 
territorial conflicts, safeguard
ing of tangible cultural heritage, and identity building.ﬂ 
  Among other duties, Mr. Rambaldi oversees 
a 1,500-member web-based forum in English 
(and smaller forums in French, Portuguese, and 
Spanish) on participatory spatial-information 
management and technologies and the ethics of mapmaking.  He also provided information about 

several related web sites (Box 1).   Mr. Rambaldi explained what 
participatory 3-D modeling is and gave examples of how it 
has been used to resolve conflicts, most often 
in remote areas between indigenous peoples with 

different levels of education and cultural backgrounds, and even speaking different languages.  Most of these areas are largel
y inaccessible, sometimes with 
no electrical power or even buildings to store equipment. 
 BOX 1  Web Sites Relevant to Participatory 3-D Modeling   Open forum on Participatory Sp
atial Information Systems and 
Technologies:  http://www.PPgis.net   Integrated Approaches to 
Participatory Development: http://www.iapad.org   Blog on PGIS/PPGIS:  http://participatorygis.blogspot.com    WebRing on Public Participation GIS (PPGIS) 
http://t.webring.com/hub?ring=ppgis  Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 9 3-D modeling is part of a family of tools based on visual language, multimedia, and multiple 
spatial dimensions.  A combin
ation of high-tech and low-tech methods, 3-D modeling is a 
community-based mapping process that combines 
indigenous spatial knowledge with other data in the form of a tangible, topographical mode
l that can be easily understood by people of all ages, regardless of language, cu
lture, or educational level.  The model, a ﬁtangible translationﬂ of 
geosynchronous satellite imagery and local 
knowledge created by the communities that are 
parties to the dispute, enables people who are not used to reading maps or 2-D geographical 
images to see their land from a bird™s-eye vi
ew. The creation of the tangible map necessarily 
involves peer-to-peer dialogue among disputants who promote th
eir issues and concerns and pinpoint areas of disagreement.  With the help of project coordinato
rs, boundaries and other features of the topography are eventually agreed upon, at which point the elders of the communities examine the map and negotiate final adjustments (Figure 2). 
  FIGURE 2 Dan Lai, Thai, and Kinh hill tribe Pe
oples negotiating territorial issues on the 
1:10,000-scale participatory 3D model of the Pu
 Mat National Park area including its buffer zone. November 2001, Nghe An Province, Vietnam.
 Source:  Giacomo Rambaldi.   Used with 
permission. 
  The model is then used to generate accura
te computer maps incorporating the decisions 
agreed upon by the disputants that can be used for planning future land use.  Each project requires a multidisciplinary team, including anthropol
ogists, social scientists, natural resource 
managers, community organizers, and geographers. 
  Mr. Rambaldi presented a case study of a very 
complex conflict in the Philippines involving 18 boundary disputes among seven ethno-linguistic gr
oups; intertribal disputes about access to 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 10natural resources and government funds; viol
ations of traditional peace agreements (
bodongs); unclear, ambiguous, or unknown boundaries between tribal areas (barangays); and infringements 
of personal rights.   Bodongs have been used for centuries in the Philippines to define intertribal relationships, 
minimize warfare, define boundaries, and deal with 
infringements.  However, they usually do not 
include images or maps, and, over time, the documen
ts are often lost or are too vague for later generations to agree which mountain is highe
st or which big tree marks the limit of a 
barangay.  The special advisor to the peace process in 
the Philippines commissioned a group headed by an 
NGO that specializes in 3-D models
 to facilitate the negotiations.   The model that was created, over a period of 
months in this case, was on a scale of 1:5,000 
and covered 700 square kilometers.  Individuals 
representing all of the parties to the dispute worked together, at first reluctantly and mistru
stfully.  Finally, however, they created a hands-on scale model of the disputed territory.  Boundaries
 were indicated by moveable color-coded lines, 
with the exact locations and corners negotiated by
 the elders of the disputant communities, who 
wrote down the landmarks (e.g., a corner ma
rked by a big tree or a large rock).    Once the model was finalized, the boundaries
 were confirmed by a group on the ground 
using GPS.  Maps were then devised based on the model showing landmarks, elevations, 

vegetation and ground cover, watersheds, roads, buildings, farms, even households.  The resulting map was much more detailed and accu
rate than existing maps. In many of these 
disputes, Mr. Rambaldi said, the only existing ma
ps of a disputed area may have been created by 
the American military during World War II.  
The boundaries of the new map are then made 
official by title deeds.   Participatory 3-D mapping accomplishes many objectives: 

  The model, and subsequent maps, provide
 common denominators for landmarks and 
legitimize decisions at the grassroots leve
l.  The information on the map provides a 
shared perspective and a common language for addressing conflicts.  The mapping process ensures participation by 
all parties and ensures their control over the process and outputs.  Simple, ordinary
 people have access to the medium, and 
everyone from children to elders participates.  Mapping facilitates, indeed, requires the sharing of information among the generations, as 

well as peer-to-peer communication among individuals from diffe
rent cultural and ethnic groups.  People who are not educated in reading maps internalize th
eir spatial understanding.  The 
model expands and re-scales their spatial framework, providing a 
first-time view of entire 
systems, such as watersheds.  Thus people ga
in the ability to generate, manage, analyze, 
and communicate spatial information in new ways. 
 Mapping can empower disadvantag
ed groups.  For instance, if the information from the 
map is published, it adds value and authorit
y to local knowledge, and indigenous people 
may then be able to communicate, peer-to-pe
er, with government offi
cials and participate in decisions that affect them. 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11 Unlike Google Earth and other high-tech programs, these maps show burial grounds, 
sacred places, and other features
 of great significance to local people.  Thus they provide a visual language that bridges linguistic barriers.   Mr. Rambaldi cautioned, however, that ma
pping is not a panacea.  Once local knowledge 

becomes public knowledge, for example, outsiders can use that information to locate and exploit 

natural resources.  In addition, indigenous boundaries
 are not necessarily fixed lines but may be 
seasonal, based on grazing patterns.  Governments may use the mapping data to draw straight 
lines that cross watersheds or
 divide grazing areas to designate municipalities.  Those who 
generate and share their knowledge need to be prepared to deal with these new realities and 
potential conflicts. Ultimately, he concluded, people are excited by ﬁbeco
ming aware that they 
know, and that what they know is important to them and to their community.ﬂ 
Discussion  A member of the audience asked how effective a 3-D model would be in a place like 
Bangladesh, which is almost perfectly flat.  Mr. Rambaldi replied th
at any topology could be modeled to include the features that are significant to the people who live in the area.  People are 
intimately aware of the features of their environm
ent, such as water patterns, fertility patterns, even variations in the taste of honey in different areas.  ﬁWe are aware th
at different people use different criteria to classify where they are living.  We must be open to diversity.ﬂ 
  Another attendee pointed out that giving people 
better information than they had before, for 
example, informing everyone of the importance of
 the watershed and the consequences of not having it in their territory, might 
lead to even more conflicts than
 before.  Mr. Rambaldi agreed 
that the moment people visualize boundaries, they
 could be creating new sources of conflict.  ﬁIntroducing new knowledge is a very delicate, but powerful and risky process.ﬂ   Someone else noted that tribal
 elders have traditionally found equitable ways of resolving 
disputes.  Technology could make that process even 
more transparent.  Mr. Rambaldi replied that 
traditional ways of handling resources often have eroded over time, particularly as a result of the 

imposition of ﬁmodern,ﬂ municipal boundaries drawn up by government, for example based on a 

watershed, as happened in the Cordillera region of the Philippines.  In addition, traditional dispute-resolution systems were sometimes violent,
 rather than equitable.  Participatory 3-D mapping can help with resource control a
nd access in some of these situations. 
  Another participant suggested 
that creating economic well-bei
ng was a greater deterrent to fighting than resolving boundary disputes.  He
 went on to say that ﬁcalling mapping technology 
[a peacebuilding tool] is mistaking a vehicle for 
a principle.ﬂ  He argued the tendency to engage in conflict is human nature.  Th
is led to a discussion about the increasing urbanization of the world and the need for well designed cities that give people a shared sense of participation in community infrastructure, thus reducing the likelihood of conflict.  Several participants agreed that involving communities in filtering inform
ation and authorizing its use ﬁbuilds trust.ﬂ 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 12The Role of Civil Society and ICT in Peacebuilding 
 Sanjana Hattotuwa is the head of ICT and p
eacebuilding at InfoShare, a technology services 
provider for social change makers based in Colo
mbo, Sri Lanka.  InfoShare, Mr. Hattotuwa said, supports systems for governance,
 sustainable content development, training for rural 
entrepreneurs, IT skills through vocational training curricula, and ICT-related workforce skills.     He explained how, in 2003, he and a few others 
decided to create an organization to use ICT to design solutions for conflict transformation.  Now a Microsoft Unlimited Potential (UP) 
partner, InfoShare designs and deploys UP training curricula and methodologies; provides 
training in IT skills for non-profits; and provide
s basic financial management packages for non-
profits to reinforce the accountability, sustai
nability, and transparency
 of their operations.   Mr. Hattotuwa described his effo
rts to use ICT to transform th
e violent conflict in Sri Lanka, 
which has been raging for the past 25 years. Just two weeks earlier, he noted, a bomb had killed about 20 people and injured 40 just a few minutes
 from his house. In spite of the difficult 
circumstances as well as because of them, InfoShare uses a range of technology to prevent, 

mitigate, and transform violent conflict as we
ll as strengthen democratic governance and human 
rights. InfoShare™s approach is 
based on the notion of ﬁsatisfycingﬂ solutions, or doing as much 
as possible within the limits
 of the highly volatile and violent conditions on the ground.    InfoShare is increasingly leveraging the wide
spread availability of mobile phones in Sri 
Lanka to complement the use of PCs as tools 
of conflict transformati
on.  A significant problem 
in this regard is the multiplicity of communi
cations standards, which limits interoperability 
among different systems and vitiates sustainabl
e outcomes.  Mr. Hattotuwa emphasized that 

ﬁinteroperability can save lives.ﬂ  For example,
 rescue and reconstruction operations after the December 2004 Asian tsunami were hampered
 more by the lack of coordination and collaboration, he said, than by the lack of funds.  ﬁEverybody operated in silos.  We know that 
interoperability is crucial.  Things are changing,ﬂ he said, ﬁbut very slowly.ﬂ  Mr. Hattotuwa said InfoShare tries to use off-the-shelf tools to 
ensure that information can be communicated 
between organizations as well as within organizations in civil society.     InfoShare™s leadership has been recognized
 by the ICT4Peace Foundation, based in Geneva, Switzerland, and established after the World Su
mmit on Information Society (WSIS) to pursue 
Paragraph 36 of the WSIS Tunis Declarati
on, which posits the central role of ICT in 

peacebuilding. In 2005, Mr. Hattotuwa joined the founda
tion as a special adviso
r.  In a series of slides, he showed examples of what InfoShare has done: 

  created a virtual ﬁone-text processﬂ designed to facilitate real-time and asynchronous 
peace negotiations based a technique that has 
been used in the past by, for example, the 
United States in the conflict between the Isra
elis and Palestinians.  The process engages political parties or stakeholders in a way that transforms, ra
ther than ratchets up, emotion, 
he said.  The essential idea is the creation of a single text in a collaborative manner, with 
the parties to the conflict drawing up the text themselves.  
 is developing an online peace library for Sr
i Lanka and South Asia, which will contain 

credible and trustworthy resources relevant to conf
licts in the area. Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 13 developed a web based anti-corruption program (
http://www.ard-acp.com) for the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID
).  The idea behind the program is that 
ﬁall people should have access to information 
that directly affects their lives.ﬂ  One 
section of the site provides StreamReader-
friendly information to visually handicapped 
people.  Another provides warnings and information from the International Federation of 
Journalists about corruption in government. 
 designed a YouTube channel (http://www.youtube.com/vikalpasl) that documents, 
through short videos, narratives of lives in conflict rarely portrayed in mainstream media.  
 designed Voices of Reconciliation Radio (http://radio.voicesofpeace.lk) that uses podcasts to explore alternative perspectives on war, peace, human rights, and governance. 
Mainstream media and other civil society or
ganizations have made CD recordings and 
sponsored workshops to disseminate this in
formation to people who have no access to the 
Internet. 
 launched a citizen journalism site (
http://www.groundviews.lk), which posts articles that do not appear in the mainstream media.  The 
site was recently awarded an Excellence in 
Journalism Award from the Society 
for Communication Research in Boston.  created a site for monitoring and recordi
ng human rights violations in Sri Lanka.  
ﬁAlthough the idea behind the site is quite simple,ﬂ Mr. Hattotuwa said, ﬁthere isn™t 
anything else in the world like it.ﬂ  The si
te uses information 
provided by two human-
rights organizations in Sri Lanka and records violations in the globally recognized HURIDOCS documentation format.  
 
 Mr. Hattotuwa then turned to the subject of
 data security.  Governments, he said, are 
becoming increasingly IT savvy and beginning to ba
n access to websites.  Infoshare is working 
to raise awareness of the need for data security and what to do if information is ﬁtaken away 
forcefully.ﬂ   As part of USAID™s Last Mile
 Initiative, Infoshare helped develop and deploy a franchised-enterprise business model for WiMax-enabled co
mmunity technology centers; identify and select 
as many as 30 franchises in about five rural ar
eas of Sri Lanka that would provide wireless-enabled ICT services, such as VOIP, Internet ac
cess, and computer training; and attract private investment to facilitate the expansion of th
e franchise model throughout Sri Lanka.  In the 
meantime, Intel, several mobile 
phone providers, and Microsoft have all contributed services or technology.  The goal is to operate independently of government subsidies, said Mr. Hattotuwa.  Discussion  An audience member again raised the que
stion of the positive and negative uses of information.  He asked Mr. Hattotuwa how ICT 
is actually contributing to a peace-building process, especially in light of the fact that government authorities are 
making very different use 
of the same information.  Mr. Hattotuwa answered
 that the Sri Lankan government uses ICT to 
promote its own line and its own propaganda, both
 locally and internatio
nally.  He said he understands that simply introducing ICT does not
 necessarily strengthen civil society.  
ﬁTechnology can be constructive,ﬂ he said, ﬁif used in a way that furthers balance. . . . Using the Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 14wrong technology at the wrong time or in the wr
ong way or wrong language can even be a force for destruction.ﬂ   Another participant noted that 
cell phones are also being used as triggers for IEDs and as networks for putting IEDs in place and that information available on the Internet has been used 
to construct IEDs.  We know there will always 
be people who abuse technology, he said, but we 
should continue to figure out how to use ICT in positive ways. 
 Comments by Respondents  Three respondents were asked to comment on th
e topics raised in th
e panel presentations.  The respondents for this panel were Irwin Jacobs, chairman, Qualcomm; Deborah Estrin, 
professor of computer science, UCLA; and Bran 
Ferren, co-chairman and chief creative officer, 
Applied Minds. 
 Respondent 1:  Irwin Jacobs 
 Irwin Jacobs, chairman of Qualcomm, focused his remarks on the use of cell phones.  His 

concern, he said, was about the integrity of the information being gathered from election 
monitors equipped with cell phones.  ﬁHow can we ensure the validity of the information if a 
government is trying to distort the results,ﬂ he
 asked.  He went on to suggest that some 
capabilities of cell-phone technology, such as GPS and putting time stamps on information, 
could help.     When cell phones were new, Dr. Jacobs 
said, providers focused on making sure 
transmission was ubiquitous, ensuring high data 
rates.  The business question was how to get phones into the hands of vast numbers of people at 
a very low cost.  As with all electronics, he noted, the prices keep coming down. 
  Now, he said, the focus is more on applications.  Besides communication capability, phones 

now have more and more computing power, such
 as GPS, cameras, video capability, computing 
and digital signal processing.  In fact, some 
people now liken the computing power of cell 
phones to the power of supercomputers of about 10 y
ears ago.  Even more important, he said, is 
the ability to download new applications, update them, and make them more pertinent.   
  
 Qualcomm is always looking for interesting pr
ojects in which it can participate, and the 
company already sponsors a number of them.  
Expanding education is a major goal.  Giving 
people more information is critical to offsetti
ng the very narrow education many of them have 
received.  A key question is how cell phones can be used to accomplish this.  They are ideal for 
disseminating information, he said, because they 
are very reliable, practically ubiquitous, and 
inexpensive enough for people to take home.  
Now it is up to Qualcomm and all of us, he continued, to learn how to take advantage of the capabilities of cell phones for education.  Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 15 Health care is another area in which ce
ll phones can be useful.  For example, sensors 
attached to cell phones are already being used to test blood.  In addition, the high data rate has proven to be beneficial for communica
tions in remote clinical settings. 
  A variety of Qualcomm projects involve the 
financial sphere, such as micro-finance.  
Qualcomm has also been working with fishermen 
to deliver information to them on their boats 

about types of fish, prices, best places to land, as well as weather conditions, weather warnings, and so on.  Similar projects are being conducted in 
agricultural areas.  Ultimately, small projects 
like these have been very successful.   Cell phones can also be useful in disasters.  
For example, Qualcomm is working on a project 
to track bird flu by keeping track of animals, pi
npointing locations of outbreaks of disease, and circulating information as early as possible. 
 Another example is how cell phones were used 
during the wildfires in the San Diego area last year.  In that case, the reverse E-911 was very 
helpful in getting information to people rapidly about vacating threatened areas.  Cell phones could be important for warning of tsunamis as well. 
  Finally, Dr. Jacobs suggested that cell phone
s with GPS capability might be useful in 
conjunction with 3-D mapping for pinpointing 
locations and thus speeding up the mapping 
process. 
 Discussion  A member of the audience noted that an important aspect of cell phones for peacebuilding is 
that they can be used to ﬁenabl
e identityﬂ in communities and networ
ks.  They are also beneficial 
for governance.  For example, a system is being 
put in place in Afghanistan for making direct 
payments to policemen in their villages, thus eliminating some of the corruption encountered 
when intermediaries deposit the policeman™s money. 
  Another person returned to the subject of 
election monitoring.  Mr
. Spence had mentioned 
that information collected by many people in differe
nt locations is sent to a central monitoring 
site.  But it would also be importa
nt for the site to send information back to a large number of 
polling sites to let observers know what is ha
ppening in various places, providing them with 
what the military calls situational awareness.  Even if it might be dangerous for everyone to have 

information, he said, ﬁif the information is out ther
e, we should organize it to take advantage of it.ﬂ 
 Respondent 2:  Deborah Estrin  Deborah Estrin is a professor of computer 
science at the Universi
ty of California, Los Angeles.  Prof. Estrin began by describing mobile
 phones as part of a technological ecosystem.  
With 50-percent penetration, cell phone tec
hnology is now accepted by people everywhere.  
Therefore, she said, it can be taken as a given and combined with other technologies.  ﬁData that 
comes by itself on the phone,ﬂ she said, ﬁis nowhere near as powerful as when you combine it 

with mapping technologies and GIS models and 
so on.ﬂ  Combined, these technologies can Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 16provide annotation, discretion, and combinations of data in the c
ontext of Internet-based model 
mapping.  ﬁThis is not a panacea,ﬂ she cauti
oned, ﬁbut it is a great opportunity.ﬂ 
  She than reiterated a point that had been ma
de several times beforeŠthat as valuable as 
information is, it can also be a target for abuse.  
In fact, the more valuable the information is, the 
more tempting it is as a target.  Voting mach
ines, she said, are a good example.  Technologies that provide sensitive information 
must be protected from corruption. 
   Another example of the benefits and dangers 
of using cell phones is that location can be 
traced.  On the plus side, this can assist in finding people and can be used to ﬁtransform science 
and public health services.ﬂ  On the minus si
de, location traces can allow individuals to be 
targeted or persecuted.  When a person geo-codes a text message and sends it, they have 
provided a time-sequenced trace of where they ar
e.  To protect users, she argued, researchers should investigate architectures that enable the controlled release of information, for example, 
releasing statistical summary information rather than raw data. 
  On an upbeat note, she concluded, a new 
generation of young people is studying technology and engineering and may soon be prep
ared to address these challenges.  Respondent 3:  Bran Ferren  Bran Ferren is co-chairman and chief creativ
e officer of Applied Minds.  He focused his remarks on three topics:  (1) the need for cau
tion when using a technology for purposes for which it was not intended; (2) the value of geospatiality and 3-D mapping;
 and (3) the limitations 
of using technologies without regard fo
r their aesthetic, st
ory-telling effect.   On the first topic, Mr. Ferren pointed out
 that the people who design text-messaging 
protocols and security systems, as well as the 
people who own and control phone systems, ﬁmay 
not be your friends.ﬂ  In fact, he said ﬁthese things are often influenced directly by governments.ﬂ 
  Therefore, he counseled caution about using te
xt messaging to guide events or influence an 
election, because these devices are not designed to be highly secure.  This does not mean text 
messaging should not be used, he said, but it does mean the users must understand the 

implications of their use.  ﬁEducating the public 
is not just about building confidence that you are there and reporting on what is goi
ng on.  It also means talking a
bout the pros and cons of the technologies and other devices you use.ﬂ   In addition, Mr. Ferren said, the public is mo
re informed and intelligent than is usually 
assumed and is capable of taking 
in a discussion of the benefits and risks of new technologies.  Public discussion of these issues is essential to ﬁsensitizingﬂ peopl
e and to the true benefits and risks of technologies.   One of the advantages of cell phones is that peopl
e do not have to be able to read or write to use them.  If the target population for election 
monitoring has a high rate
 of illiteracy, then 
obviously text messaging could not
 be used.  Even with text messaging, however, problems can 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17arise about the reliability of the system and difficulties can be encountered with parsing and sorting techniques.  ﬁAn error in one line of code can undo all of that reporting,ﬂ he said.   As for the second topic, the value of geospa
tiality and 3-D maps, he cautioned that ﬁthe 
technology must be separated from the modality 
of visualization, that is, from the social 
interactions of how it is used collaboratively.  There is nothing intrinsically real about a 3-D tabletop model,ﬂ he said.  ﬁIt is just another fo
rm of abstraction.  Only the world that surrounds 
us is real.ﬂ  Therefore, he said, 3-D mapping should be under
stood as a different method of 
abstracting information that can help peopl
e understand things through a shared creation.   Although he is a firm believer in the value of
 hard models, he said, many governments try to 
ensure that their populations are taught from a specific pe
rspective that matches the 
administration™s agenda.  ﬁSimply giving people more information does not necessarily lead to a 
predictable result.ﬂ 
  On the third topic, human beings remember th
eir world and interact with it via stories that 
take place in three-dimensional space, Mr. Ferren 
said.  Mention the Eiffel Tower, the Statue of 
Liberty, or the World Trade Cent
er, and people immediately see an image in a certain context.  So, using technology to help resolve conflicts requires (1) having a clear idea of the problem, (2) 
knowing who the audience and participants are, and (3) choosing the best technology for the 
specific situation.   Hard-mapped geospatial representations work 
well on certain scales, he said.  They do not work well on a microscopic scale, however, or on 
a very large scale.  Making a model the size of 
a room to represent a one square inch area woul
d not be effective.  Nor would the same size 
model work for an area of 10,000 square kilometers. 
  Graphic computing, touch computing, three-dimensional, two-and-one-half dimensional, 

textual, and four-dimensional computing are part 
of a tool kit.  The technology used in any 
particular project must be appropriate to the 
audience and the situation on the ground.  Perhaps a model that shows how things can be changed ju
st by removing or adding something will be most 
effective.  In some cases, even drawing on 
a napkin can be ﬁmore compelling than using a 

computer.ﬂ  The whole idea is to use the right to
ol to tell the story and expedite the matter at 
hand for conflict resolution, keeping in mind that
 ﬁstory telling is fundamental to conflict resolution.ﬂ   Mr. Ferren then turned to the technologi
es used by InfoShare.  ﬁAlthough the best technology may be invisible,ﬂ he sa
id, ﬁthe best design is not.ﬂ  The question is deciding how to design ﬁthe correct experience in the context of collaboration . . . [which is] a story-telling problem.ﬂ 
  The group gathered for the current workshop is a case in point, he said.  These individuals, 

including himself, came together because they belie
ve that physical participation is qualitatively different from virtual participation.  ﬁEighty percent of a typical meetingﬂ he said, ﬁis nonverbal 
communication . . . gestures, intonation, facial expression, eye contact, body language.  These are all part of the social dynami
cs of bringing a group together.ﬂ Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 18 He then returned to the terrain models discussed by Mr. Rambaldi.  The positive, he said, 
was that people were working together.  The negative was getting them into the room together.  
Although person-to-person interaction has a certain value, so does film and video, which can 
have a broader reach, he said, because they can be repeated and are not ﬁperishable.ﬂ 
  In conclusion, he said, ﬁinvisi
ble technology is great, but invisible design is not great.ﬂ  An experience must be designed to optimize the effect
.  ﬁEffect-based design,ﬂ he went on, ﬁrequires intentionality, as well as an understanding of the storytelling process. . . . [F]inally, we are aesthetic creatures living in an aesthetic en
vironment, and we self-select based on those 
aesthetics.  That is what has been missing in our discussion so far.ﬂ 
 Discussion  The first speaker took up Mr. Ferren™s commen
ts about the value of face-to-face meetings.  
In most cases, the speaker said, the physical gr
oup will dissipate, as will the effect of the 
meeting.  To heighten the effect of the meeting, he
 said, intensive, interactive, rich media ﬁdesign 
spacesﬂ could be designed to continue the dialogue and discussion. 
  Thus face-to-face meetings, which are very expensive and difficult to organize, can be 
supplemented with interesting, distributed, co
llaborative activities.  He particularly 
recommended Web conferencing, which is inexpensiv
e, collaborative, and includes some media.  
In addition, Web conferencing enables participants to view and mark slides and look at data and 
simulations simultaneously in real time. 
  Mr. Ferren agreed that extending the experience 
of a face-to-face meeti
ng is critical to its ultimate success.  However, he said, the deve
loped world was not willing, ﬁbecause of the expense,ﬂ to use the most effective technologies
 when dealing with problems in Third World 
countries, even though the cost to the free world of not dealing with these issues is exponentially 
higher.  He suggested that one could use a wideband teleconference link to bring two hostile tribes together that might kill each other if they 
were in the same room and present them with a 
novel conflict resolution using ﬁthe very best high-resolution, high-depth, optical fiber . . . and put in a Satcomm link if necessary.ﬂ 
  He said that meetings like this workshop al
ways focus on the cheapest tools that can be used.  At a certain point, he went on, the value equation has to be revised.  Significant amounts of money, even $5 million, for a high-bandwidth 
technology in a troubled portion of the world, 
might cost much less, even if measured only in 
dollars, than a war, which could cost billions.  A second speaker re-addressed the idea of st
orytelling, that is, th
e human experience of 
conflict as opposed to the objective experience of conflict.  He said 
that as an advisor to parties in disputes, he tells them to ﬁgo up to the balconyﬂ and focus on specific information about a 
conflict, rather than on the data.  Once they are 
out of the ﬁobjective context,ﬂ he said, they can 
often resolve questions.   He also described his experiences in Erit
rea, where a border war had killed some 60,000 
people.  Even though the International Court of Justice had brought in GPS systems and mapped 
the region, the disputants were prepared to go back to war.  Data did not solve the conflict Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 19because, he said, the war was not fundamentally a
bout the border.  Engineers love data, he went 
on, but conflicts are often not about data.     The discussions have centered around comput
ers as arithmetic engines rather than as 
communications tools, he said.  Ultimately, conflic
ts are not about better data or counting every single vote.  They are about communication.  Even the best te
chnology in the world, he said, cannot simplify the human experience of a conflic
t.  Designing the tools Mr. Ferren described will require an understanding of the anthropologic
al, sociological, and psychological aspects of a 
conflict. 
  One of the participants then turned the at
tention of the group to the limitations of map-
making used during the 1995 peace talks in Dayton, Ohio, to end the war in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina.  He said that Serbian President Slobodan Miloıevi
, Bosnian President Alija 
Izetbegovi, and Croatian President Franjo Tu
man were struggling over
 a boundary established on many American-made maps.  
 The speaker was able to supply information based on his own 
reconnaissance of the same area, pointing out that
 the lines on the maps were ﬁone farm offﬂ 
compared to what he had just seen. 
  Once the treaty was signed, the speaker, who was responsible for implementing it, found 

that one boundary was wider than the property over which the fighting had taken place.  Only a 
detailed topographical map, such as that desc
ribed by Dr. Ramaldi, would have averted this 
problem, because the line had to be carefully drawn based on the very personal information of 

one of the disputants who told him that the la
nd in question belonged to his grandmother.  ﬁI 
know it is easier to enforce a line on a road,ﬂ the man said, ﬁbut you have to put the line on the 
fence.ﬂ  The point is, the speaker continued, that a lot of issues must be taken into account, not 
just root causes, but also some symptoms. 
  The next discussant went furt
her and talked about the need to
 address both institutional and personal levels in resolving a dispute.  ﬁUsing ICT to promote situ
ational awareness is one thing.  Mediation and communication is another.ﬂ  The stories of people affected by conflicts are now becoming available through technologies, such as
 those provided by Mr. Hattotuwa, and these stories are very powerful.  At the same time, ot
her forces are trying to keep those stories from 
being told.  For example, in Burma, he sai
d, mobile phones were used to show what was 
happening there until the government cracked down
 on their use.  Stories are still being communicated, however.  Technology is changing the rules of the game. 
 
 The reason cell phones are important, commented a
nother participant, is that they are there and can be used without injections of money and resources from the outside.  Clearly, she said, 

conflicts are about story telling as well as data.  Cell phones can provide an affordable way of 
conveying a story.    Another workshop attendee addressed an ﬁanthropologicalﬂ view of conflicts.  Many 

conflicts, he said, are about the few attempting 
to dominate the many.  Technology can even the 
playing field for the many and give
 them a way to resist domination. 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 20PANEL 2 
IN THE FIELD:  CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES 
 The second panel presented th
ree case studies illustrating the challenges and opportunities peacebuilders face in the field.  The first examin
ed issues related to preventive and crisis 
diplomacy; the second explored the role of gaming
 in strategic nonviolent conflict; and the third addressed the special needs of those engaged 
in peacekeeping and post-conflict peacebuilding. 
   Preventive and Crisis Diplomacy  John Packer is director of the Human Rights Ce
ntre and professor of international law at the University of Essex.  For nine years, Prof. Packer was senior legal adviser and then director of the Office of the High Commissioner on National Mi
norities in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), an institution de
dicated to prevention of conflict through quiet 
diplomacy.
1  He has worked with transitional socie
ties across Eastern Europe and the former 
Soviet Union, as well as in Iraq, Sri Lanka, 
Afghanistan, the Central African Republic and elsewhere both independently and with intergovernmental organizations to encourage 
institutional capacity building for effective preventive diplomacy.  He participated in the 
workshop via videoconference. 
  Based on his experience, Prof. Packer said 
he has learned that personal contacts are fundamental to comprehension a
nd that storytelling and the ability to relate are crucial to resolving conflicts.  Most conversations, he said, whether diplomatic or not, begin with some 
sharing of human experience.  In the Middle East
, for example, conversations usually begin with 
tea or coffee and talk is about family and the 
weather.  Establishing trust and confidence through such simple contacts can be frustrating to some, but opportunities for personal exchange are 
vital.  He then gave several examples, including a description of 
the crucial role of storytelling, metaphors, and the challenge of 
interpretation in the meeting between U.S. President Ronald 
Reagan and Soviet Premier Mikhail Go
rbachev in Reykjavik, Iceland, in 1986.   Prof. Packer offered some ﬁminimum definitio
ns.ﬂ  Peacebuilding is a construction, he said, 
a process that implies a normative element (peace) 
and an action (building).  Peacebuilding is 
open ended; there is no point at which you 
have finally built peace and succeeded.  

Peacebuilding can be said to be a perpetual process that requires th
e creation of institutions that 
respond to, foresee, and facilitate the management
 of conflicts, which are inherent in human life 
and society.   Conflicts include competition 
for space, material goods, time, 
power, prestige and so on.  He said the minimum requirement of preventive and 
crisis diplomacy is not actually building peace, 
but ensuring the absence (or at 
least control) of violence.  Conflicts continue and are not 
necessarily bad.  The goal is not so much to solve conflicts but to put constraints on violence and minimize or eliminate the destructive consequenc
es of violence.  This requires reconciling competing interests, needs, and aspirationsŠi
n other words, managing rather than solving. 
                                                 1 For a summary and analysis of
 the work of the OSCE High Commissioner, see W. Kemp (ed.) 
Quiet Diplomacy in 
Action: The OSCE High Commissioner on National Minorities
 (The Hague: Kluwer Law International, 2001).  
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 21 If the idea is taken a step fu
rther, one can not only work toward the absence of violence, but also seek to maximize productive 
capacities, create wealth, and contribute to the general well-being of people.  By the latter, he said, he meant not only physi
cal well-being, but also social, psychological, and even spiritual well-being.   The minimum (i.e., the absence of violence, or
ganized violence, or anarchy) is sometimes 
called negative peace, which is no small achievement.  ﬁJob number one, for which most of the 
world would be greatly appreciative, is to achieve negative peace,ﬂ he said.  To actually build 
peace requires transforming negative peace to positive peace, which includes declaring the value 

of life per se, and creating opportunities and standards for social stability and trust that enables planning and investment in economic and so
cial development, what might be called 

ﬁcivilization.ﬂ  In short, p
eace building implies moving beyond negative peace, and even positive 
peace, to ﬁour way of conceiving of
 others and engaging with them.ﬂ 
  Giving citizens opportunities to invest individu
ally and collectively in their lives and to direct resources toward constructive purposes for their societies requires certain conditions.  First of all, there must be confidence, which is partly the absence of fear.  A society unencumbered by 
destructive forces and with legal order and institutional guarantees
 promotes freedom.  That kind 
of society, he said, ﬁshould be the aim we have in mind.ﬂ  But this 
is obviously a long and difficult process.   First, one must deal with the situation as one
 finds it, often a crisis, which is an immediate 
condition, the verge of war, the imminent erup
tion of violence, or sometimes the immediate 
aftermath of violence.  SometimesŠincreasin
glyŠit is anarchy (i.e. the ﬁfailed Stateﬂ 
phenomenon).  If intervention ta
kes place before a crisis, preven
tion and preventive diplomacy 
can possibly keep the crisis from developing.  In 
this situation, prevention means not structural 
prevention (such as macroeconomic organizatio
n and so on) but operational prevention (i.e. addressing proximate causes of violence, notab
ly triggers, usually th
rough some kind of 
diplomacy).  One must find ways to prevent viol
ence by addressing specific risks to control and diminish them. 
  Diplomacy is simply talking, not a high-tech 
science.  Paraphrasing Prussian General Carl von Clausewitz, Prof. Packer said diplomacy is th
e continuation of war by other means.  Conflict 
may not be resolved, but it can be addressed with
out organized violence.  The kind of diplomacy 
Prof. Packer focused on was noncoercive diplom
acy, which he defined as ﬁcertain ways of 
talking, forms of dialogue that entail more th
an comprehension, more than data, but also 
understanding.ﬂ  The goal, he continued, was to transform a relationship between parties so they 
see each other not just as dehumanized competitors 
or threats, but as people in whom they can 

see themselves. 
  Preventive diplomacy almost always requires 
intermediaries, third parties who specifically 
facilitate or assist in preventing or resolvi
ng disputes.  There are usually more than two disputants, and disputants are rarely entirely coherent or consiste
nt in their positions.  There may 
also be fourth-party actors who are not active 
in the dispute but who have interests in the 
situation.  They can be very influential.  An 
example of a fourth party actor might be an oil 
company interested in the situati
on in Sudan.  Fifth parties might not be interested in the dispute 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 22per se, but in enhancing their prestige; they too can be influential.  Situations vary in complexity, 
but none is simple.  In Darfur, for example, th
ere are as many as 28 disputing parties, Prof. 
Packer said, and more than a few third-party inte
rmediaries together with numerous interested 
fourth-party actors.   Having worked in extremely poor, underdevelop
ed areas, such as the Central African Republic, and in fairly developed, resource-rich areas with total
itarian regimes, such as Iraq, 
Prof. Packer said there is no ﬁgolden ruleﬂ 
or panacea with regard to approaches or 
communications, although ICT can be helpful in some ways.  In principle, more and better 
communications are always desirable.  Challe
nges to using ICT include the complexities 
mentioned above, questions about physical access
, proximity, contact, and meetings (e.g., are 
they open or closed).   The communications themselves may have limit
ations (e.g., the extent of their reach, who can hear or listen, time zones, and differences in la
nguage).  Then there are risks, such as the risk 
of location tracking.  In 1996, in Chechnya, for example, President Dzhokhar Dudayev was 
targeted for assassination by Russian laser-guided missiles through a trace on his cell phone 
signal.  There are also problems about the cont
ent of communications, issues of anonymity, and 
timeliness.  Better technology can present dile
mmas: for example, while authenticity and 
directness of contacts may be important to creat
e confidence and the capac
ity to record may be 
important for some purposes (such as precision, 
reliability and memory), these same qualities 
can dissuade use for fear of parties being exactly identified and held to statements, etc.  On the 
other hand, parties might welcome the opportunity to 
ﬁfly a kiteﬂ (i.e., test an idea, proposal, or possible position) and yet they may wish or need to dissociate themselves from the same.  In 

general, existing ICT tools, such as mobile 
phones, satellite dishes, Skype, Google Earth, and others, may be useful but also entail risks. 
  In conclusion, he said, peace negotiations 
often fail because of 
poor communication and poor understanding.  ICT can help provide better 
communications and understandings in terms of 
quality, quantity, and timeliness. 
 This can include access to info
rmation about options in the 

world, best practices, lessons learned, etc.; kno
wledge about others (real positions versus 
purported positions); real-time and secure contacts
 despite difficult geography; and so on.  All of 
this can contribute significantly to more eff
ective preventive and crisis diplomacy through 
accurate, substantive, reliable and timely info
rmation which will enhance credibility among 

parties.  But ICTs cannot entirely replace relationship buildi
ng and dialogue in establishing 
confidence and trust between parties. 
 
 Finally, communications technol
ogies cannot respond to the new kinds of threats that have arisen, such as irrational or nihilistic parties, terrorist
s whose only goal is destruction of enemies 
and who reject all compromises out of hand.  In the 
face of those threats, Pr
of. Packer said, he is ﬁnot confident that technology can respond to the challenge.ﬂ Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 23  Strategic Gaming for Civil Resistance 
  Peter Ackerman is founding chair of the 
International Center on Non-Violent Conflict (ICNC) and coauthor of A Force More Powerful: A Century of Nonviolent Conflict
 (Palgrave/St. Martin™s Press, 2001).  Dr. Ackerman provide
d background information on nonviolent conflict, 
nonviolent resistance, and civil resistance, all common terms to de
scribe how people living under authoritarian rule might respond when their ri
ghts, personal property, fundamental values, and 
sometimes their lives are threatened and they
 have no military option for fighting back.  
Nonviolent civil resistance, which can include strikes, boycotts, and mass protests, can be very 
disruptive even though they are nonviolent tactics, and can lead to regime transformation
.   He explained the difference between nonviolent resist
ance and nonviolence.  The latter is an ethical term for personal values that does not a
ddress trying to force authoritarians to change or leave power.  In addition, nonviolent resistance should not be confused with conflict resolution or conflict prevention.  It is a method of c
onflict management.  Of the 67 transitions to 
democracy he analyzed in 
another book he coauthored, Strategic Nonviolent Conflict: The Dynamics of People Power in the Twentieth Century (Praeger, 1994), only 17 were achieved through discussion and negotiation, he said.  The other 50, he said, involved significant civic disruptions that eventually forced the change.   Dr. Ackerman said the thesis of 
Strategic Nonviolent Conflict is that ﬁcircumstances are 
much less important than the quality of the strategic decision making of the opposition.ﬂ  
Working with Steve York, a documentary f
ilm producer, Dr. Ackerman produced three 
documentaries showing many examples of effectiv
e civil resistance, such as the independence 
movement in India led by Mahatma Gandhi, the na
tional lunch counter boycott during the civil rights movement in the United States, the Danish
 resistance to the Nazis, the anti-Pinochet 
movement in Chile, and the Solidarity movement 
in Poland.  Two further documentaries tell of 
the resistance to Serbia™s Slobodan Miloıevi (ﬁBringing Down a Dictatorﬂ) and the civil 
disruptions in response to a fraudulent election in Ukraine in 2004 (ﬁThe Orange Revolutionﬂ).   All of the documentaries show how nonviolent 
resistance has successfully
 upset the order of 
things and caused authoritarian rulers to lose c
ontrol of their power bases.  The films have been 
so successful that they have been translated into ten languages and shown in 70 countries.  Opposition groups from around the world have contacted ICNC asking for training to develop 

their own strategies for nonviolent resistance tactics.   A successful opposition movement must have a st
rategic theory, Dr. Ackerman said, and his 
organization now provides a forum 
for ﬁtrainingﬂ that involves sharing experiences and helping to develop strategic decision-making tools.  The 
basic principle is for an opposition group to find 
weaknesses in the pillars of authoritarian support (e.g., ethnic groups, the bureaucracy, economic 
institutions, security services, police, military) 
and find ways to further weaken them.  In the 

Philippines, for example, the People Power Moveme
nt was able to increase defections in the 
military and eventually bring down the government
.  Civic di
sruption based on strikes, boycotts, 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 24mass protests, and public ridicule
 are designed to unify disparate groups and exploit weaknesses in the authoritarian power base, ultimatel
y destabilizing the people at the top.    Ivan Marovic, a student leader of Otpor, the anti-Miloıevi
 movement in Serbia and a 
colleague of Dr. Ackerman, demonstrated a PC-b
ased simulation game he created while working 
at ICNC.  The game, ﬁA Force More Powerful,ﬂ 
is a pedagogical tool for assisting nonviolent opposition groups.  ﬁThe game, like all simulations, 
is a medium that enables people to teach 
themselves,ﬂ Mr. Marovic said.  Players make their own stories and then draw certain 
conclusions from them. 
  The game provides 10 predesigned scenario
s, ranging from a movement fighting a 
dictatorship or military junta to a backslidi
ng democracy to opposition to an occupation and a 

movement for self-determination.  The scen
arios include demographics and geographic information.  The game also has a 
scenario editor, a tool that enables players to create their own scenarios.  All of them are nonviolent, but th
ey all have lots of violence in them.   
  Players act within a scenario, first analyzi
ng their opponents, and then sequencing tactics, such as boycotts, strikes, street protests, and so on to maximi
ze their results and minimize their 
risks.  Tactics can include harassing officials, denying resources to the regime, conducting 
noncooperation campaigns, initiating recruiting dr
ives, and communicating with the general public to win over pillars of support, but also winning over the general public.  The player plays against the computer, which controls the regime, which is programm
ed to be able to spot when something goes wrong and try to respond and suppress the activity. 
  Mr. Marovic emphasized that the game itself is
 less important than th
e pedagogical uses of the game, which enables people to scale it to their 
needs and also to gain a sense of control in an extremely complex and disorienting situation.  The variables can be almost infinite, but the game 

enables players to try different sequences of tactics and see how they work.  In this way, it 
enables users to identify the crit
ical elements of success.  For example, it may teach people that 
they have to ally themselves with others who ar
e resistant to the regime, even if they are in 

conflict with them on a different level. 

 Discussion  A member of the audience asked how the ga
me, which is ﬁa controlled application of 
conflict,ﬂ is related to peace.  
The benefit, he said, would be if an opposition group is organized to create the elements of a civil society that
 can govern through democratic, nonviolent means. 
  Dr. Ackerman responded that ICNC is curr
ently engaged with a group that had been determined to start a violent insurgency but 
is now beginning to question its assumptions.  
Another member of the audience said that her 
group had found that nonviolent resistance is a key prevention strategy that can open a path to nonviolent transition from one regime to another. 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 25Peacekeeping and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding 
 Nicholas Von Ruben is a senior programme officer in the Depa
rtment of Field Support at the 
United Nations.  Mr. von Ruben has spent years heading peacekeeping operations in Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo, and other conflict 
zones.  His talk was ﬁnot about how we use technology, but about challenges for which technology could probably help.ﬂ   He began with a brief history of peacekeepi
ng.  In the past, he said, peacekeeping meant 
putting a military force between tw
o parties that had been at wa
r and monitoring the ceasefire.  
Today peacekeeping forces include peacebuilding components, such as police and civil units.  In 

addition, the number of peacekeeping operations ha
s increased dramatically; five new missions 
have been launched in the past 18 months.  
Five years ago, he said, 51,000 UN personnel were deployed in the field.  Today there are about 
140,000, the second largest deployed force in the 
world.   Peackekeeping forces are often stuck between op
en conflict and a ceasefire, as they are in Darfur, where fighting continues even as discussions are under way with various factions.  However, these factions are constantly mutati
ng and changing, which makes conflict resolution, 
or even a reliable ceasefire, difficult to achieve.  For effective peacekeeping there must be ﬁa 
peace to keep.ﬂ 
  Serious problems often arise when peacekeepers 
are pulled out of an area.  There must be a 
better transition, he said, between peacekeeping and peacebuilding, the period during which 
community and infrastructure for the future are developed.     UN peacekeepers are only sent into a situati
on if a Security Council resolution has been 
adopted.  Resolutions usually include a mandate
 for a general ceasefire; the monitoring and 
redeployment of forces; the monitoring of the 
movement of armed groups; the disarmament, 
demobilization, and reintegration of ex-combatants; 
the return and reintegration of refugees from 
outside the country and of internally displaced people; the establishment of human rights and 
civil protections; the restructuring of a police force (which requires a solid, independent judiciary); de-mining; the mounting of public 
information campaigns; and, finally, elections. 
  Mr. Von Ruben then described operational chal
lenges that could be better addressed with technology.  First, technology, or ﬁforce enablers,ﬂ
 might be able to make a peacekeeping force 

ﬁlook bigger.ﬂ  This would reinforce their presence and their credibility.  Next, technology that would give peacekeepers precision vision, drones or other ﬁeyes,ﬂ for example, would greatly 

increase their freedom of movement.  Peacekeepers 
also need better visibil
ity in extreme weather conditions, such as sandstorms and thunderstorms.  ﬁIn these conditions,ﬂ he said, ﬁyou need to 

have visibility, and you need to be mobile.ﬂ  In addition, technology would obviously be useful for mine detection. 
  Technology that could help peacekeepers bette
r organize and share information would be 
extremely beneficial.  The key is
 to gather information from va
rious sources, synthesize it, and weed out what is unimportant.  Technology that 
could help with the gathering and synthesis of data on political, military, soci
al, and humanitarian activities 
would enable peacekeepers to identify patterns that indicate trouble.  Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 26 He then turned to some logistics challenge
s.  Peacekeepers must be able to communicate 
with groups of people, including refugees that 
are often on the move.  Therefore, peacekeepers 
must be able to track and locate them.  He suggest
ed that, perhaps, their animals might be tagged 
with radio frequency identification chips so th
eir movements could be followed, and so people 
could be kept from wandering into
 conflict zones.  In addition, technology to help in the tracking of the flow of arms and illicit trade in natural resources w
ould be a great help.   Members of peacekeeping forces come from a
ll over the world, bringing different types of 
equipment and communications technology.  Technologi
es that would enable them to speak to 
each other in difficult environments would be in
valuable.  Communications technologies could 
also help to overcome language barriers betw
een peacekeepers and the people they work with 
and are there to protect. 
  Detecting and managing water supplies in an
 area like Darfur would be a great boon to peacekeepers.  Mr. Von Ruben mentioned re
cent work by Dr. Farouk El-Baz at Boston 
University, who believes he has found a large aquifer in northern Darfur.  Adequate water supplies, Von Ruben said, might go a long way 
toward changing the dynamics of the conflict 
there.  Finally, peacekeepers need to rely on en
ergy from sources other than fossil fuels, which 
can be expensive and dangerous to transport and stockpile, and improve the way they manage 
and dispose of waste. 
 Comments by Respondents Respondent 1:  Alan Kay  Alan Kay is president of Viewpoints Research
 Institute.  Dr. Kay presented a completely 
different perspective on how technology can be used to promote peace (see Appendix D for a 
written statement prepared by Dr. Kay).  First, 
he said, we must accept human beings for what 
they areŠcreatures that use technology to make war 
and to make peace.  However, along the 
way, some human beings have le
arned that economic comfort and substitutes for naked power 
are better at deterring war than philosophical arguments.
  ﬁBribing people with comfort,ﬂ he said, 
is a good initial strategy for peacemaking.  Howeve
r, we also need a long-term strategy to 
change the way people think through education, and for that we need to use the printed word, which is much more efficient than the spoken 
word used by indigenous peoples and people who 
are illiterate.  ﬁYou can say things in print that are almost impossible to say orally.ﬂ  
  
 As Henry David Thoreau said, ﬁWe become the 
tools of our tools,ﬂ in this case the medium 
of the printed word.  And as Marshall McLuhan said, ﬁWe shape tools, and then they reshape 
us.ﬂ  Thus the printed word, a very powerful tool, can change people.  Learning to read and write is difficult, but ﬁthe difficulty is what™s impor
tant about it.ﬂ  Once people become literate, he 
said, they think qualitatively differently from nonliterate, oral people.ﬂ  He then referred to a 
conversation between Thomas Jefferson and James 
Madison, in which Jefferson said that the 
people are the ultimate repository of power.  ﬁI
f their discretion be not well enough informed to 

do this, the answer is not to remove their power
s, but to better inform their discretion through education.ﬂ Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 27  Communications media, be they printed word
s or cell phones, are not neutral to ideas and thought, and we must be wary of introducing medi
a that do not advance non-oral thinking.  ﬁA seemingly innocent technological be
nefitŠsuch as using mobile 
telephones to provide needed and useful information, or encouraging televisi
on as ‚an information technology that doesn™t 
need to be learned™Šcould derail the larger needs of a society to learn to think non-orally.ﬂ  Dr. Kay said he believes that the cell phone culture and Internet Web culture that have sprung up are simply reflections of pop culture, which, in turn, is a reflection of built-in human impulses rather 
than what we have learned.   Math and science, he said, are another order 
of thinking based on the difficult premise that 

ﬁthe world is not as it seems.ﬂ  Only literat
e people, he argued, are capable of moving beyond the 
usual epistemology and understanding this scientific view.  Science, he said, tries to get around the poor thinking processes built into our brains and lead us to think in very different ways with very different perspectives on the world.  But, he 
reiterated, first people must become literate.  
The question is how we can achieve this quickly on a very large scale.    Inexpensive printed books enab
led people to learn individually, ﬁaway from society,ﬂ and develop their own thoughts.  If we could provide ﬁa teacher for every learnerﬂ in the form of an 
inexpensive computer (the $100 laptop) that can
 teach children to read and write in their 
indigenous languages, or even help them learn ﬁreal science and ma
th,ﬂ we would have crossed a critical threshold.  In fact, he said, the only wa
y to provide enough teachers is to use computers, 
which are easy to manufacture and can be produced
 in great numbers very
 quickly.  But for 50 years, he said, computer scientists have tried 
and failed to make a computer that can teach at 
least as well as a poor teacher.     Computer-based teaching must necessarily st
art with stories, which are built into human 
minds, and move toward the non-story thinking 
of math and science.  In addition, these 
computers can hold hundreds of books.  At the very
 least, he said, ﬁthis would be a way of 
publishing books for the entire world at a cost
 of 20 cents per book.ﬂ  Computer ﬁteachersﬂ 
would ﬁqualitatively change the world by qualitatively changing how education happens.ﬂ   He concluded that he believes
 that there are technological solutions to some of the big 
problems facing society, but only 
if people are willing to think about the larger picture that includes human beings as they are,
 ﬁanthropology without apologies.ﬂ  Respondent 2:  Nigel Snoad 
 Nigel Snoad is lead capabilities researcher wi
th Microsoft Humanitarian Systems, which is 
currently running pilot projects in collaborati
on with various humanitarian agencies in 
Afghanistan and other locations.  For several years, Dr. Snoad worked for the United Nations in 
disaster management.  He noted that one cl
ear step for peacebuilding is to improve the 
governance of states and institutions, which not only promotes st
ability but also provides people with options for the future. One component of 
good governance is the existence of mechanisms 
to prevent those with power from
 taking advantage of those with no power.  This is extremely 
difficult to achieve in the midst of conflict.    
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 28 Good governance requires accountability, which 
can mean legal checks and balances, but it 
can also be achieved in other ways.  Accountability requires building institutions, increasing transparency, and reducing corruption.  For example, he said, he had been told about a contractor who was supposed to build a school in Afghani
stan who received $50,000 for the project, even though $2 million had been provided originally and everyone in the local community knew that a 
school should cost about $100,000.  This gap, which erodes trust and confidence on every level, can start to be tackled by increased transparency and accountability, and technology can play a role.  ﬁTechnology in the service of good governance can enhance the social forces that generate trust,ﬂ he said. 
  
 He then commented on to the role of technology in diplomacy, negotiation, and 

reconciliation.  Noting that he was not an expert in this area, he said he felt that using simulations to design storytelling and storytelling support mechanisms seems to be a very positive use for 
technology.  British Gen. Rupert Smith has repeated
ly said that modern conflicts are about who 
wins this storytelling contest, noted Dr. Snoad.  The question is how to build trust and a vision 
for what is possible in society, so that people can decide they want to go along with this (non-violent) model of society rather th
an launching into violent conflict.    An audience member interrupted to say he thought this was not a good way to accomplish 
this goal.  Dr. Snoad agreed that it was not ideal, 
but in the midst of a conflict, he said, it may be 
all that can be done.  ﬁYou document what 
is happening, you alleviate suffering, you hope you are not falling into conflict, though often you are, 
and you try to use storytelling that leads to a 
solution.ﬂ 
    Technology plays a critical role in improvi
ng humanitarian response to those affected by 
conflict. Situational awareness t
ools can be used to help coordinate action to alleviate the suffering of those who are affected by violence, who usually have no voice or mechanism for 
participating in events.  In general, he said, alleviating suffering is a critic
al first step for people 
to choose a nonviolent way of satisfying their needs.   
 Technology can also be used to document a
buses and ﬁfor preserving stories for later justice.ﬂ  In the midst of a violent conflict, jus
tice may be delayed.  But preserving stories, even 
conflicting stories, gives people a voice for the future.   
 Dr. Snoad then turned to the questions that 
had been raised about the use of mobile phones 
and PC technologies.  ﬁThese tools are going to be usedﬂ in conflict situations, he said, ﬁwhether we like it or not.  So we need to think about how we can harness them to encourage our better 
natures rather than our baser instincts.ﬂ Many current humanitarian coordination mechanisms are 
based on command and control mechanisms that do 
not fit well with user empowerment, social 
networking, and the wisdom of crowds that new 
technologies enable. This can create significant opportunities for those attempting to coordinate hu
manitarian assistance or enact social methods 
of peacebuilding.     Finally, he  noted the problem of ﬁthe democr
atization of the gun.ﬂ  (A point that had been raised earlier.) He recounted how, when he was in Iraq, AK-47™s were being sold for around $50.  Guns, he said, clearly give individuals and small groups a 
means of radically affecting 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 29violence in local areas, even neighborhoods.  This is not a new problem, but dealing with this 
situation is completely different from dealing wi
th conflicts between stat
es.  ﬁThe influence of guns,ﬂ he said, ﬁcan only be countered by the democratization of some other kind of influence.  
This involves communications, storytelling, monitoring, and negotiating.ﬂ 
 Respondent 3:  Steve Wozniak 
 Steve Wozniak is executive vice president,
 chief technology officer, and chief visionary officer of Jazz Technologies, Inc.  Mr. Wozn
iak began by pointing out that conflicts are 
ubiquitous.  People have different ideas and different ways of understanding things, which often 
lead to disagreements.  If two people disagree, they can fairly easily decide not to come to blows; 

they can agree to disagree.  This is more di
fficult with groups of people, however, especially 
groups with long-standing disagreements that have led individuals in one group to demonize or 
dehumanize individuals in the other group. 
  Technology can break through the 
barriers between individuals.  During the cold war, he said, he was able to talk to people in the Soviet Union throug
h a GTE phone connection, what he called a ﬁspace bridge.ﬂ  At some
 point during or after his conv
ersations, he suddenly realized, he said, that ﬁthese people are like us.  It is our governments, the people who represent us, who 
have led us to believe they are all to be feared.ﬂ  However, he and his family were vilified for 

talking to the enemy. 
  Technology amplifies our desires, whether 
they are good or bad.  Perhaps, he mused, 
children are being taught the wrong things in school.  For example, they are taught that some 
wars are good, so they may think the next war mi
ght be their chance to make the world better.  
ﬁWe haven™t taken one step to make sure there won™
t be another Iraq in 30 years,ﬂ he said, or to 
encourage kids ﬁto come up with better ways to 
resolve conflicts.ﬂ  Education is essential to 
peace, and technology can help.  But technology can only take us so far, he said.  Some computer 
games that teach nonviolence might carry over to 
kids, he said, but we must stop teaching them 

that wars can be good.     He then returned to the computer teacher de
scribed by Dr. Kay.  Based on his experience as 
a teacher, he said, he had concluded that we will 
never be able to build a machine that can teach 
as well as a teacher.  ﬁHow can you make a co
mputer equal to a human being?ﬂ he asked.  
However, he went on, supplying low-cost phones to 
people is useful, and despite its limitations, 
the ﬁone laptop per childﬂ idea is a constructive way to put ICT in people™s hands ﬁthat is going to make them start thinking more deeply a
bout technology, jobs, and moving their countries up 

the right economic ladder. . . .  Besides, tec
hnology can give people something to do besides 
fight.ﬂ 
 Discussion  A member of the audience opened the discus
sion with a description of good governance.  ﬁGood governance,ﬂ he said, ﬁoften depends on the destruction of bad governance and whether you have the power to destroy it.ﬂ  It isn™t a question of money, he
 said, but of how power is used Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 30for change.  He went on to talk about nonviolent conflict.  Most leaders of nonviolent movements, such as civil resist
ance movements, would have used violence if it had been an 
option.  They chose a nonviolent path, he said, no
t because their situation had eased but because 
it had become more desperate.  
He cited the Solidarity movement
 in Poland as an example.  After the failure of the uprising in Warsaw in
 1970, the opposition turned to Solidarity, which 
was a nonviolent way of ﬁeliminating the sign
ificance of government for people, thus 
undermining government structures.ﬂ  Another exam
ple, the civics movements in South Africa, 
was a direct result of the failure of armed struggle.  With more than 600 civics movements, the 
people undertook boycotts and other economic measur
es that destroyed the basis for trade for many white South Africans.  They, in turn, pr
essured the political powers to release Nelson 
Mandela.     Technology can provide ways for people to comm
unicate, without the risk of betrayal, and 
to signal each other that they are on the same side.  ﬁThe power 
of civic disruption is in the ability of key elements in the military and othe
r support groups of the dictatorship to identify 
each other and join forces to resist.  He then described how in Chile, after a failed strike in a 

copper mine, the resistance realized
 that the reasons for failure were that the area was too small 
and was easily surrounded by the military.  So they 
tried a different tack.  They instructed the population of Santiago to do everythingŠwalking, driving, and working, and so onŠat half speed and to open their windows at night and make a racket by banging on pots and pans.  
People did this month after month, and, in the pr
ocess, they discovered a ﬁpent-up potential for resistance.ﬂ  More aggressive tactics followed until President 
Pinochet miscalculated and called 
for a referendum, which he ultimately lost.  When he then looked to the military to keep him in 

power, they refused to do so.  ﬁThe courage to do this depended on self-identification.ﬂ 
 DISCUSSION ABOUT NEXT STEPS 
 Patricia Thomson, executive vice president of
 USIP, opened the discussion with a few general remarks.  Everyone agrees, she said, th
at ultimately peacebuilding is about people, not 
technology.  But ﬁtechnology enablers and tools can facilitate solutions to many problems.ﬂ  She 
then listed significant challenges to peace for 
the next decade based on the background document 
developed by USIP (Appendix E): 
  Environmental degradation and climate change 
 Weapons of mass destruction 
 Weak economies, fragile states, and undemocratic states 
 Weak international institutions and the lack
 of will to act in 
the face of atrocities  Clashes of civilizations and ideologies  Growing numbers of disenfranchised people, widening gaps between rich and poor, and the radicalization and empowerment of disenfranchised and alienated groups 
 The movement of large numbers of people, 
either refugees or emigrants (legal and 

illegal)  Perverse effects of globalization, such as local problems th
at cascade into catastrophic problems (e.g., pandemics), and the growing awar
eness of inequities or other grievances that prompt disenfranchised groups to 
take action, some
times violent action 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 31 Discussion moderator Vinton Cerf, Google, In
c., asked the group to consider technologies that could help address any of these issues, particularly global warming and ensuring supplies of 
fresh water.  Global warming ha
s the potential to cause crop failures, which could lead to inadequate food supplies, and sea level rise, which could lead to dislocations of large numbers of 
people.   Another participant then took 
up the theme.  He described so
me ways that technology and 
science have reduced the likelihood of conflict by removing the ca
uses.  ﬁA lot of good things have happened over the last few years,ﬂ he said, ﬁas a result of science trying to improve the 
availability of food, increase crop yields, and so on.  In addition, refrigeration has improved the 
food supply by extending food preservation time.ﬂ 
  Another member of the group said that rem
oving the economic reasons for conflict can help, 
but should not be overstated.  Contrary to popular belief, he said, eliminating poverty would not 

eliminate conflict.  In fact, ﬁpoor starving ma
ssesﬂ do not rise up, he said, because they are 
preoccupied with efforts simply to survive.  Co
nflicts arise when wealth is created and people™s 
capacities improve.  That is when competition incr
eases.  Thus ﬁrising wealth contributes to 
conflict creation or generation to some degree.ﬂ  Besides competition for limited space and 
resources, there is also competition over pr
estige and power, which cannot be resolved by 
addressing the resource problems, he said. 
  Information and communications technologies 
can help, though.  For example, when the hotline, a simple telephone connection, was established between the White House and the 

Kremlin, it reduced the risk of nuclear war.  We 
should invest in ways to cooperate, he said.  
Instead of teaching about competition (e.g., elimin
ate the enemy, diminish the capacities of the 
competitor), we should teach constructive coope
ration, the skills and habits of teamwork. 
  Finally, he said, we must find a way to pr
omote ﬁwisdom and judgment,ﬂ which come from 

experience, but also ﬁhave to do with social psychology, confidence, and being able to measure 
risks in the face of others with
 opposing views.ﬂ  This would also contribute to good governance 
and leadership.   Dr. Cerf said that ﬁin places where people 
believe there isn™t enough of what they need 
[food, water, space, and so on] for everyone, they feel
 compelled to ‚get theirs first™ in order to 
survive.  A technology that could let people know when there is enough for everyone would reduce fears and eliminate some conflicts.ﬂ 
  Another participant referred to the simulati
on game, A Force More Powerful, which teaches 
nonviolent resistance.  He said that
 conflicts are inherent in human 
nature, so training, rather than education, might show people that there are options 
other than violence for reacting to a conflict.  They might learn ﬁhow to trick the other person into giving them what they want or directing 

him or her in another way.ﬂ  He said Inte
rnet Web 2.0 technologies enable people to communicate and describe their experiences, wh
ich might influence how people in similar 
situations respond.  ﬁIf our assumption is correct 
that more people are good than bad, we are on 
the right road,ﬂ he said. 
  Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 32 One workshop attendee agreed that education is
 a ﬁnice, long-term strategyﬂ for preventing 
conflicts.  But, he said, a combination of soci
al modeling and sensing would be beneficial for spotting the early signs of potential conflicts, ﬁsome underlying pro
cess that no one noticed,ﬂ and heading off the conflict altogether.  A series of models could be 
developed, he said, for different regions of the world, moments in time, or global 
events and situations that might be ripe for 
disruption by environmental change, and so on.  
Using all emerging technologies, he continued, and having one entity, such as the UN or an NG
O or a group of NGOs, put the modeling process, 
cataloguing, sensing, and so forth together would enable people from all over to participate and 
contribute, would begin to build ﬁa distributed community for spot
ting trouble in the early stages before things blow up.ﬂ   Dr. Cerf then summed up the discussion thus 
far.  Two technologies, he said, seem to be 
fundamentalŠcommunication technol
ogies in the broadest sense and technologies for predictive analysis and modelingŠincluding m
odels of climate, water resour
ces, and people™s behaviors.  There are two trains of thought
 in the workshop group.  One is for long-term education and changing social values over time.  The ot
her is for building peace and mitigating the 
consequences of violence in specific locations where violent conflict conti
nues or has just ended.    The discussion continued with an a
ttempt to describe the things that 
can be done, rather than should be done.  The next speaker said we cannot and should not eliminat
e conflict altogether, but rather create tools for mini
mizing the negative aspects of conflict.  He reminded the group 
that ﬁwe want conflict when it creates positive social change.ﬂ  The workshop, he said, should focus on ﬁdefinable, ‚bracketable™ problemsﬂ and ways to get involved early to minimize the 
negative consequences of violence.   Several people then discussed technologies 
that could be used to improve education in 
populations traumatized by violence
, such as technologies that enable people, particularly women, to learn on their own, outside of the school
 setting.  Someone inte
rjected a reminder that 
technologies become widely distributed only if 
commercial interests can also be satisfied.  ﬁSustainability requires a self-interested commer
cial market,ﬂ he said, ﬁand businesses will only 
become involved if they see that long-term inve
stment in peacebuilding will pay off.ﬂ  Another 
person suggested that the group mi
ght investigate ways to mobilize companies to address ﬁthe very specific, sometimes strategic, often tactical 
challenges that peacekeepers face in the field.ﬂ  
  One participant then described the satisfacti
on he had experienced after building a village well that met a community™s needs.  By coope
rating with members of the community in the 
planning, location, and building of the well, he said, he not only helped to build a well, but also imparted political and economic pow
er to this community.  ﬁThere are consequences to digging wells, building bus stations, roads, and so on, and changing one variable can affect all of the 

others,ﬂ he said.  But he also acknowledged that
 ﬁdoing one thing is easy, but doing the trillion things that have to be done is much more difficult.ﬂ 
    The ﬁmeta issue,ﬂ another speaker said, ﬁis 
how this workshop group can continue to keep these ideas in the public mind, identify entrep
reneurs and others who could contribute to solutions, and establish economic bounds so the issu
es become
 tractable.ﬂ  Engineers, he said, do the easy part, such as the actual design and building of technology.  The hard part is figuring out Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 33how to keep the process going.  This group might become a clearinghouse for nonprofits, 
academics, the military, and for-profit companies, he said, ﬁto present problems in ways that 
address the real interests and concerns of thes
e ‚customers.™ﬂ  Another said that many large 
communications technology firms just 
have to be asked to participate in these projects.  All of them, he said, have ﬁglobal initiatives.ﬂ 

 FINAL COMMENTS  Workshop steering committee Chair Jack Gibbo
ns and USIP President Richard Solomon 
closed the workshop with brief final comments.   Dr. Gibbons noted that we are living in ﬁex
traordinary timesﬂ when the agglomeration of 

power in individual nation states is now compe
ting with the influence of non-state terrorists, such as Osama bin Laden.  People like bin Laden ﬁ
don™t have . . . to worry about the preservation of an institution, because they don™t have one.ﬂ 
  This shift is occurring at the same time we
 are coping with increasing pressure on global natural resources, environmental 
change, species loss, and population growth and crowding.   For example, in some countries in the Middle Ea
st, half the population is under age 15.  Many of these young people see no jobs or future for themse
lves and are open to the appeals of terrorist groups.   ﬁWhat are the imperatives for us?ﬂ he asked.  On
e is to develop better analytical capabilities 
that can anticipate the combined effects of vari
ous population, economic, and climatic stressors.  
Being able to track ﬁdemographic transitions,ﬂ for example, and 
determine where impacts will be 
felt is ﬁdoable.ﬂ  Another important need, cont
inued Dr. Gibbons, is to explore opportunities for designing information and communi
cations technologies that are more resilient to misuse. 
  Ultimately, he said, the United States, other 
Western cultures, and fast-growing nations like 
China will need to move away from ﬁthe almo
st ubiquitous model of exponentiation as a means 
to a desired future.ﬂ  It is simply not possible,
 Dr. Gibbons asserted, to have sustainable growth while maintaining current leve
ls of resource consumption. 
  Dr. Solomon touched on a number of points ra
ised during the workshop that he felt were important.  He first noted that conflict at one le
vel is ﬁbasically a communication issue.ﬂ  He 
pointed out that when two countries are going to go to war, they withdraw their ambassadors.  
Once the conflict is under way, they ﬁdespera
tely search for a way of reestablishing communication.ﬂ  He reminded the group of Irwin 
Jacobs™ comments about the increasing power 
of the cell phone.  ﬁ[H]ow could we use that capacity . . . to deal with issues of conflict management?ﬂ 
  Dr. Solomon noted that most of USIP™s pr
ogramming is not dependent on the purchase or 
use of expensive technology, rather it is made po
ssible by the work of ﬁcreative people.ﬂ  At the same time, he added, it is clear ﬁthat technology coul
d be a very effective enabler of strategies of conflict management.ﬂ  He expressed the hope th
at follow-on activities to the workshop would Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 34explore with greater focus what existing and emer
ging technologies can contribute toward this 
goal.  ﬁWe want to follow through and figur
e out the way to build on this effort.ﬂ Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 35Appendix A  Workshop Agenda Workshop on the Use of ICT in Peacebuilding  National Academy of Engineering 
 December 14, 2007 
 Beckman Center 
Irvine, CA  Final Draft Agenda  7:30 a.m.  Breakfast 

 
8:00 a.m.   Welcome and Introductions 
   Jack Gibbons, Resource Strategies, Steering Committee Chair 
 8:30 a.m.   Conflict in the 21
st Century     Richard Solomon, U.S. Institute of Peace  

    9:15 a.m.   Panel 1:  ICT in the Cause of Peace 
Moderator:  Vint Cerf, G
oogle, Inc., Steering Committee 
 The Use of Mobile Phones in Election Monitoring    
Chris Spence, National Democratic Institute for International Affairs   GIS and Participatory 3-D M
odeling in Land-Use Negotiation Giacomo Rambaldi, Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation, Wageningen, The Netherlands    What role for civil society and ICT in peacebuilding? 
  Sanjana Hattotuwa, InfoShare (via Skype)   10:15 a.m.   BREAK 

 
 
10:30 a.m.   Respondents 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 36   Irwin Jacobs, Qualcomm 
   Deborah Estrin, UCLA  

   Bran Ferren, Applied Minds 
 11:00 a.m.   General Discussion 
   Moderator:  Jack Gibbons, Re
source Strategies, Steering    
   Committee Chair 
 11:15 a.m.   Panel 2:  In the Fi
eld:  Challenges and Opportunities    Moderator:  Patricia 
Thomson, USIP, Steering Committee     Preventive and Crisis Diplomacy 
John Packer, Human Rights Centre, University of Essex (by 

videoconference) 
  Strategic Gaming for Civil Resistance 
   Peter Ackerman and Ivan Marovi
c, International Center on     Nonviolent Conflict 
           Peacekeeping and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding 
   Nicholas Von Ruben, United Nations 
 12:15 p.m.   Respondents 
   Alan Kay, Viewpoints Research Institute 
   Nigel Snoad, Microsoft  

   Steve Wozniak, Jazz Technologies, Inc.      
 12:45 p.m.   LUNCH and Informal Discussion 
   Attendees  1:45 p.m.   Discussion re Next Step
s, Opportunities for Collaboration    Moderator:  Vint Cerf, 
Google Inc., Steering Committee   
 
2:45 p.m.   Final Comments 
   Jack Gibbons, Resource Strategies, Steering Committee Chair 
 3:00 p.m.   ADJOURN 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 37Appendix B  Attendee List NAE Workshop on the Use of ICT in Peacebuilding   NAE Steering Committee  John H. (Jack) Gibbons* 
(Former Assistant to the President for 
Science and Technology and Former 
Director, OSTP) President 

Resource Strategies 

 Vinton G. Cerf* Chief Internet Evangelist Google, Inc.  Jane Holl Lute 
(not attending) Assistant Secretary-General 
Department of Peacekeeping Operations 

United Nations  Raj Reddy* 
(not attending) Mozah Bint Nasser University Professor of 
Computer Science and Robotics 
Carnegie Mellon University 
 Patricia Powers Thomson 
Executive Vice President  
U.S. Institute of Peace 
   
Speakers  
Peter Ackerman Founding Chair International Center on Nonviolent Conflict  Sanjana Hattotuwa** 
Head, ICT and Peacebuilding, InfoShare and Special Advisor, ICT4Peace Foundation 
 Ivan Marovic Consultant  John Packer*** Professor of International Law and Director of the Human Rights Centre 
University of Essex  
 Giacomo Rambaldi 
Senior Programme Coordinator 
Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural 
Co-operation ACP-EU  Richard Solomon President 
U.S. Institute of Peace 
 Chris Spence Director, Technology Strategy and Programs 
National Democratic Institute for 
International Affairs 
 * Member of the NAE 
** Attended via Skype  
*** Attended via videoconference Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 38Nicholas Von Ruben Chief Integrated Support Services 

United Nations 
  Confirmed Guests  
Dale Burton* Vice President Technology and CTO Integrated Systems 

Northrop Grumman Corp. 
 Peter Cherry* Chief Analyst 
SAIC  Derrick Cogburn Assistant Professor of Information  
School of Information Studies 

Syracuse University 

Director of the Center for Research on 
Collaboratories and Technology Enhanced 
Learning Communities 
 Craig Collins (not attending) Coordinator Initiative on Conflict Prevention through  Quiet Diplomacy 
Human Rights Internet 
 Deborah Estrin 
Professor Computer Science  

University of California, Los Angeles 
 Bran Ferren Co-Chairman and Chief Creative Officer 
Applied Minds 
 Michael Hawley 
Director of Special Projects 
Go Expeditions 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 

 Irwin Jacobs* 
Chairman 
QUALCOMM, Inc. 
 Alan Kay* President 
Viewpoints Research Institute, Inc. 

 Patrick Meier Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy 
Tufts University 

Harvard Humanitarian Initiative 
 William ﬁBillﬂ Nash 
Adjunct Senior Fellow for Conflict Prevention and Director
, Military Fellows 
Program 
Council on Foreign Relations 
 Colin Rule Director of Online Dispute Resolution eBay and PayPal  Nigel Snoad Lead Capabilities Researcher Microsoft Humanitarian Systems 
 Daniel Stauffacher (not attending) Chairman 
ICT4Peace Foundation  Horacio Trujillo 
Director of Research 
Humanity United 

 Eli Turk Chairman of the Board 
Human Rights Internet 

 Steve Wozniak* 
Executive Vice President  
Jazz Technologies, Inc. 
  * Member of the NAE 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 39U.S. Institute of Peace Staff  Robin Gibbin Contractor   NAE Staff  Proctor Reid Director, Program Office 
National Academy of Engineering 

 Greg Pearson 
Senior Program Officer 
National Academy of Engineering 

 Jacqueline Martin Senior Awards Assistant 
National Academy of Engineering 

 Antwuan Wallace 
Science and Technology Policy Fellow Engineering Ethics Center 
National Academy of Engineering 

 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 40 Appendix C  Terms of Reference  The Use of ICT in Peacemaking National Academy of Engineering  Terms of Reference
 January 2007   Summary:  The National Academy of Engineering (
NAE) proposes to convene a group of experts in diverse fields to consider the role of information and comm
unication technology (ICT) in promoting peace and conflict resolution.   Th
e full-day workshop will consider current and 
emerging technologies and strategies for em
ploying them in conflict management and 
diplomacy.  It will also explore 
how organizations with a role in
 promoting peace, like the U.S. 
Institute of Peace, can most effectively leve
rage ICT in carrying out their missions.   
 Background and Rationale:  The United States Institute of Peace, the project™s primary funder, 
is the only national organization with a Congressional mandate to help prevent and resolve 
violent international conflicts, promote post-
conflict stability, and increase peace building 
capacity worldwide.  The Institute™s work is ba
sed on best practices and research.  Its programs 
are both analytical and operational.  Institute in
itiatives are currently active in Iraq, Afghanistan, 
the Sudan, the Niger Delta, the Balkans, Colomb
ia, and Southeast Asia, among other regions.  The Institute has asked the NAE to organize and convene a meeting that will facilitate the organization™s efforts to more effectively use ICT in achieving its mission. 
 
The project recognizes the potentially valuable role ICT can play in supporting international development and diplomacy, as well as the need for peacebuilding communities to work 

collaboratively with science and engineering 
communities.  It leverages the reputation and 
convening powers of The National Academies, 
which have a long, distinguished history of examining issues at the nexus of science, te
chnology and public policy for the betterment of 
humankind.    

 
Objectives:  The meeting will have two objectives:
  1. To explore the application of existing and on-the-horizon ICT that can facilitate conflict 
management (i.e., conflict prevention, medi
ation, and resolution, as well as post-conflict operations) with greater efficiency and efficacy; and Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 412. To begin to develop an agenda for engaging other organizations in ICT-related conflict 
management and to explore the possibility of a 
sustained working group to continue to explore these issues. 
  
Planning and Logistics:  Meeting planning, including selection of attendees and specification of an agenda, will be overseen by a steering committee 
of approximately five individuals, including 
at least one NAE member, who w
ill chair the group.  One member
 of the steering committee will 
represent the interests of the U.S. Institute of
 Peace.  The committee will conduct its work via 
telephone conference calls.  The meeting will be 
held on the West Coast at a location convenient to the majority of attendees.  An effort will 
be made to have the meeting space donated as in-
kind support.  The meeting will begin in the mo
rning and adjourn mid-afternoon, allowing most 
travelers to arrive and depart on the same day. 
 Invitees will be sent background information and 

questions to consider in advance of the meeting.   
 
Possible Topics for Discussion
:  A number of discussion to
pics are possible, including  
1. The use of ICT to extend and increase the 
impact of the education and training missions 
of peace-building organizations 

2. The use of ICT to monitor and improve inte
lligence about potential and active conflicts 3. The use of ICT to improve communications in
 such areas as simultaneous translation, 
text categorization, and security 
4. The use of ICT to support ﬁvirtual diplomacyﬂ in zones of conflict 
 
Attendees:  A total of 10 to 15 individuals will be invited to the meeting.  It is expected that 
persons with the following backgrounds will take part:  
 1.      Academic and industrial e
ngineers expert in a variety of sectors, including the ICT sector, simulation and modeling, and gaming 
2.      Individuals who think creatively about the future of technology and of technology-society interactions 

3.      Experts in diplomacy a
nd conflict management/peace building 
4.      Representatives of foundations and government agencies with
 an interest in encouraging collaboration between the science and engineering communities and peacemaking organizations.   
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 42 Appendix D  Statement by Alan Kay2   Technology and Peace?  People who like to make war are avid to use technol
ogy. And so are people who like to make peace. In 
the end, war and peace are really about ﬁhumans as they are,ﬂ namely, ﬁanthropology without apologies.ﬂ 
Mutual economic comfort and various substitutes for naked power seem to be a better deterrent to war 
than philosophical arguments. This calls for ﬁwealth
,ﬂ and most wealth-making since the invention of 
agriculture has come from scientific engineering, 
especially in the last 400 years after science was 
invented and started to guide engineering. As Bob Noyce
3 liked to say, ﬁScientists, Engineers and Artists 
create wealth, everyone else just moves it around!ﬂ 
So ﬁenticingﬂ (a nicer word than bribing) people 
with comfort and ideas is likely a good initial strategy 
for peace making. For a country like the US that 
is very good at creating wealth (and its tangible projection in the form of money), this suggests that
 we should not wage war but instead ﬁessentially buy 
out competitorsﬂ via goods and education. (This needs 
to go far beyond simple bribery, but it is startling 
to divide population counts into the amounts we sp
end for war-making. Most people are ﬁbribableﬂ for 
much less.) In the larger sense of ﬁgoods and educati
on,ﬂ we should put much more effort into stealthily 
re-educating the world (and, by the way, ourselves) rather
 than trying to force matters, and using ﬁmatters 
of force.ﬂ Technologies are part of ﬁstealth education,ﬂ because the form of a technology can have gradual effects 
not readily apparent in its initial invention and use.
 As McLuhan said, ﬁWe shape tools and then they 
reshape us.ﬂ Earlier, Thoreau noted less approvingly: ﬁWe become the tools of our tools.ﬂ A beautiful 
Amish saying is: ﬁWhat you take into yo
ur hands, you take into your heart.ﬂ 
Sometimes this is beneficial. Anthropologists gradua
lly discovered that literate cultures have qualitatively 
different thought patterns than oral cultures, and could only ascribe the difference to mental changes 
brought by gaining the skills of reading and writing, 
which gradually lead to new forms of exposition and 
argument. The printing press made a huge difference, 
not just by spreading ideas around, but by changing 
how people learned and thought, and in what terms. 
Another McLuhan gem: ﬁYou can argue about a lot 
of things with stained glass windows, but Democracy is not one of them!ﬂ  
This point of view on the relations between media, 
knowledge and ways of thinking is as startling to most 
people as ﬁthe world is not as is seemsﬂ is to most non-sci
entists (in fact, it is part of ﬁthe world is not as it seemsﬂ as related to human beings). If media are not ne
utral to ideas and thought, we should be as careful 
with the invention and deployment of new media as we would with infectious biological agents with no 
vaccines. For example, we would be able to see th
at television is one of the most pernicious and 
dangerous mediums to introduce into society, since w
ith almost no sense of loss it can displace media that 
can better carry important ideas. Many of the electronic communication devices of the last 150 years 
bring back oral communications modes and ways of th
inking. This delivers ﬁAir Guitar:ﬂ how to use lots 
of transistors without advancing anything important! 
This is what McLuhan feared when he predicted a ﬁglobal villageﬂ and a return to tribal thinking and senses of identity, fear, and actions. And it is part of Thoreau™s terse warning. 
                                                 2 http://www.vpri.org/pdf/A
CK-Pic-Bio-05-16-07.pdf.
 3 The co-inventor of the integrated circuit and co-founder of Intel. 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 43So, a seemingly innocent technological benefitŠsuch as using mobile telephones to provide needed and 
useful information, or encouraging television as ﬁan
 information technology that doesn™t need to be 
learnedﬂŠcould derail the larger needs of a society 
to learn to think non-orally. What if the very 
difficulties of learning to read and write are the 
real benefits when surmounted? What if the real 
difficulties of math, science and engineering are the real benefits when mastered? 
Science is the most important of all of these because it represents humanity™s strongest attempt at 
processes which try to get around the ﬁpoor thinkingﬂ built into our brains. It is not about just trying to 

think better, but to 
learn to think in very different ways
 about very different perspectives that are taken on 
the world. These powerful error-detecting and corr
ecting processes are even more needed for the 
difficulties of political thinking than for the physical and biological worlds.  
Good teachers are scarce everywhere in the world, and 
the situation is particularly acute in less-developed regions. Science™s very different ﬁthe world is not 
as it seemsﬂ epistemology is 
difficult for most adults not brought up with this non-commonsense point of vi
ew (and thus this is not part of most teachers™ 
world view). Developing better teachers, and enough more of them, is not
 easy or swift, even with will and resources. 
What can technology do to help here? We know from th
e history of the printing press that much learning 
can be done through books without teachers if the learne
rs can read for content. This was one of the main 
educational goals of the 19th century and early 20
th century, but can hardly be found now. It is now 
possible to provide books (and more) on electronic 
devices for about 20 cents a book providing one is 
willing to purchase 500 books. This fits very well into 
the needs of K-8 education and can be thought of 
as access to many more than 500 books (and many othe
r educational activities as well) for an amortized 
cost of about $10-$15 per year. 
Given that the teaching and mentoring problem for 
non-obvious epistemologies is the largest part of 
improving education, the most interesting and important question is not how in
expensively can personal laptop computers be made to provide ﬁbooksﬂ and 
other ﬁinformationﬂ for the underprivileged, but 
whether the 50 year old question ﬁcan the computer 
be programmed to act better than no teacher and 
better than a poor teacherﬂ be answered in the affirmative? 
If so, then for the first time there exists a route to 
provide ﬁa teacher for every learner,ﬂ and it should be 
easy to see that that this is one of the ﬁGrandest
 Challenges For Humanityﬂ (and especially for the STEM 
fields).  
One of the hardest, but most useful and important ﬁt
eachersﬂ to make that could act above the needed 
thresholds would be to create ﬁa teacherﬂ that can he
lp most children learn to read and write in their 
indigenous language without needing any other special 
human assistance. Or to help children learn ﬁreal 
scienceﬂ and ﬁreal math.ﬂ One of the important inte
llectual transitions that have to be managed for 
children are those that necessarily start with stori
es (because they are strongly built into human minds) 
and move toward the ﬁnon-storyﬂ forms of math and sci
ence that have been so powerful. Another learning 
sequence moves through ﬁmuscular learningﬂ by dire
ct contact with the world through ﬁconfigurational 
learningﬂ (including visual and auditory figurations),
 and then to the more abstract world of symbolic 
representations. 
Of course, it would be great to involve other members 
of family and society as much as possible, but this 
really needs to work for the 
learners alone if necessary. 
This has been a dream in computing for more than 50 
years now, and some of the best people in our field 
have failed to create above threshold systems (the se
veral interesting exceptions have been brute force 
designs that are very expensive 
and time-consuming to produce). 
 However, if we are trying to do better than a poor teacher, and we are not trying to do as well as a great 
teacher, the computing resources and accumulated te
chniques today should be sufficient to make a 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 44concerted effort and succeed. This would qualitativel
y change the world by qualitatively changing how 
education can happen and be delivered.  
It would cost considerably less than a B2 bomber to
 pull off, and would have immeasurably more positive 
impact.  
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 45Appendix E4  Backgrounder on International Conflict  Overview  It is essential that the United States, working with th
e international community, play an active part in 
preventing, managing, and resolving threats to inte
rnational peace.  In the post-Cold War world, these threats are numerous. They include ethnic and religio
us strife, fragile and undemocratic states, weak 

economies and growing economic disparity, political extremism, competition for scarce resources, and 

the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. The resulting suffering and destabilization of societies 
make effective forms of conflict management impera
tive. The United States Institute of Peace (USIP) is 
dedicated to meeting this challenge in new and innovative ways. 
 This backgrounder is intended as a high-level overview of the phases and drivers of conflict,
5 as well as the next decade™s top threats to p
eace. More in depth resources can be found on the Institute™s website 
(http://www.usip.org).     
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
I.  Cycle of Conflict 
 
The curve of conflict is a model that helps illustrate
 how conflicts tend to evolve over time. The curve below shows the different phases of conflict and corresponding types of third-party intervention. 
Understanding where a conflict falls in the cycle 
is essential to developing effective strategies for 
intervention, along with the timing of those strategies. 
                                                   4 Prepared by the U.S. Institute 
of Peace.  Used with permission. 
5 Throughout this document the term ﬁconflictﬂ
 is used as shorthand for violent conflict.
 Conflict Fast Facts  There are approximately 100 nascent, active, or pos
t-conflict situations in the world today.   
 In the 20th century, an average of 940,000 people died due to conflict 
every year.   Since the start of this century, an average of 2,
738 people have been driven from their homes by conflict 
every day.   Over the past decade, 2 million children have been killed by armed conflict, 1 million orphaned, 6 million 
     disabled, and 10 million impacted with severe psychological trauma.  

 For every violent death in conflict, there are an esti
mated 10 ﬁindirect deathsﬂ due to war-exacerbated factors 
    such as malnutrition. 
 In 2006, 64.5% of the world™s population felt the effects of armed conflict. 
 Billions of dollars are invested annually to sustain wa
rfare capacity. There is no comparable investment in peacefare.  Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 46All rights reserved. Please do not reproduce without appropriately citing the 
United States Institute of Peace
Conflict 
Prevention:                  
-State-Building              

-Int™l Systems
Core Conflict 
Management Skills
Conflict Prevention: 
Crisis Response
Post Conflict:    
-Stabilization    
-State-Building
Peacemaking
Peacekeeping
ceasefire
confrontation
peace 
agreement
outbreak of 
violence
rising tension
sporadic 
violence
decreasing 

tension
  II.  Drivers of Conflict 
 Below is a summary of the extensive and frequently 
contentious literature on the drivers of large-scale 

political violence. These drivers have been divided into three categories: drivers of both intra- and inter-
state conflict, drivers of intra-state conflict / civil wars, 
and drivers of inter-state c
onflict. It is important to 
note that the motivations of leaders and fighters can often be different, that conflicts often have multiple 
drivers, and that drivers change over time. 
 Drivers of Both Intra- and Inter-State Conflict: 
 Competition among social groups/ideological differences are often cited as drivers of 
conflict, typically focusing on tendencies of peopl
e to align with tribal, ethnic, or religious 
groups and to make sharp in-group / out-gr
oup distinctions. Collier and colleagues, for 
instance, find that ethnic and linguistic diversity 
within a society is correlated with onset of 
civil wars.6  Samuel Huntington™s controversial argument
 that fault lines between civilizations will be a major source of conflict in the early 21
st century also fits this general 
category at the global level.
7   Some have argued that competition for resources 
and
 greed contribute significantly to 
political violence.  Thomas Homer-Dixon™s research program has found that demographic 
and environmental stresses tend to promote civil violence.  For example, Jared Diamond and 
others have argued that population density and resulting scarc
ity of arable land created 
conditions that led to the 1994 genocide in Rwanda.
8  More broadly, according to Michael 
Klare, ﬁHistorically, many wars have been
 fought over the possession or control of vital 
resources: water, arable land, gold and silv
er, diamonds, copper, petroleum, and so on.ﬂ
9 This driver also manifests when parties or individua
ls engage in violence to enrich themselves. 
                                                 6 Paul Collier, Anke Hoeffler, and Dominic Rohner, 
Beyond Greed and Grievance: Feasibility and Civil War
. CSAE WPS/2006-10 (August 2006). Available on-line at: 
http://www.csae.ox.ac.uk/workingpapers/pdfs/2006-10text.pdf
. 7 Samuel Huntington, 
The Clash of Civilizations and 
the Remaking of World Order
 (New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 1998). 
8 Jared Diamond, 
Collapse: How Societies C
hoose to Fail or Succeed
 (New York, NY: Viking Press, 2004). 
9 Michael Klare, ﬁResource Conflict,ﬂ Compiled for the Peace and World Security Studies Program (PAWSS). Available on-line 
at: http://pawss.hampshire.edu/topics/resource/index.html. 
Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 47  Other research suggests that 
militarization increases the risk of wars.  Countries with high military 

expenditures relative to GDP are more likely to experience civil wars, but the direction of causality is 
uncertain.  Researchers have likewise observed a correlation between arms races and war, but it is 
difficult to judge whether an arms race has an independent, causal effect on war. 
 Drivers of Intra-State / Civil Wars: 
 Early research into civil wars focused on 
grievances that emanate from different group 
characteristics, ideology, or material conditions.  
On the latter, for instance, Ted Robert Gurr argues 
that: ﬁThe potential for collective violence varies st
rongly with the intensity and scope of relative 
deprivation among members of a collectivity.ﬂ
10  However, grievances alone seldom lead to armed 
conflict.  Much of the recent empirical work 
supports the centrality of 
feasibility. A significant amount of this research concerns measures of rebel 
groups™ ability to finance operations and recruit par
ticipants, and on the capacity of states to counter 
rebel movements effectively.
11   Researchers have also found elite struggles for 
power and resources can drive violent conflicts. Efforts by "bad leaders" to gain
 and consolidate power are associat
ed with many of the most deadly 
internal and international conflicts. Underlying co
nditions affect the overall risk of conflict, but 
individual actions represent important proximate drivers of violence.
12   Researchers have noted the relationship between 
endowments of certain
 natural resources
 and civil 
wars.  Recent studies have concluded that oil and diamond production are ﬁrobustly correlated with 
civil war onsets.ﬂ13,14
 Other studies have suggested that heavy reliance on agriculture or exports of 
other primary commodities may increase risk of ci
vil war, possibly through vulnerability to price 
shocks.15   There is also evidence that the 
following social factors increase the likelihood of civil war (although 
they are not necessarily the underlying drivers): 
- High proportion of population who are males aged 15-29 
- High youth unemployment 
- Mountainous terrain (presumed to make it easier to organize guerilla campaigns) 
- Low per capita income - Low growth of per capita income 
Drivers of Inter-State Wars: 
 The dominant paradigm to explain major inter-state
 wars is the ﬁrealistﬂ school of international 
relations.  From the realist perspective, war results
 from the anarchic natu
re of the international 
                                                 10 Ted Robert Gurr, 
Why Men Rebel
 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1971), p. 24. 
11 For example, Fearon and Laitin hypothesi
ze ﬁthat financially, organizationally, and politically weak central governments 
render insurgency more feasible and attractive due to weak 
local policing or inept and corr
upt counterinsurgency practices.ﬂ
  See James Fearon and David Laitin, ﬁEthnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,ﬂ 
American Political
 Science Review
, Vol. 97, no. 1 
(February 2003), pp. 75-6. 
12 Michael E. Brown, "The Causes and Regional Dimensions of Internal Conflict." In 
Michael E. Brown (Ed.), The International 
Dimensions of Internal Conflict (Cambr
idge, MA: MIT Press, 1996), pp. 571-602; 
Daniel L. Byman & Kenneth M. Pollack, 
"Let Us Now Praise Great Men." 
International Security
, 25:4 (2001), 107-146.
 13 Michael Ross, ﬁA Closer Look 
at Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,ﬂ 
Annual Review of 
Political Science
, Vol. 9 (2006), p. 295 
14 Michael L. Ross, ﬁWhat Do We Know a
bout Natural Resources and Civil War?ﬂ 
Journal of Peace Research, Vol. 41, no. 3 (May 2004), p. 352. 
15 See Michael Ross, ﬁA Closer Look 
at Oil, Diamonds, and Civil War,ﬂ 
Annual Review of Political Science
, Vol. 9 (2006); also, 
Paul Collier and Anke Hoeffler, ﬁGreed and Grievance 
in Civil War,ﬂ World Bank, DECRG (2002). Available at 
http://econ.worldbank.org/programs/conflict
.  Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 48system, in which states can only attain security by
 accumulating power, which in turn threatens other 
states.  Extending this basic framework, Stephen Van Evera™s book, 
Causes of War, focuses on ﬁcauses related to the 
character and distribution of national power.
ﬂ He articulates five hypotheses: 
 - War is more likely when states fall pr
ey to false optimism about a favorable 
outcome. 
- War is more likely when a significant 
advantage lies with the first side to mobilize or attack. 
- War is more likely when the relative pow
er of states fluctuates sharplyŠthat is, 
when windows of opportunity and vulnerability are large. 
- War is more likely when resources are cumulativeŠthat is, when the control of 
resources enables a state to protect or acquire other resources. 
- War is more likely when conquest is easy.
16   ﬁThe absence of war between democracies comes as cl
ose as anything we have to an empirical law in 
international relations,ﬂ according to Jack Levy.
17  The inverse of this so-called democratic peace 
theory implies that 
lack of democracy helps explain inter-state wars.  Though this observation points 
clearly in favor of policies to promote democratiz
ation, Mansfield and Snyder have found that while 
peace between democracies holds for mature, stable democracies, 
states transitioning to democracy
 ﬁbecome more war-prone, not less, and they do fight wars with democratic states.
18   Some scholars have argued that misperceptions
 are important causes of war, particularly when they 
concern ﬁthe adversary™s capabilities or intentions.ﬂ
19  Drawing on psychology and organizational 
theory, studies suggest that these kinds of misp
erceptions are quite common in governments, 
militaries, and the individuals who lead them, 
especially in high-stress crisis situations. 
  Among the various kinds of disputes that can lead to war between states, 
disputes over territory
 appear to be especially combustible.  Vasquez a
nd Henehan, for example, found that territorial 
disputes ﬁhave a higher (conditional) probability of go
ing to war than policy or regime disputes,ﬂ and 
account for the majority of wars between 1816 and 1992.
20   III.  Most Significant Challenges 
to Peace over the Next Decade 
During a series of workings sessions conducted with 
USIP staff, the above drivers of conflict were 
coupled with an assessment of the current geo-po
litical landscape to identify the following contemporary 
threats to peace:   Environmental degradation / climate change 

- Lack of water 
- Reduced food supplies / marine resources  
- Competition for energy / environmental resources 
 Weapons of mass destruction   

- Increasing ability to acquire, develop, and transport 
                                                 16 Stephen Van Evera, 
Causes of War 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer
sity Press, 1999), p. 4. 
17 Jack S. Levy, ﬁDomestic Politic
s and War,ﬂ in Robert I. Rotberg and Theodore K. Rabb, eds., 
The Origin and Prevention of 
Major Wars (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1988), p. 88. 
18 Edward Mansfield and Jack Sn
yder, ﬁDemocratization and War,ﬂ 
Foreign Affairs
 (May/June 1995). 
19 Jack S. Levy, ﬁMisperception and the Causes of 
War: Theoretical Linkages and Analytical Problems,ﬂ 
World Politics
, Vol. 36, 
no. 1 (October 1983), pp.76-99. 
20 John Vasquez & Marie T. Henehan, ﬁTerritorial Disputes and 
the Probability of War, 1816-1992,ﬂ 
Journal of Peace Research
, Vol. 38, no. 2 (March 2001), pp. 123-138.
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 49- Increasing incentives to develop; increasing willingness to use - Continuing erosion of WMD non-proliferation regimes,
 and incipient erosion of nuclear deterrence  
 Weak economies / Fragile states / Undemocratic states  
- Subject to popular unrest or power grabs 
- Islamic radicalism, particularly when combined 
with undemocratic societies with weak or oil-
dependant economies and with few opportunities for the population 
- Disproportionate number of unemployed people un
der the age of 30 in developing countries 
prone to conflict 
 Weak international institutions / lack of will to act  

- Lack of international institutions with the 
(perceived) legitimacy to mediate disputes/hold 
offenders accountable - Inability to mobilize preventive action / lack of will to act 
- Declining U.S. power and resultant incentive to ot
hers to challenge existing power relationships  
 Clash of civilizations/ideologies   Growing number of disenfranchised 
- Widening gaps between rich and poor 
- Radicalization and empowerment (e.g., WMD, gl
obal reach) of disenfranchised and otherwise alienated groups  Global population movements (e.g., ref
ugees, legal and illegal immigration)  Perverse effects of globalization 

- Localized problems cascading catastrophically (including but not limited to pandemics) 
- Increased awareness on the part of the disenfranc
hised, stimulated by pervasive mass media / 
internet  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 50  