DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12458Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, ImprovingHealth Through Research334 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-12499-7 | DOI 10.17226/12458Sharyl J. Nass, Laura A. Levit, and Lawrence O. Gostin, Editors; Committee onHealth Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule;Board on Health Sciences Policy; Board on Health Care Services; Institute ofMedicineBeyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sharyl J. Nass, Laura A. Levit, and Lawrence O. Gostin, 
Editors
Committee on Health Research and the Privacy of Health Information: 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule
Board on Health Sciences Policy
Board on Health Care Services
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of 
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute 
of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their 
special competences and with regard for
 appropriate balance.
The project is sponsored by the National Institutes of Health and the National Cancer 
Institute, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, American Cancer Society, American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association, American Society for Clinical Oncology, Burroughs 
Wellcome Fund, and C-Change. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views 
of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Beyond the HIPAA privacy rule : enhancing privacy, improving health through research / Com
-mittee on Health Research and the Privacy of Health Information, the HIPAA Privacy Rule ; 
Sharyl J. Nass, Laura A. Levit, and Lawrence O. Gostin, editors.
       p. ; cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-309-12499-7 (pbk.)
 1.  United States. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. 2.  Medical 
recordsŠAccess controlŠUnited States 3.  HealthŠResearchŠUnited States 4.  Privacy, Right 
ofŠUnited States.  I. Nass, Sharyl J. II. Levit, Laura A. III. Gostin, Lawrence O. (Lawrence 
Ogalthorpe) IV. Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Committee on Health Research and the Privacy 
of Health Information, the HIPAA Privacy Rule. 
  [DNLM: 1.  United States. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. 
2.  Medical Records--legislation & jurisprudenceŠUnited StatesŠGuideline. 3.  PrivacyŠ
legislation & jurisprudence--United States--Guideline. 4.  Con˜dentialityŠlegislation & 
jurisprudence--United States--Guideline. 5.  ResearchŠmethodsŠUnited StatesŠGuideline.  
WX 173 B573 2009]
  R864.B49 2009
  651.5™04261Šdc22
                                                            2009003375
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth 
Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in 
the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
For more information about the Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page at: 
www.
iom.edu.
Copyright 2009 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2009. 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: 
Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through Research.
 Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁKnowing is not enough; we must apply.
 Willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ ŠG
oetheAdvising the Nation. Improving Health.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society 
of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated 
to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general wel
-fare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, 
the
 Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on 
scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National 
Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, 
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the 
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer
-ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is presi
-dent of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in 
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Insti
-tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its 
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. 
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of
 Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. 
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the 
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to 
the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The 
 
Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. 
Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, 
of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH RESEARCH AND THE PRIVACY OF 
 HEALTH INFORMATION: THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
LAWRENCE O. GOSTIN 
(Chair
), Professor of Law, Georgetown 
University Law Center, Washington, DC
PAUL APPELBAUM, 
Professor of Psychiatry, Medicine, and Law, 
Director, Division of Psychiatry, Law, and Ethics, Columbia 
University Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY
ELIZABETH BEATTIE, 
Professor, School of Nursing, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, The Queensland University of Technology, Queensland, 
Australia
MARC BOUTIN, 
Vice President of Policy, Development, and Advocacy, 
National Health Council, Washington, DC
THOMAS W. CROGHAN, 
Senior Fellow, Mathematica Policy Research, 
Inc., Washington, DC
STANLEY W. CROSLEY, 
Chief Privacy Of˜cer, Eli Lilly and Company, 
Law Division, Indianapolis, IN
SANDRA J. HORNING, 
Professor of Medicine/Oncology, Stanford 
School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA
JAMES S. JACKSON, 
Director, Institute for Social Research, University 
of MichiganŒAnn Arbor
MARY BETH JOUBLANC, 
Chief Privacy Of˜cer, State of Arizona, 
Arizona Government Technology Agency, Phoenix, AZ
BERNARD LO, 
Professor of Medicine, Director, Program in Medical 
Ethics, University of CaliforniaŒSan Francisco
ANDREW F. NELSON, 
Executive Director, HealthPartners Research 
Foundation, Minneapolis, MN
MARC ROTENBERG, 
President, Electronic Privacy Information Center, 
Washington, DC
WENDY VISSCHER, 
Director, Of˜ce of Research Protection, RTI 
International, Research Triangle Park, NC
FRED WRIGHT, 
Associate Chief of Staff for Research, VA Connecticut 
Healthcare System, New Haven, CT
CLYDE W. YANCY, 
Medical Director, Baylor Heart and Vascular 
Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX
Consultants
SARAH M. GREENE, 
Group Health Center for Health Studies, 
 Seattle, WA
DAVID HELMS, 
President and CEO, AcademyHealth, Washington, DC
ROBERTA NESS, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
JOY PRITTS, 
Health Policy Institute, Georgetown University, 
Washington, DC
ED WAGNER, 
Director of the W.A. MacColl Institute for Healthcare 
Innovation, Center for Health Studies, Group Health Cooperative of 
Puget Sound, Seattle, WA
ALAN WESTIN, 
Privacy Consulting Group, Teaneck, NJ
Study Staff
SHARYL NASS, 
Study Director and Senior Program Of˜cer
LAURA LEVIT, 
Associate Program Of˜cer (Christine Mirzayan Science 
and Technology Policy Graduate Fellow, December 2006 to March 
2007)
CATHERINE REYES, 
Christine Mirzayan Science and Technology Policy 
Graduate Fellow (September 2006 to November 2006)
MARY ANN PRYOR, 
Senior Program Assistant (until August 2007)
MICHAEL PARK, 
Senior Program Assistant (from September 2007)
ROGER HERDMAN, 
Director, Board on Health Care Services
ANDREW POPE, 
Director, Board on Health Sciences Policy
JULIE WILTSHIRE, 
Financial Associate (until July 2007)
PATRICK BURKE, 
Financial Associate (from July 2007)
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published 
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional 
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. 
The review comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect 
the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report:
CLARA D. BLOOMFIELD, 
Distinguished University Professor, The Ohio 
State University Comprehensive Cancer Center and James Cancer 
Hospital and Solove Research Institute, Columbus
ALEXANDER M. CAPRON,
 Professor of Law and Medicine, Gould 
School of Law, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
ANN CAVOUKIAN, 
Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario, 
Of˜ce of the Information and Privacy Commissioner, Canada
DEBORAH COLLYAR, 
President, PAIR: Patient Advocates in Research, 
Danville, CA
EDWARD GOLDMAN, 
Associate Vice President and Deputy General 
Counsel, University of Michigan Health System, Ann Arbor
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 REVIEWERS
EMMETT B. KEELER, 
Senior Mathematician, Pardee RAND Graduate 
School, University of CaliforniaŒLos Angeles School of Public Health, 
Los Angeles
BETSY KOHLER, 
Executive Director, North American Association of 
Central Cancer Registries, Spring˜eld, IL
MELISSA L. MARKEY, 
Associate, Hall, Render, Killian, Heath & 
Lyman, P.L.L.C., Troy, MI
DEVON McGRAW, 
Director, Health Privacy Project, Center for 
Democracy & Technology, Washington, DC
LYNNE WARNER STEVENSON, 
Director, Cardiomyopathy and Heart 
Failure Program, Brigham and Women™s Hospital, Cardiovascular 
Division, Boston, MA
MARCY WILDER, 
 Partner, Hogan & Hartson, L.L.P., Washington, DC
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions 
or recommendations nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its 
release. The review of this report was overseen by
 Neal A. Vanselow, M.D., 
Chancellor Emeritus and Professor Emeritus of Medicine at the Tulane 
University Medical Center, and
 Bradford H. Gray, Ph.D.,
 Editor, 
The Mil
-bank Quarterly
, and Principle Research Associate, The Urban Institute. 
Appointed by the National Research Council and the Institute of Medicine, 
they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination 
of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for 
the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee 
and the institution.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
The Committee is grateful to many individuals who provided valuable 
input and information for the study, either through formal presentations or 
through informal communications with study staff and Committee mem
-bers. Contributors to the study include: Joan E. Bailey-Wilson (National 
Institutes of Health), Mark Barnes (Huron Consulting Group), Marianna 
Bledsoe (National Institutes of Health, Of˜ce of Science Policy),
 Stefan 
Brands (Credentica), Suanna Bruinooge (American Society of Clinical Oncol
-ogy), Robert Califf (Duke Translational Medicine Institute), Fred H. Cate 
(Indiana University School of Law),
 Janlori Goldman (Columbia University, 
Mailman School of Public Health), Elizabeth Goss (American Society of 
Clinical Oncology), Sarah Greene (HMO Research Network), Christina 
Heide (Department of Health and Human Services, Of˜ce for Civil Rights), 
David Helms (AcademyHealth), James Hodge (Johns
 Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health), Judd
 Hollander 
(Society for Academic Emergency 
Medicine), Holly Howe (North American Association of Central Cancer 
Registries), International Pharmaceutical Privacy Consortium, Katherine 
Kahn (University of California, Los Angeles), Murat Kantarcioglu (Univer
-sity of Texas at Dallas), Anthony Knettel (Association of Academic Health 
Centers),
 Elizabeth Mayer-Davis (University of South Carolina), Roberta 
Ness (University of Pittsburgh), Rachel Nosowsky (Miller, Can˜eld,
 Paddock 
and Stone, PLC), Ann O™Mara (National Cancer Institute, Community 
Clinical Oncology Program), John Pandiani (The Bristol Observatory), 
Wendy
 Patterson (National Cancer Institute), Deborah Peel (Patient Privacy 
Rights), Joy Pritts (Georgetown Health Policy Institute), John Ring (Ameri
-can Heart Association),
 Kristin Rosati 
(Coppersmith Gordon Schermer & 
Acknowledgments
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Brokelman, PLC), Mark
 Rothstein (University of
 Louisville), Elaine Rubin 
(Association of Academic Health Centers), Richard Schilsky (University 
of Chicago), Frank L. Silver 
(Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network), 
Lana Skirboll (National Institutes of Health, Of˜ce of Science Policy), 
Penelope Solis (American Heart Association), Ed Wagner (HMO Research 
Network), Alan Westin (Privacy Consulting Group), Marcy Wilder (Hogan 
& Hartson, L.L.P.), and Marsha Young (Booz Allen Hamilton).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Summary
   
1Overview of Conclusions and Recommendations
 15
 De˜nitions, 16
  
De˜nition of Privacy and Why Privacy Is Important, 16
  
De˜nition of Health Research and Why Health Research Is 
Important, 19
 The HIPAA Privacy Rule, 21
 The Committee™s Charge and the Overarching Goals of the 
Recommendations, 22
  
Improve the Privacy and Data Security of Health Information, 24
  
Improve the Effectiveness of Health Research, 24
  
Improve the Application of Privacy Protections for Health 
Research, 25
 The Committee™s Recommendations, 26
  
I. Develop a New Approach to Protecting Privacy in All Health 
Research, 27
  
II. Revise the Privacy Rule and Associated Guidance, 36
  
III. Implement Changes Necessary for Both Policy Options 
Above, 55
1 Introduction
 63
 Brief History of HIPAA and the Privacy Rule, 63
 Privacy and Health Research, 65
 Privacy Concerns, 65
Contents
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 CONTENTS
 The Concerns of Health Researchers, 66
 Origins of the Study, 67
 Committee Appointment and Charge, 68
 Methods, 68
 The Committee™s Conclusions and Recommendations, 70
 Framework of the Report, 72
 References, 72
2 The Value and Importance of Health Information Privacy
 75
 Concepts and Value of Privacy, 75
  
De˜nitions, 75
  
The Importance of Privacy, 77
  
Public Views of Health Information Privacy, 78
 Historical Development of Legal Protections of Health Information 
Privacy, 86
  
Principles of Fair Information Practice, 91
 Security of Health Data, 93
  
The HIPAA Security Rule and Its Limitations, 94
 Potential Technical Approaches to Health Data Privacy and 
 Security, 100
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 104
 References, 105
3 The Value, Importance, and Oversight of Health Research
 111
 Concepts and Value of Health Research, 111
  
De˜nitions, 111
  
The Importance of Health Research, 112
  
Public Perceptions of Health Research, 119
 Oversight of Health Research, 122
  
Historical Development of Federal Protections of Health 
Information in Research, 122
  
Overview of the Common Rule, 123
  
FDA Protection of Human Research Subjects, 131
 Distinguishing Health Research from Practice, 131
  
Public Health Practice Versus Public Health Research, 133
  
Quality Improvement Versus Health Research, 136
 The Importance of Effective Communication with the Public, 139
  
Disseminating Health Research Results, 139
  
Research Registries, 141
  
Informing the Public About the Methods and Value of 
 Research, 142
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 145
 References, 148
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS
 xiii
4 HIPAA, the Privacy Rule, and Its Application to Health Research
 153
 Overview of HIPAA, 153
  
Portability and Tax Provisions, 153
  
Administrative Simpli˜cation Provisions, 154
 Development of the Privacy Rule Regulations, 155
 Overview of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 157
  
Entities Subject to the Privacy Rule, 157
  
Type of Information Protected, 158
  
Restrictions on Use and Disclosure, 159
  
Individual Rights, 160
 HIPAA and Research, 162
  
Research Uses and Disclosures with Individual Authorization, 163
  
Research Uses and Disclosures Without Individual 
 Authorization, 167
  
Linking Data from Multiple Sources, 177
  
Genetic Information and the Privacy Rule, 180
  
Accounting of Research Disclosures, 181
 Enforcement of the Privacy Rule, 184
 Relationship Between HIPAA and Other Laws, 186
  
Federal Research Statutes, 186
  
General Federal Laws, 186
  
State Laws, 187
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 188
 References, 193
5 Effect of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on Health Research
 199
 Overview of Survey Results, 199
  
Association of American Medical Colleges Survey, 200
  
National Cancer Advisory Board Survey, 203
  
AHRQ Survey, 203
  
National Survey of Epidemiologists, 204
  
HMO Research Network Survey, 204
  
AcademyHealth Survey, 206
  
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology 
Survey, 206
 North American Association of Central Cancer Registries, 207
  
American Society of Clinical Oncology Interviews, 208
  
Association of Academic Health Centers Focus Groups, 208
 Selection Bias, 209
  
General Studies of Consent and Selection Bias, 210
  
HIPAA Authorization and Selection Bias, 212
 Ef˜ciency of Research, 214
  
Cost and Time, 214
  
Recruitment, 218
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv
 CONTENTS
  
IRB and Privacy Board Oversight, 220
  
Business Associate Agreements, 227
  
International Collaboration, 228
 Abandoned Studies, 228
 Deidenti˜ed Information, 230
  
Access to Deidenti˜ed Data, 230
 Quality of Deidenti˜ed Data, 232
 Authorization Process, 233
 Concerns About Potential Legal Consequences, 234
 Potential Ways to Reduce Interpretive and Variability Among IRBs, 
Privacy Boards, and Covered Entities, 235
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 239
 References, 240
6 A New Framework for Protecting Privacy in Health Research
 245
 Review of the Limitations of the Privacy Rule, 247
  
Improve the Privacy and Data Security of Health 
Information, 247
  
Improve the Effectiveness of Health Research, 253
  
Improve the Application of Privacy Protections for Health 
Research, 255
 The New Framework, 257
  
Examples of Informative Models, 258
  
The Committee™s Recommendation, 264
  
The Role of Informed Consent in the New Framework, 266
 The New Framework Addresses the Overarching Goals, 269
  
Improving the Privacy and Data Security of Health 
Information, 269
  
Improving the Effectiveness of Health Research, 271
  
Improving the Application of Privacy Protections for Health 
Research, 272
 Relevance of the Recommendation to Other Federal Actions, 272
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 279
 References, 281
Appendixes
A Previous Recommendations to the Department of Health and 
 Human Services
 285
B Commissioned Survey Methodology
 293
C Committee Member and Staff Biographies
 301
Abbreviations and Acronyms
 311
Glossary
   
315
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1BEYOND
 THE
 HIPAA P
RIVACY
 R
ULE
:  ENHANCING
 P
RIVACY
, I
MPROVING
 HEALTH
 T
HROUGH
 R
ESEARCH
Ethical health research and privacy protections both provide valuable 
bene˜ts to society. Health research is vital to improving human health and 
health careŠand protecting individuals involved in research from harm and 
preserving their rights is essential to the conduct of ethical research. The pri
-mary justi˜cation for protecting personal privacy is to protect the interests 
of individuals. In contrast, the primary justi˜cation for collecting personally 
identi˜able health information for health research is to bene˜t society. But it 
is important to stress that privacy also has value at the societal level because 
it permits complex activities, including research and public health activities, 
to be carried out in ways that protect individuals™ dignity. It is also important 
to note that health research can bene˜t individuals, for example, when it 
facilitates access to new vaccines, therapies, improved diagnostics, and more 
effective ways to prevent illness and deliver care.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) developed 
a set of federal standards for protecting the privacy of personal health 
information under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996 (HIPAA).
1 The HIPAA Privacy Rule set forth detailed regulations 
1 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule (ﬁStandards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Informa
-tion: Final Ruleﬂ) can be found at 45 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) parts 160 and 164. 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/AdminSimpRegText.pdf (accessed August 2, 2008). A summary of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule, prepared by the HHS Of˜ce for Civil Rights, is available at http://www.
hhs.gov/ocr/privacysummary.pdf (accessed August 2, 2008). 
Summary
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
regarding the types of uses and disclosures of individuals™ personally identi˜
-able health informationŠcalled ﬁprotected health informationﬂŠpermitted 
by ﬁcovered entitiesﬂ (health plans, health care clearinghouses, and health 
care providers who transmit information in electronic form in connection 
with transactions for which HHS has adopted standards under HIPAA).
2 A 
major goal of the HIPAA Privacy Rule is to ensure that individuals™ health 
information is properly protected while allowing the ˚ow of information 
needed to promote high-quality health care. The HIPAA Privacy Rule also 
set out requirements for the conduct of health research.
The Institute of Medicine Committee on Health Research and the Pri
-vacy of Health Information (the committee) was charged with two principal 
tasks
3: (1) to assess whether the HIPAA Privacy Rule is having an impact 
on the conduct of health research, de˜ned broadly as ﬁa systematic inves
-tigation, including research development, testing and evaluation, designed 
to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledgeﬂ
4; and (2) to propose 
reco
mmendations to facilitate the ef˜cient and effective conduct of impor
-tant health research while maintaining or strengthening the privacy protec
-tions of personally identi˜able health information.
The committee™s conclusion is that the HIPAA Privacy Rule does not 
protect privacy as well as it should, and that, as currently implemented, 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule impedes important health research. The commit
-tee found that the Privacy Rule (1) is not uniformly applicable to all health 
research, (2) overstates the ability of informed consent to protect privacy 
rather than incorporating comprehensive privacy protections, (3) con˚icts 
with other federal regulations governing health research, (4) is interpreted 
differently across institutions, and (5) creates barriers to research and leads 
to biased research samples, which generate invalid conclusions. In addition, 
security breaches are a growing problem for health care databases. In devel
-oping its recommendations to improve this situation, the committee was 
guided by three overarching goals: (1) improve the privacy and data security 
of health information; (2) improve the effectiveness of health research; and 
(3) improve the application of privacy protections for health research. A 
summary of the committee™s recommendations is presented in Box S-1.
2 
45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006).
3 
The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Institute, 
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the American Cancer Society, the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association, the American Society for Clinical Oncology, the 
Burroughs Welcome Fund, and C-Change.
4 
45 C.F.R. § 164.510 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3RECOMMENDATION
 I.
 DEVELOP
 A N
EW
 A
PPROACH
 TO
 PROTECTING
 P
RIVACY
 IN
 A
LL
 H
EALTH
 R
ESEARCH
The committee™s ˜rst and foremost recommendation (Recommenda
-tion I) is that Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal 
agencies to develop a new approach to protecting privacy in health research 
that would apply uniformly to all health research. When this new approach 
is implemented, HHS should exempt health research from the HIPAA Pri
-vacy Rule. The new approach should enhance privacy protections through 
improved data security, increased transparency of activities and policies, 
and greater accountability, while also allowing important health research 
to be undertaken with appropriate oversight. The new approach should do 
all of the following:
Ł Apply to any person, institution, or organization conducting health 
research in the United States, regardless of the source of data or 
funding.
Ł Entail clear, goal-oriented, rather than prescriptive, regulations.
Ł Require researchers, institutions, and organizations that store 
health data to establish strong data security safeguards.
Ł Make a clear distinction between the privacy considerations that 
apply to interventional research and research that is exclusively 
information based.
Ł Facilitate greater use of data with direct identi˜ers removed in 
health research, and implement legal sanctions to prohibit unauthor
-ized reidenti˜cation of information that has had direct identi˜ers 
removed.
Ł Require ethical oversight of research when personally identi˜able 
health information is used without informed consent. HHS should 
develop best practices for oversight that should consider:
o Measures taken to protect the privacy, security, and con˜den
-tiality of the data;
o Potential harms that could result from disclosure of the data; 
and
o Potential public bene˜ts of the research.
Ł Certify institutions that have policies and practices in place to pro
-tect data privacy and security in order to facilitate important large-
scale information-based research for clearly de˜ned and approved 
purposes, without individual consent.
Ł Include federal oversight and enforcement to ensure regulatory 
compliance.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX S-1
 Summary of the Committee™s Recommendations
The committee™s foremost recommendation is the following:
I.
 Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal agencies to 
develop a new approach to protecting privacy that would apply uniformly 
to all health research. When this new approach is implemented, HHS 
should exempt health research from the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 Apply privacy, security, transparency, and accountability obligations to all health 
records used in research.
If national policy makers choose to continue to rely on the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
rather than adopt a new federal approach (Recommendation I), the committee 
recommends the following:
II.
 HHS should revise the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated guidance.
A.
 HHS should reduce variability in interpretations of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in health research by covered entities, Institutional Review Boards 
(IRBs) and Privacy Boards through revised and expanded guidance and 
harmonization.
1.
 HHS should develop a dynamic, ongoing process to increase empirical 
knowledge about current ﬁbest practicesﬂ for privacy protection in responsible 
research using protected health information (PHI), and promote the use of 
those best practices.
2.
 HHS should encourage greater use of partially
 deidenti˜ed data called ﬁlimited 
datasetsﬂ and develop clear guidance on how to set up and comply with the 
associated data use agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively, in order to 
enhance privacy in research by expanding use and usability of data with direct 
identi˜ers removed.
3.
 HHS should clarify the distinctions between ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure 
appropriate IRB and Privacy Board oversight of PHI disclosures for these 
activities.
4.
 HHS guidance documents should simplify the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s provisions 
regarding the use of PHI in activities preparatory to research and harmonize 
those provisions with the Common Rule, in order to facilitate appropriate 
IRB and Privacy Board oversight of identi˜cation and recruitment of potential 
research participants.
B. HHS should develop guidance materials to facilitate more effective 
use of existing data and materials for health research and public health 
purposes.
1.
 HHS should develop guidance that clearly states that individuals can autho
-rize use of PHI stored in databases or associated with biospecimen banks 
for speci˜ed future research under the HIPAA Privacy Rule with IRB/Privacy 
Board oversight, as is allowed under the Common Rule, in order to facilitate 
use of repositories for health research.
2.
 HHS should develop clear guidance for use of a single form that permits indi
-viduals to authorize use and disclosure of health information in a clinical trial 
and to authorize the storage of their biospecimens collected in conjunction 
with the clinical trial, in order to simplify authorization for interrelated research 
activities.
3.
 HHS should clarify the circumstances under which DNA samples  or sequences 
are considered PHI, in order to facilitate appropriate use of DNA in health 
research.
4.
 HHS should develop a mechanism for linking data from multiple sources so 
that more useful datasets can be made available for research in a manner that 
protects privacy, con˜dentiality, and security.
C.
 HHS should revise provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule that entail heavy 
burdens for covered entities and impede research without providing sub
-stantive improvements in patient privacy.
1.
 HHS should reform the requirements for the accounting of disclosures of PHI 
for research.
2.
 HHS should simplify the criteria that IRBs and Privacy Boards use in making 
determinations for when they can waive the requirements to obtain authoriza
-tion from each patient whose PHI will be used for a research study, in order to 
facilitate appropriate authorization requirements for responsible research.
Regardless of whether Recommendation I or II is implemented, the following rec
-ommendations, which are independent of the Privacy Rule, should be adopted:
III.
 Implement changes necessary for both policy options above (Recom
-mendations I and II).
A.
 All institutions (both covered entities and non-covered entities) in the 
health research community should take strong measures to safeguard 
the security of health data.
  
HHS should also support the development and use of new security technolo
-gies and self-evaluation standards.
B.
 HHSŠor, as necessary, CongressŠshould provide reasonable protec
-tion against civil suits for members of Institutional Review Boards and 
Privacy Boards who serve in good faith to encourage service on IRBs 
and Privacy Boards.
 But no protection for willful or wanton misconduct.
C.
 HHS and researchers should take steps to provide the public with more 
information about health research by:
1.
 Disseminating research results to study participants and the public.
2.
 Educating the public about how research is done and what value it provides.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5BOX S-1
 Summary of the Committee™s Recommendations
The committee™s foremost recommendation is the following:
I.
 Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal agencies to 
develop a new approach to protecting privacy that would apply uniformly 
to all health research. When this new approach is implemented, HHS 
should exempt health research from the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 Apply privacy, security, transparency, and accountability obligations to all health 
records used in research.
If national policy makers choose to continue to rely on the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
rather than adopt a new federal approach (Recommendation I), the committee 
recommends the following:
II.
 HHS should revise the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated guidance.
A.
 HHS should reduce variability in interpretations of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in health research by covered entities, Institutional Review Boards 
(IRBs) and Privacy Boards through revised and expanded guidance and 
harmonization.
1.
 HHS should develop a dynamic, ongoing process to increase empirical 
knowledge about current ﬁbest practicesﬂ for privacy protection in responsible 
research using protected health information (PHI), and promote the use of 
those best practices.
2.
 HHS should encourage greater use of partially
 deidenti˜ed data called ﬁlimited 
datasetsﬂ and develop clear guidance on how to set up and comply with the 
associated data use agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively, in order to 
enhance privacy in research by expanding use and usability of data with direct 
identi˜ers removed.
3.
 HHS should clarify the distinctions between ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure 
appropriate IRB and Privacy Board oversight of PHI disclosures for these 
activities.
4.
 HHS guidance documents should simplify the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s provisions 
regarding the use of PHI in activities preparatory to research and harmonize 
those provisions with the Common Rule, in order to facilitate appropriate 
IRB and Privacy Board oversight of identi˜cation and recruitment of potential 
research participants.
B. HHS should develop guidance materials to facilitate more effective 
use of existing data and materials for health research and public health 
purposes.
1.
 HHS should develop guidance that clearly states that individuals can autho
-rize use of PHI stored in databases or associated with biospecimen banks 
for speci˜ed future research under the HIPAA Privacy Rule with IRB/Privacy 
Board oversight, as is allowed under the Common Rule, in order to facilitate 
use of repositories for health research.
2.
 HHS should develop clear guidance for use of a single form that permits indi
-viduals to authorize use and disclosure of health information in a clinical trial 
and to authorize the storage of their biospecimens collected in conjunction 
with the clinical trial, in order to simplify authorization for interrelated research 
activities.
3.
 HHS should clarify the circumstances under which DNA samples  or sequences 
are considered PHI, in order to facilitate appropriate use of DNA in health 
research.
4.
 HHS should develop a mechanism for linking data from multiple sources so 
that more useful datasets can be made available for research in a manner that 
protects privacy, con˜dentiality, and security.
C.
 HHS should revise provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule that entail heavy 
burdens for covered entities and impede research without providing sub
-stantive improvements in patient privacy.
1.
 HHS should reform the requirements for the accounting of disclosures of PHI 
for research.
2.
 HHS should simplify the criteria that IRBs and Privacy Boards use in making 
determinations for when they can waive the requirements to obtain authoriza
-tion from each patient whose PHI will be used for a research study, in order to 
facilitate appropriate authorization requirements for responsible research.
Regardless of whether Recommendation I or II is implemented, the following rec
-ommendations, which are independent of the Privacy Rule, should be adopted:
III.
 Implement changes necessary for both policy options above (Recom
-mendations I and II).
A.
 All institutions (both covered entities and non-covered entities) in the 
health research community should take strong measures to safeguard 
the security of health data.
  
HHS should also support the development and use of new security technolo
-gies and self-evaluation standards.
B.
 HHSŠor, as necessary, CongressŠshould provide reasonable protec
-tion against civil suits for members of Institutional Review Boards and 
Privacy Boards who serve in good faith to encourage service on IRBs 
and Privacy Boards.
 But no protection for willful or wanton misconduct.
C.
 HHS and researchers should take steps to provide the public with more 
information about health research by:
1.
 Disseminating research results to study participants and the public.
2.
 Educating the public about how research is done and what value it provides.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Informative examples for such an approach include Ontario™s Personal 
Health Information Protection Act (PHIPA)
5 and a similar model recently 
proposed in the United Kingdom.
6 Ontario™s PHIPA shares a number of 
similarities with the HIPAA Privacy Rule. In general, both rules require 
the holder of personally identi˜able health data to get informed consent 
(referred to as authorization in the Privacy Rule) before using those data for 
a purpose other than providing services directly related to the health care 
of the patient. If a researcher wishes to use personally identi˜able health 
data without getting informed consent, both rules require the researcher 
to obtain a waiver of informed consent approved by an independent ethics 
board before the study begins.
However, the HIPAA Privacy Rule and PHIPA do have some key dif
-ferences. One major difference is that unlike the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 
which applies privacy obligations unevenly across the health care sector, 
PHIPA applies to health information custodians (HICs; e.g., providers, 
hospitals, and pharmacies) that collect, use, and disclose personally iden
-ti˜able health information, as well as to non-HICs that receive personally 
identi˜able health information from a HIC. Thus, the privacy protections 
follow the data.
Another important difference is that PHIPA permits HICs to disclose 
personally identi˜able health information without consent to ﬁprescribed 
persons or entitiesﬂ that have in place privacy practices, policies, and pro
-cedures approved by Ontario™s Information and Privacy Commissioner. The 
prescribed persons or entities may then disclose information to
 researchers 
either in deidenti˜ed form, or in identi˜able form with approval of a 
Research Ethics Board (Canadian equivalent of an Institutional Review 
Board [IRB] or Privacy Board). Consistent with the principle of transpar
-ency, a prescribed entity must also make public a description of its functions 
and a summary of its practices, policies, and procedures. A similar approach 
was recommended in a report commissioned by the United Kingdom™s Prime 
Minister on secondary uses of personal information. This report suggested 
the creation of ﬁsafe harbors,ﬂ which have three de˜ning characteristics: 
(1) they provide a secure environment for processing personally identi˜able 
health data, (2) they are restricted to ﬁapproved researchersﬂ who meet 
relevant criteria, and (3) they implement penalties and allow for criminal 
sanctions against researchers who abuse their access to personally identi˜
-able data. The committee believes that such an approach, combined with 
strong security measures, offers adequate privacy protections for personally 
5 
Personal Health Information Protection Act, Statutes of Ontario 2004, Ch. 3, Schedule A; 
Ontario Regulation 329/04.
6 
In a report commissioned by the United Kingdom™s Prime Minister on secondary uses of 
personal information.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7identi˜able health information in information-based health research, while 
greatly expanding research opportunities.
The committee™s new framework entails a two-part practical approach 
to protecting health information privacy because there are fundamental 
differences between information-based research (e.g., using medical records 
or stored biological samples) and direct, interventional human subjects 
research. Applying the same human subjects protections in these two dif
-ferent scenarios is neither appropriate nor justi˜able. Promoting individual 
autonomy is essential when a person™s health care or participation in clini
-cal research is considered. The purpose of informed consent in this type 
of research is mainly to protect research participants from physical harm 
by providing a description of the potential risks and bene˜ts of the study. 
In contrast, in information-based research that relies solely on medical 
records and stored biospecimens, the research participant faces no risk of 
direct physical harm. In this context, informed consent (authorization) is 
intended to ensure that individuals are able to exercise control over their 
personal information that is held by third parties, and to give individuals 
the right to determine whether their personal information can be used in 
a particular research project (or a series of such projects, if consent for 
future research is permitted). Because of these fundamental differences 
between information-based research and direct, interventional human sub
-jects research, the committee makes a clear distinction between the privacy 
considerations that apply to interventional research and research that is 
exclusively information based.
First, the committee recommends that all interventional research, 
regardless of funding source and support, should be required to comply 
with the Common Rule,
7 and all researchers who gain access to personally 
identi˜able health information as part of the interventional research should 
be required to protect that information with strong security measures. 
Research participants should be allowed to provide consent for future 
research uses of data and biological materials collected as part of the inter
-ventional study as long as an IRB reviews and approves the future uses, 
ensuring that the new study is not incompatible with the original consent.
Second, the committee recommends that HHS and other relevant fed
-eral agencies develop a new approach to uniform, goal-oriented oversight 
of information-based research, with a focus on best practices in privacy, 
security, and transparency as in PHIPA and the proposed United Kingdom 
model. This new approach should include a mechanism by which some 
programs or institutions could be certi˜ed by HHS or another accredit
-ing body, similar to a prescribed entity as in PHIPA or a safe harbor as in 
7 
The ﬁCommon Ruleﬂ is the term used by 18 federal agencies who have adopted the same 
regulations governing the protection of human subjects of research.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the United Kingdom model. Such entities could then collect and analyze 
personally identi˜able health information for clearly de˜ned and approved 
purposes, without individual consent. Because of the administrative require
-ments in becoming certi˜ed, this option is most appropriate for disease 
registries and other very large scale research databases. Certi˜ed entities 
could also aggregate personally identi˜able data from multiple sources, and 
then provide data to researchers with direct identi˜ers removed, under strict 
security requirements. This would facilitate greater use of data with direct 
identi˜ers removed in research because the aggregated datasets would be 
more complete and thus would lead to more accurate conclusions. To fur
-ther protect privacy, unauthorized reidenti˜cation of information that has 
had direct identi˜ers removed should be prohibited by law, and violators 
should face legal sanctions.
In cases where researchers cannot use data with direct identi˜ers 
removed, and personally identi˜able health information is needed for 
research, approval and oversight by an ethics oversight board should be 
required, partially analogous to what is now done under the HIPAA
 Privacy 
Rule and PHIPA. This board could perhaps entail a new body speci˜
-cally formulated to review medical records research, rather than relying 
on traditional IRBs that were created to review interventional research. 
If researchers seek a waiver of patient consent, an ethics oversight board 
should consider the measures the researchers propose to take to protect 
the privacy and con˜dentiality of the data, the potential harms that could 
result from disclosure of the data, and the potential public bene˜ts of the 
proposed research study. In order to facilitate consistent application of this 
option, HHS will need to develop clear guidance and best practices on how 
to assess the potential harm, the proposed measures to protect privacy and 
con˜dentiality, and the potential public bene˜ts of a research study, as has 
been done under PHIPA.
Although expectations regarding privacy vary among different demo
-graphic groups, public opinion polls suggest that a signi˜cant portion of the 
American public would like to control all access to their medical records 
for research via an individual consent mechanism. However, obligations to 
implement comprehensive privacy protectionsŠsuch as security, transpar
-ency, and accountabilityŠare independent of patient consent. Moreover, 
the committee concluded, based on considerable testimony and other evi
-dence, that a universal requirement for informed consent can lead to invalid 
results because of signi˜cant differences between patients who do or do not 
grant consent, and missed opportunities to advance medical science because 
it can be prohibitively costly and dif˜cult to obtain consent for studies that 
require analysis of very large datasets. As a result, the committee™s new 
framework includes two alternatives to consent that can be used in certain 
circumstances (e.g., disclosure to a certi˜ed entity and waiver of informed 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9consent by an ethics review board), which are intended to facilitate research 
that is socially bene˜cial and to protect privacy through increased security, 
transparency, and accountability.
If society seeks to derive the bene˜ts of medical research in the form of 
improved health and health care, information should be shared to achieve 
that greater good, and governing regulations should support the use of 
such information, with appropriate oversight. In the committee™s proposed 
new framework, the greater emphasis on ensuring the security protections 
of personally identi˜able health information (as in the committee™s Recom
-mendation III.A), facilitating research using data with direct identi˜ers 
removed, and ensuring the scienti˜c merits of any proposed research in the 
new framework should help to foster its acceptability. Nonetheless, effective 
communication with the public about how health research is done and the 
value it provides (the committee™s Recommendation III.C) will be important 
to address concerns and gain acceptance.
RECOMMENDATION
 II.
 REVISE
 THE
 P
RIVACY
 RULE
 AND
 A
SSOCIATED
 G
UIDANCE
If this comprehensive new approach is not implemented (or, for the 
interim while the new framework is being developed), the committee pro
-poses as an alternative that HHS revise the current HIPAA Privacy Rule 
and the associated guidance. These revisions would address some of the 
problems uncovered during the course of this study.
Recommendation II.A.
 The committee recommends that HHS develop 
guidance materials to reduce variability among IRBs and Privacy Boards 
in their interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule as applied to research. 
One of the weaknesses in the current privacy protection system is that there 
is extreme variability in the regulatory interpretations and approval deci
-sions among IRBs and Privacy Boards. Regulatory language often is not 
 
easily understandable and is subject to wide interpretation. Thus local IRBs 
and Privacy Boards interpret state and federal regulations independently, 
resulting in a great deal of variation in how the regulations are imple
-mented. To address this problem, the committee developed four speci˜c 
recommendations.
First, HHS should develop a dynamic, ongoing process to increase empir
-ical knowledge about current ﬁbest practicesﬂ for privacy protection in 
responsible research using protected health information (PHI), and promote 
use of those best practices. To accomplish this, HHS should regularly convene 
consensus development conferences in collaboration with health research 
stakeholders to collect and evaluate current practices in privacy protection.
Second, HHS should encourage greater use of partially deidenti˜ed 
data called ﬁlimited datasetsﬂ and develop clear guidance on how to set 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
up and comply with the associated data use agreements (DUAs) more 
ef˜ciently and effectively. Currently, there is pervasive confusion regarding 
the conditions of DUAs and how recipients may meet those conditions. As 
a result, in some health care settings, the burden of establishing a DUA 
prevents research from going forward. At the other extreme, some covered 
entities sign DUAs as a matter of course, providing little meaningful privacy 
protection to the patient.
Third, HHS should clarify the somewhat arti˜cial distinction it has 
made between ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure appropriate IRB and 
Privacy Board oversight of PHI disclosures for these closely related activi
-ties. This will require HHS to consult with relevant stakeholders to develop 
standard criteria for IRBs and Privacy Boards to use when making distinc
-tions between health research and related endeavors, such as public health 
practice and quality improvement practices. These criteria should be evalu
-ated regularly by HHS to ensure that the criteria are helpful and producing 
the desired outcomes.
Fourth, HHS should simplify the guidance regarding the use of PHI in 
activities preparatory to research and harmonize these provisions with the 
Common Rule. The committee recommends that all researchers (including 
those internal to a covered entity) be required to obtain IRB approval (as 
required under the Common Rule) prior to contacting potential research 
participants. When making a decision about whether to approve research 
projects, the IRB should review and consider the investigator™s plans for 
contacting patients, and ensure that the information will be used only 
for research projects approved by the IRB and will not be disclosed 
elsewhere.
Recommendation II.B.
 The committee recommends that HHS develop 
guidance materials to facilitate more effective use of existing data and 
materials for health research and public health purposes. Many institutions 
create and maintain databases with patient health information or reposito
-ries with biological materials collected from patients. These databases and 
biospecimen banks are used for many types of health research, including 
studies to understand diseases or to compare patient outcomes following 
different treatments. Current interpretations of provisions of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule sometimes make it dif˜cult to effectively use these valuable 
resources for health research. The committee developed four speci˜c recom
-mendations to facilitate important health research by maximizing the use
-fulness of patient data associated with biospecimen banks and in research 
databases, thereby allowing novel hypotheses to be tested with existing 
data and materials as knowledge and technology improve. The recom
-mendations would align interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule with the 
Common Rule on several points, simplify or clarify the relevant processes 
in research, and develop new tools for data aggregation.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11
First, the committee recommends that HHS develop guidance which 
clearly states that individuals can authorize use of PHI stored in databases 
or associated with biospecimen banks for speci˜ed future research under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule with IRB oversight, as is allowed under the Com
-mon Rule. Future uses should be described in suf˜cient detail to allow 
individuals to give informed consent, and researchers should be required 
to have IRBs determine that the new research is not incompatible with the 
initial consent. Second, the committee recommends that HHS develop clear 
guidance for use of a single form that permits individuals to authorize use 
and disclosure of health information in a clinical trial and to authorize the 
storage of their biospecimens collected in conjunction with the clinical trial. 
This will simplify the authorization process for interrelated research activi
-ties by integrating all relevant information into one simple document.
Third, the committee recommends that HHS clarify the circumstances 
under which DNA samples or sequences are considered PHI. Genetic infor
-mation does not itself identify an individual in the absence of other identify
-ing information. However, in some circumstances, a person™s genetic code 
could be construed as a unique identi˜er in that it could be used to match a 
sequence in another biospecimen bank or databank that does include identi
-˜ers. The committee advocates a focus on strong security measures and the 
adoption of strict prohibitions and legal sanctions against the unauthorized 
reidenti˜cation of individuals from DNA sequences, by anyone.
Fourth, HHS should develop a mechanism for linking data from mul
-tiple sources so that more useful datasets can be made available for research 
in a manner that protects privacy, con˜dentiality, and security. One way this 
could be accomplished, for example, might be through data warehouses 
that are certi˜ed for the purpose of linking data from different sources. The 
organizations responsible for such linking would be required to use strong 
security measures and would maintain the details about how the linkage was 
done, should another research team need to recreate the linked dataset.
Recommendation II.C.
 The committee recommends that HHS revise 
provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule that currently hinder research but 
do not provide substantive privacy protections. First, HHS should reform 
the requirements for the accounting of disclosures (AOD) of PHI made 
for research and public health purposes. Until technology advances make 
automatic AOD tracking feasible, affordable, and widely available, the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule should permit covered entities to inform patients in 
advance that PHI might be used for health research with IRB/Privacy Board 
oversight or for public health purposes. As an alternative to AOD, to ensure 
transparency, institutions should maintain a list, accessible to the public, of 
all studies approved by an IRB/Privacy Board.
In addition, HHS should simplify the criteria that IRBs and Pri
-vacy Boards use in determining whether to waive the requirement that 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 
researchers obtain authorization from each patient whose PHI will be 
used in a research study. If HHS decides to retain the current waiver 
 
criteria, HHS should provide clear and reasonable de˜nitions to the vague 
terms used in the waiver criteria (i.e., what constitutes ﬁminimal riskﬂ to 
the privacy of individuals and what constitutes ﬁimpracticableﬂ), as well 
as providing speci˜c case examples. This would be especially helpful for 
multi
-institutional studies, which fall under the jurisdiction of multiple 
IRBs or Privacy Boards.
RECOMMENDATION
 III.
 IMPLEMENT
 CHANGES
 NECESSARY
 FOR
 BOTH
 POLICY
 OPTIONS
 ABOVE
 (R
ECOMMENDATIONS
 I 
AND
 II)
The committee™s last set of recommendations do not directly relate to 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule, but should be adopted in order to achieve the 
committee™s overarching goals under both policy options described above 
(the new framework or revisions to the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated 
guidance).
Recommendation III.A.
 The committee recommends that all health 
research institutions improve the security of personally identi˜able health 
information. For example, institutions could: appoint a security of˜cer 
responsible for assessing data protection needs and implementing solutions 
and staff training; make greater use of encryption and other techniques for 
data security; include data security experts on IRBs; implement a breach 
noti˜cation requirement, so that patients may take steps to protect their 
identity in the event of a breach; and implement layers of security protec
-tion to eliminate single points of vulnerability to security breaches. In addi
-tion, the federal government should support (1) the development and use of 
genuine privacy-enhancing techniques that minimize or eliminate the col
-lection of personally identi˜able data, and (2) standardized self-evaluations 
and security audits and certi˜cation programs to help institutions achieve 
the goal of safeguarding the security of personal health data.
Recommendation III.B.
 The committee also recommends that HHSŠ
or, as necessary, CongressŠprovide reasonable protection against civil suits 
brought pursuant to state or federal laws for members of IRBs and Privacy 
Boards for decisions made within the scope of their responsibilities under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule. The limitation on liability 
should not include protection for willful and wanton misconduct in review
-ing the research, but should instead be reserved for good-faith decisions, 
backed by minutes or other evidence. Effective oversight of health research 
depends on the recruitment of quali˜ed and knowledgeable volunteers to 
serve on IRBs and Privacy Boards. But the increasing workload and com
-plexity of IRB and Privacy Board service have made it dif˜cult to recruit 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 13
and retain knowledgeable IRB members and to ensure time for the ethical 
re˚ection necessary to make appropriate decisions about human research 
projects. Moreover, because of the growth over the past decade of lawsuits 
naming individual IRB members as defendants, fear of penalties and civil 
suits can be a signi˜cant deterrent in recruiting quali˜ed volunteers to serve 
on IRBs and Privacy Boards.
Recommendation III.C.
 Finally, the committee recommends that HHS 
and researchers take steps to provide the public with more information 
about health research. Surveys indicate that the vast majority of Americans 
believe health research is important, and they are interested in the ˜ndings 
of research studies. Yet patients often lack information about how health 
research is conducted and are rarely informed about research results that 
may have a direct impact on their health. The committee recommends that 
researchers inform interested research participants (who granted authori
-zation for a particular study) with a simpli˜ed summary of the results at 
the conclusion of a research study. HHS should also encourage researchers 
to register their trials and other studies in public databases, particularly 
when the research is being conducted under a waiver of authorization. In 
addition, HHS and the health research community should work to educate 
the public about how research is done, and what value it provides. These 
recommendations could be accomplished without any changes to HIPAA 
or the Privacy Rule by making them a condition of funding for research 
grants from HHS and other research sponsors, and by providing additional 
funds to cover the cost.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
Overview of Conclusions 
and Recommendations
Ethical health research and privacy protections both provide valuable 
bene˜ts to society. Health research is vital to improving human health and 
health careŠand protecting individuals involved in research from harm 
and preserving their rights is essential to the conduct of ethical research. 
The primary justi˜cation for protecting personal privacy is to protect the 
interests of individuals. In contrast, the primary justi˜cation for collecting 
personally identi˜able health information for health research is to bene˜t 
society. But it is important to stress that privacy also has value at the societal 
level because it permits complex activities, including research and public 
health activities, to be carried out in ways that protect individuals™ dignity. 
It is also important to note that health research can bene˜t individuals, for 
example, when it facilitates access to new therapies, improved diagnostics, 
and more effective ways to prevent illness and deliver care.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) developed 
a set of federal standards for protecting the privacy of personal health 
information under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
1 The HIPAA Privacy Rule set forth detailed regula
-tions regarding the types of uses and disclosures of individuals™ personally 
 
identi˜able health informationŠcalled ﬁprotected health informationﬂŠ
permitted by ﬁcovered entitiesﬂ (health plans, health care clearing houses, 
and health care providers who transmit information in electronic form in 
connection with transactions for which HHS has adopted standards under 
1 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule can be found at 45 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.) parts 160 
and 164 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
HIPAA).
2 A major goal of the Privacy Rule is to ensure that individuals™ 
health information is properly protected while allowing the ˚ow of infor
-mation needed to promote high-quality health care. The Privacy Rule also 
set out requirements for the conduct of health research.
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) Committee on Health Research and 
the Privacy of Health Information (the committee) was charged with two 
principal tasks
3: (1) to assess whether the HIPAA Privacy Rule is having an 
impact on the conduct of health research, de˜ned broadly to include biomedi
-cal research, epidemiological studies, and health services research, as well as 
studies of behavioral, social, and economic factors that affect health; and 
(2) to propose recommendations to enable the ef˜cient and effective conduct 
of important health research while maintaining or strengthening the privacy 
protections of personally identi˜able health information (Box O-1).
The committee™s conclusion is that the HIPAA Privacy Rule does not 
protect privacy as well as it should, and that, as currently implemented, 
the Privacy Rule impedes important health research. The committee found 
that the Privacy Rule (1) is not uniformly applicable to all health research, 
(2) overstates the ability of informed consent to protect privacy rather than 
incorporating comprehensive privacy protections, (3) con˚icts with other 
federal regulations governing health research, (4) is interpreted differently 
across institutions, and (5) creates barriers to research and leads to biased 
research samples, which generate invalid conclusions. In addition, security 
breaches are a growing problem for health care databases. In this report, 
the committee presents its analysis and ˜ndings, along with several recom
-mendations for accomplishing the dual goals of protecting health privacy 
while facilitating responsible and bene˜cial research.
DEFINITIONS
De˜nition of Privacy and Why Privacy Is Important
The term ﬁprivacyﬂ is used frequently, yet there is no universally 
accepted de˜nition of the term, and there is considerable confusion about 
the meaning, value, and scope of the concept. The focus of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule and the IOM committee™s report are on the privacy of per
-sonal health information. In this context, privacy pertains to the collection, 
 
storage, and use of personal information and addresses the question of who 
2 
45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006).
3 
The study was funded by the National Institutes of Health, the National Cancer Inst
itute, 
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the American Cancer Society, the American Heart 
Association/American Stroke Association, the American Society for Clinical Oncology, the 
Burroughs Wellcome Fund, and C-Change.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 17
BOX O-1
 Committee Statement of Task
 An Institute of Medicine committee will investigate the effects on health research 
of the Privacy Rule regulations implementing the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) section on Administrative Simpli˜cation and 
prepare a report. In conducting the study, the committee will:
1.
 Consider the range of study types, such as clinical trials, epidemiologic designs, 
research using tissue repositories and databases, public health research, and 
health services research, to the extent that available data and evidence allow;
2.
 Consider research carried out by the full range of sponsors: government, public 
and private academic, and for-pro˜t sectors, including the pharmaceutical, 
biotechnology, and medical device industries;
3.
 Review provisions of the Privacy Rule relevant to health research, including 
those dealing with authorizations and accounting of disclosures of personal 
health information, deidenti˜cation of data, reviews preparatory to research, 
and others, and on reviewing them, may identify provisions that merit priority 
attention and analysis;
4.
 Consider issues of interpretation and implementation of the Privacy Rule, as 
well as of harmonization with overlapping provisions of the Common Rule and 
Food and Drug Administration regulations, which have existed much longer;
5.
 Examine the potential impact of the Rule on public health research, on the 
recruitment of research subjects for studies, on carrying out research interna
-tionally, and on research using data and biomaterials in databases and tissue 
repositories; and
6.
 Consider the needs for privacy of identi˜able personal health information and 
the value of such privacy to patients and the public.
 As data and evidence allow, the needs and bene˜ts of patient privacy will be 
balanced against the needs, risks, and bene˜ts of identi˜able health information 
for various kinds of health research. The committee will formulate recommenda
-tions for alterations or retention of the status quo accordingly.
has access to personal information and under what conditions. Issues of 
privacy include whether speci˜c types of data about an individual can be 
collected at all, as well as the justi˜cations, if any, under which data col
-lected for one purpose can be used for another purpose. Another important 
issue in privacy analysis is whether an individual has authorized particular 
uses of his or her personal information.
Although privacy is often used interchangeably with the terms ﬁcon
-˜dentialityﬂ and ﬁsecurity,ﬂ they have distinct meanings. Con˜dentiality, 
though closely related to privacy, refers to the obligations of those who 
receive information in the context of an intimate relationship to respect the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
privacy interests of those to whom the data relate and to safeguard that 
information. Con˜dentiality addresses the issue of whether to keep infor
-mation exchanged in that relationship from being disclosed to third parties. 
Thus, for example, con˜dentiality requires physicians not to disclose infor
-mation shared with them by a patient in the course of a physicianŒpatient 
relationship. Unauthorized or inadvertent disclosures of data gained as part 
of an intimate relationship are considered breaches of con˜dentiality.
Security, as de˜ned by Turn and Ware in 1976, is ﬁthe procedural and 
technical measures required to (a) prevent unauthorized access, modi˜ca
-tion, use, and dissemination of data stored or processed in a computer 
system, (b) prevent any deliberate denial of service, and (c) to protect the 
system in its entirety from physical harm.ﬂ
4 Currently existing, commonly 
deployed security measures help keep health records safe from unauthorized 
use, although no security measure can prevent an invasion of privacy by 
individuals who have authority to access a health record.
American society places a high value on a private sphere protected 
from intrusion, and the bioethics principle of nonmale˜cence
5 requires 
safeguarding personal privacy. Breaches of an individual™s privacy and con
-˜dentiality may affect a person™s dignity and cause irreparable harm. When 
personally identi˜able health information
6 is disclosed to an employer, 
insurer, or family member, for example, the disclosure can result in stigma, 
embarrassment, and discrimination. Safeguarding privacy and con˜dential
-ity are also important for both individuals and society. Individuals are less 
likely to participate in health research or other socially and individually 
bene˜cial activities, including candid and complete disclosures of sensitive 
information to their physicians, if they do not believe their privacy is being 
protected. However, it should also be noted that perceptions of privacy vary 
among individuals and groups. Information that is considered intensely 
private by one person may not be by others. The concept of privacy is also 
context speci˜c, and acquires a different meaning depending on the stated 
reasons for the information being gathered, the intentions of the parties 
involved, as well as the politics, convention, and cultural expectations.
The bioethics principle of respect for persons places importance on indi
-vidual autonomy or self-determination, which allows ind
ividuals to make 
decisions for themselves about matters that are important to their own well-
being. U.S. society also places a high value on individual
 autonomy, and one 
4 
Turn, R., and W. H. Ware. 1976. Privacy and security issues in information systems. 
The 
RAND Paper Series.
 Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.
5 
The ethical principle of doing no harm, based on the Hippocratic maxim, primum non 
nocere, ˜rst do no harm.
6 
This term may encompass a broad range of information, including personal and family 
health history, physician notes and orders, test results, medication and immunization records, 
and documentation of surgeries or hospitalizations.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 19
way to respect individuals is to ensure that they can make the choice about 
when, and whether, personal information (particularly sensitive informa
-tion) can be shared with others.
Many statutory and regulatory protections of privacy have attempted 
to incorporate these values and concerns through emphasis on the principles 
of fair information practices,
7 which have been adopted in various forms at 
the international, federal, and state levels. The principles of fair information 
practices address issues such as data quality, limitations on collection and use, 
speci˜cation of purpose, security safeguards, openness of practices and poli
-cies, individual participation, and accountability. They re˚ect a broad consen
-sus about the need for standards to protect individual privacy and to facilitate 
information ˚ows in an increasingly technology-dependent, global society.
De˜nition of Health Research and Why Health Research Is Important
Under both the HIPAA Privacy Rule and a federal regulation known 
as the Common Rule,
8 ﬁresearchﬂ is de˜ned as ﬁa systematic investigation, 
including research development, testing and evaluation, designed to develop 
or contribute to generalizable knowledge.ﬂ This is a broad de˜nition that 
may include biomedical research, epidemiological studies,
9 and health ser
-vices research,
10
 as well as studies of behavioral, social, and economic 
 
factors that affect health.
Perhaps the most familiar form of health research is the clinical trial 
in which patients volunteer to participate in studies to test the ef˜cacy of 
new medical interventions. Today, though, an increasingly large portion of 
health research is information based. More and more research entails the 
analysis of data and biological samples that were initially collected for one 
purpose and are now being used for another purpose such as research.
11
 7 
The concept of fair information practices originated with the 1973 report of the Secretary™s 
Advisory Committee on Automated Personal Data Systems, reporting to the Secretary of the 
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, titled 
Records, Computers and the Rights 
of Citizens
, http://epic.org/privacy/hew1973report/ (accessed August 3, 2008). 
8 
The Common Rule is a federal policy for the protection of human subjects adopted by 
18 federal agencies and of˜ces. 45 C.F.R. part 46, http://
www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/common.
htm
l (accessed August 3, 2008).
9 
Epidemiology is the study of the occurrence, distribution, and control of diseases in 
populations.
10
 Health services research has been de˜ned as a multidisciplinary ˜eld of inquiry, both basic 
and applied, that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery, organization, ˜nanc
-ing, and outcomes of health care services to increase knowledge and understanding of the 
structure, processes, and effects of health services for individuals and populations.
11
 The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics has noted that the term ﬁsecond
-ary usesﬂ of health data is ill de˜ned and therefore urged abandoning it in favor of precise 
description of each use. Consequently, the IOM committee has chosen to minimize use of the 
term in this report.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
In the ˜elds of epidemiology, health services research, and public health 
research, the use of existing data to conduct research is common. Existing 
data are analyzed to identify patterns of occurrences, determinants, and 
the natural history of disease; to evaluate health care interventions and 
services; to perform drug safety surveillance; and to perform some genetic 
and social studies.
A prime example of the bene˜ts of research using existing biological sam
-ples and patients™ records is the development of Herceptin
® (trastuzumab), 
a revolutionary new treatment for some kinds of breast cancer. In addition, 
many ˜ndings from research using patients™ medical records have changed 
the practice of medicine. Examples of how health research based on data 
from medical records has informed and in˚uenced national and other policy 
decisions abound. Just to cite a few: Research based on data from medical 
records underlies the estimate that tens of thousands of Americans die each 
year from medical errors in the hospital and has provided valuable informa
-tion for reducing these medical errors by implementing health information 
technology, such as e-prescribing. Medical records research has documented 
that disparities and lack of access to care in inner cities and rural areas 
results in poorer health outcomes, and has demonstrated that speci˜c pre
-ventive services (e.g., mammography) substantially reduce mortality and 
morbidity at reasonable costs. Furthermore, such research has established 
a causal link between the nursing shortage and patient health outcomes 
by documenting that patients in hospitals with fewer registered nurses are 
hospitalized
 longer and are more likely to suffer complications, such as 
urinary tract infections and upper gastrointestinal bleeding. As the use of 
electronic medical records increases, the pace of medical records research 
is accelerating, and the opportunities to use these records to generate new 
knowledge about what works in health care are expanding.
The varying methods of health research provide complementary 
insights. Although clinical trials can provide important information about 
the ef˜cacy and adverse effects of medical interventions by controlling the 
variables that could impact the results of the study, feedback from real-
world clinical experience is also crucial for comparing and improving the 
use of drugs, vaccines, medical devices, and diagnostics. The Food and Drug 
Administration™s (FDA™s) approval of a drug for a particular indication, for 
example, is based on a series of controlled clinical trials, often with a few 
hundred to a few thousand patients. After a drug has received the FDA™s 
approval for marketing, however, it may be used by millions of people in 
many different contexts. Thus tracking clinical experience with the drug is 
important for identifying relatively rare adverse effects and for determining 
the effectiveness in different populations or circumstances.
Like privacy, all of these health-related activities provide high value 
to society. Collectively, these activities can provide important information 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 21
about disease trends and risk factors, outcomes of treatment or public 
health interventions, functional abilities, patterns of care, and health care 
costs and utilization. They have led to signi˜cant discoveries, the develop
-ment of new therapies, and a remarkable improvement in health care and 
public health.
12
 Thus, they provide a sense of hope for people with chronic, 
life-threatening, or fatal conditions. If the health research enterprise is 
impeded, or if it is less robust, important societal interests are adversely 
affected.
THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
The U.S. Congress passed HIPAA in 1996 with the primary goals of 
making health care delivery more ef˜cient and increasing the number of 
Americans with health insurance coverage.
The HIPAA Privacy Rule was developed by HHS under HIPAA™s 
administrative simpli˜cation provisions, which mandated the creation of 
privacy standards for ﬁprotected health informationﬂ (PHI) in the absence 
of federal legislation. A major goal of the HIPAA Privacy Rule is to ensure 
that individuals™ health information is properly protected while allowing 
the ˚ow of information needed to promote high-quality health care. Rec
-ognizing that patients™ health records also play an important role in health 
research, Congress wanted to ensure that the implementation of HIPAA 
would not impede health researchers™ continued access to data from health 
records. Responding to this objective, HHS attempted to create a system 
that mandates privacy protection for individually identi˜able health infor
-mation while allowing important uses of the information in health care 
and research.
The HIPAA Privacy Rule sets forth detailed regulations regarding the 
types of uses and disclosures of ﬁprotected health information,ﬂ de˜ned as 
ﬁindividually identi˜able health informationﬂ that is held or transmitted by 
a ﬁcovered entity.ﬂ Covered entities are health plans, health care clearing
-houses, and health care providers who transmit information in electronic 
form in connection with a transaction for which HHS has developed a 
standard under HIPAA.
13
 A covered entity may not use or disclose PHI 
except either (1) as the Privacy Rule permits, or (2) as the individual who 
is the subject of the information (or the individual™s personal representa
-tive) authorizes in writing. The Privacy Rule applies not only to health 
information exchanged or stored electronically, but also to PHI held by a 
12
 See Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: Proposed 
Rule, 64 Fed. Reg. 59918, 59967 (1999) for a discussion on the bene˜ts of health records 
research.
13
 45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
covered entity in any form or media, including electronic, paper, and oral 
communications.
14
Although the HIPAA Privacy Rule applies to information uses and trans
-actions necessary for the provision of health care, it is also applicable to a 
great deal of information used in health research. As already explained, the 
data in individuals™ medical records may be important or essential to some 
types of health research. When obtaining PHI from a covered entity to use 
in their research, health researchers are required to follow the provisions of 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule. The Privacy Rule permits a covered entity to use 
and disclose PHI for research purposes without an individual™s authoriza
-tion if the covered entity obtains either (1) documentation that an alteration 
or waiver of the individual™s authorization for the use or disclosure of the 
information has been approved by an IRB or Privacy Board, or (2) speci˜ed 
representations from the researchers that the PHI is being used or disclosed 
solely for purposes preparatory to research, or for research using only the 
PHI of decedents. A covered entity may also use or disclose PHI without 
an individual™s authorization if the PHI is contained as part of a ﬁlimited 
datasetﬂ from which speci˜ed direct identi˜ers have been removed, and the 
researcher enters into a data use agreement with the covered entity.
THE COMMITTEE™S CHARGE 
AND
 THE
  OVERARCHING
 GOAL
S OF
 THE
 RECOM
MENDATIONS
The sponsors of this study asked the IOM to assess whether the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule implemented by HHS is impacting the conduct of health 
research, and requested that the IOM committee propose recommenda
-tions to facilitate the ef˜cient and effective conduct of important health 
research while maintaining or strengthening the privacy protections of 
personally identi˜able health information. To undertake this task, the IOM 
appointed a 15-member committee (Committee on Health Research and the 
Privacy of Health Information) with a broad range of expertise and experi
-ence covering various ˜elds of health research; privacy of health informa
-tion; health law, regulation, and ethics; human research protections; health 
 
center administration; use and protection of electronic health information; 
and patient advocacy.
As the study progressed and committee members began thinking about 
potential recommendations, they identi˜ed three general methods for 
improving the current system for safeguarding health information privacy: 
14
 Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule protected health information excludes education records 
covered by the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, as amended, 20 U.S.C. 1232(g), 
records described at 20 U.S.C. 1232(g)(a)(4)(B)(iv), and employment records held by a covered 
entity in its role as employer.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 23
(1) the provision of guidance from HHS and its Of˜ce for Civil Rights to 
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs), Privacy Boards, institutions, and other 
participants and stakeholders, which is the easiest way to achieve changes; 
(2) regulatory changes to the HIPAA Privacy Rule provisions, which can 
be done via HHS, but is more dif˜cult than providing new guidance; and 
(3) statutory changes in HIPAA or other legislation at the federal or state 
level, which is the most dif˜cult to accomplish, but may be necessary. The 
committee members decided to be as modest as possible in proposing rec
-ommendations to facilitate the ef˜cient and effective conduct of important 
health research while maintaining or strengthening the privacy protections 
of personally identi˜able health information, with the goal of making it 
easier to effect change if policy makers agree with the proposals.
Ultimately, committee members agreed to make two sets of recom
-mendations. First, the committee proposes a bold, innovative, and more 
uniform approach to the dual challenge of protecting privacy while sup
-porting bene˜cial and responsible research.
15
 Although a totally new 
approach may be harder to implement in the short term than more 
incremental changes, it might help to stimulate fresh ideas about the best 
ways to protect privacy and improve health research as the nation seeks 
the best way to support these two interconnected values over the next 
several years. Second, in the event that policy makers decide that HIPAA 
wasŠand continues to beŠthe most useful model for how to safeguard 
privacy in health research, the committee proposes a series of detailed 
proposals to improve the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated guidance.
There is no question that the goals of safeguarding privacy and enhanc
-ing health research are sometimes in tension. Stringent measures to safe
-guard privacy can make it harder to conduct high-quality research, and 
research itself can pose a threat to privacy. Yet the committee believes that 
there is a synergy between the two, that promoting both is desirable, and 
that it is possible to strengthen certain privacy protections while still facili
-tating important health research.
For that reason, the committee™s intent in developing its recommen
-dations was to advance both privacy and health research interests to the 
extent possible. The committee understands that the lines are not neat, the 
questions are complex, and the challenges are formidable. Nevertheless, 
our recommendations are aimed at strengthening health research regula
-tions and practices that effectively safeguard personally identi˜able health 
information, while changing provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule or 
its interpretations that the committee found to be mostly formalistic or 
15
 Responsible health research is methodologically sound, is scienti˜cally valid, protects 
the rights and interests of study subjects, and addresses a question or problem relevant to 
improving human health.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 
ineffective. They also aim to facilitate data collection and use for bene˜cial 
and high-quality health research, with appropriate oversight, to advance 
knowledge about human health.
To facilitate bene˜cial health research while still ensuring adequate 
protection of patient privacy, the committee grounded its recommenda
-tions in three fundamental goals: (1) improve the privacy and data security 
of health information; (2) improve the effectiveness of health research; 
and (3) improve the application of privacy protections for health research 
(Box O-2). These three basic goals are discussed further below.
Improve the Privacy and Data Security of Health Information
In the context of health research, the privacy goal is the commitment to 
handle personal information of patients and research participants in accor
-dance with meaningful privacy protections. These protections should include 
strong security measures, disclosure of the purposes for which personally 
identi˜able health information is used (transparency), and legally enforceable 
obligations to ensure information is secure and used appropriately (account
-ability). This commitment extends to everyone who collects, uses, or has 
access to personal information of patients and research participants.
Practices of security, transparency, and accountability take on 
 
extraordinary importance in the health research setting. Researchers and 
other data users should disclose clearly how and why personal informa
-tion is being collected, used, and secured, and should be subject to legally 
enforceable obligations to ensure that personal information is used appro
-priately and securely. In this manner, privacy protection will help to ensure 
research participant and public trust and con˜dence in medical research.
Improve the Effectiveness of Health Research
Research discoveries are central to achieving the goal of extending 
the quality of healthy lives. Research into causes of disease, methods for 
BOX O-2
 Three Goals Underlying the Committee™s Recommendations
1.
 Improve the privacy and data security of health information.
2.
 Improve the effectiveness of health research.
3.
 Improve the application of privacy protections for health research.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 25
prevention, techniques for diagnosis, and new approaches to treatment 
has increased life expectancy, reduced infant mortality, limited the toll of 
infectious diseases, and improved outcomes for patients with heart disease, 
cancer, diabetes, and other diseases. Patient-oriented clinical research that 
tests new ideas makes medical and public health progress possible.
Today the rate of discovery is accelerating, and science is at the preci
-pice of a remarkable period of investigative promise made possible by new 
knowledge about the genetic underpinnings of disease. Genomic research 
is opening new possibilities for preventing illness and for developing safer, 
more effective medical care that may eventually be tailored for speci˜c indi
-viduals. Further advances in relating genetic information to predispositions 
to disease and responses to treatments will require use of large amounts of 
existing health-related information and stored biological specimens. The 
increasing use of electronic medical records will further facilitate the gen
-eration of new knowledge through research and accelerate the pace of dis
-covery. These efforts will require broad participation of patients in research 
and broad data sharing to ensure that the results are valid and applicable 
to different segments of the population. Collaborative partnerships among 
communities of patients, their physicians, and teams of researchers to gain 
new scienti˜c knowledge will bring tangible bene˜ts for people in this 
country and around the world.
Improve the Application of Privacy Protections for Health Research
The HIPAA Privacy Rule was written to provide consistent standards 
in the United States for the use and disclosure of PHI by covered entities, 
including the use and disclosure of such information for research purposes. 
In its current state, however, the HIPAA Privacy Rule is dif˜cult to reconcile 
with other federal regulations, including HHS regulations for the protec
-tion of human subjects (the Common Rule), FDA regulations pertaining to 
human subjects protections,
16
 and other applicable federal or state laws.
For example, inconsistencies in federal regulations governing the 
 
deidenti˜cation of personal health information, obtaining individual con
-sent for future research, and the recruitment of research volunteers make 
it challenging for health researchers to undertake important research 
activities while seeking to comply with all these regulations. In addition, 
there is substantial variation in the way in which institutions interpret and 
apply the Privacy Rule. For example, the way in which IRBs and Privacy 
Boards interpret the provisions when making decisions about authoriza
-tion requirements varies across institutions, and often is quite conservative. 
Especially for multisite research and studies that are reviewed by both IRBs 
16
 21 C.F.R. parts 50 and 56 (1988).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
and Privacy Boards, the inconsistent interpretation and application of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule™s provisions pertaining to research can create barriers 
to research and even lead to the discontinuation of ongoing research stud
-ies, which squanders the contributions of research participants. Adding 
yet another layer of complexity and variability for health researchers is a 
lack of clarity in the way the HIPAA Privacy Rule applies to various types 
of health research or closely related health care practices. Moreover, there 
are signi˜cant gaps in who and what is covered by current federal research 
regulations. Whether a research activity is subject to the provisions of the 
Privacy Rule or the Common Rule depends on a number of factors, includ
-ing the source of funding, the source of the data, and whether the researcher 
meets the de˜nition of a covered entity.
The situation in the United States is in stark contrast to the situation 
in most other countries, where uniform regulations apply to all research 
conducted in the country. The committee believes a new direction is needed, 
with a more uniform approach to patient protections, including privacy, in 
health research. Improved clarity, harmonization, and uniform application 
of regulations governing health research are needed to align the interests 
and understandings of the research community, the custodians of PHI, and 
other stakeholders such as patients, so that implementation of the privacy 
protections in health research can be achieved with acceptability to all.
THE COMMITTEE™
S RECOMMENDATIONS
The IOM Committee on Health Research and the Privacy of Health 
Information developed several recommendations with the intent of strength
-ening the privacy protections of personally identi˜able health information and 
facilitating the ef˜cient and effective conduct of bene˜cial health research. A 
summary of the committee™s recommendations is presented in Box O-3.
The committee™s ˜rst and foremost recommendation (Recommenda
-tion I) is that Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal 
agencies to develop a new approach to ensuring privacy that would apply 
uniformly to all health research in the United States. When this new approach 
is implemented, HHS should exempt health research from the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule. This new approach, separate from the HIPAA Privacy Rule, should 
ensure privacy in health research by emphasizing security, accountability, and 
transparency while also allowing important health research to be undertaken 
with appropriate oversight. If national policy makers decide that the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule has been, and continues to be, a useful model for safeguarding 
privacy in health research, the committee also proposes as an alternative 
that HHS revise the current HIPAA Privacy Rule and the associated guid
-ance. These revisions, which could also be implemented in the interim while 
a new, comprehensive approach is being developed, would address many of 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 27
the problems uncovered during the course of this study. HHS should develop 
guidance materials to reduce variability among IRBs and Privacy Boards 
in their interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule as applied to research 
(Recommendation II.A); develop guidance materials to facilitate more effec
-tive use of existing data and materials for health research and public health 
purposes (Recommendation II.B); and revise some provisions of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule that currently hinder research but that do not provide meaning
-ful privacy protections (Recommendation II.C). The committee™s last set of 
recommendations, though not directly related to the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 
should be adopted in order to achieve the committee™s overarching goals. The 
committee recommends that all health research institutions improve the secu
-rity of personally identi˜able health information (Recommendation III.A), 
that HHSŠor, as necessary, CongressŠprovide reasonable protection to IRB 
and Privacy Board members for good faith decisions to encourage service on 
IRBs (III.B), and that HHS and researchers take steps to disseminate health 
research results more broadly, and to inform the public about the nature of 
health research and its value to individuals and society as a whole (Recom
-mendation III.C). Adopting this set of recommendations will be important 
regardless of whether Option I or II is implemented.
In the remaining pages of this overview, the abbreviated recommenda
-tions of the IOM committee, shown in Box O-3, are presented in fuller 
detail.
I. Develop a New Approach to Protecting Privacy in All Health Research
Background
The primary justi˜cation for including research provisions in the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule was to remedy perceived shortcomings of federal privacy pro
-tections in health research under the Common Rule, but the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule has numerous limitations of its own. In proposing the Privacy Rule, 
HHS acknowledged that, ideally, it would have preferred to regulate health 
researchers directly by extending the protections of the Common Rule to 
research that is not federally supported and by imposing additional criteria 
for the waiver of patient authorization for the use of personally identi˜able 
health information in research.
17
 But HHS recognized that it did not have 
the authority to do this. For that reason, HHS attempted to protect the 
health information released to researchers indirectly (but within the scope 
17
 U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
Recommendations on the Con˜dentiality 
of Individually-Identi˜able Health Information to the Committees on Labor and Human 
Resources 
(1997), and Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: 
Proposed Rule, 64 Fed. Reg. 59918, 59968 (1999).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX O-3
 Summary of the Committee™s Recommendations
The committee™s foremost recommendation is the following:
I.
 Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal agencies to 
develop a new approach to protecting privacy that would apply uniformly 
to all health research. When this new approach is implemented, HHS 
should exempt health research from the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 Apply privacy, security, transparency, and accountability obligations to all health 
records used in research.
If national policy makers choose to continue to rely on the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
rather than adopt a new federal approach (Recommendation I), the committee 
recommends the following:
II.
 HHS should revise the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated guidance.
A.
 HHS should reduce variability in interpretations of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in health research by covered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards 
through revised and expanded guidance and harmonization.
1.
 HHS should develop a dynamic, ongoing process to increase empirical 
knowledge about current ﬁbest practicesﬂ for privacy protection in responsible 
research using protected health information (PHI), and promote the use of 
those best practices.
2.
 HHS should encourage greater use of partially
 deidenti˜ed data called ﬁlimited 
datasetsﬂ and develop clear guidance on how to set up and comply with the 
associated data use agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively, in order to 
enhance privacy in research by expanding use and usability of data with direct 
identi˜ers removed.
3.
 HHS should clarify the distinctions between ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure 
appropriate IRB and Privacy Board oversight of PHI disclosures for these 
activities.
4.
 HHS guidance documents should simplify the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s provisions 
regarding the use of PHI in activities preparatory to research and harmonize 
those provisions with the Common Rule, in order to facilitate appropriate 
IRB and Privacy Board oversight of identi˜cation and recruitment of potential 
research participants.
B. HHS should develop guidance materials to facilitate more effective 
use of existing data and materials for health research and public health 
purposes.
1.
 HHS should develop guidance that clearly states that individuals can autho
-rize use of PHI stored in databases or associated with biospecimen banks 
for speci˜ed future research under the HIPAA Privacy Rule with IRB/Privacy 
Board oversight, as is allowed under the Common Rule, in order to facilitate 
use of repositories for health research.
2.
 HHS should develop clear guidance for use of a single form that permits indi
-viduals to authorize use and disclosure of health information in a clinical trial 
and to authorize the storage of their biospecimens collected in conjunction 
with the clinical trial, in order to simplify authorization for interrelated research 
activities.
3.
 HHS should clarify the circumstances under which DNA samples or sequences 
are considered PHI, in order to facilitate appropriate use of DNA in health 
research.
4.
 HHS should develop a mechanism for linking data from multiple sources so 
that more useful datasets can be made available for research in a manner that 
protects privacy, con˜dentiality, and security.
C.
 HHS should revise provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule that entail heavy 
burdens for covered entities and impede research without providing sub
-stantive improvements in patient privacy.
1.
 HHS should reform the requirements for the accounting of disclosures of PHI 
for research.
2.
 HHS should simplify the criteria that IRBs and Privacy Boards use in making 
determinations for when they can waive the requirements to obtain authoriza
-tion from each patient whose PHI will be used for a research study, in order to 
facilitate appropriate authorization requirements for responsible research.
Regardless of whether Recommendation I or II is implemented, the following rec
-ommendations, which are independent of the Privacy Rule, should be adopted:
III.
 Implement changes necessary for both policy options above (Recom
-mendations I and II).
A.
 All institutions (both covered entities and non-covered entities) in the 
health research community should take strong measures to safeguard 
the security of health data.
  
HHS should also support the development and use of new security technolo
-gies and self-evaluation standards.
B.
 To encourage service on Institutional Review Boards, HHSŠor, as neces
-sary, CongressŠshould provide reasonable protection against civil suits 
for members of Institutional Review Boards and Privacy Boards who 
serve in good faith.
 But no protection for willful or wanton misconduct.
C.
 HHS and researchers should take steps to provide the public with more 
information about health research by:
1.
 Disseminating research results to study participants and the public.
2.
 Educating the public about how research is done and what value it provides.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 29
BOX O-3
 Summary of the Committee™s Recommendations
The committee™s foremost recommendation is the following:
I.
 Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal agencies to 
develop a new approach to protecting privacy that would apply uniformly 
to all health research. When this new approach is implemented, HHS 
should exempt health research from the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 Apply privacy, security, transparency, and accountability obligations to all health 
records used in research.
If national policy makers choose to continue to rely on the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
rather than adopt a new federal approach (Recommendation I), the committee 
recommends the following:
II.
 HHS should revise the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated guidance.
A.
 HHS should reduce variability in interpretations of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in health research by covered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards 
through revised and expanded guidance and harmonization.
1.
 HHS should develop a dynamic, ongoing process to increase empirical 
knowledge about current ﬁbest practicesﬂ for privacy protection in responsible 
research using protected health information (PHI), and promote the use of 
those best practices.
2.
 HHS should encourage greater use of partially
 deidenti˜ed data called ﬁlimited 
datasetsﬂ and develop clear guidance on how to set up and comply with the 
associated data use agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively, in order to 
enhance privacy in research by expanding use and usability of data with direct 
identi˜ers removed.
3.
 HHS should clarify the distinctions between ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure 
appropriate IRB and Privacy Board oversight of PHI disclosures for these 
activities.
4.
 HHS guidance documents should simplify the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s provisions 
regarding the use of PHI in activities preparatory to research and harmonize 
those provisions with the Common Rule, in order to facilitate appropriate 
IRB and Privacy Board oversight of identi˜cation and recruitment of potential 
research participants.
B. HHS should develop guidance materials to facilitate more effective 
use of existing data and materials for health research and public health 
purposes.
1.
 HHS should develop guidance that clearly states that individuals can autho
-rize use of PHI stored in databases or associated with biospecimen banks 
for speci˜ed future research under the HIPAA Privacy Rule with IRB/Privacy 
Board oversight, as is allowed under the Common Rule, in order to facilitate 
use of repositories for health research.
2.
 HHS should develop clear guidance for use of a single form that permits indi
-viduals to authorize use and disclosure of health information in a clinical trial 
and to authorize the storage of their biospecimens collected in conjunction 
with the clinical trial, in order to simplify authorization for interrelated research 
activities.
3.
 HHS should clarify the circumstances under which DNA samples or sequences 
are considered PHI, in order to facilitate appropriate use of DNA in health 
research.
4.
 HHS should develop a mechanism for linking data from multiple sources so 
that more useful datasets can be made available for research in a manner that 
protects privacy, con˜dentiality, and security.
C.
 HHS should revise provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule that entail heavy 
burdens for covered entities and impede research without providing sub
-stantive improvements in patient privacy.
1.
 HHS should reform the requirements for the accounting of disclosures of PHI 
for research.
2.
 HHS should simplify the criteria that IRBs and Privacy Boards use in making 
determinations for when they can waive the requirements to obtain authoriza
-tion from each patient whose PHI will be used for a research study, in order to 
facilitate appropriate authorization requirements for responsible research.
Regardless of whether Recommendation I or II is implemented, the following rec
-ommendations, which are independent of the Privacy Rule, should be adopted:
III.
 Implement changes necessary for both policy options above (Recom
-mendations I and II).
A.
 All institutions (both covered entities and non-covered entities) in the 
health research community should take strong measures to safeguard 
the security of health data.
  
HHS should also support the development and use of new security technolo
-gies and self-evaluation standards.
B.
 To encourage service on Institutional Review Boards, HHSŠor, as neces
-sary, CongressŠshould provide reasonable protection against civil suits 
for members of Institutional Review Boards and Privacy Boards who 
serve in good faith.
 But no protection for willful or wanton misconduct.
C.
 HHS and researchers should take steps to provide the public with more 
information about health research by:
1.
 Disseminating research results to study participants and the public.
2.
 Educating the public about how research is done and what value it provides.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
of its limited authority) by imposing restrictions on information disclosures 
by covered entities. The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics 
(NCVHS) and others have noted the limitations of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule and have called for stronger protections of health privacyŠnotably, 
by expanding the purview of the Privacy Rule beyond the current covered 
entities.
The IOM committee believes an even bolder change is needed. The 
number of studies using medical records to address important questions 
about health and disease is likely to increase with the growing availability 
of electronic records. As the volume and importance of digital personal 
health data increase exponentially, the public can be expected to heighten 
demands for a legal framework that provides meaningful safeguards to 
protect personally identi˜able health information in the health research set
-ting. Thus, the IOM committee recommends developing a new framework 
to both protect individuals™ privacy and facilitate responsible and bene˜cial 
health research.
Recommendation I:
 Congress should authorize HHS and other rel
-evant federal agencies to develop a new approach to protecting privacy 
in health research that would apply uniformly to all health research. 
When this new approach is implemented, HHS should exempt health 
research from the HIPAA Privacy Rule. The new approach should 
enhance privacy protections through improved data security, increased 
transparency of activities and policies, and greater accountability while 
also allowing important health research to be undertaken with appro
-priate oversight. The new approach should do all of the following:
Ł Apply to any person, institution, or organization conducting health 
research in the United States, regardless of the source of data or 
funding.
Ł Entail clear, goal-oriented, rather than prescriptive, regulations.
Ł Require researchers, institutions, and organizations that store 
health data to establish strong data security safeguards.
Ł Make a clear distinction between the privacy considerations that 
apply to interventional research and research that is exclusively 
information based.
Ł Facilitate greater use of data with direct identi˜ers removed in 
health research, and implement legal sanctions to prohibit unauthor
-ized reidenti˜cation of information that has had direct identi˜ers 
removed.
Ł Require ethical oversight of research when personally identi˜able 
health information is used without informed consent. HHS should 
develop best practices for oversight that should consider:
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 31
o Measures taken to protect the privacy, security, and con˜den
-tiality of the data;
o Potential harms that could result from disclosure of the data; 
and
o Potential public bene˜ts of the research.
Ł Certify institutions that have policies and practices in place to pro
-tect data privacy and security in order to facilitate important large-
scale information-based research for clearly de˜ned and approved 
purposes, without individual consent.
Ł Include federal oversight and enforcement to ensure regulatory 
compliance.
Rationale
The committee concluded that the HIPAA Privacy Rule impedes impor
-tant health research and does not protect privacy as well as it should. 
Rather than offering an effective and comprehensive approach to solving 
the real problems of protecting privacy while ensuring the vitality of the 
national research agenda, the Privacy Rule often focuses on formalistic 
issues. A new approach to protecting the privacy of personally identi˜able 
information used in health research should both provide strong and effec
-tive protection for often-sensitive personally identi˜able health information 
and facilitate scienti˜c discovery and medical innovation necessary to save 
lives and enhance the quality of the public™s health. It should do so in a 
way that does not burden individuals with a ˚urry of health privacy notices 
and consent forms, or burden our health care system with a new level of 
bureaucracy and expense.
A new framework developed by HHS and other relevant agencies 
that emphasizes privacy, security, accountability, and transparency and is 
applicable to all health research in the United States would eliminate confu
-sion, reduce variability, facilitate responsible research, and enhance trust in 
the research enterprise. Clear and simple regulations that are less subject 
to varying interpretation by ethical oversight boards, as well as federal 
oversight and enforcement of regulatory compliance, will be important to 
consistently and ef˜ciently ensure privacy and instill trust while enabling 
important research.
The committee favors an approach in which both ethical health 
research and privacy protections are supported. Informative examples for 
such an approach include Ontario™s Personal Health Information Protec
-tion Act (PHIPA)
18
 and a similar model recently proposed in the United 
18
 Personal Health Information Protection Act, Statutes of Ontario 2004, Ch. 3, Schedule 
A; Ontario Regulation 329/04.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Kingdom.
19
 Ontario™s PHIPA shares a number of similarities with the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule. In general, both rules require the holder of personally 
identi˜able health data to obtain informed consent (referred to as autho
-rization in the Privacy Rule) before using those data for a purpose other 
than providing services directly related to the health care of the patient. 
If a researcher wishes to use personally identi˜able health data without 
obtaining informed consent, both rules require the researcher to obtain 
a waiver of informed consent approved by an independent ethics board 
before the study begins.
However, the HIPAA Privacy Rule and PHIPA do have some key dif
-ferences. One major difference is that unlike the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 
which applies privacy obligations unevenly across the health care sector, 
PHIPA applies to health information custodians (HICs; e.g., providers, 
hospitals, and pharmacies) that collect, use, and disclose personally iden
-ti˜able health information, as well as to non-HICs that receive personally 
identi˜able health information from a HIC. Thus, the privacy protections 
follow the data.
Another important difference is that PHIPA permits HICs to disclose 
personally identi˜able health information without consent to ﬁprescribed 
persons or entities,ﬂ who must have in place practices, policies, and pro
-cedures approved by Ontario™s Information and Privacy Commissioner 
to protect the privacy and con˜dentiality of personally identi˜able health 
information it receives and maintains. The prescribed persons or entities 
may then disclose information to researchers either in deidenti˜ed form, or 
in identi˜able form with approval of a Research Ethics Board (Canadian 
equivalent of an IRB or Privacy Board). Consistent with the principle of 
transparency, a prescribed entity must also make public a description of its 
functions and a summary of its practices, policies, and procedures. A similar 
approach to prescribed entities was recommended in a report commissioned 
by the United Kingdom™s Prime Minister on secondary uses of personal 
information. This report suggested the creation of ﬁsafe harbors,ﬂ which 
have three de˜ning characteristics: (1) they provide a secure environment 
for processing personally identi˜able health data, (2) they are restricted 
to ﬁapproved researchersﬂ who meet relevant criteria, and (3) they imple
-ment penalties and allow for criminal sanctions against researchers who 
abuse their access to personally identi˜able data. The committee believes 
that such an approach, combined with strong security measures, offers 
adequate privacy protections for personally identi˜able health information 
in information-based health research, while greatly expanding research 
opportunities.
19
 In a report commissioned by the United Kingdom™s Prime Minister on secondary uses of 
personal information.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 33
Health research increasingly relies on the review of information about 
patients™ actual experiences with treatments to determine the risks and 
bene˜ts of drugs and other therapies, in addition to traditional interven
-tional and comparative clinical trials with patients. Regulations under 
a new approach to ensuring privacy in health should acknowledge the 
fact that research based exclusively on information (e.g., using medical 
records or stored biological samples) is not the same as direct, interven
-tional human subjects research. For that reason, applying the same human 
subjects protections in these two different scenarios is neither appropriate 
nor justi˜able. Promoting individual autonomy is essential when a person™s 
health care or participation in clinical research is considered. The purpose 
of informed consent in this type of research is mainly to protect research 
participants from physical harm by providing a description of the potential 
risks and bene˜ts of the study. In contrast, in information-based research 
that relies solely on medical records and stored biospecimens, the research 
participant faces no risk of direct physical harm. In this context, informed 
consent (authorization) is intended to ensure that individuals are able to 
exercise control over their personal information that is held by third par
-ties, and to give individuals the right to determine whether their personal 
information can be used in a particular research project (or a series of such 
projects, if consent for future research is permitted).
Because of these fundamental differences between information-based 
research and direct, interventional human subjects research, the committee 
suggests a two-part practical approach to protecting health information 
privacy. First, all interventional research, regardless of funding source and 
support, should be required to comply with the Common Rule and all 
researchers who gain access to personally identi˜able health information 
as part of the interventional research should be required to protect that 
information with strong security measures. Research participants should 
be allowed to provide consent for future research uses of data and biologi
-cal materials collected as part of the interventional study as long as an IRB 
reviews and approves the future uses, ensuring that the new study is not 
incompatible with the original consent.
Second, a new approach to uniform, goal-oriented oversight of 
information-based research should be developed by HHS and other rel
-evant federal agencies, with a focus on best practices in privacy, security, 
and transparency as in PHIPA and the proposed United Kingdom model. 
This new approach should include a mechanism by which some programs 
or institutions could be certi˜ed by HHS or another accrediting body, 
similar to a prescribed entity as in PHIPA or a safe harbor as in the United 
Kingdom model. Such entities could then collect and analyze personally 
identi˜able health information for clearly de˜ned and approved purposes, 
without individual consent. Because of the administrative requirements in 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
becoming certi˜ed, this option is most appropriate for disease registries 
and other very large scale research databases. Certi˜ed entities could also 
aggregate personally identi˜able data from multiple sources, and then pro
-vide data to researchers with direct identi˜ers removed, under strict security 
requirements. This would facilitate greater use of data with direct identi
-˜ers removed in research because the aggregated datasets would be more 
complete and thus would lead to more accurate conclusions. To further 
protect privacy, unauthorized reidenti˜cation of information that has had 
direct identi˜ers removed should be prohibited by law, and violators should 
face legal sanctions.
In cases where researchers cannot use data with direct identi˜ers 
removed, and personally identi˜able health information is needed for 
research, approval and oversight by an ethics oversight board should be 
required, partially analogous to what is now done under the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule and PHIPA. This oversight board could perhaps entail a new body spe
-ci˜cally formulated to review medical records research, rather than relying 
on traditional IRBs that were created to review interventional research. If 
researchers seek a waiver of patient consent, an ethics oversight board should 
consider the measures to be taken to protect the privacy and con˜dentiality 
of the data, the potential harms that could result from disclosure of the data, 
and the potential public bene˜ts of the proposed research study. In order 
to facilitate consistent application of this option, HHS will need to develop 
clear guidance and best practices on how to assess the potential harm, the 
proposed measures to protect privacy and con˜dentiality, and the potential 
public bene˜ts of a research study, as has been done under PHIPA.
There is a great deal of variability in whether and how IRBs and other 
ethical oversight boards consider the public bene˜t and scienti˜c merit of 
research proposals. But the ˜rst rule of ethical research is that the research 
must have scienti˜c valueŠmeaning that it addresses an important ques
-tion of human health and is designed and conducted using methodology 
that is appropriate and rigorous. The scienti˜c merit of research varies 
by project, just as the potential risk to privacy of research varies across 
different
 protocols. The committee believes that when making decisions 
about whether a research protocol that entails the disclosure of personally 
identi˜able information should go forward, ethical oversight boards should 
take all of these factorsŠpotential risks/harms to research participants™ pri
-vacy as well as scienti˜c merit and potential public bene˜t of the research 
 
proposalŠinto consideration.
A previous IOM committee on Assessing the System for Protecting 
Human Research Subjects recommended that ﬁhuman research participant 
protection programsﬂ use distinct mechanisms for initial reviews of scien
-ti˜c merit and that these reviews should precede and inform the compre
-hensive ethical review of research studies. Ethical oversight board members 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 35
themselves may not have the expertise to assess the merit of diverse research 
studies, but they should have access to evaluations by scienti˜c review com
-mittees or funder peer review panels, which would help them assess the 
anticipated bene˜ts of a proposed research project.
Although expectations regarding privacy vary among different demo
-graphic groups, public opinion polls suggest that a signi˜cant portion of the 
American public would like to control all access to their medical records 
for research via an individual consent mechanism. However, obligations to 
implement comprehensive privacy protectionsŠsuch as security, transpar
-ency, and accountabilityŠare independent of patient consent. Moreover, the 
committee concluded, based on considerable testimony and other evidence, 
that a universal requirement for informed consent can lead to invalid results 
because of signi˜cant differences between patients who do or do not grant 
consent, and to missed opportunities to advance medical science because it 
can be prohibitively costly and dif˜cult to obtain consent for studies that 
require analysis of very large datasets. As a result, the committee™s new 
framework includes two alternatives to consent that can be used in certain 
circumstances (e.g., disclosure to a certi˜ed entity and waiver of informed 
consent by an ethics review board), which are intended to facilitate research 
that is socially bene˜cial and to protect privacy through increased security, 
transparency, and accountability.
If society seeks to derive the bene˜ts of medical research in the form of 
improved health and health care, information should be shared to achieve 
that greater good, and governing regulations should support the use of such 
information, with appropriate oversight. In the committee™s proposed new 
framework, the greater emphasis on ensuring the security protections of 
personally identi˜able health information, facilitating research using data 
with direct identi˜ers removed, and ensuring the scienti˜c merits of any 
proposed research in the new framework should help to foster its accept
-ability. Nonetheless, effective communication with the public about how 
health research is done and the value it provides (the committee™s Recom
-mendation III.C below) will be important to address concerns and gain 
acceptance.
The committee™s proposal for a new approach to ensuring privacy in 
health research that is uniformly applicable to all health research in the 
United States is especially timely because Congress has shown considerable 
interest in producing new legislation to facilitate the implementation of a 
nationwide health information technology system. Such a system has been 
hailed as a means of addressing rising health care costs and improving the 
quality and ef˜ciency of health care, but privacy concerns are emerging as a 
primary obstacle to the implementation of such a nationwide system. Some 
legislative proposals would follow the HIPAA model of privacy protections, 
while others would require different or additional approaches to ensure 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the privacy of electronic health records. A nationwide health information 
technology system has the potential to accelerate health research by mak
-ing large amounts of health data available to study and thus could lead to 
major advances in medicine. Nevertheless, caution is warranted in devel
-oping new regulations because the adoption of new, restrictive regulations 
might actually impede health research, to the great detriment of patients 
and society.
If Recommendation I is not implemented and the nation continues to 
rely on the HIPAA Privacy Rule for protecting privacy in health research, 
the committee proposes an alternative set of recommendations (Recom
-mendations II.AŒC) that could address some of the problems uncovered 
during the course of this study, by improving the HIPAA Privacy Rule and 
associated guidance.
II. Revise the Privacy Rule and Associated Guidance
Recommendation II.A:
 HHS should reduce variability in interpreta
-tions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule in health research by covered entities, 
IRBs, and Privacy Boards through revised and expanded guidance and 
harmonization.
Background
One of the weaknesses in the current privacy protection system is that 
there is extreme variability in the regulatory interpretations and approval 
decisions among IRBs and Privacy Boards. Regulatory language often is not 
easily understandable and is subject to wide interpretation. Thus local IRBs 
and Privacy Boards interpret state and federal regulations independently, 
resulting in a great deal of variation in how the regulations are implemented. 
For example, projects that are similar in design and intent may be granted 
a waiver of individual authorization by some IRBs and Privacy Boards, but 
not others, on the basis of differing interpretations of the Privacy Rule™s 
waiver criteria. In addition, some IRBs and Privacy Boards may con˚ate 
the Common Rule and Privacy Rule, or apply the research provisions of the 
Privacy Rule to activities for which they are not applicable, such as public 
health practice or the operation of cancer registries.
Furthermore, in the case of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, covered entities 
that disclose PHI are regulated, not the health researchers who receive 
the information. As a result, covered entities, as well as IRBs and Privacy 
Boards, may be reluctant to permit disclosures of PHI that would allow 
health research to go forward, even in situations where it is ethically and 
legally justi˜ed. Lacking suf˜cient guidance from HHS, IRBs and Privacy 
Boards sometimes interpret the HIPAA Privacy Rule too conservatively out 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 37
of concern that a particular health research activity might result in institu
-tional noncompliance with the Privacy Rule.
HHS intended to allow IRBs and Privacy Boards to have some local 
control in implementing and interpreting the HIPAA Privacy Rule as it 
applies to the use and disclosure of PHI for research. The committee™s 
recommendations below are intended not to reduce the decision-making 
powers and ˚exibility of local IRBs and Privacy Boards, but rather to make 
it easier for IRBs and Privacy Boards to review research proposals fairly 
and quickly. Additional guidance and clari˜cation from HHS on the speci˜c 
points listed below, along with speci˜c case examples to help delineate what 
is or is not permissible under the Privacy Rule, would make it easier for 
IRBs and Privacy Boards to make the appropriate review decisions.
Recommendation II.A.1:
 HHS should develop a dynamic, ongoing 
process to increase empirical knowledge about current ﬁbest practicesﬂ 
for privacy protection in responsible research using PHI, and promote 
use of those best practices.
Ł HHS should regularly convene consensus development conferences 
in collaboration with health research stakeholders to collect and 
evaluate current practices in privacy protection in order to identify 
and disseminate best practices.
Ł Stakeholders can then enable and encourage researchers to use 
these best practices in designing and conducting research involving 
the use of PHI.
Rationale
There are many diverse approaches to health research. The broad array 
of methods and data sources for such research presents a challenge to IRBs 
and Privacy Boards that must determine how various state and federal regu
-lations apply to each research protocol. Uncertainty about how the various 
regulations apply to a given protocol can lead to overly conservative deci
-sions by these boards, making it more dif˜cult for some important health 
research to go forward. For example, some covered entities misinterpret the 
Privacy Rule by requiring researchers to obtain authorization from next of 
kin in order to access the PHI of decedents, which is not required under 
the provisions. Such factors contribute to the tremendous variability in the 
decisions made by IRBs and Privacy Boards.
Current guidance from HHS addresses only what is permissible under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule; the guidance does not identify best practices. A 
dynamic, ongoing process for the identi˜cation and dissemination of best 
practices in privacy protection for various types of health research by HHS 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
would facilitate reviews by IRBs and Privacy Boards and lead to more 
consistent and appropriate decisions. HHS guidance materials with best 
practices and models or templates for things such as the patient authoriza
-tion form, waiver of authorization form, data use agreements, and business 
associate agreements would make it easier for investigators to appropriately 
design research projects and put institutions at ease about decisions their 
IRBs and Privacy Boards make with regard to privacy concerns. Such guid
-ance materials should be written as clearly and simply as possible, using 
an inclusive, dynamic, and transparent development process, and should 
override all prior guidance documents.
The committee believes that a proactive role by HHS in disseminating 
guidance changes to IRBs and Privacy Boards is essential. This endeavor 
could perhaps be accomplished as an activity of the National Institutes of 
Health Roadmap for Medical Research under the direction of the HHS 
Of˜ce for Civil Rights. An informative precedent for the dissemination 
efforts might be the Health Resources and Services Administration™s devel
-opment of the 
National Practitioner Data Bank (NPDB) Guidebook
,20
 an 
activity established through Title IV of the Healthcare Quality Improvement 
Act of 1986. The 
NPDB Guidebook
, which is frequently updated, provides 
many case examples of what should be done in various situations.
StakeholdersŠincluding researchers; research institutions, IRBs, and 
Privacy Boards; sponsors of research; public health practitioners and agen
-cies; patient and consumer organizations; and privacy expertsŠcould have 
considerable in˚uence on the adoption of best practices once they have been 
identi˜ed, so they could help to make privacy protections and IRB/Privacy 
Board decisions more uniform. For example, Requests for Proposals and 
other funding mechanisms could be more instructive on the requirements 
for the protection of privacy.
Many academic researchers depend on their ability to procure funding 
from a source external to their institutions, and research sponsors have obli
-gations to protect research participants. Thus, major nonfederal funders of 
health research could be a powerful force for adherence to ethical guidelines 
even in the absence of strong federal regulations and enforcement. Organi
-zations whose primary missions are focused on promoting responsible and 
ethical researchŠsuch as PRIM&R (Public Responsibility in Medicine and 
Research) and the Association for the Accreditation of Human Research 
Protection Programs, Inc., which serve as primary educational vehicles for 
IRB professionals and offer certi˜cation programsŠcould also contribute 
much to this dynamic and ongoing process. Increased participation in these 
20
 Division of Quality Assurance, Health Resources and Services Administration,
 National 
Practitioner Data Bank Guidebook
, Rockville, MD, http://www.npdb-hipdb.hrsa.gov
/npdbguidebook.html (accessed August 1, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 39
organizations by research investigators in particular could extend under
-standing of regulatory requirements and foster national discourse about 
issues of interpretation and application of the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
Recommendation II.A.2:
 HHS should encourage greater use of par
-tially deidenti˜ed data called ﬁlimited datasetsﬂ and develop clear 
guidance on how to set up and comply with the associated data use 
agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively, in order to enhance privacy 
in research by expanding use and usability of data with direct identi
-˜ers removed.
Rationale
The HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule both exempt from 
their provisions research using health data from which personal identi˜ers 
have been removed. Because the two rules de˜ne personally identi˜able 
information and deidenti˜cation differently, however, there is a discrepancy 
between what research involving existing data is exempt from the Common 
Rule and what research is exempt from the Privacy Rule.
The standard for deidenti˜cation as de˜ned in the Common Rule is 
that the identity of the subject may not be readily ascertained by the health 
researcher (e.g., ﬁanonymizedﬂ datasets with no direct identi˜ers included).
21
 Thus, health research using information recorded in such a manner that sub
-jects cannot be readily identi˜ed is exempt from the Common Rule.
22
Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, there are two ways to deidentify health 
information so that it is exempt from the Privacy Rule. One is to remove 
18 speci˜ed identi˜ers that identify or could provide a reasonable basis to 
identify an individual, including both direct identi˜ers (e.g., name, address, 
medical records number, Social Security number, health plan bene˜ciary 
number) and indirect identi˜ers (e.g., dates of service and geographic sub
-divisions smaller than a state).
23
 The second way is to have a quali˜ed stat
-istician determine that the risk is very small that any identi˜ers present on a 
given data ˜le could be used alone, or in combination with other available 
information, to identify an individual.
24
This discrepancy between deidenti˜cation standards under the two 
rules can give rise to situations in which research with anonymized data 
that is exempt from IRB oversight under the Common Rule may still 
21
 45 C.F.R. § 46.102(f)(2) (2006).
22
 45 C.F.R. § 46.101(b)(4) (2006).
23
 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(b) (2006). There are no restrictions on the use or disclosure of dei
-denti˜ed health information. 
24
 Id.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
require a decision by an IRB or a Privacy Board to determine if a waiver 
of individuals™ authorization of disclosure for the use of their information 
for research purposes is appropriate under the Privacy Rule. However, IRBs 
have not had to review these protocols in the past, and they may have dif
-˜culty in making appropriate decisions about waivers.
The HIPAA Privacy Rule™s restrictions put greater emphasis on the pos
-sibility that deidenti˜ed health data could be reidenti˜ed using publicly avail
-able databases. Record linkage technology has advanced rapidly in the past 
10 years, making reidenti˜cation of data easier now than when the Common 
Rule was implemented. Yet many researchers maintain that removing all 18 
data categories required by the HIPAA Privacy Rule can render a dataset 
unusable for research. Several organizationsŠincluding the Secretary™s Advi
-sory Committee on Human Research Protections (SACHRP), NCVHS, and 
the Association of American Medical CollegesŠhave recommended chang
-ing the HIPAA Privacy Rule to reduce the number of identi˜ers that must be 
removed for a dataset to be considered deidenti˜ed and thus exempt from 
IRB and Privacy Board oversight if used in health research. Some elements 
of the 18 identi˜ers (e.g., ZIP Codes, geographic subdivisions, and dates 
of service or tissue collection) do not directly identify individuals, and are 
essential for some types of health research, such as epidemiology or studies 
of disease incidence.
In 2002, in response to the concerns that had been raised, HHS modi
-˜ed the HIPAA Privacy Rule to create a category of partially deidenti˜ed 
data called the ﬁlimited dataset,ﬂ in which health information that is 
stripped of the 16 most direct identi˜ers can be used and disclosed for 
research without obtaining individuals™ authorization or an IRB/Privacy 
Board waiver if the covered entity enters into a data use agreement (DUA) 
with the recipient of the data.
25
 Geographic subdivisions (other than street 
addresses) and dates and other numbers, characteristics, or codes not listed 
as direct identi˜ers in the regulation can be included in a limited dataset, 
making it more useful for research.
Currently, however, there is pervasive confusion regarding the condi
-tions of DUAs and how recipients may meet those conditions. As a result, 
in some health care settings, the burden of establishing a DUA prevents 
research from going forward. However, at the other extreme, some covered 
entities sign DUAs as a matter of course, providing little meaningful privacy 
protection to the patient. The committee recommends that HHS ameliorate 
this situation by issuing clear guidance on how to set up and comply with 
data use agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively, with a goal-oriented 
focus on the safeguards that researchers should use to protect individuals™ 
privacy.
25
 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(e)(3)(i) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 41
Recommendation II.A.3:
 HHS should clarify the distinctions between 
ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure appropriate IRB and Privacy 
Board oversight of PHI disclosures for these activities.
Ł HHS should consult with relevant stakeholders to develop standard 
criteria for IRBs and Privacy Boards to use when making distinc
-tions between health research and related endeavors such as public 
health practice and quality improvement practices. These criteria 
should be evaluated regularly by HHS to ensure that the criteria 
are helpful and producing the desired outcomes.
Rationale
The HIPAA Privacy Rule makes a somewhat arti˜cial distinction 
between health research and some closely related activities, such as public 
health and quality improvement activities, which also may involve collec
-tion and analysis of PHI. Under the Privacy Rule (as well as the Common 
Rule), these activities, which aim to protect the public™s health and improve 
the quality of patient care, are considered health care ﬁpracticeﬂ rather than 
health research.
HHS considered public health and quality improvement activities 
important enough to give them special status under federal regulations by 
permitting them to be undertaken without authorization or an IRB/Privacy 
Board waiver of authorization. Yet it can be a challenge for IRBs and 
Privacy Boards, researchers, health care practitioners, and research par
-ticipants to distinguish among activities that are or are not subject to the 
various provisions of the Privacy Rule (and the Common Rule). Inappro
-priate decisions may prevent important activities from being undertaken 
or could potentially allow disclosures of PHI that are not permitted under 
the regulations.
A number of models outlining the criteria IRBs and Privacy Boards 
should use to distinguish practice and research have been proposed to 
address these dif˜culties. One recent model, for example, provides a detailed 
checklist for IRBs and Privacy Boards to use in determining whether an 
activity is (1) public health ﬁresearchﬂ that must comply with the research 
provisions of the Privacy Rule, or (2) public health ﬁpracticeﬂ that does not 
need IRB or Privacy Board review.
26
The committee believes that standardizing the criteria is essential to 
support the conduct of these important health care activities. For that 
reason, the committee recommends that HHS convene the relevant stake
-holders to develop standard criteria for IRBs and Privacy Boards to use 
when making decisions about whether protocols entail research or prac
-26
 See Chapter 3 for a complete discussion of this model. 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
tice, using the available models above as examples. The regulation should 
have enough ˚exibility to allow important activities to go forward with 
appropriate levels of oversight. In addition, it will be important to evalu
-ate whether these criteria are effective in aiding IRB/Privacy Board reviews 
of proposed protocols and whether they lead to appropriate IRB/Privacy 
Board decisions.
Recommendation II.A.4:
 HHS guidance documents should simplify 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s provisions regarding the use of PHI in activi
-ties preparatory to research and harmonize those provisions with the 
Common Rule, in order to facilitate appropriate IRB and Privacy 
Board oversight of identi˜cation and recruitment of potential research 
participants.
Rationale
Many research studies, especially those focused on rare conditions with 
limited eligible patient populations, rely on large-scale medical chart reviews 
and searches of patient databases to identify patients who might be eligible 
for and might bene˜t from a particular study. Suf˜cient patient enrollment 
in a timely fashion is essential to ensure the meaningfulness and reliability of 
the research results. Researchers may also need to examine medical records 
in order to develop useful and appropriate research designs and protocols.
The HIPAA Privacy Rule has some speci˜c provisions that allow a cov
-ered entity to use or disclose PHI without an individual™s authorization if 
the information is to be used for research. One provision allows a covered 
entity to use and disclose PHI without an individual™s authorization if the 
covered entity obtains the following representations from the researcher: 
(1) the use or disclosure of the information is solely to prepare a research 
protocol or is otherwise preparatory to research; (2) the researcher will not 
remove any PHI from the covered entity; and (3) the PHI for which access is 
sought is necessary for the research.
27
 However, there is widespread confu
-sion regarding what is permitted under this provision of the Privacy Rule. 
Surveys and studies also indicate that recruiting patients for research has 
become more dif˜cult and costly under the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
HHS has issued multiple guidance statements to help address this con
-fusion, but these guidance statements, some of which have been contradic
-tory, have failed to solve the problem.
According to current HHS guidance on the Privacy Rule, researchers 
(both internal and external to a covered entity) may conduct a review of 
27
 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(1)(ii) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 43
medical records under the Privacy Rule™s exception that allows the use and 
disclosure of PHI without an individual™s authorization if the information is 
being used by a researcher for activities preparatory to research. However, 
HHS guidance also speci˜es that only internal researchers (an employee or 
member of the covered entity™s workforce) may contact potential research 
participants about the possibility of enrolling in a study under this provi
-sion of the Privacy Rule. External researchers are not allowed to record or 
remove patient contact information from a covered entity. They must get 
a partial waiver from an IRB or Privacy Board to perform any recruitment 
activities. This interpretation of the Privacy Rule creates an arti˜cial distinc
-tion between internal and external researchers that actually provides less 
privacy protection than that afforded by the Common Rule, which requires 
that any activities preparatory to research involving human subjects, or 
related to initial recruitment of subjects for research studies, be reviewed 
and approved by an IRB. Thus, the HIPAA Privacy Rule permits conduct 
that is prohibited by the Common Rule.
According to SACHRP, HHS statements regarding these provisions for 
activities preparatory to research have led to ﬁenormous confusion,ﬂ and 
many ﬁinstitutions are hesitant to permit many recruitment activities critical 
to the continuation of the research enterprise, out of fear that they are in 
some way misinterpreting the government™s current positions on research 
recruitment.ﬂ In 2004 SACHRP indicated that it was ﬁvery concerned that 
the bureaucratic complexities here undermine, rather than enhance, the 
attention that needs to be paid to the welfare and interests of subjects in 
the research recruitment process.ﬂ
To address these issues, the committee recommends that all
 researchers 
(including those internal to the covered entity) be required to obtain IRB 
approval (as required under the Common Rule) prior to contacting potential 
research participants. When making a decision about whether to approve 
research projects, the IRB should review and consider the investigator™s 
plans for contacting patients, and ensure that the information will be used 
only for research projects approved by the IRB and will not be disclosed 
elsewhere. The committee believes that IRBs can protect research partici
-pants, including their privacy and con˜dentiality interests, but as noted in 
Recommendation II.A.1, educational outreach by HHS is needed to address 
misunderstandings of these provisions.
Recommendation II.B:
 HHS should develop guidance materials to 
facilitate effective use of existing data and materials for health research 
and public health purposes.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Background
Many institutions create and maintain databases with patient health 
information or repositories with biological materials collected from patients. 
These databases and biospecimen banks are used for many types of health 
research, including studies to understand diseases or to compare patient 
outcomes following different treatments.
Current interpretations of provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule some
-times make it dif˜cult to effectively use these valuable resources for health 
research. Currently, for example, HHS interprets the Privacy Rule as pro
-hibiting patient authorization for future research use of PHI associated with 
the individuals™ biospecimens collected in the course of a clinical trial or 
treatment by covered entities.
Such interpretations of the HIPAA Privacy Rule create confusion and 
unnecessary burdens for patients and researchers alike and lead to lost 
opportunity by impeding important health research. Furthermore, because 
such interpretations are inconsistent with the Common Rule, they lead 
to inequities between covered entities and non-covered entities that hold 
databases and biospecimen banks.
The committee™s four speci˜c recommendations below are intended to 
facilitate important health research by maximizing the usefulness of patient 
data associated with biospecimen banks and in research databases, thereby 
allowing novel hypotheses to be tested with existing data and materials as 
knowledge and technology improve. The recommendations would align 
interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule with the Common Rule on several 
points, simplify or clarify the relevant processes in research, and develop 
new tools for data aggregation.
Recommendation II.B.1:
 HHS should develop guidance that clearly 
states that individuals can authorize use of PHI stored in databases or 
associated with biospecimen banks for speci˜ed future research under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule with IRB oversight, as is allowed under the 
Common Rule, to facilitate use of repositories for health research. 
Ł Future uses should be described in suf˜cient detail to allow indi
-viduals to give informed consent.
Ł IRBs should determine that the new research is not incompatible 
with the initial consent.
Rationale
Databases and biospecimen banks, once created, offer a cost-effective 
resource of information for rapidly addressing new health research ques
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 45
tions as technologies and knowledge advance. Collecting the data and 
biospecimens necessary to address each new research question as it arises 
would take years, or even decades, at great expense. Thus, the pace and 
ef˜ciency of medical progress is enhanced signi˜cantly by using established 
resources whenever feasible. When new potential prognostic markers of 
disease are identi˜ed, for example, they must be validated by studying the 
markers in many patients over the course of the disease. Examining samples 
stored in biobanks, where disease progression has already been recorded 
over many years, is a fast and relatively inexpensive way of determining 
whether the marker has promise for clinical use and warrants further 
investigation.
The provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, as interpreted by HHS, 
may impede research with established biospecimen banks and databases. 
The Privacy Rule requires an individual™s authorization for the use or dis
-closure of protected information to describe, with speci˜city, the purpose 
of the proposed use or disclosure of such information.
28
 HHS regards all 
future uses of PHI as nonspeci˜cŠand therefore ineligible for inclusion in 
an authorization for the collection and storage of biological materials and 
data. In contrast, the Common Rule makes it possible to obtain individuals™ 
consent to future use or disclosure of their health information for health 
research, with IRB oversight, as long as any intended future use is described 
in suf˜cient detail to allow informed consent.
HHS has maintained that allowing individuals to authorize future uses 
of their PHI could leave decisions about future research projects at the 
discretion of covered entities, because the HIPAA Privacy Rule, unlike the 
Common Rule, does not require IRB or Privacy Board review of research 
uses and disclosures made with individual authorization.
29
 For that reason, 
HHS requires that individuals be recontacted to obtain their authoriza
-tion for the use or disclosure of their existing data and biospecimens for 
any additional research studies undertaken unless the researchers obtain a 
waiver or alteration of individual authorization. Recontacting individuals 
to obtain their additional authorization is very impractical. Even when 
another contact is possible, the process can be intrusive and burdensome 
for patients and their families.
As long as an IRB is overseeing the research, obtaining individuals™ 
authorization for future use of their information in existing databases and 
biospecimen banks in health research should be adequate for protecting 
privacy. One way to overcome the discordance between the Privacy Rule 
and the Common Rule would be for HHS to issue guidance explicitly stat
-ing that future research may go forward if the following conditions are 
28
 45 C.F.R. § 164.508 (2006).
29
 Id.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
met: (1) the individual™s authorization describes the types or categories of 
research that may be conducted with the PHI stored in the database or 
biobank; and (2) an IRB determines that the proposed new research is not 
incompatible with the initial consent and authorization, and poses no more 
than a minimal risk.
Because science is evolving quickly, one cannot adequately anticipate 
what knowledge will be gained in the future. Signi˜cant opportunities 
for bene˜cial research could be lost without some revisions in the current 
interpretation of this portion of the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Databases and 
biospecimen banks created and maintained with federal funds, in particular, 
should be used for multiple studies as often as feasible, especially given the 
high cost of developing such repositories and the high value of investigating 
and comparing multiple scienti˜c questions from the same pool of data.
Recommendation II.B.2:
 HHS should develop clear guidance for use of 
a single form that permits individuals to authorize use and disclosure 
of health information in a clinical trial and to authorize the storage of 
their biospecimens collected in conjunction with the clinical trial, in 
order to simplify authorization for interrelated research activities.
Rationale
Informed consent and authorization are essential for the protection of 
individuals who volunteer to participate in clinical trials. Thus, it is impera
-tive that the informed consent and authorization documents are easily 
understood and meaningful to the individuals involved. Ideally, all relevant 
information should be integrated into one simple document.
The HIPAA Privacy Rule™s complex provisions have generated mis
-perceptions about restrictions on individuals™ ability to provide compound 
authorization for the related activities of clinical trial participation and 
biospecimen donation. Such misperceptions can diminish the informed 
nature of consent and authorization because they can lead to patient 
confusion and misunderstanding. HHS has stated that if a covered entity 
plans to collect and store biospecimens in a research repository in conjunc
-tion with a clinical trial, individuals™ authorization for storage of the PHI 
associated with the repository must be separate from authorization for 
disclosure of the PHI associated with participation in the clinical trial.
HHS arrived at this interpretation through a series of steps. First, 
it is generally not permissible to condition treatment on an individual™s 
authorization for the use of PHI, although the HIPAA Privacy Rule does 
permit a covered entity to condition treatment in a clinical trial on sign
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 47
ing an authorization.
30
 Second, although the HIPAA Privacy Rule gener
-ally permits researchers to combine an authorization form with any other 
type of written permission (including another authorization), it prohibits 
 
researchers from combining authorizations where the covered entity condi
-tions the provision of treatment on signing only one of the authorizations, 
but not the other.
31 Because HHS has concluded that collection of PHI for a 
clinical trial and for a repository are separate research activities, researchers 
cannot condition participation in the clinical trial on signing authorization 
to include PHI in a repository.
32
Currently, therefore, the two authorizations cannot be combined in one 
form unless (1) the form has separate signature lines for each authoriza
-tion, and (2) the text clearly delineates the two activities and states that the 
participant is not required to sign the portion authorizing the contribution 
of PHI to the repository in order to receive treatment in a clinical trial.
There is much confusion about these provisions of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule, and some institutions require two complete authorization forms with 
all the attendant language rather than two signature lines on the same form. 
The excess paperwork that results is burdensome for patients; can reduce 
the informed nature of authorization by confusing patients; and may reduce 
patient participation in research. Guidance from HHS to clearly indicate 
that a single authorization form with two signature lines is permissible in 
such circumstances would reduce variability and increase the informed 
nature of authorization.
Recommendation II.B.3:
 HHS should clarify the circumstances under 
which DNA samples or sequences are considered PHI, in order to 
facilitate appropriate use of DNA in health research.
Rationale
With recent technological advances in biomedical research, it is now 
possible to learn a great deal about disease processes and individual varia
-tions in treatment effectiveness or susceptibility to disease from genetic 
analyses because the DNA sequences that make up a person™s genome 
strongly in˚uence a person™s health. In this genomic age of health research, 
patient blood and tissue samples stored in biospecimen banks can provide a 
30
 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(b)(4)(i) (2006).
31
 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(b)(3) (2006).
32
 National Institutes of Health, 
Research Repositories, Databases, and the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule
, January 2004, http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pdf/research_repositories_˜nal.pdf 
(accessed August 1, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
wealth of information for addressing long-standing questions about health 
and disease.
But HHS has not yet issued clear guidance on how the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule applies to DNA samples or sequences. HHS guidance documents 
indicate that blood or tissue samples themselves are not protected under 
HIPAA unless they contain or are associated with the 18 personal identi˜ers 
speci˜ed by the HIPAA Privacy Rule. In addition, HHS has stated that the 
results of an analysis of blood or tissue, if containing or associated with 
individually identi˜able information, would be PHI. Yet the research com
-munity remains uncertain about whether genetic information accompany
-ing biospecimens is protected under the HIPAA Privacy Rule because the list 
of HIPAA identi˜ers includes vague terms such as ﬁbiometric identi˜ersﬂ 
and ﬁunique identifying characteristics.ﬂ
33
Genetic information does not itself identify an individual in the absence 
of other identifying information. Even the European Union, which has a 
more restrictive privacy regime than the United States, does not consider 
DNA in and of itself to be a direct identi˜er.
34
 In some circumstances, 
however, a person™s genetic code could be construed as a unique identi˜er 
in that it could be used to match sequence in another biospecimen bank 
or databank that does include identi˜ers. As genetic information becomes 
more prevalent in research and health care, the latter scenario is more 
likely to occur. As health care enters the era of personalized medicine, for 
example, genetic information is more likely to be included in a person™s 
health records. But at the same time, realization of the promises of person
-alized medicine will require research on DNA from a great many diverse 
individuals whose medical history is well documented.
The committee believes that establishing consistent standards for the 
use and protection of genetic information is important. The committee 
advocates a focus on strong security measures and recommends the adop
-tion of strict prohibitions on the unauthorized reidenti˜cation of ind
ividuals 
from DNA sequences, by anyone.
Regardless of how genetic information is regulated under the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule, a federal prohibition of genetic discrimination is necessary 
to allay privacy concerns and diminish potential negative consequences of 
unintended disclosure of genetic information. Many people are concerned 
about genetic discriminationŠthe misuse of genetic information by insur
-ance companies, employers, and others to make decisions based on a 
person™s DNA. Thus, in addition to protecting the privacy of individuals™ 
33
 45 C.F.R. § 164.514 (2006).
34
 Article 29 Data Protection Working Party, European Union, ﬁOpinion 4/2007 on the 
Concept of Personal Data,ﬂ WP 136, adopted June 27, 2007, http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/
fsj/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2007/wp136_en.pdf (accessed August 1, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 49
genetic information, it is important to protect people against genetic dis
-crimination. The hope is that the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination 
Act of 2008, recently signed into law, will begin to address some of these 
concerns.
Recommendation II.B.4:
 HHS should develop a mechanism for linking 
data from multiple sources so that more useful datasets can be made 
available for research in a manner that protects privacy, con˜dentiality, 
and security.
Rationale
Because a single database may not provide a complete picture of a 
patient™s condition or health history, it is often necessary to combine infor
-mation about a patient from multiple sources. However, the way in which 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule has been interpreted and implemented has made 
linking data from diverse sources for research purposes more dif˜cult. 
Thus, the Privacy Rule impedes health research and compromises the value 
and reliability of research that is undertaken.
Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, it is possible in principle for a researcher 
to aggregate PHI from multiple covered entities with individual authoriza
-tion or with an IRB or Privacy Board™s waiver of such authorization. 
Obtaining individuals™ authorization for research that entails the review of 
thousands of medical records is unrealistic, though, and even with a waiver 
of authorization, covered entities with large datasets are now often reluc
-tant to allow researchers access to PHI. More commonly, covered entities 
provide data to researchers with direct identi˜ers removed. Because datasets 
from multiple sources cannot be linked to generate a more complete record 
of a patient™s health history without a unique identi˜er, though, datasets 
with direct identi˜ers removed are often of minimal value to researchers 
and are not frequently used. A third party may collect PHI from covered 
entities and aggregate the data for research by establishing business associ
-ate agreements with the various data sources, but in practice, such agree
-ments are used infrequently for this purpose because they are complicated 
and impractical to set up for individual research projects.
The committee believes a better approach would be to establish secure, 
trusted intermediaries that could develop a protocol, or key, for routinely 
linking health data from different sources, and then provide more complete 
and useful datasets with the identi˜ers removed to researchers. One way 
this could be accomplished, for example, might be through data ware
-houses that are certi˜ed for the purpose of linking data from different 
sources. The organizations responsible for such linking would be required 
to use strong security measures and would maintain the details about how 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the linkage was done, should another research team need to recreate the 
linked dataset. Using such intermediaries would facilitate greater use of 
health data with direct identi˜ers removed for research and lead to more 
meaningful study results while also increasing patient privacy protections 
and allaying concerns of covered entities.
Some federal agencies are already developing mechanisms for linking 
information from different sources. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS), for example, provides a linking service for Medicare and 
Medicaid data via contractors that create standardized data ˜les tailored for 
research. CMS also has begun pilot projects to aggregate Medicare claims 
data with data from commercial health plans and, in some cases, Medicaid, 
in order to calculate and report quality measures for physician groups.
A broader effort to link data from diverse sources, called the National 
Health Data Stewardship Entity, has been initiated by the federal Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). AHRQ is also involved in 
implementing the Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act of 2005, 
which encourages creation of Patient Safety Organizations to receive infor
-mation from hospitals, doctors, and health care providers on a privileged 
and con˜dential basis, for analysis and aggregation. Even though the pur
-pose of these two AHRQ initiatives is to monitor health care quality,
35,36
 they could provide a model for data aggregation that is potentially appli
-cable to health research.
The administrative simpli˜cation provisions of HIPAA speci˜cally pro
-vided for the creation of a unique individual identi˜er that would permit 
the linking of data from different sources, but work on developing such 
an identi˜er has been halted because there is a great deal of controversy 
regarding how it could be implemented without compromising individual 
privacy. In addition, federal agencies are under pressure from the Of˜ce of 
Budget and Management to reduce the use of Social Security numbers as 
unique identi˜ers. Nevertheless, it is clear that the development of some 
type of linking key (not based on Social Security numbers) would make 
linkages among databases more ef˜cient, standardized, and reliable, and 
less costly. Moreover, this type of linkage could greatly facilitate many types 
of information research and improve quality of care.
Recommendation II.C.
 HHS should revise provisions of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule that entail heavy burdens for covered entities and impede 
35
 National Health Data Stewardship, Request for Information, 72 Fed. Reg. 30803 (June 4, 
2007).
36
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, Patient Safety Organizations Website, http://www.pso.ahrq.gov (accessed August 1, 
2008); Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act, Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 73 Fed. 
Reg. 8112 (February 12, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 51
research without providing substantive improvements in patient 
privacy.
Background
For some provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the burdens are heavy 
and the privacy protections are small. Such provisions may need to be 
reconsidered if society is to derive maximal bene˜ts from health research. 
The committee recommends revising two components of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule that are very burdensome with respect to the level of privacy protec
-tion they afford.
Recommendation II.C.1:
 HHS should reform the requirements for the 
accounting of disclosures (AOD) of PHI for research.
Ł The HIPAA Privacy Rule should permit covered entities to inform 
patients in advance that PHI might be used for health research 
with IRB/Privacy Board oversight or for public health purposes. 
Accordingly, the Privacy Rule should be revised to exempt disclo
-sures of PHI made for research and public health purposes from 
the Privacy Rule™s accounting of disclosures requirements. As an 
alternative to AOD, to ensure transparency, institutions should 
maintain a list, accessible to the public, of all studies approved by 
an IRB/Privacy Board.
Rationale
Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, individuals have a right to receive an 
accounting of disclosures, a list of all disclosures of their PHI by a covered 
entity or the covered entity™s business associates in the past 6 years. Accord
-ing to HHS, the AOD provision of the HIPAA Privacy Rule was intended 
ﬁas a means for the individual to ˜nd out the nonroutine purposes for 
which his or her PHI was disclosed by the covered entity, so as to increase 
the individual™s awareness of persons or entities other than the individual™s 
health care provider or health plan in possession of this information.ﬂ The 
AOD requirement does not constitute an audit trail, though, because the 
provision has numerous exceptionsŠincluding disclosures of PHI for health 
care operations, pursuant to an authorization, as part of a limited dataset, 
for national security or intelligence purposes, and to correctional institu
-tions or law enforcement of˜cials.
Disclosures of PHI by covered entities for research purposes under 
a waiver of individual authorization approved by an IRB or a Privacy 
Board, or for public health purposes as required by law, must be included 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
in an AOD report. Furthermore, HHS has noted that ﬁmaking a set of 
records available for review by a third party constitutes a disclosure 
of the PHI in the entire set of records, regardless of whether the third 
party actually reviews any particular record.ﬂ The AOD provision of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule provides an exception for research involving groups 
of 50 or more subjects by allowing the covered entity to develop a general 
list of all protocols for which a person™s PHI may have been disclosed. 
Even then, however, there is a considerable administrative obligation to 
generate such a list. Furthermore, in many medical facilities, a general list 
of protocols is extensive and thus relatively meaningless to a particular 
patient.
The AOD provision of the HIPAA Privacy Rule places a heavy admin
-istrative burden on health systems and health services research that achieves 
little in terms of protecting privacy. Moreover, HHS has provided no guid
-ance to covered entities about practical ways to ful˜ll this requirement in an 
ef˜cient manner. On the basis of testimony in 2004, the Secretary™s Advisory 
Committee on Human Research Protections concluded that the cost and 
burden of compliance with the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s AOD requirements 
were so high that institutions were likely to accept the risk of noncompliance 
rather than incur the cost of compliance.
Annual surveys of health care privacy of˜cers undertaken by the Ameri
-can Health Information Management Association (AHIMA) since 2004 
have similarly found that many facilities report dif˜culties with the AOD 
requirement. Such surveys have also found that the demand for AOD reports 
by individuals is extremely low. Two thirds of health care privacy of˜cers 
participating in the survey reported receiving no requests at all. Nearly one 
third of respondents indicated that they would like to see a change to the 
AOD provision of the HIPAA Privacy RuleŠthe most frequently cited provi
-sion among all respondents and the most frequently cited provision by far 
among respondents with more than 20,000 admissions
/discharges per year. 
On the basis of these results, AHIMA concluded that ﬁfor many, this [AOD] 
provision is not only burdensome but also signi˜cantly inef˜cient.ﬂ
37
Robust safeguards are already in place to protect the privacy of PHI 
disclosures in health research via IRBs and Privacy Boards. As the health 
care system moves toward broader implementation of electronic health 
records, however, automatic tracking of audit trails will be important to 
incorporate. Technology advances will likely make automatic AOD track
-ing feasible, affordable, and widely available in the future. Until then, the 
committee recommends that disclosures of PHI made for health research 
37
 American Health Information Management Association, 2006, 
The State of HIPAA Privacy 
and Security Compliance
, http://www.ahima.org/emerging_issues/2006StateofHIPAACompliance.
pdf (accessed April 20, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 53
and public health purposes be exempted from the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s 
AOD requirement.
Recommendation II.C.2:
 HHS should simplify the criteria that IRBs 
and Privacy Boards use in making determinations for when they can 
waive the requirements to obtain authorization from each patient whose 
PHI will be used for a research study, in order to facilitate appropriate 
authorization requirements for responsible research.
Ł If HHS decides to retain the current waiver criteria, HHS should 
provide clear and reasonable de˜nitions of terms used in those 
criteria, such as ﬁminimal riskﬂ to the privacy of individuals (in 
the ˜rst criterion) and ﬁimpracticableﬂ (in the second and third 
criteria). HHS should also provide speci˜c case examples of what 
should or should not be considered impracticable or of minimal 
risk.
Rationale
Under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, researchers seeking to use PHI in 
medical records for research must obtain authorization from each patient 
unless an IRB or a Privacy Board makes a determination that a waiver of 
individual authorization is warranted. For many types of research with 
medical records, making that determination is a challenge for IRBs and 
Privacy Boards. Many studies involve thousands of records, making indi
-vidual authorization unrealistic. But the criteria in the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
that IRBs and Privacy Boards apply in making these decisions are complex 
and very subjective.
Currently, IRBs and Privacy Boards must use three criteria in consider
-ing whether to approve a waiver of individual authorization for the use of 
PHI in research.
38
 The ˜rst criterion is that the use or disclosure of PHI 
in the research involves no more than a ﬁminimal riskﬂ to the privacy of 
individuals. The Privacy Rule lists three elements that must be present in 
making this determination: (1) ﬁan adequate plan to protect the identi˜ers 
from improper use and disclosure;ﬂ (2) ﬁan adequate plan to destroy the 
identi˜ers;ﬂ and (3) ﬁadequate written assurances that the PHI will not be 
reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by law, 
for authorized oversight of the research project, or for other research for 
which the use or disclosure of PHI is otherwise permissible.ﬂ However, the 
decision about what is ﬁadequateﬂ is highly subjective, and thus different 
institutions are likely to set varying thresholds for ﬁminimal risk.ﬂ
38
 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(2)(ii) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
The other two criteria that IRBs or Privacy Boards currently must use 
in considering whether to approve a waiver of individual authorization 
are (1) that ﬁthe research could not practicably be conducted without the 
waiver;ﬂ and (2) that the ﬁresearch could not practicably be conducted 
without access to and use of PHIﬂ
39
 (as opposed to deidenti˜ed data or a 
limited dataset). The concept of practicability is used in both the Common 
Rule and in the HIPAA authorization criteria, but what is ﬁpracticableﬂ or 
ﬁimpracticableﬂ has never been adequately de˜ned by the HHS Of˜ce for 
Human Research Protections or the HHS Of˜ce for Civil Rights (e.g., with 
regard to cost/feasibility). Not surprisingly, therefore, institutions apply 
varying de˜nitions independently, often too conservatively to allow even 
low-risk research to proceed. Some institutions interpret the term imprac
-ticable to mean not at all possible and even require researchers to demon
-strate that a study will fail without a waiver of authorization. The lack of 
clarity leads to a great deal of variability across institutions and impedes 
research. Patients have also questioned the meaning of the term.
Simpli˜cation or clari˜cation by HHS of the criteria that IRBs or Pri
-vacy Boards must use in deciding whether to approve a waiver of individual 
authorization would be especially helpful for multi-institutional studies, 
which fall under the jurisdiction of multiple IRBs or Privacy Boards. Cov
-ered entities are permitted to rely on a waiver of authorization approved 
by a single IRB or Privacy Board with jurisdiction. Currently, however, 
covered entities often decide to require approval from their own IRB or 
Privacy Board prior to disclosing PHI to the requesting researcher, regard
-less of whether another IRB or Privacy Board already granted a waiver of 
authorization. This practice leads to delays and variability in the protocol 
at different sites.
Simpli˜cation of the criteria for approval of waivers by IRBs and Pri
-vacy Boards would also be helpful for smaller or community-based institu
-tions that do not have internal counsel or regulatory affairs specialists, and 
thus are more likely to opt out of research that requires decisions about 
authorizations. With better guidance, all covered entities would have more 
con˜dence in their decisions and might be more willing to rely on a lead 
IRB or Privacy Board™s decision in the case of multi-institutional studies.
If HHS decides to retain the three criteria that IRBs or Privacy Boards 
currently use in deciding whether to approve a waiver of individual autho
-rization, however, the committee recommends that HHS provide clear and 
reasonable de˜nitions of the vague terms used in those criteria. Speci˜cally, 
HHS should de˜ne what constitutes ﬁminimal riskﬂ to the privacy of indi
-viduals (in the ˜rst criterion) and de˜ne what constitutes ﬁimpracticableﬂ 
(in the second and third criteria). HHS should also provide speci˜c case 
39
 Id.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 55
examples of what should or should not be considered impracticable or of 
minimal risk to reduce variability and overly conservative interpretations.
III. Implement Changes Necessary for Both Policy Options Above 
 (Recommendations I and II)
Regardless of whether Recommendation I or II is implemented, the 
following recommendations, which are independent of the Privacy Rule, 
should be adopted. Strong security measures are essential to effective pri
-vacy protection, willingness to serve in IRBs is important for ensuring 
appropriate oversight of research, and the public should be provided with 
more information about health research.
Recommendation III.A:
 All institutions (both covered entities and non-
covered entities) in the health research community that are involved 
in the collection, use, and disclosure of personally identi˜able health 
information should take strong measures to safeguard the security of 
health data. For example, institutions could:
Ł Appoint a security of˜cer responsible for assessing data protection 
needs and implementing solutions and staff training.
Ł Make greater use of encryption and other techniques for data 
security.
Ł Include data security experts on IRBs.
Ł Implement a breach noti˜cation requirement, so that patients may 
take steps to protect their identity in the event of a breach.
Ł Implement layers of security protection to eliminate single points 
of vulnerability to security breaches.
In addition, the federal government should support the development 
and use of:
Ł Genuine privacy-enhancing techniques that minimize or eliminate 
the collection of personally identi˜able data.
Ł Standardized self-evaluations and security audits and certi˜cation 
programs to help institutions achieve the goal of safeguarding the 
security of personal health data.
Rationale
Effective health privacy protections require effective data security 
measures. Protecting the privacy of research participants and maintain
-ing the con˜dentiality of their data have always been imperative to most 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 
researchers and a fundamental tenet of clinical research. Recently, however, 
several highly publicized examples of stolen or misplaced computers con
-taining health data have heightened the public™s concerns about privacy. 
Such events pose problems not only for patient privacy, but also for health 
research, because public trust is essential for patients to be willing to par
-ticipate in research. Moreover, data security is a key component of compre
-hensive privacy protections. Thus, the committee recommends improving 
the security of personally identi˜able health information.
The HIPAA Security Rule (which entails a set of regulatory provisions 
separate from the Privacy Rule) already sets a ˚oor for data security stan
-dards within covered entities, but not all institutions that conduct health 
research are subject to HIPAA regulations. Moreover, the security protec
-tions intended by the HIPAA Security Rule may not be suf˜cient to prevent 
breaches.
The committee recommends that all institutions conducting health 
research undertake measures to strengthen data protections. Given the 
recent spate of lost or stolen laptops containing patient health information, 
for example, encryption should be required for all laptops and removable 
media containing such data. There are differences among the missions and 
activities of institutions in the health research community, however, so 
some ˚exibility in the implementation of speci˜c security measures will be 
necessary.
Examples of security standards and guidelines already exist in some 
sectors, but they are not widely applied in academic settings. The National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), for example, has developed 
standards and guidance for the implementation of the Federal Information 
Security Management Act of 2002, which was meant to bolster computer 
and network security within the federal government and af˜liated par
-ties (e.g., government contractors). The NIST standards include minimum 
security requirements for information and information systems, as well 
as guidance for assessing and selecting appropriate security controls for 
information systems, for determining security control effectiveness, and for 
certifying and accrediting information systems.
40
HHS, working through its Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for 
Health Information Technology,
41
 could play an important role in develop
-ing or adapting standards for health research applications, then encourage 
and facilitate broader use of such standards in the health research commu
-40
 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Federal Information Security 
Management Act Implementation Project Website, updated November 1, 2007, http://csrc.
nist.gov/groups/SMA/˜sma/index.html (accessed August 1, 2008).
41
 Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services, Of˜ce of the National Coordinator: Mission, http://www.hhs.
gov/healthit/onc/mission/ (accessed August 1, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 57
nity. The issue of the security of health data will continue to grow in impor
-tance as the health care industry moves toward widespread implementation 
of electronic health records, and Congress has already proposed numerous 
bills to facilitate and regulate that transition. As noted in the committee™s 
recommendation about the requirements for the accounting of disclosures 
of PHI for research above (Recommendation II.C.1), advances in informa
-tion technology will likely make it easier to implement measures such as 
audit trails and access controls in the future.
Enhancing security could reduce the risk of data theft and reinforce 
the public™s trust in the research community by diminishing anxiety about 
the potential for unintentional disclosure of information. The publication 
of best practices and outreach to all stakeholders by HHS, combined with 
a cooperative approach to compliance with security standards such as self-
evaluation and audit programs, would promote progress in this area. As 
noted in Recommendation II.A.1, research sponsors could also play a role 
in fostering the adoption of best practices in data security.
Recommendation III.B:
 HHSŠor, as necessary, CongressŠshould 
provide reasonable protection against civil suits brought pursuant to 
federal or state law for members of IRBs and Privacy Boards for deci
-sions made within the scope of their responsibilities under the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule and the Common Rule, in order to encourage service on 
Institutional Review Boards and Privacy Boards. The limitation on 
liability for members of IRBs and Privacy Boards should not include 
protection for willful and wanton misconduct in reviewing the research, 
but should instead be reserved for good-faith decisions, backed by min
-utes or other evidence, in responsibly applying the legal requirements 
under the HIPAA Privacy Rule or the Common Rule.
Rationale
IRBs, Privacy Boards, and institutions have enormous responsibility in 
determining whether health research projects are planned and conducted 
in a way that minimizes or eliminates the potential risk to human research 
participants, including both direct physical harms and nonphysical harms 
(e.g., breach of privacy). The workload of IRBs and the complexity of their 
work have been steadily increasing as a result of new and evolving require
-ments for research regulation and documentation, including the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule. Surveys and studies indicate that the IRB review process has 
become more lengthy and dif˜cult since implementation of the Privacy 
Rule, which may increase opportunity costs due to delayed or undiscovered 
research ˜ndings that might improve health.
Effective oversight of health research depends on the recruitment of 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
quali˜ed and knowledgeable volunteers to serve on IRBs and Privacy Boards. 
But the increasing workload and complexity of IRB and Privacy Board service 
have made it dif˜cult to recruit and retain knowledgeable IRB and Privacy 
Board members and to ensure time for the ethical re˚ection necessary to make 
appropriate decisions about human research projects. Moreover, because of 
the growth over the past decade of lawsuits naming individual IRB members 
as defendants, fear of penalties and civil suits can be a signi˜cant deterrent 
in recruiting quali˜ed volunteers to serve on IRBs and Privacy Boards. Such 
fears could also lead IRB and Privacy Board members to be overly conserva
-tive in their decisions about research proposals brought before them.
Members of IRBs and Privacy Boards are generally indemni˜ed by 
their institutions, but they are not immune from being named in a suit. 
Therefore, they might still have to devote time and resources to defending 
themselves for decisions made by an IRB or Privacy Board on which they 
served. Members of IRBs or Privacy Boards who receive limited protection 
against lawsuits may be less likely to interpret the HIPAA Privacy Rule too 
conservatively.
Providing this type of limitation on liability for IRB and Privacy Board 
members would be similar to the precedent of protection for peer review 
members under state laws and under the Health Care Quality Improve
-ment Act of 1986. A similar provision was incorporated into the Ontario 
Personal Health Information Protection Act of 2004, under which members 
of ethical boards are immune for acts done and omissions made in good 
faith that are reasonable under the circumstances. In addition to reducing 
over interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule in health research, such 
protections might also facilitate multi-institutional research by reducing the 
variability among local IRBs and Privacy Boards, as they should be more 
willing to accept the decision of a lead IRB or Privacy Board. Indeed, mov
-ing in the direction of national IRBs/Privacy Boards, as is encouraged by 
the National Cancer Institute for cancer clinical trials, might further reduce 
overly conservative interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
Finally, it should be noted that HHS policy is to seek compliance 
with the HIPAA Privacy Rule ˜rst, rather than penalties, when a concern 
is brought to its attention. Institutions might be less inclined to interpret 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule too conservatively if this policy were stated more 
clearly in guidance materials provided by HHS. Thus, even without the 
enactment of a new protective statute for IRB and Privacy Board members, 
simple clari˜cation and clear communication of the way HHS will enforce 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule and seek penalties would be helpful.
Recommendation III.C:
 HHS and researchers should take steps to pro
-vide the public with more information about health research.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 59
Background
Surveys indicate that the vast majority of Americans believe health 
research is important, and are interested in the ˜ndings of research studies. 
The majority of patients also appear to be willing to participate in health 
research, either by volunteering for a study to test a medical intervention 
or by allowing access to their medical records or stored biospecimens, 
under certain conditions. Their willingness to participate in research is 
dependent on trust in researchers to safeguard the rights and well-being of 
patients, including assurance of privacy and con˜dentiality, and the belief 
that the research is a worthwhile endeavor that warrants their involve
-ment. Yet patients often lack information about how health research is 
conducted and are rarely informed about research results that may have a 
direct impact on their health. The committee™s two recommendations below 
address the public™s desire for more information about health research and 
are important components in ful˜lling two of the committee™s overarching 
goals of the report: (1) improving the privacy and data security of health 
information, and (2) improving the effectiveness of health research. Both 
recommendations could be accomplished by HHS and the health research 
community without any changes to HIPAA or the Privacy Rule by making 
them a condition of funding from HHS and other research sponsors and 
by providing additional funds to cover the cost.
Recommendation III.C.1:
 Health researchers should make greater 
efforts to inform study participants and the public about the results of 
research and the relevance and importance of those results.
Ł Researchers should inform interested research participants (who 
granted authorization for a particular study) with a simpli˜ed sum
-mary of the results at the conclusion of a research study.
Ł HHS should encourage registration of trials and other studies in 
public databases, particularly when research is conducted with a 
waiver of authorization.
Rationale
Empirical evidence indicates that people want to be informed about 
research results, and ethicists have long recommended this kind of feedback 
and community involvement. In addition, the IOM committee identi˜ed 
transparencyŠthe responsibility to disclose clearly how and why personally 
identi˜able information is being collectedŠas an important component of 
comprehensive privacy protections. An IOM report in 2002 titled 
Respon
-sible Research: A Systems Approach to Protecting Research Participants 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
recommended improved communication with the public and research par
-ticipants to ensure that the protection process is open and accessible to all 
interested parties, noting that transparency is best achieved by providing 
graded levels of information and guidance to interested parties.
Effective communication could also build the public™s trust in the 
research community, which is important because trust is necessary for the 
public™s continued participation in research under both the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule and the committee™s new framework. Learning about clinically rel
-evant ˜ndings from a study in which a patient has participated could make 
patients feel more integrated into the process and could encourage more 
patients to participate in future studies. Moreover, if the study results indi
-cate that an altered course of care is warranted, direct feedback about these 
results could lead to improved health care for study participants.
Thus, the committee recommends that when patients grant authori
-zation for their medical records to be used in a particular study, health 
researchers should make greater efforts at the conclusion of the study to 
inform study participants about the results, and the relevance and impor
-tance of those results. Broader adoption of electronic medical records may 
be helpful in accomplishing this goal, but multiple impediments, beyond 
cost and technology, may prevent delivery of meaningful feedback to par
-ticipants. Although some guidelines for providing and explaining study 
results to research participants have been proposed, they differ in details 
because limited data are available on this subject, and thus standards are 
lacking. A summary of the results alone, while necessary and reasonable, 
can be seen as a token, and also raises questions about issues such as how 
best to write summaries and how to present research with uninformative 
outcomes.
HHS should also encourage registration of trials and other studies in 
public databases, particularly when research is conducted with a waiver 
of authorization as a way to make information about research studies 
more broadly available to the public. Numerous clinical trial registries 
already exist, and registration has increased in recent years. The National 
Library of Medicine established a clinical trials registry
42
 in 2000, which 
has expanded to serve as the FDA™s required site for submissions about clini
-cal trials subject to the FDA databank requirement and now also includes 
information from several other trial registries. The FDA Amendments Act 
of 2007 expanded the scope of required registrations and provided the ˜rst 
federally funded trials results database. In fall 2005, the International Com
-mittee of Medical Journal Editors adopted a policy requiring prospective 
trial registration as a precondition for publication.
The development of clinical trial registries is an important ˜rst step 
toward providing high-quality clinical trial information to the public. Cur
-42
 See 
http://clinicaltrials.go
v (accessed August 6, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 61
rently, however, there is no centralized system for disseminating informa
-tion about clinical trials of drugs or other interventions. Thus, patients 
and their health care providers have dif˜culty identifying ongoing studies. 
Moreover, some trials are still exempt from registration and data reporting. 
An additional limitation of clinical trial databases is that noninterventional 
studies (including observational studies that play an increasingly critical 
role in biomedical research) are not generally included. Because many non
-interventional studies are conducted with a waiver of authorization, includ
-ing those studies in a registry could be an important method for increasing 
public knowledge of those studies.
Recommendation III.C.2:
 HHS and the health research community 
should work to educate the public about how health research is done, 
and what value it provides.
Rationale
Health research provides a community bene˜t by determining the most 
effective treatments and by developing new therapies. Interventional clini
-cal trials are the most visible of the various types of health research, but a 
great deal of informative health research entails analysis of thousands of 
patient records to better understand human diseases, to determine treat
-ment effectiveness, and to identify adverse side effects of therapies. This 
form of research is likely to increase in frequency as the availability of elec
-tronic health records continues to expand. As medicine moves toward the 
goal of personalized medicine, research results will be even more likely to 
be directly relevant to patients, but more study participants will be needed 
to derive meaningful results.
However, many patients probably are not aware that their medical 
records are being used in database research. Moreover, surveys show that 
many patients desire not only notice, but also the opportunity to decide 
about whether to consent to such research with medical records. As noted 
in Recommendation III.A, strengthening security protections of health data 
should reduce the risk of security breaches and their potential negative con
-sequences, and thus should help to alleviate patient concerns in this regard. 
But educating patients about how health research is conducted, monitored, 
and reported could also help to increase patients trust in the research com
-munity, which is important for the public™s continued participation under 
both the HIPAA Privacy Rule and the committee™s new framework.
In addition, an educated public could also decrease the potential for 
biased research samples. A universal requirement to obtain authorization 
for medical records research can lead to a biased study sample, and thus 
inaccurate conclusions, because those who decline to participate may be 
more or less likely than average to have a particular health problem. A 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
study sample may also be biased if certain members are underrepresented 
or overrepresented relative to others in the population. A biased sample 
is problematic, because any statistic computed from that sample has the 
potential to be consistently erroneous, and thus, conclusions drawn from a 
biased sample are likely to be invalid. Conveying to the public the impor
-tance of health care improvements derived from medical records research 
and stressing the negative impact of incomplete datasets on research ˜nd
-ings may increase the public™s participation in research and their willing
-ness to support information-based research that is conducted with IRB or 
Privacy Board oversight and a waiver of patient authorization.
There are numerous examples of important research ˜ndings from 
medical records research that would not have been possible if direct patient 
consent and authorization were always required, including the ˜nding that 
infants exposed to diethylstilbestrol (DES) during the ˜rst trimester of 
pregnancy had an increased risk of breast, vaginal, and cervical cancer and 
reproductive anomalies as adults. Studies of medical records also led to the 
discovery that folic acid supplementation during pregnancy can prevent 
neural tube defects.
Thus, HHS and the health research community should work to edu
-cate the public about how research is done, and what value it provides. All 
stakeholders, including professional organizations, nonpro˜t funders, and 
patient organizations, have different interests and responsibilities to make 
sure their constituencies are well informed, but coordination and identi˜ca
-tion of best practices by HHS would be helpful. For example, the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology and the American Heart Association already 
have some online resources to help patients gather information about 
research that may be relevant to their conditions. Research is needed to 
identify which segments of the population would be receptive to and bene˜t 
from various types of information about how research is done and its value 
in order to create and implement an effective education plan.
Greater use of community-based participatory research, in which 
 
community-based organizations or groups bring community members into 
the research process as partners to help design studies and disseminate the 
knowledge gained,
43
 would also help achieve this goal. These groups help 
researchers to design activities that the community is likely to value and to 
recruit research participants, by using the knowledge of the community to 
understand health problems. They also inform community members about 
how the research is done and what comes out of it, with the goal of provid
-ing immediate community bene˜ts from the results when possible.
43
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser
-vices, 
Creating Partnerships, Improving Health: The Role of Community-Based Participatory 
Research
, June 2003, http://
www.ahrq.gov/research/cbprrole.ht
m (accessed August 1, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63
1Introduction
BRIEF
 H
ISTORY
 OF
 HIPAA 
AND
 THE
 P
RIVACY
 R
ULE
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) was 
passed on August 21, 1996, with the dual goals of making health care 
delivery more ef˜cient and increasing the number of Americans with health 
insurance coverage. These objectives were pursued through three main pro
-visions of the Act: (1) the portability provisions, (2) the tax provisions, and 
(3) the administrative simpli˜cation provisions. The focus of this report, 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule, was promulgated under the third provision. The 
administrative simpli˜cation provisions of HIPAA instructed the Secretary 
of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to issue sev
-eral regulations concerning electronic transmission of health information, 
which was expanding greatly in the early 1990s. The primary purpose of 
these provisions was to standardize the use of electronic health informa
-tion, but Congress also recognized that advances in electronic technology 
could endanger the privacy of health information. Thus, HIPAA mandated 
the development of nationwide security standards and safeguards for the 
use of electronic health care information as well as the creation of privacy 
standards for protected health information.
11 
Protected health information is personally identi˜able health information transmitted by 
electronic media, maintained in electronic media, or transmitted or maintained in any other 
form or medium. Protected health information excludes education records covered by the 
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act, as amended, 20 U.S.C. 1232(g), records described 
at 20 U.S.C. 1232(g)(a)(4)(B)(iv), and employment records held by a covered entity in its role 
as employer.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Although the Common Rule
2 imposed some requirements on the use 
of health information in research, federal regulations speci˜cally targeting 
health information privacy were lacking. In accordance with the adminis
-trative simpli˜cation provisions, HHS developed the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 
which set out detailed regulations regarding the types of uses and disclo
-sures of personally identi˜able health information that are permitted by the 
covered entities.
3 HHS ˜rst issued a proposed version of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule for public comment in 1999, but because of the enormous volume of 
comments received regarding the regulations, as well as a change in execu
-tive branch leadership following the 2000 Presidential election, the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule evolved through several iterations before the ˜nal version was 
issued in 2002 (45 C.F.R. parts 160 and 164). Most health care providers 
and health plans were required to be in compliance with this version of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule by April 14, 2003. Small health plans were given until 
April 14, 2004, to be in compliance.
The primary targets of the HIPAA Privacy Rule were information uses 
and transactions necessary for the provision of health care, but the ˜nal 
regulations also apply to a great deal of health research. Congress rec
-ognized the important role that health records play in conducting health 
research, and wanted to ensure that implementation of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule would not impede researchers™ continued access to such data. This 
is re˚ected in two House reports on HIPAA with identical language, stat
-ing: ﬁThe conferees recognize that certain uses of individually identi˜able 
information are appropriate, and do not compromise the privacy of an 
individual. Examples of such use of information include . . . the transfer 
of information from a health plan to an organization for the sole purpose 
of conducting health careŒrelated research. As health plans and providers 
continue to focus on outcomes research and innovation, it is important 
that the exchange and aggregated use of health care data be allowedﬂ (U.S. 
Congress, 1996a,b).
In response, HHS attempted to create a system that mandated privacy 
protection for individually identi˜able health information while allow
-ing important uses of the information in health care and research. Thus, 
researchers must now follow the provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
when obtaining data from a covered entity.
2 
The ﬁCommon Ruleﬂ is the term used by 18 federal agencies who have adopted the same 
regulations governing the protection of human subjects of research.
3 
45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006), a health plan, a health care clearinghouse, or a health care 
provider that transmits health information in electronic form in connection with a transaction 
for which HHS has adopted a standard.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 65
PRIVACY
 AND
 H
EALTH
 R
ESEARCH
Health research and privacy protections both provide valuable bene˜ts 
to society, and the two topics are interrelated. Researchers know that trust 
is essential for patients to be willing to participate in research, and many 
patients value research and are willing to share their health information in 
the hope of reaping some bene˜t from scienti˜c advances for themselves or 
their families. Collection and analysis of health information is necessary to 
attain the full bene˜ts of health research for the individual, the family, and 
the community. The challenge is to identify the most essential components 
of both privacy protection and research, to ensure maximal bene˜t and 
minimal risk.
Some health research projects with important implications for health 
care improvements and public health protections entail the analysis of infor
-mation that many would consider sensitive. For example, some research 
examines information regarding individuals™ sexuality, or smoking, alcohol, 
and drug use habits. Also, it may be necessary to collect information on an 
individual™s social, racial, or economic status to study the in˚uence of pov
-erty, nutrition, and social relationships on health. Many research projects 
now also study a person™s genetic pro˜le to gain insight into predispositions 
for diseases. Epidemiology and public health research may trace disease 
incidence and characteristics, or response to treatments.
Research participants are more willing to share personal information 
and more likely to truthfully answer research questions when they believe 
the privacy of their personal information is protected against inadvertent 
or unwanted disclosure. This helps to assure individuals that their risk of 
harm in participating, including economic, social, or psychological harm, is 
minimal (Hodge et al., 1999). Furthermore, when researchers have access 
to accurate and comprehensive medical datasets, the results are more likely 
to be valid and meaningful to broad populations.
PRIVACY
 C
ONCERNS
Since the HIPAA Privacy Rule was implemented, privacy advocates and 
others have argued that the United States needs stronger privacy protections 
than are provided in the HIPAA Privacy Rule (Friedman, 2006; Gellman, 
2006; Sobel, 2007). These demands have generally focused on health care 
rather than health research, and are based to a large extent on theory, opin
-ions, and anecdotal experiences. As noted in the methods section below, a 
Harris Poll undertaken during the course of this study provided new and 
current insight into the experiences and expectations of the U.S. public with 
regard to privacy in health research. A review of the relevant literature, 
including surveys and focus group studies, can be found in Chapter 2.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
After reviewing the available evidence, the committee concluded that 
the public is deeply concerned about the privacy and security of personal 
health information, and that the HIPAA Privacy Rule has reduced, but not 
eliminated, those concerns. In some surveys, the majority of respondents 
were not comfortable with their health information being provided for 
health research except with notice and express consent. But in others, a 
majority of respondents were willing to forgo notice and consent if vari
-ous safeguards and speci˜c types of research were speci˜ed. As noted in 
Chapter 3, surveys also indicate that the majority of Americans are sup
-portive of health research, but they lack information about how research is 
conducted and are rarely informed about research results that may have a 
direct impact on their health.
THE
 CONCERNS
 OF
 H
EALTH
 RESEARCHERS
Researchers began raising concerns about the potential impact of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research when the regulations were ˜rst 
proposed. However, researchers did not play a large role in shaping the ˜nal 
version of the HIPAA Privacy Rule published by HHS. Most of the com
-ments that HHS received from the research community during the notice 
of proposed rulemaking period were focused on urging HHS not to include 
research within the HIPAA Privacy Rule regulations at all. Few comments 
suggested alternatives to the regulatory scheme proposed by HHS, or gave 
HHS constructive comments on how to incorporate the research provisions 
into the rule (IOM, 2006).
After the date of compliance for the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the con
-cerns of researchers escalated. Numerous anecdotal reports and expert 
opinions, along with a number of surveys, indicate that the HIPAA Pri
-vacy Rule has had a negative effect on the ability of researchers to con
-duct valid research due to new restrictions on access to health data, and 
has not produced a measurable increase in the protection of data used in 
research (NCVHS, 2003; Ramirez and Niederhuber, 2003; Tovino, 2004; 
Walker, 2005) (see also Chapter 5). Because of the reported concerns 
about the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s effect on research, several organizations 
have provided HHS with recommendations on how to improve the way 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule regulates research. The past recommendations 
of the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, the Associa
-tion of American Medical Colleges, and the HHS Secretary™s Advisory 
 
Committee on Human Research Protections are listed in Appendix A. As 
noted in the methods section below, several new surveys were also under
-taken during the course of this study to provide more current, systematic 
data for the committee™s deliberations. The committee also reviewed 
a number of studies that attempted to assess the impact of the HIPAA 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 67
 
Privacy Rule on health research. A complete review of the literature can 
be found in Chapter 5.
ORIGINS
 OF
 THE
 STUDY
The 2003 Annual Report of the President™s Cancer Panel, which made 
a number of recommendations regarding issues affecting cancer survivors, 
also included a recommendation that ﬁThe Institute of Medicine (IOM) 
should be commissioned to evaluate the impact of HIPAA provisions and 
provide guidance to legislators on amendments needed to make this law 
serve the interests of cancer survivors and othersﬂ after concluding that 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule slowed research on cancer survivors in a variety 
of ways (President™s Cancer Panel, 2004). The Panel™s 2005Œ2006 report 
again called for an evaluation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule provisions that 
were thought to inhibit the ability to track and collect data for research on 
cancer survivors (President™s Cancer Panel, 2006). Based on those recom
-mendations, the IOM™s National Cancer Policy Forum held a workshop on 
the topic, inviting a diverse group of speakers representing many relevant 
stakeholders from academia, industry, and the public. The proceedings of 
that workshop, held June 16, 2006, were then reported in a summary pub
-lished by the IOM (IOM, 2006).
At that workshop, speakers reiterated many of the challenges described 
above in applying the HIPAA Privacy Rule to health research, noting that 
despite having several years to learn and adapt to the new rules, as well as 
new guidance from HHS and the Of˜ce for Civil Rights (OCR),
 researchers 
are still facing dif˜culty in working under the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Although 
the goal of the HIPAA Privacy Rule was to establish a uniform set of federal 
standards to be applied nationwide, many speakers testi˜ed that there is 
enormous variation among institutions and oversight boards in the way the 
regulations are interpreted and applied, with many adopting exceptionally 
conservative interpretations. Moreover, it was reported that many smaller 
institutions lacked the staff and infrastructure to implement the regulations 
on research and ensure compliance, and were opting out of research entirely 
to avoid the risk of penalties for HIPAA noncompliance (IOM, 2006). 
However, many speakers also stressed the need to maintain or strengthen 
the privacy protections for personal health information.
Following the publication of the IOM™s National Cancer Policy Forum™s 
workshop summary, the governing board of the National Academies deter
-mined that a consensus study to examine the effects of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule on health research would be of value, and funding for the study 
was obtained from diverse sources, including the National Institutes of 
Health, the National Cancer Institute, the Burroughs Wellcome Fund, the 
 
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the American Heart Association (AHA)/
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
American Stroke Association, the American Cancer Society, the American 
Society for Clinical Oncology (ASCO), and C-Change.
COMMITTEE
 APPOINTMENT
 AND
 C
HARGE
The funders of the study asked the IOM to examine the available 
evidence to determine whether the HIPAA Privacy Rule was impacting the 
conduct of health research. As a major funder of the study, HHS had a 
particular interest in distinguishing direct effects of mandates in the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule on the conduct of research from the variable in˚uence of 
interpretation and implementation of the regulations by various institutions 
and oversight boards.
To examine the question, the IOM appointed a 15-member committee 
with a broad range of expertise and experience covering various ˜elds of 
health research; privacy of health information; health law, regulation, and 
ethics; human research protections and IRBs; health center administration; 
use and protection of electronic health information; and patient advocacy. 
The IOM committee was charged with the task of proposing recommenda
-tions that would facilitate the ef˜cient and effective conduct of responsible 
health research while maintaining or strengthening the privacy protections 
of identi˜able health information (Box 1-1).
METHODS
The committee reviewed the available published literature and obtained 
input from experts in the ˜eld and interested individuals and institutions. 
The literature review, as well as the proceedings of the IOM workshop 
described above, demonstrated there was a dearth of systematic data to 
determine whether the HIPAA Privacy Rule was having an impact on health 
research. Because many published reports were based on isolated anecdotes 
or small surveys, the IOM committee sought larger surveys with national 
coverage. As a result, the IOM, in consultation with committee members, 
took the unusual step of commissioning
4 several surveys to assess current 
perceptions among health researchers of the effect of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule on research, and to gauge the public™s perception of and expectations 
for privacy in health research. The ˜rst survey entailed a national web-
based survey of U.S. epidemiologists overseen by Dr. Roberta Ness at the 
University of Pittsburgh. A second project, undertaken by Sarah Greene and 
Dr. Ed Wagner at the Group Health Center for Health Studies in Seattle, 
involved a survey of HMO Research Network (HMORN) investigators and 
4 
The surveys were commissioned with private funding. No federal funds were used to sup
-port collection of survey data.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 69
BOX 1-1
 Committee Statement of Task
 An Institute of Medicine committee will investigate the effects on health 
research of the Privacy Rule regulations implementing the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) section on Administrative Sim
-pli˜cation and prepare a report. In conducting the study, the committee will:
1.
 Consider the range of study types, such as clinical trials, epidemiologic designs, 
research using tissue repositories and databases, public health research, 
and health services research, to the extent that available data and evidence 
allow;
2.
 Consider research carried out by the full range of sponsors: government, pub
-lic and private academic, and for-pro˜t sectors, including the pharmaceutical, 
biotechnology, and medical device industries;
3.
 Review provisions of the Privacy Rule relevant to health research, including 
those dealing with authorizations and accounting of disclosures of personal 
health information, deidenti˜cation of data, reviews preparatory to research, 
and others, and on reviewing them, may identify provisions that merit priority 
attention and analysis;
4.
 Consider issues of interpretation and implementation of the Privacy Rule, as 
well as of harmonization with overlapping provisions of the Common Rule and 
Food and Drug Administration regulations, which have existed much longer;
5.
 Examine the potential impact of the Rule on public health research, on the 
recruitment of research subjects for studies, on carrying out research interna
-tionally, and on research using data and biomaterials in databases and tissue 
repositories; and
6.
 Consider the needs for privacy of identi˜able personal health information and 
the value of such privacy to patients and the public.
 As data and evidence 
allow, the needs and bene˜ts of patient privacy will be balanced against the 
needs, risks, and bene˜ts of identi˜able health information for various kinds of 
health research. The committee will formulate recommendations for alterations 
or retention of the status quo accordingly. 
a survey of HMORN Institutional Review Boards. A Harris Interactive Poll 
of the public, developed by Alan Westin of the Privacy Consulting Group, 
served as the third survey. Detailed descriptions of the methodologies and 
analysis for each of the surveys can be found in Appendix B. Several 
additional surveys and focus groups were undertaken independently by 
organizations, with the intent of providing input to the IOM committee. 
Those organizations include AcademyHealth, AHA, ASCO, the American 
Association of Central Cancer Registries, and the Association of Academic 
Health Centers.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Surveys are useful in identifying the main issues surrounding the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule™s regulation of research, but it is important to rec
-ognize the limitations of opinion surveys. As noted brie˚y in Chapters 2, 
3, and 5, designing quality surveys presents many challenges. These chal
-lenges include ensuring that the respondents are truly representative of the 
population being surveyed, developing the wording of questions, framing 
the responses provided, analyzing the relationship and potential in˚uence 
of questions to each other in the survey process, and applying statistical 
analyses to the data acquired. Although they are helpful in gaining the per
-spective of populations of interest, such as current members of the health 
research community or of the public, survey methods are also prone to 
subject bias and error. Motivational factors may in˚uence the results of 
surveys that address sensitive subjects, and respondents may be unwilling 
to provide accurate information for reasons of self-protection or personal 
gain (Wentland and Smith, 1993). In addition, experiments in social psy
-chology suggest that responses to survey questions regarding attitude are 
in˚uenced by environment, survey type, and the context in which the ques
-tion is presented (Tourangeau et al., 2000). The committee™s intention in 
presenting ˜ndings from opinion surveys, including those commissioned by 
the IOM, is to shed light on opinions regarding the in˚uence of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule on health research and patient privacy; it is not an attempt to 
de˜nitively determine cause and effect.
THE COMMITTEE™S CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The recommendations put forth in this report represent committee 
consensus that was developed through review and discussion of the above 
information sources. There are three general methods for improving the 
current system: (1) HHS and its OCR could provide more guidance to 
IRBs, Privacy Boards, institutions, and other participants and stakeholders, 
which is the simplest and most direct way to achieve change; (2) regula
-tory changes to the HIPAA Privacy Rule provisions may be necessary in 
some cases, but are more dif˜cult to undertake; and (3) statutory change of 
HIPAA or other legislation at the federal or state level, which is the most 
dif˜cult to accomplish. The committee tried to be as modest as possible in 
proposing recommendations to achieve its goals, with the aim of making it 
easier to effect change if policy makers agree with our proposals.
After reviewing the available evidence, the committee concluded that 
covered entities, Institutional Review Boards (IRBs), Privacy Boards, and 
researchers alike have faced dif˜culty in interpreting and implementing 
the complex regulation. There is a great deal of variation in how these 
stakeholders have responded to the HIPAA Privacy Rule, with many cov
-ered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards interpreting the HIPAA Privacy 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 71
Rule very conservatively. These interpretations impede some important 
research activities, and can also limit the validity and generalizability of 
some research results. The variation in interpretation is especially problem
-atic for multi-institutional research projects. Gaining IRB or Privacy Board 
approval from multiple institutions for a particular project is challenging 
and can lead to signi˜cant delays or even abandoned studies, and also can 
result in protocol variations at different research sites. The committee also 
found that for some provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the burdens are 
heavy and the privacy protections in research are small.
Therefore, the committee concluded that the HIPAA Privacy Rule, 
as currently interpreted and implemented, impedes research without pro
-tecting privacy as well as it should. The committee™s approach to its task 
evolved as the study progressed and the group began thinking about poten
-tial recommendations. The committee decided to approach the problem in 
two ways. First, the committee proposes a bold, innovative, and more uni
-form approach to the dual challenge of protecting privacy and supporting 
bene˜cial and responsible research.
5 Although this new approach may be 
harder to implement in the short term, it should help stimulate fresh ideas 
about the best ways to protect privacy and improve research as the nation 
thinks about these two interrelated values over the next several years. 
Second, the committee makes a series of detailed proposals to improve the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule and associated guidance. These recommendations aim 
to reduce variability in the interpretation of the HIPAA Privacy Rule as 
applied to research, and to facilitate important health research within the 
scope of the HIPAA Privacy Rule through revised and expanded guidance, 
or by altering some provisions that pose a hindrance to research but do not 
provide signi˜cant privacy protections. The committee™s last set of recom
-mendations do not directly relate to the HIPAA Privacy Rule, but should be 
adopted regardless of which of the committee™s approaches is implemented 
(the new framework or revisions to the HIPAA Privacy Rule and associ
-ated guidance). These include improving the security of identi˜able health 
information, encouraging service on Institutional Review Boards and Pri
-vacy Boards, and providing more information to the public about research 
results, how health research is conducted, and how it contributes to the 
welfare of individuals and society as a whole.
5 
Responsible health research is methodologically sound, scienti˜cally valid, protects the 
rights and interests of study subjects, and addresses a question or problem relevant to improv
-ing human health.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
FRAMEWORK
 OF
 THE
 REPORT
Chapter 2
 describes the value and importance of health information 
privacy with an overview of how informational privacy has been protected 
by law; a review of survey data on public opinions, expectations, and expe
-riences; and a discussion on the security of health data.
Chapter 3
 describes the value and importance of responsible health 
research, and includes an overview of how health information is used in 
research and how federal regulations govern the conduct of research.
Chapter 4 
provides an overview of the HIPAA Privacy Rule and how 
privacy regulations apply to health research, including a discussion of the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule™s relation to other regulations that govern the privacy 
of health information in research.
Chapter 5 
reviews the available evidence, including results from recent 
surveys, on the impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on the conduct of health 
research.
Chapter 6 
describes the limitations of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, and 
proposes a new and broader framework for the protection of privacy in 
health research.
The 
Appendixes
 provide a summary of previous recommendations 
to HHS about the HIPAA Privacy Rule and health research, as well as a 
description of the surveys commissioned by the committee (survey methods 
and analysis).
RE
FERENCES
Friedman, D. S. 2006. HIPAA and research: How have the ˜rst two years gone? 
American 
Journal of Ophthalmology
 141(3):543Œ546.
Gellman, R. 2006. Crimes and sanctions. 
Journal of AHIMA 
77(9):96Œ97.
Hodge, J. G., Jr., L. O. Gostin, and P. D. Jacobson. 1999. Legal issues concerning electronic 
health information: Privacy, quality, and liability. 
Journal of the American Medical Asso
-ciation
 282(15):1466Œ1471.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2006. 
Effect of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research: 
Proceedings of a workshop presented to the National Cancer Policy Forum.
 Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press.
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, Subcommittee on Privacy and Con˜den
-tiality. 
Susan Ehringhaus™s testimony on behalf of the Association of American Medical 
Colleges. 
November 19, 2003.
President™s Cancer Panel. 2004. 
Living beyond cancer: Finding a new balance. 
http://deainfo.
nci.nih.gov/ADVISORY/pcp/pcp03-04rpt/Survivorship.pdf (accessed May 1, 2008).
President™s Cancer Panel. 2006. 
Assessing progress, advancing change. 
http://deainfo.nci.nih.
gov/ADVISORY/pcp/pcp07rpt/pcp07rpt.pdf (accessed June 15, 2008).
Ramirez, A. G., and J. E. Niederhuber. 2003 (November 5). Letter to The Honorable Tommy G. 
Thompson, Secretary of Department of Health and Human Services. Washington, DC.
Sobel, R. 2007. The HIPAA paradox: The Privacy Rule that™s not. 
Hastings Center Report
 37(4):40Œ50.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 73
Tourangeau, R., L. Rips, and K. Rasinski. 2000. 
The psychology of survey response.
 Cam
-bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Tovino, S. A. 2004. The use and disclosure of protected health information for research under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Unrealized patient autonomy and burdensome government 
regulation. 
South Dakota Law Review
 49(3):447Œ502.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. 1996a. 
Health 
Coverage Availability and Affordability Act of 
1996
. 104th Cong., 2d Sess. March 25, 
1996.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee of Conference. 1996b. 
Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996
. 104th Cong., 2d Sess. July 31, 1996.
Walker, D. K. 2005. 
Impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health services research.
 Philadel
-phia, PA: Abt Associates, Inc.
Wentland, E. J., and K. W. Smith. 1993. 
Survey responses: An evaluation of their validity.
 San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75
2The Value and Importance of 
Health Information Privacy
Ethical health research and privacy protections both provide valuable 
bene˜ts to society. Health research is vital to improving human health and 
health care. Protecting patients involved in research from harm and preserv
-ing their rights is essential to ethical research. The primary justi˜cation for 
protecting personal privacy is to protect the interests of individuals. In con
-trast, the primary justi˜cation for collecting personally identi˜able health 
information for health research is to bene˜t society. But it is important to 
stress that privacy also has value at the societal level, because it permits 
complex activities, including research and public health activities to be car
-ried out in ways that protect individuals™ dignity. At the same time, health 
research can bene˜t individuals, for example, when it facilitates access to 
new therapies, improved diagnostics, and more effective ways to prevent 
illness and deliver care.
The intent of this chapter
1 is to de˜ne privacy and to delineate its 
importance to individuals and society as a whole. The value and importance 
of health research will be addressed in Chapter 3.
CONCEPTS
 AND
 V
ALUE
 OF
 P
RIVACY
De˜nitions
Privacy has deep historical roots (reviewed by Pritts, 2008;
 Westin, 
1967), but because of its complexity, privacy has proven dif˜cult to 
1 
Sections of this chapter were adapted from a background paper by Pritts (2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
de˜ne and has been the subject of extensive, and often heated, debate by 
 
philosophers, sociologists, and legal scholars. The term ﬁprivacyﬂ is used 
frequently, yet there is no universally accepted de˜nition of the term, and 
confusion persists over the meaning, value, and scope of the concept of 
privacy. At its core, privacy is experienced on a personal level and often 
means different things to different people (reviewed by Lowrance, 1997; 
Pritts, 2008). In modern society, the term is used to denote different, but 
overlapping, concepts such as the right to bodily integrity or to be free from 
intrusive searches or surveillance. The concept of privacy is also context 
speci˜c, and acquires a different meaning depending on the stated reasons 
for the information being gathered, the intentions of the parties involved, 
as well as the politics, convention and cultural expectations (Nissenbaum, 
2004; NRC, 2007b).
Our report, and the Privacy Rule itself, are concerned with health 
informational privacy. In the context of personal information, concepts 
of privacy are closely intertwined with those of con˜dentiality and secu
-rity. However, although privacy is often used interchangeably with the 
terms ﬁcon˜dentialityﬂ and ﬁsecurity,ﬂ they have distinct meanings. 
Privacy
 addresses the question of who has access to personal information and under 
what conditions. Privacy is concerned with the collection, storage, and use 
of personal information, and examines whether data can be collected in the 
˜rst place, as well as the justi˜cations, if any, under which data collected for 
one purpose can be used for another (secondary)
2 purpose. An important 
issue in privacy analysis is whether the individual has authorized particular 
uses of his or her personal information (Westin, 1967).
Con˜dentiality
 safeguards information that is gathered in the context 
of an intimate relationship. It addresses the issue of how to keep informa
-tion exchanged in that relationship from being disclosed to third parties 
(Westin, 1976). Con˜dentiality, for example, prevents physicians from 
disclosing information shared with them by a patient in the course of a 
 
physicianŒpatient relationship. Unauthorized or inadvertent disclosures 
of data gained as part of an intimate relationship are breaches of con
-˜dentiality (Gostin and Hodge, 2002; NBAC, 2001).
Security
 can be de˜ned as ﬁthe procedural and technical measures 
required (a) to prevent unauthorized access, modi˜cation, use, and dis
-semination of data stored or processed in a computer system, (b) to prevent 
any deliberate denial of service, and (c) to protect the system in its entirety 
from physical harmﬂ (Turn and Ware, 1976). Security helps keep health 
2 
The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics has noted that the term ﬁsecond
-ary usesﬂ of health data is ill de˜ned and therefore urged abandoning it in favor of precise 
description of each use. Consequently, the IOM committee has chosen to minimize use of the 
term in this report.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 77
records safe from unauthorized use. When someone hacks into a computer 
system, there is a breach of security (and also potentially, a breach of con
-˜dentiality). No security measure, however, can prevent invasion of privacy 
by those who have authority to access the record (Gostin, 1995).
The Importance of Privacy
There are a variety of reasons for placing a high value on protecting 
the privacy, con˜dentiality, and security of health information (reviewed by 
Pritts, 2008). Some theorists depict privacy as a basic human good or right 
with intrinsic value (Fried, 1968; Moore, 2005; NRC, 2007a; Terry and 
Francis, 2007). They see privacy as being objectively valuable in itself, as 
an essential component of human well-being. They believe that respecting 
privacy (and autonomy) is a form of recognition of the attributes that give 
humans their moral uniqueness.
The more common view is that privacy is valuable because it facilitates 
or promotes other fundamental values, including ideals of personhood 
(Bloustein, 1967; Gavison, 1980; Post, 2001; Solove, 2006; Taylor, 1989; 
Westin, 1966) such as:
Ł Personal autonomy (the ability to make personal decisions)
Ł Individuality
Ł Respect
Ł Dignity and worth as human beings
The bioethics principle nonmale˜cence
3 requires safeguarding personal 
privacy. Breaches of privacy and con˜dentiality not only may affect a 
person™s dignity, but can cause harm. When personally identi˜able health 
information, for example, is disclosed to an employer, insurer, or fam
-ily member, it can result in stigma, embarrassment, and discrimination. 
Thus, without some assurance of privacy, people may be reluctant to 
provide candid and complete disclosures of sensitive information even to 
their physicians. Ensuring privacy can promote more effective communica
-tion between physician and patient, which is essential for quality of care, 
enhanced autonomy, and preventing economic harm, embarrassment, and 
discrimination (Gostin, 2001; NBAC, 1999; Pritts, 2002). However, it 
should also be noted that perceptions of privacy vary among individuals 
and various groups. Data that are considered intensely private by one per
-son may not be by others (Lowrance, 2002).
But privacy has value even in the absence of any embarrassment or 
3 
The ethical principle of doing no harm, based on the Hippocratic maxim, primum non 
nocere, ˜rst do no harm.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
tangible harm. Privacy is also required for developing interpersonal rela
-tionships with others. Although some emphasize the need for privacy to 
establish intimate relationships (Allen, 1997), others take a broader view 
of privacy as being necessary to maintain a variety of social relationships 
(Rachels, 1975). By giving us the ability to control who knows what about 
us and who has access to us, privacy allows us to alter our behavior with 
different people so that we may maintain and control our various social 
relationships (Rachels, 1975). For example, people may share different 
information with their boss than they would with their doctor.
Most discussions on the value of privacy focus on its importance to the 
individual. Privacy can be seen, however, as also having value to society 
as a whole (Regan, 1995). Privacy furthers the existence of a free society 
(Gavison, 1980). For example, preserving privacy from widespread surveil
-lance can be seen as protecting not only the individual™s private sphere, but 
also society as a whole: Privacy contributes to the maintenance of the type 
of society in which we want to live (Gavison, 1980; Regan, 1995).
Privacy can foster socially bene˜cial activities like health research. Indi
-viduals are more likely to participate in and support research if they believe 
their privacy is being protected. Protecting privacy is also seen by some as 
enhancing data quality for research and quality improvement initiatives. 
When individuals avoid health care or engage in other privacy-protective 
behaviors, such as withholding information, inaccurate and incomplete 
data are entered into the health care system. These data, which are subse
-quently used for research, public health reporting, and outcomes analysis, 
carry with them the same vulnerabilities (Goldman, 1998).
The bioethics principle of respect for persons also places importance on 
individual autonomy, which allows individuals to make decisions for them
-selves, free from coercion, about matters that are important to their own 
well-being. U.S. society also places a high value on individual
 autonomy, 
and one way to respect persons and enhance individual
 autonomy is to 
ensure that people can make the choice about when, and whether, per
-sonal information (particularly sensitive information) can be shared with 
others.
Public Views of Health Information Privacy
American society places a high value on individual rights, personal 
choice, and a private sphere protected from intrusion. Medical records can 
include some of the most intimate details about a person™s life. They docu
-ment a patient™s physical and mental health, and can include information 
on social behaviors, personal relationships, and ˜nancial status (Gostin and 
Hodge, 2002). Accordingly, surveys show that medical privacy is a major 
concern for many Americans, as outlined below (reviewed by Pritts, 2008; 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 79
Westin, 2007). As noted in Chapter 1, however, there are some limits to 
what can be learned from surveys (Tourangeau et al., 2000; Wentland, 
1993; Westin, 2007). For example, how the questions and responses are 
worded and framed can signi˜cantly in˚uence the results and their inter
-pretation. Also, responses are biased when respondents self-report measures 
of attitudes, behavior, and feelings in such a way as to represent themselves 
favorably.
In a 1999 survey of consumer attitudes toward health privacy, three 
out of four people reported that they had signi˜cant concerns about the 
privacy and con˜dentiality of their medical records (Forrester Research, 
1999). In a more recent survey, conducted in 2005 after the implementation 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy 
Rule, 67 percent of respondents still said they were concerned about the 
privacy of their medical records, suggesting that the Privacy Rule had not 
effectively alleviated public concern about health privacy. Ethnic and racial 
minorities showed the greatest concern among the respondents. Moreover, 
the survey showed that many consumers were unfamiliar with the HIPAA 
privacy protections. Only 59 percent of respondents recalled receiving a 
HIPAA privacy notice, and only 27 percent believed they had more rights 
than they had before receiving the notice (Forrester Research, 2005). One 
out of eight respondents also admitted to engaging in behaviors intended 
to protect their privacy, even at the expense of risking dangerous health 
effects. These behaviors included lying to their doctors about symptoms or 
behaviors, refusing to provide information or providing inaccurate infor
-mation, paying out of pocket for care that is covered by insurance, and 
avoiding care altogether (Forrester Research, 2005).
A series of polls conducted by Harris Interactive suggest, however, 
that the privacy of health information has improved since implementation 
of the Privacy Rule. Prior to its creation, a 1993 survey by Harris Interac
-tive showed that 27 percent of Americans believed their personal medical 
information had been released improperly in the past 3 years. In contrast, 
14 percent and 12 percent of respondents believed this had happened to 
them in 2005 and 2007, respectively (Harris Interactive, 2005, 2007). In 
the 2005 survey, about two-thirds of respondents reported having received 
a HIPAA privacy notice, and of these people, 67 percent said the privacy 
notice increased their con˜dence that their medical information is being 
handled properly (Harris Interactive, 2005).
Responses to other questions on recent public opinion polls conducted 
by Harris Interactive only partially corroborate these ˜ndings. In one sur
-vey, 70 percent of respondents indicated that they are generally satis˜ed 
with how their personal health information is handled with regard to 
privacy protections and security. Nearly 60 percent of the respondents 
reported that they believe the existing federal and state health privacy pro
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
tection laws provide a reasonable level of privacy protection for their health 
information (Harris Interactive, 2005). Nonetheless, half of the respondents 
also believed that ﬁ[P]atients have lost all control today over how their 
medical records are obtained and used by organizations outside the direct 
patient health care such as life insurers, employers, and government health 
agencies.ﬂ In another survey, 83 percent of respondents reported that they 
trust health care providers to protect the privacy and con˜dentiality of their 
personal medical records and health information (Westin, 2007). However, 
in that survey, 58 percent of respondents believed the privacy of personal 
medical records and health information is not protected well enough today 
by federal and state laws and organizational practices.
A number of studies suggest that the relative strength of privacy, con
-˜dentiality, and security protections can play an important role in people™s 
concerns about privacy (reviewed by Pritts, 2008). When presented with 
the possibility that there would be a nationwide system of electronic medi
-cal records, one survey found 70 percent of respondents were concerned 
that sensitive personal medical record information might be leaked because 
of weak data security, 69 percent expressed concern that there could be 
more sharing of medical information without the patient™s knowledge, and 
69 percent were concerned that strong enough data security will not be 
installed in the new computer system.
Con˜dentiality is particularly important to adolescents who seek health 
care. When adolescents perceive that health services are not con˜dential, 
they report that they are less likely to seek care, particularly for reproduc
-tive health matters or substance abuse (Weddle and Kokotailo, 2005). In 
addition, the willingness of a person to make self-disclosures necessary to 
mental health and substance abuse treatment may decrease as the perceived 
negative consequences of a breach of con˜dentiality increase (Petrila, 1999; 
Roback and Shelton, 1995; Taube and Elwork, 1990). These studies show 
that protecting the privacy of health information is important for ensuring 
that individuals seek and obtain quality care.
The potential for economic harm resulting from discrimination in health 
insurance and employment is also a concern for many people (reviewed by 
Pritts, 2008). Polls consistently show that people are most concerned about 
insurers and employers accessing their health information without their per
-mission (Forrester Research, 2005; PSRA, 1999). This concern arises from 
fears about employer and insurer discrimination. Concerns about employer 
discrimination based on health information, in particular, increased 16 
percent between 1999 and 2005, with 52 percent of respondents in the 
later survey expressing concern that their information might be seen by an 
employer and used to limit job opportunities (Forrester Research, 2005; 
PSRA, 1999). Reports alleging that major employers such as Wal-Mart base 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 81
some of their hiring decisions on the health of applicants suggest that these 
concerns may be justi˜ed (Greenhouse and Barbaro, 2005).
Studies show that individuals are especially concerned about genetic 
information being used inappropriately by their insurers and employers 
(reviewed by Pritts, 2008). Even health care providers appear to be affected 
by these concerns. In a survey of cancer-genetics specialists, more than half 
indicated that they would pay out of pocket rather than bill their insurance 
companies for genetic testing, for fear of genetic discrimination (Hudson, 
2007). Although surveys do not reveal a signi˜cant percentage of indi
-viduals who have experienced such discrimination, geneticists have reported 
that approximately 550 individuals were refused employment, ˜red, or 
denied life insurance based on their genetic constitution (NBAC, 1999). 
In addition, a study in the United Kingdom suggested that life insurers in 
that country do not have a full grasp on the meaning of genetic informa
-tion and do not assess or act in accord with the actuarial risks presented 
by the information (Low et al., 1998). There is, therefore, some legitimate 
basis to individuals™ concerns about potential economic harm and the need 
to protect the privacy of their genetic information. Recent passage of the 
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act in the United States will hope
-fully begin to address some of these concerns.
4Patient Attitudes About Privacy in Health Research
Ideally, there would be empirical evidence regarding the privacy value 
of all the speci˜c Privacy Rule provisions that impact researchers, but there 
are only limited data on this topic from the consumer/patient perspective. 
A few studies have attempted to examine the public™s attitudes about the 
use of health information in research. However, few have attempted to 
do so with respect to the intricacies of the protections afforded by the 
 
Privacy Rule or the Common Rule,
5 which are likely not well known to 
the public.
A review by Westin of 43 national surveys with health privacy ques
-tions ˜elded between 1993 and September 2007 identi˜ed 9 surveys
6 with 
one or more questions about health research and privacy (Westin, 2007). In 
some, the majority of respondents were not comfortable with their health 
4 
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 establishes some protections to 
prevent discrimination based on a patient™s genetic background.
5 
The ﬁCommon Ruleﬂ is the term used by 18 federal agencies who have adopted the same 
regulations governing the protection of human subjects of research. See Chapter 3 for a 
detailed description of the rule.
6 
These surveys were undertaken by a wide range of sponsors (Markle Foundation, Equifax, 
Institute for Health Freedom, Geneforum, Privacy Consulting Group) and a wide range of 
surveyors (Harris Interactive, Public Opinion Strategies, Genetics and Public Policy Center).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
information being provided for health research except with notice and 
express consent. But in others, a majority of respondents were willing to 
forgo notice and consent if various safeguards and speci˜c types of research 
were offered. For example, a recent Harris Poll found that 63 percent of 
respondents would give general consent to the use of their medical records 
for research, as long as there were guarantees that no personally identi˜able 
health information would be released from such studies (Harris Interactive, 
2007). This is similar to the percentage of people willing to participate in 
a ﬁclinical research studyﬂ (Research!America, 2007; Woolley and Propst, 
2005) (see also Chapter 3). A 2006 British survey also found strong sup
-port for the use of personally identi˜able information without consent for 
public health research and surveillance, via the National Cancer Registry 
(Barrett et al., 2007).
Westin noted that opinions varied in the surveys according to devel
-opments on the health care scene and with consumer privacy trends. He 
concluded from this review that the majority of consumers are positive 
about health research, and if asked in general terms, support their medical 
information being made available for research. However, he also noted that 
most of these surveys presented the choice in ways that did not articulate 
the key permission process, and that there was much ambiguity in who 
 
ﬁresearchersﬂ are, what kind of ﬁhealth researchﬂ is involved, and how 
the promised protection of personal identities would be ensured (Westin, 
2007).
Reviewing the handful of detailed studies examining patient views of 
the use of their medical information in research through surveys, structured 
interviews, or focus groups, Pritts determined that a number of common 
themes emerge (reviewed by Pritts, 2008):
Ł Patients were generally very supportive of research provided safe
-guards are established to protect the privacy and security of their 
medical information (Damschroder et al., 2007; Kass et al., 2003; 
Robling et al., 2004; Westin, 2007; Willison et al., 2007).
Ł Patients were much more comfortable with the use of anonymized 
data (e.g., where obvious identi˜ers have been removed) than fully 
identi˜able data for research (Damschroder et al., 2007; Kass et 
al., 2003; Robling et al., 2004; Whiddett et al., 2006).
Ł Patients were less comfortable with sharing information about 
ﬁsensitiveﬂ conditions such as mental health with researchers 
(Damschroder et al., 2007; Robling et al., 2004).
In studies where patients were able to provide unstructured comments, 
they expressed concern about the potential that anonymized data would be 
reidenti˜ed. They were also concerned that insurers or employers or others 
who could discriminate against subjects could potentially access informa
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 83
tion maintained by researchers (Damschroder et al., 2007; Kass et al., 2003; 
Robling et al., 2004). Some feared that researchers would sell information 
to drug companies or other third parties
 (Damschroder et al., 2007).
Although supportive of research, the majority of patients in these 
 
studies expressed a desire to be consulted before their information was 
released for research (Damschroder et al., 2007; Kass et al., 2003; Robling 
et al., 2004; Westin, 2007; Whiddett et al., 2006; Willison et al., 2007). 
Some surveys also show that even if researchers would receive no directly 
identifying information (e.g., name, address, and health insurance number), 
the majority of respondents still wanted to have some input before their 
medical records were disclosed (Damschroder et al., 2007; Robling et al., 
2004; Willison et al., 2007). For example, in a 2005 Australian survey, 
67 percent of respondents indicated they would be willing to allow their 
 
deidenti˜ed health records to be used for medical research purposes, but 81 
percent wanted to be asked ˜rst (Flannery and Tokley, 2005).
Studies indicate that public support for research and willingness to 
share health information can vary with the purpose or type of activity being 
conducted (reviewed by Pritts, 2008). Studies have found there was less 
support for activities that were primarily for a commercial purpose, or that 
might be used in a manner that would not help patients (Damschroder et 
al., 2007; Willison et al., 2007). Some participants expressed concern that 
some researchers were motivated by monetary rewards and that decision 
makers would act out of self-interest (Damschroder et al., 2007).
One recent study suggests that the biggest predictor of whether 
patients are willing to share their medical records with researchers is the 
patients™ trust that their information will be kept private and con˜dential 
 
(Damschroder et al., 2007). In this study, the patients who most trusted the 
Veterans Affairs system to keep their medical records private were more 
likely to accept less stringent requirements for informed consent. Thirty-
four percent of veterans who participated in intensive focus groups using 
deliberative democracy were willing to allow researchers associated with the 
Veterans Health Administration to use their medical records without any 
procedures for patient input, subject to Institutional Review Board (IRB) 
approval, and another 17 percent reported that patients should have to ask 
for their medical records to be 
excluded 
from research studies (opt-out).
But participants in focus groups also have expressed a desire to be 
informed of how their health information was used for research. This desire 
was tied to a sense of altruismŠthey wanted to know that their informa
-tion was useful and that they may have contributed to helping others by 
allowing their medical records to be used for research (Damschroder et al., 
2007; Robling et al., 2004). The veterans also recommended methods to 
give research participants more control over how their medical records are 
used in research. These recommendations included requiring that partici
-pants are fully informed about how their medical records are being used 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
in research; providing assurances that the research being conducted will 
bene˜t fellow veterans; updating research participants about ˜ndings and 
ongoing research; and setting out clear and consistent consequences for 
anyone who violates a patient™s privacy (Damschroder et al., 2007).
The recent Harris poll
7 commissioned by the Institute of Medicine 
(IOM) committee for this study found that 8 percent of respondents 
had been asked to have their medical information used in research, but 
declined. When asked why, 30 percent indicated they were concerned about 
the privacy and con˜dentiality of their personal information, but many 
other reasons were also commonly cited (ranging from 5 to 24 percent of 
respondents), including worry that participation would be risky, painful, or 
unpleasant; lack of trust in the researchers; or belief that it would not help 
their condition or their family (Westin, 2007).
Some studies also suggest that individuals™ attitudes toward the use of 
their medical records in research may be in˚uenced by a person™s state of 
health. Although the commissioned Harris Poll found that people who are 
in only fair health, who have a disability, or who had taken a genetic test 
were slightly more concerned than the public about health researchers see
-ing their medical records (55 percent versus 50 percent), other data suggest 
that people with health concerns may be more supportive of using medi
-cal records in research. For example, qualitative market research by the 
National Health Council showed that individuals with chronic conditions 
have a very favorable attitude toward the implementation of electronic 
personal health records (EPHRs). During the focus group discussions, par
-ticipants noted that EPHRs could be very advantageous in medical research 
and were supportive of this use even though many had expressed concern 
about the privacy and con˜dentiality of EPHRs (Balch et al., 2005, 2006). 
Although the Council did not speci˜cally ask about attitudes toward health 
research and privacy, these results suggest that individuals with chronic 
conditions may be more likely to grant researchers access to their medical 
records, and to place less emphasis on protecting privacy than members of 
the general population.
Also, a Johns Hopkins University survey of patients having, or at risk 
for, serious medical conditions examined these patients™ attitudes about the 
use of their medical records in research, and compared those results to polls 
from the general population. Thirty-one percent of respondents stated that 
medical researchers should have access to their medical records without 
their permission if it would help to advance medical knowledge.
In contrast, the recent Harris poll of the public found that 19 percent 
of respondents would be willing to forgo consent to use personal medical 
and health information, as long as the study never revealed their identity 
7 
The survey was conducted online by Harris Interactive between September 11 and 18, 
2007, with 2,392 respondents. The methodology for the survey is described in Appendix B.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 85
and it was supervised by an IRB (Westin, 2007). An additional 8 percent 
indicated they would be willing to give general consent in advance to have 
personally identi˜able medical or health information used in future research 
projects without the researchers having to contact them, and 1 percent said 
researchers should be free to use their personal medical and health informa
-tion without their consent at all. Thus, 28 percent of respondents would be 
willing to grant researchers access to their medical records without giving 
speci˜c consent for each research project. Thirty-eight percent believed 
they should be asked to consent to each research study seeking to use their 
personally identi˜able medical or health information, and 13 percent did 
not want researchers to contact them or to use their personal or health 
information under any circumstances. However, those who preferred not 
to be contacted at all were actually less likely than those who would grant 
conditional permission to have declined participating in a research study. 
Notably, 20 percent of respondents were unsure how to respond to the 
question about notice and consent for research.
Among the 38 percent who said they wanted notice and consent, 
80 percent indicated that they would want to know the purpose of the 
research, and 46 percent wanted to know speci˜cally whether the research 
could help their health condition or those of family members. Sixty-two 
percent indicated that knowing about the speci˜c research study and who 
would be running it would allow the respondent to decide whether to trust 
the researchers. A little more than half of the respondents (54 percent) said 
they would be worried that their personally identi˜able information may be 
disclosed outside the study. Among those 54 percent, three-quarters agreed 
with the statement ﬁI would feel violated and my trust in the researchers 
betrayed.ﬂ Between 39 and 67 percent were concerned about discrimination 
in a government program, by an employer, or in obtaining life or health 
insurance (Westin, 2007).
However, about 70 percent of all respondents indicated that they trusted 
health researchers to protect the privacy and con˜dentiality of the medical 
records and health information they obtain about research participants. 
Furthermore, among respondents who had participated in health research, 
only 2 percent reported that any of their personally identi˜able medical 
information used in a study was given to anyone outside the research staff, 
and half of those disclosures were actually made to other researchers or 
research institutions (Westin, 2007).
In summary, very limited data are available to assess the privacy value 
of the Privacy Rule provisions that impact researchers. Surveys indicate 
that the public is deeply concerned about the privacy and security of per
-sonal health information, and that the HIPAA Privacy Rule has perhaps 
reducedŠbut not eliminatedŠthose concerns. Patients were generally very 
supportive of research, provided safeguards were established to protect the 
privacy and security of their medical information, although some surveys 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
indicate that a signi˜cant portion of the public would still prefer to control 
access to their medical records via consent, even if the information is anony
-mized. Studies indicate that public support for research and willingness to 
share health information varies with health status and the type of research 
conducted, and depends on the patients™ trust that their information will be 
kept private and con˜dential. An understanding the public™s attitude toward 
privacy is important throughout the rest of this report, because many of the 
IOM committee™s recommendations affect the nature of the privacy protec
-tions afforded by the federal health research regulations.
HISTORICAL
 D
EVELOPMENT
 OF
 L
EGAL
 P
ROTECTIONS
 OF
 H
EALTH
 I
NFORMATION
 P
RIVACY
The medical community has long recognized the importance of pro
-tecting privacy in maintaining public trust in doctors and researchers, and 
codes of medical ethics re˚ect a desire to increase this public trust. Since 
the time of Hippocrates, physicians have pledged to keep information 
about their patients private and con˜dential (Feld and Feld, 2005). The 
 
Hippocratic Oath states, ﬁWhat I may see or hear in the course of the 
treatment or even outside of the treatment in regard to the life of men, 
which on no account one must spread abroad, I will keep to myself. . . .ﬂ 
This pledge to privacy has been included in the code of ethics of nearly all 
health care professionals in the United States. For example, the ˜rst Code 
of
 Ethics of the American Medical Association in 1847 included the concept 
of con˜dentiality (OTA, 1993).
The value of health information privacy has also been recognized by 
affording it protection under the law (reviewed by Pritts, 2008). The rules 
for protecting the privacy of health information in the clinical care and 
health research contexts developed along fairly distinct paths until the 
promulgation of the federal privacy regulations under HIPAA.
8 Prior to 
HIPAA, health information in the clinical setting was protected primarily 
under a combination of federal and state constitutional law, as well as state 
common law and statutory protections (Box 2-1).
In contrast, research practices have been governed largely by federal 
regulations called the Common Rule, which have historically focused on 
protecting individuals from physical and mental harm in clinical trials 
(see subsequent sections of this chapter). Although the standards apply to 
research that uses personally identi˜able health information, the protection 
of information is not their primary focus.
8 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Public Law 104Œ191 (1996) (most 
relevant sections codi˜ed at 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320(d)Œ1320(d)(8).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 87
BOX 2-1
 Overview of Privacy Protections in the Law
Constitutional Protections
 Both federal and state constitutions generally afford citizens some protec
-tion for the privacy of their health information. However, with limited exceptions, 
individuals are only protected against governmental intrusions into their personal 
health information and may not raise constitutional concerns about private action. 
Even when state action is involved, individuals rarely prevail on claims premised 
on constitutional rights to informational privacy because state interests generally 
outweigh the individual™s privacy interest.
 The U.S. Constitution does not expressly provide a right to privacy, but the 
courts have determined that various constitutional provisions implicitly create 
zones of privacy that are protected by the Constitution. The privacy interests rec
-ognized include both the individual™s interest in making certain kinds of important 
decisions, and the individual™s interest in avoiding disclosure of personal matters. 
With respect to informational privacy, the courts have afforded limited constitu
-tional protections, although the right is not absolute, with the courts weighing 
factors such as the type of record and information that it contains, the potential 
for harm in an unauthorized disclosure and the injury from disclosure to the rela
-tionship in which the record was generated against the public interest or need for 
the disclosure, and the adequacy of safeguards to prevent unauthorized access 
or disclosure. Several federal courts have expressly recognized the constitutional 
right of privacy in connection with medical and prescription records.
 All states have constitutional provisions similar to those in the U.S. Constitu
-tion, which give rise to an implied right of privacy. Unlike the U.S. Constitution, 
however, constitutions in 10 states grant individuals an express right to privacy. 
Courts have consistently determined that health or medical information is an area 
of privacy that is protected by state constitutions.
Common Law Protections
 State common law generally recognizes that some health care relationships 
are based on maintaining the con˜dentiality of information obtained in the course 
of care and affords a remedy when that con˜dentiality is breached. Traditionally, 
the law™s regulation of ﬁprivacyﬂ consisted essentially of the protection of con˜
-dentiality within the doctorŒpatient relationship. Courts have found that actions 
may be maintained against private parties for unauthorized disclosures of health 
information under a number of legal theories, including invasion of privacy, implied 
breach of contract, breach of con˜dentiality, and breach of ˜duciary relation
-ship. Obtaining a remedy for disclosure of health information under any of these 
 
theories, however, is dif˜cult.
 In the health care context, the promise of con˜dentiality is intended to encour
-age patients to fully disclose their most personal information to assist in accurate 
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
diagnosis and treatment. Courts have thus found the duty of con˜dentiality applies 
to physicians, hospitals, psychiatrists, and social workers. The underlying duty 
of con˜dentiality is not absolute, and the courts have indicated that there is no 
breach of con˜dentiality when a disclosure is made as required by statute (e.g., 
mandatory reporting to state of˜cials of infectious or contagious diseases) or 
common law (e.g., a duty to disclose information concerning the safety of third 
persons). The extent to which state common law protects the con˜dentiality of 
health information in the evolving health care paradigm, where many people and 
organizations that receive and maintain health information do not have a direct 
relationship with the patient, is unclear. In most states, common law protections, 
particularly in tort, have been codi˜ed in statute.
Statutory and Regulatory Protections
 Since the 1970s, the trend has been to augment existing constitutional and 
common law rights with statutory protections speci˜cally designed to protect the 
privacy and con˜dentiality of health information (see Table 2-1). Although the 
common law continues to be important, the federal and state governments have 
increasingly focused on promulgating distinct standards for the protection of 
health information.
 The shift to statutory and regulatory protections for health information was 
largely a response to the changing nature of recordkeeping in general, and of the 
nature of the provision of health care. As noted by the 1977 Privacy Protection 
Study Commission, ﬁThe emergence of third-party payment plans; the use of 
health care information for non-healthcare purposes; the growing involvement of 
government agencies in virtually all aspects of health care; and the exponential 
increase in the use of computers and automated information systems for health-
care record information have combined to put substantial pressure on traditional 
con˜dentiality protections.ﬂ
SOURCES: Bodger (2006); Gostin (1995); Magnussen (2004); NCSL (2008); 
Pritts (2002, 2008); Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977); Richards and 
Solove (2007); Terry and Francis (2007).
BOX 2-1
 Continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 89
diagnosis and treatment. Courts have thus found the duty of con˜dentiality applies 
to physicians, hospitals, psychiatrists, and social workers. The underlying duty 
of con˜dentiality is not absolute, and the courts have indicated that there is no 
breach of con˜dentiality when a disclosure is made as required by statute (e.g., 
mandatory reporting to state of˜cials of infectious or contagious diseases) or 
common law (e.g., a duty to disclose information concerning the safety of third 
persons). The extent to which state common law protects the con˜dentiality of 
health information in the evolving health care paradigm, where many people and 
organizations that receive and maintain health information do not have a direct 
relationship with the patient, is unclear. In most states, common law protections, 
particularly in tort, have been codi˜ed in statute.
Statutory and Regulatory Protections
 Since the 1970s, the trend has been to augment existing constitutional and 
common law rights with statutory protections speci˜cally designed to protect the 
privacy and con˜dentiality of health information (see Table 2-1). Although the 
common law continues to be important, the federal and state governments have 
increasingly focused on promulgating distinct standards for the protection of 
health information.
 The shift to statutory and regulatory protections for health information was 
largely a response to the changing nature of recordkeeping in general, and of the 
nature of the provision of health care. As noted by the 1977 Privacy Protection 
Study Commission, ﬁThe emergence of third-party payment plans; the use of 
health care information for non-healthcare purposes; the growing involvement of 
government agencies in virtually all aspects of health care; and the exponential 
increase in the use of computers and automated information systems for health-
care record information have combined to put substantial pressure on traditional 
con˜dentiality protections.ﬂ
SOURCES: Bodger (2006); Gostin (1995); Magnussen (2004); NCSL (2008); 
Pritts (2002, 2008); Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977); Richards and 
Solove (2007); Terry and Francis (2007).
TABLE 2-1
 Federal Health Privacy Statutes and Executive 
Orders That Regulate the Collection and Disclosure of 
Information
Statute
Year
Privacy Protection
Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA)
1966
Prevents personally identi˜able health 
information from being included in the 
release of information as part of a FOIA 
request
Privacy Act 
1974
Protects the privacy of health, research, 
and other records held by federal agencies
Family Educational Rights 
and Privacy Act
1974
Requires schools to have written 
permission from a parent or student prior 
to releasing information from a student™s 
education record
Veterans Omnibus Health 
Care Act
1976
Protects the privacy of medical records 
relating to the treatment of drug abuse, 
alcohol abuse, infection with AIDS or 
sickle cell anemia, in the Department of 
Veterans Affairs
Protection of Pupil Rights 
Amendment
1978
Protects the rights of pupils and the 
parents of pupils in programs funded by 
the Department of Education
Social Security Act, 
Section 1106
1986
Prohibits unauthorized disclosure of 
individually identi˜able records held by 
the Department of Health and Human 
Services, the Social Security 
Administration, and their contractors
Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement 
Amendments
1988
Requires clinical laboratories to protect 
the con˜dentiality of test results and 
reports, including information on patient 
and clinical study subjects; medical 
information may only be disclosed to 
authorized persons as de˜ned by state or 
federal law
Public Health Service Act, 
Health Omnibus Program 
Extension
1988
Provides for Certi˜cates of Con˜dentiality 
that protect personally identi˜able 
research information
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Statute
Year
Privacy Protection
Americans with 
Disabilities Act
1990
Employers must treat employees™ and 
applicants™ medical information and 
medical conditions con˜dentially
Public Health Service Act, 
Section 543, Federal 
Con˜dentiality 
Requirements for 
Substance Abuse Patient 
Records
1992
Federally assisted alcohol or substance 
abuse programs must keep patient alcohol 
and drug abuse treatment records 
con˜dential, absent patient consent or a 
court order
Health Insurance 
Portability and 
Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), Privacy Rule
1996
Protects the privacy of individually 
identi˜able information held by covered 
entities
Balanced Budget Act
1997
Added language to the Social Security Act 
to require Medicare+Choice organizations 
to establish safeguards for the privacy of 
individually identi˜able patient 
information
Clinton™s Executive Order 
13145
2000
Bans the use of genetic information in 
federal hiring and promotion decisions
Con˜dential Information 
Protection and Statistical 
Ef˜ciency Act
2002
Ensures that information supplied by 
individuals or organizations to a federal 
agency for statistical purposes under a 
pledge of con˜dentiality is used 
exclusively for statistical purposes
Medicare Prescription 
Drug, Improvement and 
Modernization Act
2003
Requires prescription drug plan sponsors 
to comply with the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
and the Security Rule requirements
Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act
2008
Prohibits discrimination against 
individuals based on their genetic 
information in health insurance and 
employment
TABLE 2-1
 Continued
BOX 2-1
 Continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 91
Principles of Fair Information Practice
The framework in which detailed statutory and regulatory protections 
of privacy originated was in the 1973 report of an advisory committee to 
the U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW), ﬁdesigned 
to call attention to issues of recordkeeping practice in the computer age that 
may have profound signi˜cance for us allﬂ (HEW, 1973). The principles 
were intended to ﬁprovide a basis for establishing procedures that assure 
the individual a right to participate in a meaningful way in decisions about 
what goes into records about him and how that information shall be usedﬂ 
(HEW, 1973). In addition to affording individuals the meaningful right 
to control the collection, use, and disclosure of their information, the fair 
information practices also impose af˜rmative responsibilities to safeguard 
information on those who collect it (reviewed by Pritts, 2008).
The fundamental principles of fair information practice articulated in 
the report have since been ampli˜ed and adopted in various forms at the 
international, federal, and state levels (Gelman, 2008). The fair information 
practices endorsed by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), which have been widely cited, include the following 
principles (OECD, 1980):
Ł Collection Limitation
 There should be limits to the collection of personal data, and any 
such data should be obtained by lawful and fair means and, where 
appropriate, with the knowledge or consent of the data subject.
Ł Data Quality
 Personal data should be relevant to the purposes for which they are 
to be used, and to the extent necessary for those purposes, should 
be accurate, complete, and kept updated.
Ł Purpose Speci˜cation
 The purposes for which personal data are collected should be speci
-˜ed not later than at the time of data collection, and the subsequent 
use limited to the ful˜llment of those purposes or such others as 
are not incompatible with those purposes, and as are speci˜ed on 
each occasion of change of purpose.
Ł Use Limitation
 Personal data should not be disclosed, made available, or otherwise 
used for purposes other than those speci˜ed in accordance with 
[the Purpose Speci˜cation] except:
 (a) with the consent of the data subject; or
 (b) by the authority of law.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Ł Security Safeguards
 Personal data should be protected by reasonable security safeguards 
against such risks as loss or unauthorized access, destruction, use, 
modi˜cation, or disclosure of data.
Ł Openness
 There should be a general policy of openness about developments, 
practices, and policies with respect to personal data. Means should 
be readily available of establishing the existence and nature of 
personal data, and the main purposes of their use, as well as the 
identity and usual residence of the data controller.
Ł Individual Participation
 An individual should have the right to know whether a data con
-troller has data relating to him/her, to obtain a copy of the data 
within a reasonable time in a form that is intelligible to him/her, 
to obtain a reason if the request for access is denied, to challenge 
such a denial, to challenge data relating to him/her, and, if the chal
-lenge is successful, to have the data erased, recti˜ed, completed, or 
amended.
Ł Accountability
 A data controller should be accountable for complying with mea
-sures, which give effect to the principles stated above.
These principles have been adopted at the federal and state levels to 
varying degrees. The United States has taken a sector-driven approach 
toward adopting the principles of fair information practices, with the fed
-eral and state governments promulgating statutes and regulations that apply 
only to speci˜c classes of record keepers or categories of records.
9,10
At the federal level, the fair information practices were ˜rst incorporated 
into the Privacy Act of 1974, which governs the collection, use, and disclo
-sure of personally identi˜able data held by the federal government and some 
of its contractors. Hospitals operated by the federal government and health 
care or research institutions operated under federal contract are subject to 
the Privacy Act, while other health care entities remained outside its scope 
(Gostin, 1995). Nevertheless, the Privacy Act afforded perhaps the broadest 
9 
The original 1973 HEW Advisory Committee contemplated and rejected the creation of 
a centralized, federal approach to regulating the use of all automated personal data systems 
(see HEW, 1973).
10
 Europe, in contrast, has adopted fair information practices in a broad, more uniform 
 
fashion by incorporating them into the European Union (EU) Directive, which protects indi
-viduals with regard to the processing of any personal data and on the free movement of such 
data. The EU Directive applies to personal data of many types, including medical and ˜nancial, 
and widely applies to all who process such data, resulting in protections (Gelman, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 93
protection for health information at the federal level until the promulgation 
of the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
For their part, states have adopted (and continue to adopt) laws that 
not only mirror the Privacy Act in protecting government-held records, 
but also that afford broader protections for personally identi˜able health 
information held by private parties. However, these principles have not 
been adopted uniformly among states, resulting in a patchwork of state 
health privacy laws that provide little consistency from entity to entity or 
from state to state.
For example, the states have enacted the fair information practice 
restriction on use and disclosure of information in varying ways (reviewed 
by Pritts, 2008). Some allow the disclosure of health information for 
research without the individual™s permission and others require such per
-mission. Others only require such permission to release only certain types 
of information for research. Similarly, state statutes vary widely in how 
they have applied the accountability principle, both in the way they pro
-vide remedies for breaches in con˜dentiality and security and with respect 
to the standard imposed for initiating a suit. Also, only a few states have 
statutorily required providers to undertake security measures to ensure that 
health information is used and disclosed properly.
SECURITY
 OF
 H
EALTH
 D
ATA
Protecting the security of data in health research is important because 
health research requires the collection, storage, and use of large amounts of 
personally identi˜able health information, much of which may be sensitive 
and potentially embarrassing. If security is breached, the individuals whose 
health information was inappropriately accessed face a number of potential 
harms. The disclosure of personal information may cause intrinsic harm 
simply because that private information is known by others (Saver, 2006). 
Another potential danger is economic harm. Individuals could lose their 
job, health insurance, or housing if the wrong type of information becomes 
public knowledge. Individuals could also experience social or psychological 
harm. For example, the disclosure that an individual is infected with HIV 
or another type of sexually transmitted infection can cause social isola
-tion and/or other psychologically harmful results (Gostin, 2008). Finally, 
security breaches could put individuals in danger of identity theft (Pritts, 
2008).
Protecting the privacy of research participants and maintaining the 
con˜dentiality of their data have always been paramount in research and a 
fundamental tenet of clinical research. However, several highly publicized 
examples of stolen or misplaced computers containing health data have 
heightened the public™s concerns about the security of health data (for a list 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
of security breaches in health research, see Table 2-2). The extent to which 
these breaches have caused tangible harm to the individuals involved is dif˜
-cult to quantify (Pritts, 2008). A Government Accountability Of˜ce (GAO) 
report studying major security breaches involving nonmedical personal 
information concluded that most security breaches do not result in identity 
theft (GAO, 2007). However, the lack of identity theft resulting from past 
breaches is no guarantee that future breaches will not result in more serious 
harm. A recent report from the Identity Theft Resources
 Center found that 
identity theft is up by 69 percent for the ˜rst half of 2008, compared to the 
same time period in 2007 (ITRC, 2008). Also, regardless of actual harm, 
security breaches are problematic for health research because they under
-mine public trust, which is essential for patients to be willing to participate 
in research (Hodge et al., 1999). A recent study found patients believe that 
requiring researchers to have security plans encourages researchers to take 
additional precautions to protect data (Damschroder et al., 2007). More
-over, data security is important to protect because it is a key component of 
comprehensive privacy practices.
The HIPAA Security Rule and Its Limitations
The goals of security are threefold: to ensure that (1) only authorized 
individuals see stored data; (2) they only see the data when they need 
to use it for an authorized purpose; and (3) what they see is accurate. 
 
Traditionally, these goals have been pursued through protections intended 
to make data processing safe from unauthorized access, alteration, deletion, 
or transmission. The HIPAA Security Rule employs this traditional solution 
to protecting security, and sets a ˚oor for data security standards within 
covered entities (Box 2-2).
11
The HIPAA Security Rule has several major gaps in security protection. 
First, like the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the HIPAA Security Rule only applies to 
covered entities. Many researchers who rely on protected health information 
(PHI)
12
 to conduct health research are not covered entities, and thus are 
not required to implement any of the security requirements outlined in the 
Security Rule. Although federal research regulations include protections of 
privacy, there are no other laws that speci˜cally require researchers to imple
-ment security protections for research data. Second, the HIPAA Security Rule 
only protects electronic medical records; it does not require covered entities 
11
 Security Standards, 45 C.F.R. parts 160, 162, and 164 (2003). The ˜nal standards were 
adopted on February 20, 2003. Covered entities were required to be in compliance with the 
regulation on April 21, 2005 (and April 21, 2006, for small health plans). 
12
 Protected health information (PHI) refers to all personally identi˜able health information 
maintained by a HIPAA covered entity. 45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2002).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 95
TABLE 2-2
 Research Security Breaches: 2006Œ2008
Date 
Organization
Event
No. of 
Records 
Affected
Consequence 
3/3/06
Georgetown 
University
A cyber attack on a 
server exposed the 
personal information 
of elderly District of 
Columbia (DC) 
residents. The 
compromised server 
was used by 
researchers to 
monitor services 
provided to the 
elderly for the DC 
Of˜ce on Aging. 
41,000
The person making the 
attack came from 
outside the University 
and was not authorized 
to access the data. 
However, there is no 
evidence that personal 
data have been 
misused.
6/20/06 
University of 
Alabama 
School of 
Medicine
A computer 
containing the 
personal information 
on donors, recipients, 
and potential 
recipients from the 
university™s kidney 
transplant program 
was stolen. 
9,800
The computer was 
stolen in February, but 
individuals were not 
noti˜ed until June, 
because it took months 
for the University to 
reconstruct the missing 
data.
9/29/06
University of 
Iowa, 
Department of 
Psychology
A computer was 
attacked that stored 
the personal 
information of 
research subjects 
participating in a 
study on maternal 
and child health from 
1995 to the present. 
14,500 
There is no evidence 
that any personal 
information on the 
computer was accessed.
10/24/06
Jacobs 
Neurological 
Institute 
(Buffalo, NY)
A laptop containing 
patient records and 
research data was 
stolen from a 
researcher™s locked 
of˜ce.
Unknown 
The chief technology 
of˜cer reported that no 
personally identi˜able 
information was stored 
on the laptop. 
1/4/07
SickKids 
(Ontario)
A laptop containing 
personal health 
information on 
research participants 
from 10 research 
studies was stolen.
Unknown 
The computer was 
password protected, so 
it is unlikely that any 
data were accessed.
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Date 
Organization
Event
No. of 
Records 
Affected
Consequence 
2/16/07
U.S. 
Department of 
Veterans 
Affairs (VA)
An unencrypted 
computer hard drive 
disappeared from a 
VA research center in 
Alabama. 
Unknown
The Secretary of the 
VA shut down the 
Research Enhancement 
Award Programs until 
proper security 
standards are in place.
3/30/07
University of 
CaliforniaŒ 
San Francisco
A computer that 
contained the 
personal information 
on cancer research 
subjects was stolen 
from a locked 
research of˜ce. 
+3,000
There is no evidence 
that any information 
on the computer was 
used by unauthorized 
persons. 
6/7/07
U.S. Marines/
Pennsylvania 
State 
University
A researcher posted 
the personal 
information of many 
U.S. Marines online. 
This information then 
turned up in a cache 
on Google™s search 
engine. 
10,554
During the time period 
that the information 
was online, the website 
was only accessed by 
one individualŠa 
Marine whose 
information was 
released. 
8/17/07
Walter Reed 
Army Institute 
of Research
Boxes of documents 
containing personal 
information were 
found in the 
dumpster at an 
apartment building. 
The documents 
should have been 
shredded.
Unknown 
The boxes were intact 
when discovered, so it 
is unlikely that
 any of 
the personal 
information was 
accessed.
2/23/08
National 
Institutes of 
Health
A laptop computer 
that contained 
sensitive medical 
information on 
patients enrolled in a 
clinical trial was 
stolen. The 
information was not 
encrypted, in 
violation of the 
government™s data-
security policy. 
2,500
Because the 
information was not 
encrypted, it is possible 
that private health 
information was 
accessed on the 
computer. 
SOURCES: ITRC (2006, 2007); PRC (2008).
TABLE 2-2
 Continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 97
BOX 2-2
 The HIPAA Security Rule
 The ˜nal HIPAA Security Standards were adopted on February 20, 2003. 
Covered entities were required to be in compliance with the regulation on April 21, 
2005 (and April 21, 2006, for small health plans). In designing the HIPAA Security 
Rule, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) recognized that cov
-ered entities affected by this Rule were varied in terms of size, sophistication in 
technology use, and relative risks. Rather than dictate speci˜c technological solu
-tions, HHS deliberately made the rule ˚exible and usable by all covered entities 
regardless of size and purpose. HHS also speci˜cally stayed away from requiring 
any particular tec
hnology solutions to protect security. The Rule was intended to 
encourage covered entities to use future technology as it developed.
 Unlike the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the HIPAA Security Rule only protects elec
-tronic protected health information (EPHI). The Security Rule requires covered 
entities that process EPHI to maintain suf˜cient security measures to ensure the 
con˜dentiality, integrity, and availability of all EPHI. The Rule enumerates speci˜c 
administrative, technical, and physical security safeguards for covered entities to 
implement. Each safeguard is either classi˜ed as ﬁaddressableﬂ or ﬁrequired.ﬂ For 
the former, a ﬁcovered entity must conduct a risk analysis to determine whether 
each speci˜cation is reasonable and appropriate for its unique situation,ﬂ and only 
those safeguards that are ﬁreasonable and appropriateﬂ must be implemented. 
Required security safeguards are those mandated by the Rule.
 The Rule gives covered entities the responsibility for training their workforces 
to comply with the security regulation and for having written security policies 
and procedures in place. However, covered entities are only required to protect 
against reasonably anticipated threats or hazards to the security of the data, and 
reasonably anticipated uses or disclosures of such information that are not permit
-ted under the Privacy Rule.
SOURCES: 68 Fed. Reg. 8333, 8334 (2003); 45 C.F.R. § 164.306; 45 C.F.R. § 
164.316 (2007).
to implement any security protections for health information stored in paper 
records. There is an ongoing effort to implement electronic health records. 
However, many health records now exist only in paper form and may not 
be securely protected.
Third, many covered entities apparently are not yet in full compliance 
with all the requirements of the HIPAA Security Rule, based on surveys
13
 of 
13
 Since 2004, the American Health Information Management Association has annually 
surveyed health care privacy of˜cers and others whose jobs related to the HIPAA privacy 
function to gain an understanding of where health care organizations stand with regard to 
implementing the Privacy and Security Rules required by HIPAA (AHIMA, 2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
health care privacy of˜cers and other individuals responsible for implement
-ing the HIPAA regulations conducted by the American Health Information 
Management Association (AHIMA). The surveys found that although the 
percentage of respondents who believe their facilities are in full compliance 
with the HIPAA Security Rule is increasing yearly, the number is still not 100 
percent. In 2006, 1 year after implementation of the HIPAA security regula
-tions, 25 percent of respondents described themselves as fully compliant with 
the Security Rule, and 50 percent described themselves as 85 to 95 percent 
compliant (compared to 17 percent of respondents in 2005 reporting they 
were fully compliant, and 43 percent describing themselves as 85 to 95 per
-cent compliant). More than halfŠ54 percentŠof respondents reported that 
their covered entity had upgraded its electronic software system to comply 
with the HIPAA Security Rule. All the respondents reported that their cov
-ered entity has an individual responsible for assessing data protection needs 
and implementing solutions and staff training (compared to 89 percent in 
2005), but the number of facilities reporting that they have an entire com
-mittee or task related to security decreased from 2005 (59 percent versus 78 
percent) (AHIMA, 2006).
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) has the
 authority 
to enforce the HIPAA Security Rule, and has received 378 security com
-plaints as of 2008 without issuing any ˜nes or penalties. A recent report 
issued by the HHS Of˜ce of Inspector General evaluated CMS™s oversight 
and enforcement of the HIPAA Security Rule and ﬁfound that CMS had 
taken limited steps to ensure that covered entities adequately implement 
security protectionsﬂ (OIG, 2008). However, a 2008 Resolution Agreement 
entered into by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
and CMS with Seattle-based Providence Health & Services for breaches of 
the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules may indicate that CMS is starting to 
take a more af˜rmative approach to enforcement. The agreement requires 
 
Providence Health & Services to pay $100,000 and to implement a correc
-tive action plan to ensure electronic patient information is appropriately 
safeguarded against future security breaches (OCR, 2008). In addition, 
CMS has recently partnered with PricewaterhouseCoopers to conduct secu
-rity audits of covered entities to examine how well they are implementing 
the requirements of the HIPAA Security Rule. Ten to 20 assessments are 
planned for 2008 (Conn, 2008). Together these actions may have a positive 
effect on the percentage of covered entities fully compliant with the HIPAA 
Security Rule.
Regardless of whether the HIPAA Security Rule is actively enforced, the 
other gaps in the HIPAA Security Rule™s protection of personal health infor
-mation are problematic because enhanced security is necessary to reduce the 
risk of data theft and to reinforce the public™s trust in the research commu
-nity by diminishing anxiety about the potential for unintentional disclosure 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 99
of information. 
Thus, the IOM committee recommends that all institutions 
(both covered entities and non-covered entities) in the health research com
-munity that are involved in the collection, use, and disclosure of personally 
identi˜able health information take strong measures to safeguard the secu
-rity of health data.
 Given the differences among the missions and activities 
of institutions in the health research community, some ˚exibility in the 
implementation of speci˜c security measures will be necessary.
Examples of measures that institutions should implement include 
appointment of a security of˜cer on IRBs and Privacy Boards to be respon
-sible for assessing data protection needs and implementing solutions and 
staff training; use of encryption and encoding techniques, especially for 
laptops and removable media containing personally identi˜able health 
information; and implementation of a breach noti˜cation requirement, 
so that patients may take steps to protect their identity in the event of a 
breach (IOM, 2000). More generally, institutions should implement layers 
of security protections, so that if security fails at one layer the breach will 
likely be stopped by another layer of security protection. The publication 
of best practices combined with a cooperative approach to compliance 
with security standardsŠsuch as self-evaluation, security audits, and cer
-ti˜cation programsŠwould also promote progress in this area. Research 
sponsors could play a role in the adoption of best practices in data secu
-rity, by requiring researchers to implement appropriate security measures 
prior to providing funding. In addition, the federal government should 
support the development of technologies to enhance the security of health 
information.
Examples of security standards and guidelines already exist in some 
sectors, but they are not widely applied in health research. For instance, the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology has developed standards 
and guidance for the implementation of the Federal Information Security 
Management Act of 2002, which was meant to bolster computer and net
-work security within the federal government and af˜liated parties (e.g., 
government contractors). These include standards for minimum security 
requirements for information and information systems, as well as guidance 
for assessing and selecting appropriate security controls for information sys
-tems, for determining security control effectiveness, and for certifying and 
accrediting information systems (NIST, 2007). However, two recent GAO 
reports found that although the federal government is improving informa
-tion security performance, a number of signi˜cant information security 
control de˜ciencies remain (GAO, 2008a,b). HHS, working through its 
Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology,
14
 could play an important role in developing or adapting standards for health 
14
 See 
http://www.hhs.gov/healthit/onc/mission
/.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
research applications, and then encourage and facilitate broader use of such 
standards in the health research community.
POTENTIAL
 T
ECHNICAL
 A
PPROACHES
 TO
 HEALTH
 D
ATA
 P
RIVACY
 AND
 S
ECURITY
The security of data will continue to grow in importance as the health 
care industry moves toward greater implementation of electronic health 
records, and Congress has already proposed numerous bills to facilitate 
and regulate that transition (see also Chapter 6). Advances in information 
technology will likely make it easier to implement such measures as audit 
trails and access controls in the future. Although the committee does not 
recommend a speci˜c technology solution, there are at least four techno
-logical approaches to enhancing data privacy and security that have been 
proposed by others as having the potential to be particularly in˚uential in 
health research: (1) Privacy-preserving data mining and statistical disclo
-sure limitation, (2) personal electronic health record devices, (3) indepen
-dent consent management tools, and (4) pseudonymisation. Each seeks to 
minimize or eliminate the transfer of personally identi˜able data (Burkert, 
2001). The advantages, limitations, and current feasibility of each are 
described brie˚y below.
Privacy-preserving data mining and statistical disclosure limitation. 
In recent 
years, a number of techniques have been proposed for modifying or trans
-forming data in such a way so as to preserve privacy while statistically 
analyzing the data (reviewed in Aggarwal and Yu, 2008; NRC, 2000, 2005, 
2007b,c). Typically, such methods reduce the granularity of representation 
in order to protect con˜dentiality. There is, however, a natural trade-off 
between information loss and the con˜dentiality protection because this 
reduction in granularity results in diminished accuracy and utility of the 
data, and methods used in their analysis. Thus, a key issue is to maintain 
maximum utility of the data without compromising the underlying privacy 
constraints. In addition, there are a very large number of de˜nitions of pri
-vacy and its protection in the statistical disclosure limitation and the privacy-
preserving data mining literatures, in part because of the varying goals.
Examples of statistical disclosure limitation and privacy-preserving data 
mining methods include perturbation methods such as noise addition, which 
attempts to mask the identi˜able attributes of individual records, aggrega
-tion methods such as k-anonymity, which attempts to reduce the granularity 
of representation of the data in such a way that a given record cannot be 
distinguished from at least (k Œ 1) other records, the release of summary 
statistics that can be used for actual statistical analyses such as marginal 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 101totals from contingency tables, and various approaches to the generation of 
synthetic data. Several of these are reviewed in Aggarwal and Yu (2008).
Other technologies include cryptographic methods for distributive pri
-vacy protection, which operate by allowing researchers to query various 
databases online using cryptographic algorithms (Brands, 2007; reviewed in 
Aggarwal and Yu, 2008), query auditing techniques, and output perturba
-tion using methodology known as differential privacy (many of these tech
-niques are reviewed in Aggarwal and Yu, 2008, and Dwork, 2008). These 
technologies aim to protect privacy by minimizing the out˚ow of informa
-tion to researchers, as the providers of the databases do not make any of the 
actual data available to the researchers. The principal drawback of many 
of these methods relates to the potentially limited utility of the released 
information, especially for secondary analyses not planned in advance.
Each of the methods referred to above have strengths and weaknesses 
for speci˜c kinds of statistical analyses. Precisely how this body of develop
-ing methodologies may be effectively used in the types of health research 
of the sort envisioned in this report remains an open question and this is 
an area of active research. Thus, alternative mechanisms for data protec
-tion going beyond the removal of obvious identi˜ers and the application 
of limited modi˜cations of data elements are required. These mechanisms 
need to be backed up by legal penalties and sanctions.
Personal electronic health record devices.
 The use of personal electronic 
health record devices requires that all individuals possess a personal elec
-tronic device, such as a personal digital assistant (PDA) or personal com
-puter, to manage their health information. The electronic device is intended 
to be used by individuals to aggregate all of their health information into 
one location (i.e., the electronic device). The infrastructure for implement
-ing this privacy-enhancing technology exists, but there are several serious 
problems with relying on this technology in health research. First, it is 
unclear who would provide individuals with the devices, how they would 
be maintained, and who would bear the cost of the maintenance. Second, it 
is impossible for researchers to query every single individual for permission 
to access his/her personal electronic health record device in order to deter
-mine if he/she meets the criteria for the relevant study. Only individuals 
who are on the Internet and are involved in health research could easily be 
queried. Third, the use of personal electronic devices would make it almost 
impossible to aggregate data because of the dif˜culty of accessing data 
from multiple sources. These problems are suf˜ciently serious that the use 
of this technology is unlikely to offer a satisfactory solution to the privacy 
and security concerns in health research (Brands, 2007).
Independent consent management tools. 
The independent consent manage
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
ment tool (or infomediary) relies on a health trust to store all of an individ
-ual™s health data. When researchers are interested in accessing an individual™s 
health information for a study, the researchers must contact the health trust. 
The health trust will then approach the individual and asks whether he/she is 
willing to give consent for the research. Examples of this technology include 
Microsoft™s HealthVault, Google Health, and Revolution Health.
Independent consent management tools allow individuals to make 
 
blanket consents for their health information to be released for certain types 
of researchers. For example, an individual can have a standing consent that 
his/her information can be released to all researchers at the Mayo Clinic, or 
for all research on cancer, etc. Thus, the use of a health trust allows an indi
-vidual to have the power of consent for all uses of his/her health informa
-tion, but does not require a speci˜c consent in all instances (Brands, 2007). 
Some privacy advocates are very favorable about the use of this technology 
because they see it as a way to give patients complete control over who can 
see and use their health information (PPR, 2008).
However, the use of this technology in health research has several 
major problems. The ˜rst problem is that the health trust in this system 
becomes a ﬁhoney potﬂ (i.e., the health trust holds ALL of an individual™s 
data). This creates serious trust and security issues because a person™s entire 
health record is stored in a single entity (Brands, 2007). A 2006 survey of 
global ˜nancial services institutions found that respondents reported that 
nearly 50 percent of all security breaches were a result of an internal failure 
(e.g., a virus or worm originating inside the organization, insider fraud, 
or
 inadvertent leakage of consumer data) (Melek and MacKinnon, 2006). 
Many security breaches in health care are likely also a result of internal 
failures. In addition, these organizations are currently not regulated by 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule, so there are no legal federal privacy restrictions 
preventing these entities from releasing individuals™ data to the govern
-ment, marketing companies, or others, and no mandatory data security 
requirements. New legislation or regulation making health trusts liable for 
security breaches may be necessary before the public is willing to trust these 
organizations to store personal health data (Metz, 2008).
The second major impediment to the widespread adoption of indepen
-dent consent management tools is the dif˜culty of providing individuals 
with secure online access to view their health information. The companies 
marketing this technology need to develop a mechanism where ind
ividuals 
can access their medical information held by the health trust without 
endangering its security and privacy. The current methods for individual 
authentication online do not work well (NRC, 2003), but the use of a 
strong authentication system in a single domain may solve this problem. 
The companies will also need to address the fact that a signi˜cant portion 
of the population does not have online access at all (Brands, 2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 103The ˜nal problem with using independent consent management systems 
in health research is the inability to ensure the authenticity and integrity 
of responses. There is no existing method for the health trusts to provide 
the researchers with a guarantee that the information contained in their 
database is accurate. If data are authenticated using existing methods, such 
as through the use of digital signing, then it is impossible to truly protect 
the privacy of the individuals™ information being disclosed (NRC, 2003). 
 
Cryptographic selective disclosure techniques may be able to solve this 
problem, but the technology does not exist yet (Brands, 2007).
Pseudonymization.
 Pseudonymization is a method ﬁused to replace the 
true identities (nominative) of individuals or organizations in databases by 
pseudo-identities (pseudo-IDs) that cannot be linked directly to their cor
-responding nominative identitiesﬂ (Claerhout and De Moor, 2005). The 
bene˜t of using pseudonymization in health research is that it protects indi
-viduals™ identities while allowing researchers to link personal data across 
time and place by relying on the pseudo-IDs.
Most pseudonymization methods use a trusted third party to perform 
the pseudonymization process. This results in at least three entities being 
involved in the creation of each database. There is the data source that has 
access to nominative personal data (e.g., PHI), the trusted third party, and 
the data register that uses the pseudonymized data for research.
Two methods of pseudonymization are the batch data collection and 
the interactive data collection. In the batch data collection, the data sup
-plier splits the data into two parts: (1) the identi˜ers that relate to a speci˜c 
person (e.g., Social Security number, name), and (2) the payload data, which 
includes all the nonidenti˜able data associated with each individual. The 
data are prepseudonymized at the data source and transferred to the trusted 
third party, which converts the prepseudonyms data into a ˜nal pseudo-ID. 
Both the ˜nal pseudo-ID and payload data are transferred to the data regis
-ter, where they are stored and used for research; no data are stored with the 
trusted third party. Privacy concerns are minimized because the only version 
of the data that is available to researchers is pseudonymized data.
The interactive data collection is used in situations where neither 
the data supplier nor the data register has a need for local storage of the 
data. All the data is stored by a trusted third party in pseudonymous 
form. Both the data supplier and the data register must query the trusted 
third party to access the data (Claerhout and De Moor, 2005; De Moor 
et al., 2003).
It is unclear how technologies relying on pseudonymization would be 
implemented under the requirements of the HIPAA Privacy Rule. In order 
for information to be considered deidenti˜ed, the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
speci˜cally states that covered entities can assign a code or other means of 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
record identi˜cation (such as a pseudo-ID), but the code cannot be derived 
from, or related to, information about the subject of the information.
15
 This 
means that any pseudo-IDs created using this technology must be based 
entirely on nonpersonal information. Alternatively, any researchers using 
the pseudonymized data must go through the normal IRB/Privacy Board 
review process.
CONCLUSIONS
 AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on its review of the information described in this chapter, the 
committee agreed on an overarching principle to guide the formation of 
recommendations. The committee af˜rms the importance of maintaining 
and improving the privacy of health information. In the context of health 
research, privacy includes the commitment to handle personal information 
of patients and research participants with meaningful privacy protections, 
including strong security measures, transparency, and accountability.
16
 These commitments extend to everyone who collects, uses, or has access 
to personally identi˜able health information of patients and research par
-ticipants. Practices of security, transparency, and accountability take on 
extraordinary importance in the health research setting: Researchers and 
other data users should disclose clearly how and why personal informa
-tion is being collected, used, and secured, and should be subject to legally 
enforceable obligations to ensure that personally identi˜able information 
is used appropriately and securely. In this manner, privacy protection will 
help to ensure research participation and public trust and con˜dence in 
medical research.
As part of the process of implementing this principle into the federal 
oversight regime of health research, 
the committee recommends that all 
institutions in the health research community that are involved in the col
-lection, use, and disclosure of personally identi˜able health information 
should take strong measures to safeguard the security of health data.
 For 
example, institutions could:
Ł Appoint a security of˜cer responsible for assessing data protection 
needs and implementing solutions and staff training.
Ł Make greater use of encryption and other techniques for data 
security.
Ł Include data security experts on IRBs.
15
 Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: Final Rule, 67 Fed. 
Reg. 53182, 53232 (2002).
16
 This is derived from the principles of fair information practices (see Chapter 2 for more 
detail).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 105Ł Implement a breach noti˜cation requirement, so that patients may 
take steps to protect their identity in the event of a breach.
Ł Implement layers of security protection to eliminate single points 
of vulnerability to security breaches.
In addition, the federal government should support the development 
and use of:
Ł Genuine privacy-enhancing techniques that minimize or eliminate 
the collection of personally identi˜able data.
Ł Standardized self-evaluations and security audits and certi˜cation 
programs to help institutions achieve the goal of safeguarding the 
security of personal health data.
Effective health privacy protections require effective data security mea
-sures. The HIPAA Security Rule (which entails a set of regulatory provisions 
separate from the Privacy Rule) already sets a ˚oor for data security stan
-dards within covered entities, but not all institutions that conduct health 
research are subject to HIPAA regulations. Also, the survey data presented 
in this chapter show that neither the HIPAA Privacy Rule nor the HIPAA 
Security Rule have directly improved public con˜dence that personal health 
information will be kept con˜dential. Therefore, all institutions conducting 
health research should undertake measures to strengthen data protections. 
For example, given the recent spate of lost or stolen laptops containing 
patient health information, encryption should be required for all laptops 
and removable media containing such data. However, in general, given the 
differences among the missions and activities of institutions in the health 
research community, some ˚exibility in the implementation of speci˜c secu
-rity measures will be necessary.
Enhanced security would reduce the risk of data theft and reinforce 
the public™s trust in the research community by diminishing anxiety about 
the potential for unintentional disclosure of information. The publication 
of best practices and outreach to all stakeholders by HHS, combined with 
a cooperative approach to compliance with security standards, such as 
self-evaluation and audit programs, would promote progress in this area. 
Research sponsors could also play a roll in fostering the adoption of best 
practices in data security.
REFERENCES
Aggarwal, C. C., and P. S. Yu, eds. 2008. 
Privacy-preserving data mining: Models and algo
-rithms. 
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
AHIMA (American Health Information Management Association). 2006. 
The state of 
HIPAA privacy and security compliance.
 http://www.ahima.org/emerging_issues/
2006StateofHIPAACompliance.pdf (accessed April 20, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Allen, A. 1997. Genetic privacy: Emerging concepts and values. In 
Genetic secrets: Protecting 
privacy and con˜dentiality in the genetic era
, edited by M. Rothstein. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press. Pp. 3
1Œ59.
Balch, G. I., L. Doner, M. K. Hoffman, and E. Macario. 2005. 
An exploration of how patients 
and family caregivers think about counterfeit drugs and the safety of prescription drug 
retail outlets for the National Health Council.
 Oak Park, IL: Balch Associates.
Balch, G. I., L. M. A. Doner, M. K. Hoffman, M. P. Merriman, E. Monroe-Cook, and G. 
Rathjen. 2006. 
Concept and message development research on engaging communities to 
promote electronic personal health records for the National Health Council.
 Oak Park, 
IL: Balch Associates.
Barrett, G., J. A. Cassell, J. L. Peacock, and M. P. Coleman. 2007. National survey of British 
public™s view on use of identi˜able medical data by the National Cancer Registry. 
British 
Medical Journal
 332(7549):1068Œ1072.
Bloustein, E. 1967. Privacy as an aspect of human dignity: An answer to Dean Prosser. 
New 
York Law Review
 39:34.
Bodger, J. A. 2006. Note, taking the sting out of reporting requirements: Reproductive 
health clinics and the constitutional right to informational privacy. 
Duke Law Journal 
56:583Œ609.
Burkert, H. 2001. Privacy-enhancing technologies: Typology, critique, vision. In 
Technology 
and privacy: The new landscape
, edited by P. E. Agre and M. Rotenberg. Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press. Pp. 125Œ142.
Claerhout, B., and G. J. E. De Moor. 2005. Privacy protection for clinical and genomic data: 
The use of privacy-enhancing techniques in medicine. 
Journal of Medical Informatics
 74:257Œ265.
Conn, J. 2008. CMS™ HIPAA watchdog presents potential con˚ict. 
Modern Healthcare.
 http://
www.modernhealthcare.com (accessed July 28, 2008).
Damschroder, L. J., J. L. Pritts, M. A. Neblo, R. J. Kalarickal, J. W. Creswell, and R. A. 
Hayward. 2007. Patients, privacy and trust: Patients™ willingness to allow researchers to 
access their medical records. 
Social Science & Medicine
 64(1):223Œ235.
De Moor, G. J. E., B. Claerhout, and F. De Meyer. 2003. Privacy enhancing techniques: The 
key to secure communication and management of clinical and genomic data. 
Methods 
of Information in Medicine
 42:148Œ153.
Dwork, C. S., 2008. An ad omnia approach to de˜ning and achieving private data analysis, 
proceedings of the ˜rst sigkdd international workshop on privacy, security, and trust in 
kdd (invited). 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science
 4890.
Feld, A. D., and A. D. Feld. 2005. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA): Its broad effect on practice. 
American Journal of Gastroenterology
 100(7):1440Œ1443.
Flannery, J., and J. Tokley. 2005. 
AMA poll shows patients are concerned about the privacy 
and security of their medical records.
 Australian Medical Association. 
http://www.ama.
com.au/web.nsf/doc/WEEN-6EG7L
Y (accessed December 10, 2007).
Forrester Research. 1999. 
National survey: Con˜dentiality of medical records.
 http://www.
chcf.org (accessed February 12, 2007).
Forrester Research. 2005. 
National consumer health privacy survey 
200
5. http://www.chcf.
org/topics/view.cfm?itemID=115694 (accessed February 12, 2007).
Fried, C. 1968. Privacy. 
Yale Law Journal 
77:475Œ493.
GAO (Government Accountability Of˜ce). 2007. 
Personal information: Data breaches are 
frequent, but evidence of resulting identity theft is limited. 
Washington, DC: GAO.
GAO. 2008a. 
Although progress reported, federal agencies need to resolve signi˜cant 
 
de˜ciencies: Statement of Gregory C. Wilshusen, Director, Information Security Issues.
 Washington, DC: GAO.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 107GAO. 2008b. 
Information security: Progress reported, but weaknesses at federal agencies 
persist: Statement of Gregory C. Wilshusen, Director, Information Security Issues.
 Wash
-ington, DC: GAO.
Gavison, R. 1980. Privacy and the limits of the law. 
Yale Law Journal 
89:421Œ471.
Gelman, R. 2008. 
Fair information practices: A basic history.
 http://bobgellman.com/rg-docs/
rg-FIPshistory.pdf (accessed April 15, 2008).
Goldman, J. 1998. Protecting privacy to improve health care. 
Health Affairs
 17(6):47Œ60.
Gostin, L. O. 1995. Health information privacy. 
Cornell Law Review
 80:101Œ184.
Gostin, L. 2001. Health information: Reconciling personal privacy with the public good of 
human health. 
Health Care Analysis 
9:321.
Gostin, L. 2008. Surveillance and public health research: Personal privacy and the ﬁright to 
know.ﬂ In 
Public health law: Power, duty, restraint
. 2nd ed. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press.
Gostin, L. O., and J. G. Hodge. 2002. Personal privacy and common goods: A framework for 
balancing under the national health information Privacy Rule. 
Minnesota Law Review 
86:1439.
Greenhouse, S., and M. Barbaro. 2005. Walmart memo suggests ways to cut employee bene˜t 
costs. 
The New York Times.
 http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/26/business/26walmart.
ready.html?pagewanted=1&_r=1 (accessed April 14, 2008).
Harris Interactive. 2005. 
Health Information Privacy (HIPAA) notices have improved pub
-lic™s con˜dence that their medical information is being handled properly. 
http://www
.harrisinteractive.com/news/printerfriend/index.asp?NewsID=849 (accessed April 3, 
2007).
Harris Interactive. 2007. 
Many U.S. adults are satis˜ed with use of their personal health 
information. 
http://www.harrisinteractive.com/harris_poll/index.asp?PID=743 (accessed 
May 15, 2007).
HEW (Department of Health, Education and Welfare). 1973. 
Records, computers and the 
rights of citizens: Report of the Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Automated Per
-sonal Data Systems. 
http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/1973privacy/tocprefacemembers.htm 
 
(accessed July 12, 2008)
Hodge, J. G., Jr., L. O. Gostin, and P. D. Jacobson. 1999. Legal issues concerning electronic 
health information: Privacy, quality, and liability. 
JAMA
 282(15):1466Œ1471.
Hudson, K. L. 2007. Prohibiting genetic discrimination. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 356:2021.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2000. 
Protecting data privacy in health services research.
  
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
ITRC (Identity Theft Resource Center). 2006. 
200
6 disclosures of U.S. Data incidents. 
http://
idtheftmostwanted.org/ITRC%20Breach%20Report%202006.pdf (accessed July 7, 
2008).
ITRC. 2007. 
200
7 breach list. 
http://idtheftmostwanted.org/ITRC%20Breach%20Report%
 202007.pdf (accessed July 7, 2008).
ITRC. 2008. 
Security breaches.
 http://www.idtheftcenter.org/artman2/publish/lib_survey/
ITRC_2008_Breach_List_printer.shtml (accessed July 22, 2008).
Kass, N. E., M. R. Natowicz, S. C. Hull, R. R. Faden, L. Plantinga, L. O. Gostin, and J. 
Slutsman. 
2003.Theuseofmedicalrecordsinresearch:Whatdopatientswant?
2003. The use of medical records in research: What do patients want? 
Journal 
of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 31:429Œ433.
Low, L., S. King, and T. Wilkie. 1998. Genetic discrimination in life insurance: Empirical 
evidence from a cross sectional survey of genetic support groups in the United Kingdom. 
British Medical Journal
 317:1632Œ1635.
Lowrance, W. W. 1997. 
Privacy and health research: A report to the U.S. Secretary of Health and 
Human Services.
 http://aspe.hhs.gov/DATACNCL/PHR.htm (accessed May 10, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Lowrance, W. W. 2002. 
Learning from experience, privacy and the secondary use of data in 
health research. 
London: The Nuf˜eld Trust.
Magnussen, R. 2004. The changing legal and conceptual shape of health care privacy. 
The 
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 32:681.
Melek, A., and M. MacKinnon. 2006. 
Deloitte global security survey.
 http://www.deloitte.com/
dtt/cda/doc/content/us_fsi_150606globalsecuritysurvey(1).pdf (accessed July 23, 2008).
Metz, R. 2008. 
Google makes health service publicly available.
 Associated Press. http://biz.
yahoo.com/ap/080519/google_health.html (accessed August 13, 2008).
Moore, A. 2005. Intangible property: Privacy, power and information control. In 
Informa
-tion ethics: Privacy, property, and power
, edited by A. Moore. Seattle, WA: University 
of Washington Press.
NBAC (National Bioethics Advisory Commission). 1999. 
Research involving human biologi
-cal materials: Ethical issues and policy guidance, report and recommendations.
 Vol. 1. 
Rockville, MD: NBAC.
NBAC. 2001. 
Ethical and policy issues in research involving human participants.
 Rockville, 
MD: NBAC.
NCSL (National Conference of State Legislatures). 2008. 
Privacy protections in state constitu
-tions.
 http://www.ncsl.org/programs/lis/privacy/stateconstpriv03.htm (accessed June 10, 
2008).
Nissenbaum, H. 2004. Privacy as Contextual Integrity. 
Washington Law Review
 79: 
101Œ139.
NRC (National Research Council). 2000. 
Improving access to and con˜dentiality of research 
data: Report of a workshop.
 Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
NRC. 2003. 
Who goes there?: Authentication through the lens of privacy.
 Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2005. 
Expanding access to research data: Reconciling risks and opportunities.
 Wash
-ington, DC: The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2007a. 
Engaging privacy and information technology in a digital age.
 Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2007b. 
Privacy and information technology in a digital age.
 Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press.
NRC. 2007c. 
Putting people on the map: Protecting con˜dentiality with linked social-spatial 
data.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
OCR (Of˜ce for Civil Rights). 2008. 
HIPAA compliance and enforcement.
 http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/privacy/enforcement/ (accessed August 13, 2008).
OECD. 1980. 
Guidelines on the protection of privacy and transborder ˚ows of personal data. 
http://www.oecd.org/document/0,2340,en_2649_34255_1815186_1_1_1_1,00.html (ac
-cessed August 13, 2008).
OIG (Of˜ce of Inspector General). 2008. 
Nationwide review of the Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996
 oversight.
 Washington, DC: Department of Health and Human Services.
OTA (Of˜ce of Technology Assessment). 1993. 
Protecting privacy in computerized medical 
information.
 Washington, DC: OTA.
Petrila, J. 1999. Medical records con˜dentiality: Issues affecting the mental health and sub
-stance abuse systems. 
Drug Bene˜t Trends 
11:6Œ10.
Post, R. 2001. Three concepts of privacy. 
Georgetown Law Journal 
89:2087Œ2089.
PPR (Patient Privacy Rights). 2008 (October 4). Press release: 
Microsoft raises the bar for 
privacy in electronic health record solutions. 
http://www.patientprivacyrights.org/site/
PageServer?pagename=HealthVault_PressRelease/ (accessed August 13, 2008).
PRC (Privacy Rights Clearinghouse). 2008. 
A chronology of data breaches. 
http://www.
privacyrights.org/ar/ChronDataBreaches.htm (accessed July 8, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH INFORMATION PRIVACY
 109Pritts, J. L. 2002. Altered states: State health privacy laws and the impact of the federal health 
Privacy Rule. 
Yale Journal of Health Policy, Law & Ethics
 2(2):327Œ364.
Pritts, J. 2008. 
The importance and value of protecting the privacy of health information: 
Roles of HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule in health research.
 http://www.iom.
edu/CMS/3740/43729/53160.aspx (accessed March 15, 2008).
Privacy Protection Study Commission. 1977. 
Personal privacy in an information society.
 http://epic.org/privacy/ppsc1977report/ (accessed April 21, 2008).
PSRA (Princeton Survey Research Associates). 1999. 
Medical privacy and con˜dentiality 
 
survey.
 http://www.chcf.org/topics/view.cfm?itemID=12500 (accessed August 11, 2008).
Rachels, J. 1975. Why privacy is important. 
Philosophy and Public Affairs 
4:323Œ333.
Regan, P. 1995. 
Legislating privacy: Technology, social values, and public policy.
 Chapel Hill, 
NC: University of North Carolina Press.
Research!America. 2007. 
America speaks: Poll summary.
 Vol. 7. Alexandria, VA: United 
Health Foundation.
Richards, N. M., and D. J. Solove. 2007. Privacy™s other path: Recovering the law of con˜
-dentiality. 
Georgetown Law Journal
 96:124.
Roback, H., and M. Shelton. 1995. Effects of con˜dentiality limitations on the psycho
-therapeutic process. 
Journal of Psychotherapy Practice and Research
 4:185Œ193.
Robling, M. R., K. Hood, H. Houston, R. Pill, J. Fay, and H. M. Evans. 2004. Public attitudes 
towards the use of primary care patient record data in medical research without consent: 
A qualitative study. 
Journal of Medical Ethics 
30:104Œ109.
Saver, R. 2006. Medical research and intangible harm. 
University of Cincinnati Law Review
 74:941Œ1012.
Solove, D. J. 2006. A taxonomy of privacy. 
University of Pennsylvania Law Review 
154:516Œ518.
Taube, D. O., and A. Elwork. 1990. Researching the effects of con˜dentiality law on patients™ 
self-disclosures. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice
 21:72Œ75.
Taylor, C. 1989. 
Sources of the self: The making of modern identity. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Terry, N. P., and L. P. Francis. 2007. Ensuring the privacy and con˜dentiality of electronic 
health records. 
University of Illinois Law Review
 2007(2):681Œ736.
Tourangeau, R., L. J. Rips, and K. Rasinski. 2000. 
The psychology of survey response.
  
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Turn, R., and W. H. Ware. 1976. Privacy and security issues in information systems. 
The 
RAND Paper Series. 
Santa Monica, CA: The RAND Corporation.
Weddle, M., and P. Kokotailo. 2005. 
Con˜dentiality and consent in adolescent substance 
abuse: An update.
 Virtual Mentor, American Medical Association Journal of Ethics. 
 http:/
/virtualmentor.ama-assn.org/2005/03/pdf/pfor1-0503.pdf (accessed August 1, 
2008).
Wentland, E. J. 1993. Survey responses: An evaluation of their validity. San Diego, CA: 
 
Academic Press.
Westin, A. 1966. Science, privacy and freedom. 
Columbia Law Review
 66(7):1205Œ1253.
Westin, A. 1967. 
Privacy and freedom.
 New York: Atheneum.
Westin, A. 1976. 
Computers, health records, and citizen rights.
 http://eric.ed.gov
/ERICWebPortal/
custom/portlets/recordDetails/detailmini.jsp?_nfpb=true&_&ERICExtSearch
_SearchValue_
0=ED143358&ERICExtSearch_SearchType_0=no&accno=ED143358
 (accessed July 30, 
2008).
Westin, A. 2007. 
How the public views privacy and health research.
 Institute of Medicine. http://
www.iom.edu/Object.File/Master/48/528/%20Westin%20IOM%20Srvy%20Rept%2011-
1107.pdf (accessed November 11, 2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Whiddett, R., I. Hunter, J. Engelbrecht, and J. Handy. 
2006.Patients™attitudestowardssharing
2006. Patients™ attitudes towards sharing 
their health information. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics 
75(7):530Œ541.
Willison, D. J., L. Schwartz, J. Abelson, C. Charles, M. Swinton, D. Northrup, and L. 
Thabane. 2007 (September 25Œ28). 
Alternatives to project-speci˜c consent for access to 
personal information for health research. What do Canadians think?
 Paper presented at 
29th International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners, Montreal, 
Canada.
Woolley, M., and S. M. Propst. 2005. Public attitudes and perceptions about health related 
research. 
JAMA
 294:1380Œ1384.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111
3The Value, Importance, and 
Oversight of Health Research
The previous chapter reviewed the value of privacy, while this chapter 
examines the value and importance of health research. As noted in the 
introduction to Chapter 2, the committee views privacy and health research 
as complementary values. Ideally, society should strive to facilitate both for 
the bene˜t of individuals as well as the public.
In addition to de˜ning health research and delineating its value to 
individuals and society, this chapter provides an overview and historical 
perspective of federal research regulations that were in place long before 
the Privacy Rule was implemented. Because a great deal of medical research 
falls under the purview of multiple federal regulations, it is important to 
understand how the various rules overlap or diverge. The chapter also 
explains how the de˜nition of research has become quite complex under 
the various federal regulations, which make a distinction between research 
and some closely related health practice activities that also use health data, 
such as quality improvement initiatives.
The chapter also reviews the available survey data regarding public 
perceptions of health research and describes the importance of effective 
communication about health research with patients and the public.
CONCEPTS
 AND
 V
ALUE
 OF
 H
EALTH
 R
ESEARCH
De˜nitions
Under both the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) Privacy Rule and the Common Rule, ﬁresearchﬂ is de˜ned as ﬁa 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
systematic investigation, including research development, testing and evalu
-ation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledge.ﬂ This 
is a broad de˜nition that may include biomedical research, epidemiologi
-cal studies,
1 and health services research,
2 as well as studies of behavioral, 
social, and economic factors that affect health.
Perhaps the most familiar form of health research is the clinical trial, 
in which patients volunteer to participate in studies to test the ef˜cacy and 
safety of new medical interventions. But an increasingly large portion of 
health research is now information based. A great deal of research entails 
the analysis of data and biological samples that were initially collected for 
diagnostic, treatment, or billing purposes, or that were collected as part of 
other research projects, and are now being used for new research purposes. 
This secondary
3 use of data is a common research approach in ˜elds such 
as epidemiology, health services research, and public health research, and 
includes analysis of patterns of occurrences, determinants, and natural his
-tory of disease; evaluation of health care interventions and services; drug 
safety surveillance; and some genetic and social studies (Lowrance, 2002; 
Lowrance and Collins, 2007).
The Importance of Health Research
Like privacy, health research has high value to society. It can provide 
important information about disease trends and risk factors, outcomes of 
treatment or public health interventions, functional abilities, patterns of 
care, and health care costs and use. The different approaches to research 
provide complementary insights. Clinical trials can provide important infor
-mation about the ef˜cacy and adverse effects of medical interventions by 
controlling the variables that could impact the results of the study, but 
feedback from real-world clinical experience is also crucial for comparing 
and improving the use of drugs, vaccines, medical devices, and diagnostics. 
For example, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval of a drug for 
a particular indication is based on a series of controlled clinical trials, often 
1 
Epidemiology is the study of the occurrence, distribution, and control of diseases in 
populations.
2 
Health services research has been de˜ned as a multidisciplinary ˜eld of inquiry, both 
basic and applied, that examines the use, costs, quality, accessibility, delivery, organization, 
˜nancing, and outcomes of health care services to increase knowledge and understanding of 
the structure, processes, and effects of health services for individuals and populations (IOM, 
1995).
3 
The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics has noted that ﬁsecondary usesﬂ 
of health data is an ill-de˜ned term, and urges abandoning it in favor of precise description 
of each use (NCVHS, 2007a). Thus, the committee chose to minimize use of the term in this 
report.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 113
with a few hundred to a few thousand patients, but after approval it may be 
used by millions of people in many different contexts. Therefore, tracking 
clinical experience with the drug is important for identifying relatively rare 
adverse effects and for determining the effectiveness in different populations 
or in various circumstances. It is also vital to record and assess experience 
in clinical practice in order to develop guidelines for best practices and to 
ensure high-quality patient care.
Collectively, these forms of health research have led to signi˜cant 
discoveries, the development of new therapies, and a remarkable improve
-ment in health care and public health.
4 Economists have found that medi
-cal research can have an enormous impact on human health and longevity, 
and that the resulting increased productivity of the population contributes 
greatly to the national economy (Hat˜eld et al., 2001; Murphy and Topel, 
1999) in addition to the individual bene˜ts of improved health. If the 
research enterprise is impeded, or if it is less robust, important
 societal 
interests are affected.
The development of Herceptin as a treatment for breast cancer is a 
prime example of the bene˜ts of research using biological samples and 
patient records (Box 3-1) (Slamon et al., 1987). Many other examples of 
˜ndings from medical records research have changed the practice of medi
-cine as well. Such research underlies the estimate that tens of thousands of 
Americans die each year from medical errors in the hospital, and research 
has provided valuable information for reducing these medical errors by 
implementing health information technology, such as e
-prescribing (Bates 
et al., 1998; IOM, 2000b). This type of research also has documented that 
disparities in health care and lack of access to care in inner cities and rural 
areas result in poorer health outcomes (Mick et al., 1994). Furthermore, 
medical records research has demonstrated that preventive services (e.g., 
mammography) substantially reduce mortality and morbidity at reasonable 
costs (Mandelblatt et al., 2003), and has established a causal link between 
the nursing shortage and patient health outcomes by documenting that 
patients in hospitals with fewer registered nurses are hospitalized longer 
and are more likely to suffer complications, such as urinary tract infections 
and upper gastrointestinal bleeding (Needleman et al., 2002). These ˜nd
-ings have all informed and in˚uenced policy decisions at the national level. 
As the use of electronic medical records increases, the pace of this form of 
research is accelerating, and the opportunities to generate new knowledge 
about what works in health care are expanding (CHSR, 2008).
4 
See Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information, 64 Fed. Reg. 
59918, 59967 (preamble to rule proposed November 3, 1999) for a discussion on the bene˜ts 
of health records research.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX 3-1
 Examples of Important Findings from 
Medical Database Research
Herceptin and breast cancer:
 Data were collected from a cohort of more than 
9,000 breast cancer patients whose tumor specimens were consecutively received 
at the University of San Antonio (1974Œ1992, from across the United States). Data 
were collected prospectively with audits for veri˜cation, and recurrences were 
recorded through systematic patient follow-up. This database was analyzed to 
identify prognostic factors, and the results showed that ampli˜cation of the HER-2 
oncogene was a signi˜cant predictor of both overall survival and time to relapse in 
patients with breast cancer. This information subsequently led to the development 
of Herceptin (trastuzumab), a targeted therapy that is effective for many women 
with HER-2Œpositive breast cancer.
Folic acid and birth defects:
 Medical records research led to the discovery that 
supplementing folic acid during pregnancy can prevent neural tube birth defects 
(NTDs). Studies in the 1970s found that vitamin (folate) de˜ciency and use of 
anticonvulsive drugs that deplete folate were associated with higher rates of 
NTDs, and studies in the 1980s found that use of folate supplements was associ
-ated with decreased rates. Population-based surveillance systems showed that 
the number of NTDs decreased 31 percent after mandatory forti˜cation of cereal 
grain products.
Effects of intrauterine DES exposure:
 Starting in the 1940s, diethylstilbestrol 
(DES) was used by millions of pregnant women to prevent miscarriages and other 
disorders in pregnancy. In the 1970s, retrospective studies of medical records 
began to show that infants exposed to DES during the ˜rst trimester of pregnancy 
had an increased risk as adults of breast, vaginal, and cervical cancer as well as 
reproductive anomalies. In November 1971, the FDA sent a 
FDA Drug Bulletin
 to all U.S. physicians advising them to stop prescribing DES to pregnant women 
and ordered that prevention of miscarriage be removed from Indications and 
pregnancy be added to Contraindications in the physician-prescribing information 
for DES.
Patient safety:
 Health services research estimated that tens of thousands of 
 
Americans die each year from medical errors in the hospital. A 1998 study led by 
David Bates (Brigham & Women™s Hospital) found that computerized order entry 
of prescriptions at Brigham & Women™s Hospital reduced medical error rates by 
55 percent; rates of serious errors fell by 86 percent. In response to this ground
-breaking work, hospitals around the country are installing their own computer
-ized physician order entry systems. For example, The Leapfrog GroupŠa large 
national coalition of more than 100 public and private organizations that provide 
health care bene˜tsŠincludes computerized physician order entry as one of the 
safety standards it encourages hospitals to adopt.
Mortality risks of antipsychotic drugs in the elderly:
 In 2005, the FDA issued 
a public health advisory stating that the atypical (second generation) antipsychotic 
medications increase mortality among elderly patients. This decision was based 
on the results of 17 placebo-controlled trials with such drugs that enrolled a total 
of 5,106 elderly patients with dementia who had behavioral disorders. Fifteen of 
the studies showed numerical increases in mortality in the drug-treated group 
compared to the placebo-treated patients (approximately 1.6-1.7Œfold increase 
in mortality), most often due to heart-related events (e.g., heart failure, sudden 
death) or infections (mostly pneumonia). However, the risk of death with older, 
conventional agents was not known. Results from two subsequent retrospective 
reviews of 27,000 and 37,000 medical records of elderly patients who had been 
treated with either conventional or atypical antipsychotic drugs indicated that 
conventional antipsychotic medications are at least as likely as atypical agents to 
increase the risk of death among those patients. As a result, the FDA now requires 
that the prescribing information for all antipsychotic drugs includes the same infor
-mation about this risk in a boxed warning and a warnings section.
Child safety:
 Using the Partners for Child Passenger Safety (PCPS)Šan ongoing 
child-focused, real-time, crash surveillance system established with the State Farm 
Insurance Companies in 1997ŠFlaura Winston (Children™s Hospital of
 Pennsylvania) 
found that only 25 percent of children between 3 and 7 years of age were appropri
-ately restrained in crashes; children in seat belts alone were at a 3.5-fold increased 
risk of serious injury. Winston™s analysis of PCPS data led to the rapid adoption of 
belt-positioning boosters as the appropriate form of restraint for children once they 
have outgrown car seats. Appropriate restraint by children in this age group has 
doubled, and child fatality from crashes is at its lowest level ever.
Obesity:
 Eric Finkelstein (RTI International) used data from the late 1990s to ˜nd 
that obesity is responsible for up to $92.6 billion in medical expenditures each 
year; approximately half of obesity-related health care costs are borne by Medi
-care and Medicaid. A 2002 study by Roland Sturm (RAND) found that the effects 
of obesity on a number of chronic conditions were larger than those of smoking 
or problem drinking. Since then, obesity has been escalated to the top of the list 
of health care priorities, and policy makers have appropriated funds for federal 
agencies to fund health services research that encourages people to understand 
the effects of diet and exercise on their health.
Rural health:
 Stephen Mick (Virginia Commonwealth University) and colleagues 
examined rural hospital performance in the late 1980s and early 1990s and found 
that activity typical of urban hospitals is beyond the capacity of most rural facilities 
and recommended that a new federal approach would be required to preserve 
rural acute-care services. This work helped form the intellectual basis for Medi
-care™s highly successful Critical Access Hospital program, which was designed to 
improve rural health care access and reduce closures of hospitals that provide 
essential community services.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 115
BOX 3-1
 Examples of Important Findings from 
Medical Database Research
Herceptin and breast cancer:
 Data were collected from a cohort of more than 
9,000 breast cancer patients whose tumor specimens were consecutively received 
at the University of San Antonio (1974Œ1992, from across the United States). Data 
were collected prospectively with audits for veri˜cation, and recurrences were 
recorded through systematic patient follow-up. This database was analyzed to 
identify prognostic factors, and the results showed that ampli˜cation of the HER-2 
oncogene was a signi˜cant predictor of both overall survival and time to relapse in 
patients with breast cancer. This information subsequently led to the development 
of Herceptin (trastuzumab), a targeted therapy that is effective for many women 
with HER-2Œpositive breast cancer.
Folic acid and birth defects:
 Medical records research led to the discovery that 
supplementing folic acid during pregnancy can prevent neural tube birth defects 
(NTDs). Studies in the 1970s found that vitamin (folate) de˜ciency and use of 
anticonvulsive drugs that deplete folate were associated with higher rates of 
NTDs, and studies in the 1980s found that use of folate supplements was associ
-ated with decreased rates. Population-based surveillance systems showed that 
the number of NTDs decreased 31 percent after mandatory forti˜cation of cereal 
grain products.
Effects of intrauterine DES exposure:
 Starting in the 1940s, diethylstilbestrol 
(DES) was used by millions of pregnant women to prevent miscarriages and other 
disorders in pregnancy. In the 1970s, retrospective studies of medical records 
began to show that infants exposed to DES during the ˜rst trimester of pregnancy 
had an increased risk as adults of breast, vaginal, and cervical cancer as well as 
reproductive anomalies. In November 1971, the FDA sent a 
FDA Drug Bulletin
 to all U.S. physicians advising them to stop prescribing DES to pregnant women 
and ordered that prevention of miscarriage be removed from Indications and 
pregnancy be added to Contraindications in the physician-prescribing information 
for DES.
Patient safety:
 Health services research estimated that tens of thousands of 
 
Americans die each year from medical errors in the hospital. A 1998 study led by 
David Bates (Brigham & Women™s Hospital) found that computerized order entry 
of prescriptions at Brigham & Women™s Hospital reduced medical error rates by 
55 percent; rates of serious errors fell by 86 percent. In response to this ground
-breaking work, hospitals around the country are installing their own computer
-ized physician order entry systems. For example, The Leapfrog GroupŠa large 
national coalition of more than 100 public and private organizations that provide 
health care bene˜tsŠincludes computerized physician order entry as one of the 
safety standards it encourages hospitals to adopt.
Mortality risks of antipsychotic drugs in the elderly:
 In 2005, the FDA issued 
a public health advisory stating that the atypical (second generation) antipsychotic 
medications increase mortality among elderly patients. This decision was based 
on the results of 17 placebo-controlled trials with such drugs that enrolled a total 
of 5,106 elderly patients with dementia who had behavioral disorders. Fifteen of 
the studies showed numerical increases in mortality in the drug-treated group 
compared to the placebo-treated patients (approximately 1.6-1.7Œfold increase 
in mortality), most often due to heart-related events (e.g., heart failure, sudden 
death) or infections (mostly pneumonia). However, the risk of death with older, 
conventional agents was not known. Results from two subsequent retrospective 
reviews of 27,000 and 37,000 medical records of elderly patients who had been 
treated with either conventional or atypical antipsychotic drugs indicated that 
conventional antipsychotic medications are at least as likely as atypical agents to 
increase the risk of death among those patients. As a result, the FDA now requires 
that the prescribing information for all antipsychotic drugs includes the same infor
-mation about this risk in a boxed warning and a warnings section.
Child safety:
 Using the Partners for Child Passenger Safety (PCPS)Šan ongoing 
child-focused, real-time, crash surveillance system established with the State Farm 
Insurance Companies in 1997ŠFlaura Winston (Children™s Hospital of
 Pennsylvania) 
found that only 25 percent of children between 3 and 7 years of age were appropri
-ately restrained in crashes; children in seat belts alone were at a 3.5-fold increased 
risk of serious injury. Winston™s analysis of PCPS data led to the rapid adoption of 
belt-positioning boosters as the appropriate form of restraint for children once they 
have outgrown car seats. Appropriate restraint by children in this age group has 
doubled, and child fatality from crashes is at its lowest level ever.
Obesity:
 Eric Finkelstein (RTI International) used data from the late 1990s to ˜nd 
that obesity is responsible for up to $92.6 billion in medical expenditures each 
year; approximately half of obesity-related health care costs are borne by Medi
-care and Medicaid. A 2002 study by Roland Sturm (RAND) found that the effects 
of obesity on a number of chronic conditions were larger than those of smoking 
or problem drinking. Since then, obesity has been escalated to the top of the list 
of health care priorities, and policy makers have appropriated funds for federal 
agencies to fund health services research that encourages people to understand 
the effects of diet and exercise on their health.
Rural health:
 Stephen Mick (Virginia Commonwealth University) and colleagues 
examined rural hospital performance in the late 1980s and early 1990s and found 
that activity typical of urban hospitals is beyond the capacity of most rural facilities 
and recommended that a new federal approach would be required to preserve 
rural acute-care services. This work helped form the intellectual basis for Medi
-care™s highly successful Critical Access Hospital program, which was designed to 
improve rural health care access and reduce closures of hospitals that provide 
essential community services.
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Workforce and health outcomes: 
In 1997, Jack Needleman (University of 
CaliforniaŒLos Angeles) and Peter Buerhaus (Vanderbilt University) analyzed 
more than 6 million patient discharge records from 799 hospitals in 11 states. They 
found that patients in hospitals with fewer registered nurses stay hospitalized lon
-ger and are more likely to suffer complications, such as urinary tract infections and 
upper gastrointestinal bleeding. This research established a causal link between 
the nursing shortage and outcomes, and helped move the nursing shortage into 
the public™s eye and onto policy makers™ radar. In 2002, Congress passed the 
Nurse Reinvestment Act to increase the domestic supply of nurses.
SOURCES: Bates et al. (1998); FDA (1971, 2005, 2008); Finkelstein et al. (2003); 
Gill et al. (2007); Herbst et al. (1971); IOM (2000b); Mick et al. (1994); Needleman 
et al. (2002); Pitkin (2007); Schneeweiss et al. 
(2007);Slamonetal.(1987);Thorpe
(2007); Slamon et al. (1987); Thorpe 
et al. (2004); Veurink et al. (2005); Winston et al. (2000).
BOX 3-1
 Continued
Advances in health information technology are enabling a transforma
-tion in health research that could facilitate studies that were not feasible 
in the past, and thus lead to new insights regarding health and disease. As 
noted by the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, ﬁClinically 
rich information is now more readily available, in a more structured format, 
and able to be electronically exchanged throughout the health and health 
care continuum. As a result, the information can be better used for quality 
improvement, public health, and research, and can signi˜cantly contribute 
to improvements in health and health care for individuals and populationsﬂ 
(NCVHS, 2007a). The informatics grid recently developed with support 
from the National Cancer Institute (Cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid, 
or caBIG) is an example of a how information technologies can facilitate 
health research by enabling broader sharing of health data while still ensur
-ing regulatory compliance and protecting patient privacy (Box 3-2).
Science today is also changing rapidly and becoming more complex, so 
no single researcher or single site can bring all the expertise to develop and 
validate medical innovations or to ensure their safety. Thus, ef˜cient shar
-ing of information between institutions has become even more important 
than in previous eras, when there were fewer new therapies introduced. The 
expansion of treatment options, as well as the escalating expense of new 
therapies, mandates greater scrutiny of true effectiveness,
5 once ef˜cacy 
5 Effectiveness can be de˜ned as the extent to which a speci˜c test or intervention, when used 
under 
ordinary
 circumstances, does what it is intended to do. Ef˜cacy refers to the extent to 
which a speci˜c test or intervention produces a bene˜cial result under 
ideal
 conditions (e.g., 
in a clinical trial).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 117
BOX 3-2
 caBIG (Cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid)
 The National Cancer Institute™s caBIG Data Sharing and Intellectual Capital 
Workspace™s mission is to enable all constituencies in the cancer communityŠ
including researchers, physicians, and patientsŠto share data and knowledge 
through an informatics grid ﬁby addressing the legal, regulatory, ethical, policy, 
academic, proprietary, and contractual barriers.ﬂ
 The caBIG strives to achieve this objective through a number of different 
initiatives. First, caBIG provides decision support tools for institutions that share 
data through the informatics grid. This analytic framework is intended to encour
-age institutions to make consistent analysis of legal, regulatory, and ethical con
-straints on data sharing. The program has identi˜ed four sets of considerations 
for institutions to analyze: (1) intellectual property considerations, (2) privacy and 
con˜dentiality considerations, (3) IRB and ethical considerations, and (4) sponsor 
considerations.
 Second, caBIG has identi˜ed a number of best practices and processes for 
facilitating the approval of data sharing agreements via the caBIG infrastructure. 
Currently identi˜ed best practices include suggestions for conducting the patient 
informed consent process in a manner that permits data to be shared via caBIG, 
standardizing expectations for sharing unpublished data, creating recommenda
-tions for developing contract clauses for sponsored research projects that permit 
broad data sharing, and providing information documents for IRBs and Privacy 
Boards to use in reviewing proposals for data sharing via caBIG.
 Third, caBIG has created model documents intended to facilitate and expe
-dite the arrangements between institutions to share data. These include model 
informed consent provisions, model researcher questionnaires and data shar
-ing checklists, and security-related agreements. Finally, caBIG has developed 
security policies and requirements for systems that are attached to or access the 
caBIG infrastructure.
 Under caBIG, each institution retains legal responsibility for the research data 
it generates; this includes responsibility for complying with the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule, the Common Rule, as well as any applicable state laws. The institutions 
also retain the right to determine who they will share their data with, what type of 
data (deidenti˜ed versus identi˜able) they will share and under what terms and 
conditions. The advantage to conducting research within the caBIG technical 
infrastructure is that the program has identi˜ed the common legal and ethical 
considerations that apply to all researchers across the country, and has simpli˜ed 
the process for sharing data. In addition, the caBIG infrastructure has increased 
institutions™ trust in one another because ﬁeveryone is playing by the same rulesﬂ 
and a common set of expectations exist. Recently, the BIG Health Consortium 
was developed to extend the concept of caBIG beyond cancer research, and to 
link all stakeholders in biomedicine through a new biomedical con˜guration.
SOURCES: Big Health (2008); NCI (2008); NCVHS (2007b).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
has been demonstrated. This requires registries of patient characteristics, 
outcomes, and adverse events. Large populations are required to facili
-tate comparison of patient populations and to calculate risk/bene˜t esti
-mates. For example, INTERMACS
6 (Interagency Registry for Mechanically 
Assisted Circulatory Support) is a national registry for patients who are 
receiving mechanical circulatory support device therapy to treat advanced 
heart failure. This registry was devised as a joint effort of the National 
Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Ser
-vices, FDA, clinicians, scientists and industry representatives. Analysis of 
the data collected is expected to facilitate improved patient evaluation and 
management while aiding in better device development. Registry results are 
also expected to in˚uence future research and facilitate appropriate regula
-tion and reimbursement of such devices. Similarly, the Extracorporeal Life 
Support Organization (ELSO),
7 an international consortium of health care 
professionals and scientists who focus on the development and evaluation 
of novel therapies for support of failing organ systems, maintains a registry 
of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation and other novel forms of organ 
system support. Registry data are used to support clinical practice and 
research, as well as regulatory agencies. Another example is the database 
developed by the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) for the col
-lection, storage, analysis and publication of data pertaining to the patient 
waiting list, organ matching, and transplants.
8 Launched in 1999, this 
secure Internet-based system contains data regarding every organ donation 
and transplant event occurring in the United States since 1986.
Information-based research, such as research using health information 
databases has many advantages (reviewed by Lowrance, 2002). It is often 
faster and less expensive than experimental studies; it can analyze very large 
sets of data and may detect unexpected phenomena or differences among 
subpopulations that might not be included in a controlled experimental 
study; it can often be undertaken when controlled trials are simply not 
possible for ethical, technical, or other reasons, and it can be used to study 
effectiveness of a speci˜c test or intervention in clinical practice, rather than 
just the ef˜cacy as determined by a controlled experimental study. It can 
also reexamine data accrued in other research studies, such as clinical trials, 
to answer new questions quickly and inexpensively. However, information-
based research does have limitations. Often it has less statistical rigor than 
controlled clinical studies because it lacks scienti˜c control over the original 
data collection, quality, and format that prospective experimental research 
can dictate from the start. In addition to these scienti˜c limitations, because 
6 
See 
http://www.intermacs.or
g.7 
See http://www.elso.med.umich.edu.
8 
See http://www.unos.org/Data.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 119
of its relational and often distant physical separation from the data subjects, 
and the sheer volume of the records involved, obtaining individual consent 
for the research can be dif˜cult or impossible.
Advances in information-based medical research could also facilitate the 
movement toward personalized medicine, which will make health research 
more meaningful to individuals. The goal of personalized medicine is to 
tailor prevention strategies and treatments to each individual based on 
his/her genetic composition and health history. In spite of the strides made 
in improving health through new treatments, it is widely known that most 
drugs are effective in only a fraction of patients who have the condition 
for which the drug is indicated. Moreover, a small percentage of patients 
are likely to have adverse reactions to drugs that are found to be safe for 
the majority of the population at the recommended dose. Both of these 
phenomena are due to variability in the patient population. Revolutionary 
advances in the study of genetics and other markers of health and disease 
are now making it possible to identify and study these variations, and are 
leading to more personalized approaches to health careŠthat is, the ability 
to give ﬁthe appropriate drug, at the appropriate dose, to the appropri
-ate patient, at the appropriate time.ﬂ Achieving the goals of personalized 
medicine will lead to improvements in both the effectiveness and the safety 
of medical therapies.
Public Perceptions of Health Research
A number of studies have been undertaken to gauge the public™s atti
-tude toward research and the factors that in˚uence individuals™ willingness 
to participate in research. The surveys reviewed in this chapter focus on 
interventional clinical trials. A review of survey questions to gauge the 
public willingness to allow their medical records to be used in research can 
be found in Chapter 2.
The Public Values Health Research
A number of studies suggest that most Americans have a positive view 
of medical research and believe that research is bene˜cial to society. A 
recent Harris poll found that nearly 80 percent of respondents were inter
-ested in health research ˜ndings, consistent with previous survey results 
(Westin, 2007). A study in 2005 compiled data from 70 state surveys and 
18 national surveys and found that the majority of Americans believe main
-taining world leadership in health-related research is important.
 Seventy-
eight percent of respondents said that it is very important, and 17 percent 
said that it is somewhat important. Only 4 percent of Americans reported 
that maintaining world leadership in health-related research is not impor
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
tant (Woolley and Propst, 2005). Similar results were found in a 2007 
surveyŠ76 percent of respondents reported that science plays a very impor
-tant role in our health, and 78 percent reported that science plays a very 
important role in our competitiveness (Research!America, 2007).
The Virginia Commonwealth University 2004 Life Sciences Survey also 
found that most Americans have a positive view of research. In this study, 
90 percent of respondents agreed that developments in science have made 
society better; 92 percent reported that ﬁscienti˜c research is essential for 
improving the quality of human livesﬂ; and 84 percent agreed that ﬁthe 
bene˜ts of scienti˜c research outweigh the harmful resultsﬂ (NSF, 2006).
Overall Experience When Participating in Research
Little is known about the attitudes of individuals who have actually 
participated in medical research. However, the available evidence suggests 
that most research participants have positive experiences. A recent Harris 
Poll found that 13 percent of respondents had participated in some form 
of health research, and 87 percent of those felt comfortable about their 
experience (Westin, 2007). In a study focused on cancer, 93 percent of 
respondents who participated in research reported it as a very positive expe
-rience; 76 percent said they would recommend participation in a clinical 
trial to someone with cancer. Most physicians surveyed in this study stated 
that they believe clinical trial participants receive the best possible care, 
and have outcomes at least as good as patients receiving standard cancer 
treatment (Comis et al., 2000). Another study found that 55 percent of indi
-viduals who participated in a research study would be willing to participate 
again in a future research study (Trauth et al., 2000).
Willingness to Participate in Research
Public opinion surveys indicate that a majority of Americans are 
willing to participate in clinical research studies. In 2001, a compilation 
of studies commissioned by Research!America found that 63 percent of 
Americans would be willing to participate in a clinical research study 
 
(Woolley and Propst, 2005). This percentage has remained stable over 
time. A 2007 Research!America survey also found that 63 percent of 
Americans would be very likely to participate in a clinical research study 
if asked (Research!America, 2007); 68 percent of respondents reported 
that their desire to improve their own health or the health of others was a 
major factor in deciding whether to participate in a clinical research project 
(Research!America, 2007).
Other surveys also suggest that willingness to participate in research 
focused on speci˜c diseases is quite high. In one survey, the percentage of 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 121
respondents indicating a willingness to participate in a medical research 
study was 88 percent for cancer, 86 percent for heart disease, 83 percent for 
a noncurable fatal disease, 79 percent for addiction, 78 percent for depres
-sion, and 76 percent for schizophrenia (Trauth et al., 2000). Respondents 
with greater knowledge of how research is conducted were more willing to 
participate (Trauth et al., 2000). Another study found that 8 of 10 Ameri
-cans would consider participating in a clinical trial if faced with cancer. 
More than two-thirds of respondents said they would be willing to partici
-pate in a clinical trial designed to prevent cancer (Comis et al., 2000).
Americans also seem to be very supportive of medical research that 
relies on genetic data. A 2007 survey found that 93 percent of Americans 
supported the use of genetic testing if the information collected is used by 
researchers to ˜nd new ways to diagnose, prevent, or treat disease (Genetics 
& Public Policy Center, 2007). Two separate surveys found that 66 percent 
of Americans would be willing to donate their genetic material for medical 
research (Genetics & Public Policy Center, 2007; Research!America, 2007). 
However, despite this apparent positive view of genetic research, 92 percent 
of Americans reported they were concerned about their genetic information 
being used in a ﬁharmful wayﬂ (Genetics & Public Policy Center, 2007).
Many factors, in addition to concerns about privacy and con˜dential
-ity (Genetics & Public Policy Center, 2007; Research!America, 2007), may 
in˚uence an individual™s willingness to participate in a medical research 
study. The Trauth survey found that individuals with higher income levels, 
with a college or graduate degree, or with children were more likely to 
participate in research. Age affected willingness to participate: 57 percent of 
respondents ages 18Œ34 were willing to participate in research, but only 31 
percent of respondents ages 65 or older were willing (Trauth et al., 2000).
Other factors that potentially in˚uence an individual™s willingness to 
participate in research are race and ethnicity. It is well documented that 
minorities participate in health research at a much lower percentage than 
white Americans. Many cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic barriers 
could be responsible for this difference (Giuliano et al., 2000), and study 
results have been variable on this issue. Several studies suggest that the low 
participation rates by racial and ethnic minority groups are due to their 
strong distrust of the medical research community compared to the general 
population (Braunstein et al., 2008; Corbie-Smith et al., 1999; Farmer et 
al., 2007; Grady et al., 2006; Shavers et al., 2002).
However, other evidence suggests that the low percentage of minorities 
participating in research is related to minority groups™ lack of access to the 
research community (Brown et al., 2000; Wendler et al., 2006; Williams 
and Corbie-Smith, 2006). Thus, it is likely that the low number of minority 
individuals participating in medical research is at least partly due to recruit
-ment techniques that are ineffective for minority populations.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
The survey that focused on cancer research suggests that one of the 
main reasons why individuals do not participate in research is lack of 
knowledge about the availability of clinical trials. In a survey of nearly 
6,000 cancer patients, 85 percent said they were unaware of the opportu
-nity to participate in a clinical trial. Respondents who did participate said 
they did so because of one of the following beliefs: (1) trials provide access 
to the best quality of care (76 percent), (2) their participation would bene˜t 
future cancer patients (72 percent), (3) they would receive newer and better 
treatment (63 percent), and (4) participation would get them more care and 
attention (40 percent) (Comis et al., 2000).
A recommendation from a physician can also impact participation. In 
the United States, 48 percent of respondents to one survey reported that a 
physicians™ recommendation would be a major factor in deciding whether 
to take part in a research study. Nearly three-fourths of respondents also 
cited an institution™s reputation as a key factor to consider when deciding 
whether to participate in a study (Research!America, 2007). Twenty percent 
of respondents in an Italian public survey indicated that the presence of a 
physician as a reference during a research study in˚uenced their willingness 
to participate (Mosconi et al., 2005).
In sum, surveys indicate that the vast majority of Americans have a 
positive view of medical research, believe that research is bene˜cial to soci
-ety, and are interested in health research ˜ndings. Although little is known 
about the attitudes of individuals who have actually participated in medical 
research, the available evidence suggests that most research participants 
have positive experiences. Surveys also suggest that a majority of Americans 
are willing to participate in clinical research studies. Similar to the ˜ndings 
in Chapter 2, surveys indicate that many factors, in addition to concerns 
about privacy and con˜dentiality, can potentially in˚uence an individual™s 
willingness to participate in medical research, including the type of research 
and personal characteristics such as health status, age, education, and race. 
Notably, respondents with greater knowledge of how research is conducted 
were more willing to participate in research.
OVERSIGHT OF HEALTH RESEARCH
Historical Development of Federal Protections 
of Health Information in Research
The development of international codes, federal legislation, and federal 
regulation of human subjects often occurred in response to past abuses in 
biomedical experiments (reviewed by Pritts, 2008) (Box 3-3). The most 
well-known examples included (1) reported abuses of concentration camp 
prisoners in Nazi experiments during World War II, and (2) the Tuskegee 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 123
syphilis study begun in 1932, in which researchers withheld effective treat
-ment from affected African American men long after a cure for syphilis was 
found. Most of the current principles and standards for conducting human 
subjects research were developed primarily to protect against the physical 
and mental harms that can result from these types of biomedical experi
-ments. Therefore, they focus on the principles of autonomy and consent. 
Although the standards apply to research that uses identi˜able health infor
-mation, research based solely on information is not their primary focus.
In the United States, perhaps the most in˚uential inquiry into the pro
-tection of human subjects in research was the Belmont Report. The Belmont 
principles have been elaborated on in many settings, and served as the basis 
for formal regulation of human subjects research in the United States. In 
general, states do not directly regulate the activity of most researchers 
(Burris et al., 2003). However, the Belmont Commission™s recommendations 
were re˚ected in the Department of Health and Human Services™ (HHS™s) 
Policy for Protection of Human Subjects Research, Subpart A of 45 C.F.R. 
46 (ﬁSubpart Aﬂ) in 1979.
9 These protections were considered a bench
-mark policy for federal agencies, and in December 1981, the President™s 
Commission for the Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical 
and Behavioral Research recommended
10
 that all federal departments and 
agencies adopt the HHS regulations.
11
In 1982, the President™s Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy 
appointed a Committee for the Protection of Human Research Subjects 
to respond to the recommendations of the President™s commission. The 
committee agreed that uniformity of federal regulations on human subjects 
protection is desirable to eliminate unnecessary regulations and to promote 
increased understanding by institutions that conduct federally supported 
or regulated research. As a result, in 1991, other federal departments and 
agencies joined HHS in adopting a uniform set of rules for the protection of 
human subjects of research, identical to Subpart A of 45 C.F.R. 46, which 
is now informally known as the ﬁCommon Rule.ﬂ Eighteen federal agencies 
have now adopted the Common Rule as their own respective regulations.
Overview of the Common Rule
The Common Rule governs most federally funded research conducted 
on human beings and aims to ensure that the rights of human subjects 
9 
The Department of Health, Education and Welfare (now HHS) had previously issued policy 
and guidance on the protection of human subjects. See Williams (2005).
10
 In its report ﬁFirst Biennial Report on the Adequacy and Uniformity of Federal Rules and 
Policies, and their Implementation, for the Protection of Human Subjects in Biomedical and 
Behavioral Research, Protecting Human Subjects.ﬂ
11
 45 C.F.R. part 46 (2005).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX 3-3
 The Basis for Human Subjects Protections 
in Biomedical Research
Nuremberg Code
 The Nuremberg Code, created by the international community after the Nazi 
War Crimes Trials, is generally seen as the ˜rst codi˜cation of ethical norms 
governing experimentation on humans. Although it did not carry the force of law, 
the Nuremberg Code was the ˜rst international document to advocate voluntary 
participation and informed consent, which is partially based on autonomy. The 
Code established a set of ethical standards for physical experiments on humans 
emphasizing the following principles:
Ł The need to obtain the informed consent of the research subject;
Ł The duty to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering and injury; 
and
Ł The requirement that any and all risks associated with the research must be 
outweighed by associated bene˜ts.
Declaration of Helsinki
 In 1964, The World Medical Association adopted the ﬁEthical Principles for 
Medical Research Involving Human Subjects,ﬂ also known as the ﬁDeclaration of 
Helsinki,ﬂ noting that all ﬁ[m]edical research is subject to ethical standards that 
promote respect for all human beings and protect their health and rights.ﬂ The 
Declaration, which sets forth ethical principles to provide guidance to investiga
-tors and participants in human subjects research, made expressly clear that 
ethical standards on medical research encompass the protection of research on 
identi˜able human material or identi˜able data. The Declaration reiterated the 
principles of informed consent found in the Nuremberg Code and ampli˜ed them 
by, among other things, requiring that all experimental research be reviewed by 
an independent body. The principles are based on the general concept that it is 
the duty of medical researchers ﬁto protect the life, health, privacy, and dignity 
of the human subject.ﬂ The principles also require that ﬁ[e]very precaution [is 
made] . . . to respect the privacy of the subject, the con˜dentiality of the patient™s 
information and to minimize the impact of the study on the subject™s physical and 
mental integrity and on the personality of the subject.ﬂ Thus, the Helsinki Declara
-tion promotes the concepts of respect, autonomy, privacy, and con˜dentiality.
Belmont Report
 In 1979, the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of 
Biomedical and Behavioral Research, created largely in response to the ethical 
breaches of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, issued the ﬁBelmont Reportﬂ to guide 
the resolution of ethical problems arising from research involving human subjects. 
The report ˜rst distinguished between practice (interventions designed solely to 
enhance the well-being of a patient) and research (activities intended to test a 
hypothesis and gain generalizable knowledge) and concluded that when elements 
of research are present in an activity, that activity should undergo review for the 
protection of human subjects. The Commission then identi˜ed and de˜ned three 
overarching principles applicable to research involving human subjects: respect 
for persons, bene˜cence, and justice. Two of these principles, respect for persons 
and bene˜cence, are particularly relevant to privacy. The principle of respect for 
persons encompasses the requirement to treat competent adults as autonomous 
individuals capable of making their own choices. In application, this requires that 
subjects, to the degree that they are capable, be given the opportunity to choose 
what will or will not happen to them. Informed consent is closely tied to the princi
-ple of respect for persons because it provides information about potential bene˜ts 
and risks, including how personal data will be protected, and requires comprehen
-sion of those risks and voluntariness to participate. The principle of respect for 
persons also seeks to protect persons with diminished autonomy, such as children 
and persons with serious mental disabilities. The principle of bene˜cence consists 
of the obligations to not harm the subject and to maximize possible bene˜ts and 
minimize possible harms. Such an assessment should consider not only physical 
and psychological harms, but also social and economic harms, including breach 
of privacy. These harms are to be weighed against the anticipated bene˜t to the 
subject (if any) and the anticipated bene˜t to society. Although not as salient to 
questions of privacy and research, the third Belmont principle of justice is also 
worth emphasizing. Justice requires that the bene˜ts and burdens of human 
subjects research be fairly allocated. It therefore protects the least advantaged in 
society.
SOURCES: Furrow et al. (2004); HEW (1979); Pritts (2008); Williams (2005); 
WMA (1964).
are protected during the course of a research project. The Common Rule 
stresses the importance of individual autonomy and consent; requires inde
-pendent review of research by an Institutional Review Board (IRB); and 
seeks to minimize physical and mental harm. Privacy and con˜dentiality 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 125
BOX 3-3
 The Basis for Human Subjects Protections 
in Biomedical Research
Nuremberg Code
 The Nuremberg Code, created by the international community after the Nazi 
War Crimes Trials, is generally seen as the ˜rst codi˜cation of ethical norms 
governing experimentation on humans. Although it did not carry the force of law, 
the Nuremberg Code was the ˜rst international document to advocate voluntary 
participation and informed consent, which is partially based on autonomy. The 
Code established a set of ethical standards for physical experiments on humans 
emphasizing the following principles:
Ł The need to obtain the informed consent of the research subject;
Ł The duty to avoid all unnecessary physical and mental suffering and injury; 
and
Ł The requirement that any and all risks associated with the research must be 
outweighed by associated bene˜ts.
Declaration of Helsinki
 In 1964, The World Medical Association adopted the ﬁEthical Principles for 
Medical Research Involving Human Subjects,ﬂ also known as the ﬁDeclaration of 
Helsinki,ﬂ noting that all ﬁ[m]edical research is subject to ethical standards that 
promote respect for all human beings and protect their health and rights.ﬂ The 
Declaration, which sets forth ethical principles to provide guidance to investiga
-tors and participants in human subjects research, made expressly clear that 
ethical standards on medical research encompass the protection of research on 
identi˜able human material or identi˜able data. The Declaration reiterated the 
principles of informed consent found in the Nuremberg Code and ampli˜ed them 
by, among other things, requiring that all experimental research be reviewed by 
an independent body. The principles are based on the general concept that it is 
the duty of medical researchers ﬁto protect the life, health, privacy, and dignity 
of the human subject.ﬂ The principles also require that ﬁ[e]very precaution [is 
made] . . . to respect the privacy of the subject, the con˜dentiality of the patient™s 
information and to minimize the impact of the study on the subject™s physical and 
mental integrity and on the personality of the subject.ﬂ Thus, the Helsinki Declara
-tion promotes the concepts of respect, autonomy, privacy, and con˜dentiality.
Belmont Report
 In 1979, the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of 
Biomedical and Behavioral Research, created largely in response to the ethical 
breaches of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study, issued the ﬁBelmont Reportﬂ to guide 
the resolution of ethical problems arising from research involving human subjects. 
The report ˜rst distinguished between practice (interventions designed solely to 
enhance the well-being of a patient) and research (activities intended to test a 
hypothesis and gain generalizable knowledge) and concluded that when elements 
of research are present in an activity, that activity should undergo review for the 
protection of human subjects. The Commission then identi˜ed and de˜ned three 
overarching principles applicable to research involving human subjects: respect 
for persons, bene˜cence, and justice. Two of these principles, respect for persons 
and bene˜cence, are particularly relevant to privacy. The principle of respect for 
persons encompasses the requirement to treat competent adults as autonomous 
individuals capable of making their own choices. In application, this requires that 
subjects, to the degree that they are capable, be given the opportunity to choose 
what will or will not happen to them. Informed consent is closely tied to the princi
-ple of respect for persons because it provides information about potential bene˜ts 
and risks, including how personal data will be protected, and requires comprehen
-sion of those risks and voluntariness to participate. The principle of respect for 
persons also seeks to protect persons with diminished autonomy, such as children 
and persons with serious mental disabilities. The principle of bene˜cence consists 
of the obligations to not harm the subject and to maximize possible bene˜ts and 
minimize possible harms. Such an assessment should consider not only physical 
and psychological harms, but also social and economic harms, including breach 
of privacy. These harms are to be weighed against the anticipated bene˜t to the 
subject (if any) and the anticipated bene˜t to society. Although not as salient to 
questions of privacy and research, the third Belmont principle of justice is also 
worth emphasizing. Justice requires that the bene˜ts and burdens of human 
subjects research be fairly allocated. It therefore protects the least advantaged in 
society.
SOURCES: Furrow et al. (2004); HEW (1979); Pritts (2008); Williams (2005); 
WMA (1964).
protections, although not de˜ned in a detailed and prescriptive manner, are 
included as important components of risk in research.
The framework for achieving the goal of protecting human subjects 
is based on two foundational requirements: the informed consent of the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
research participant and the review of proposed research by an IRB. 
This section describes some of the basic parameters of the Common Rule 
(reviewed by Pritts, 2008). Particular provisions that interact with the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule are described in more detail in Chapter 4.
Scope of the Common Rule
In general, the Common Rule applies only to research on human 
subjects that is supported by the federal government.
12
 As noted previ
-ously, research is de˜ned as ﬁa systematic investigation, including research 
development, testing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to 
generalizable knowledge.ﬂ
13
Under the Common Rule, a ﬁhuman subjectﬂ is de˜ned as ﬁa living 
individual about whom an investigator . . . conducting research obtains (1) 
Data through intervention or interaction with the individual, or (2) Identi˜
-able private information.ﬂ Private information is considered to be personally 
identi˜able if the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained by 
the investigator or associated with the information.
The Common Rule applies to most human subjects research conducted 
using federal funds, but its in˚uence is broader because most institutions 
that accept federal funds sign an agreement (a Federalwide Assurance 
or FWA) with HHS to abide by the Common Rule requirements in all 
research, regardless of funding source. Nonetheless, some privately funded 
human subjects research is conducted outside the purview of federal regu
-lation (Goldman and Choy, 2001; Williams, 2005). Companies and other 
organizations may voluntarily choose to apply the Common Rule to their 
research projects, and many do. However, research projects in which com
-pliance is voluntary are not subject to oversight or disciplinary action by 
HHS (Goldman and Choy, 2001; Williams, 2005).
Informed Consent
14
The Common Rule requires that a researcher obtain informed consent 
(usually in writing) from a person before he/she can be admitted to a study 
(Williams, 2005). Informed consent is sought through a process in which 
a person learns key facts about a research study, including the potential 
risks and bene˜ts, so that he/she can then agree voluntarily to take part or 
decide against it.
12
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.101 (2005).
13
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.102(d) (2005).
14
 This section on informed consent is based largely on a Congressional Research Service 
report (Williams, 2005), as adapted by Pritts (2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 127
The Common Rule informed consent regulations focus primarily on the 
elements and documentation of informed consent rather than on the process 
used to obtain it. As to the process, the regulations require that informed 
consent be sought only under circumstances that provide the prospective 
subject with adequate opportunity to consider whether to participate. The 
Common Rule requires that information pertaining to informed consent 
be given in language understandable to the subject, and that the consent 
does not imply that the subject is giving up his/her legal rights or that the 
investigator is released from liability for negligence during the conduct of 
the study.
15
The Common Rule also speci˜es a number of elements that must be 
provided when informed consent is sought. These elements include:
Ł an explanation of the purposes of the research,
Ł the expected duration of the subject™s participation,
Ł the potential risks and bene˜ts of the research,
Ł how con˜dentiality will be maintained,
Ł the fact that participation is strictly voluntary, and
Ł who the subject can contact to answer questions about the study 
or about his/her rights as a research participant.
In certain limited circumstances, the Common Rule allows an informed 
consent to be for unspeci˜ed future research. For example, under the Com
-mon Rule an informed consent can be used to obtain a person™s permission 
to study personally identi˜able information maintained in a repository for 
future, unspeci˜ed research purposes (HHS, 2003).
For the most part, the required elements of an informed consent 
address all types of research, although some are more relevant to bio
-medical research (e.g., the consent must include a disclosure of appropri
-ate alternative procedures or courses of treatment, if any, that might be 
advantageous to the subject). One required element of informed consent 
is particularly relevant to research involving personally identi˜able health 
information. The Common Rule requires an informed consent to include a 
statement describing the extent, if any, to which con˜dentiality of records 
identifying the subject will be maintained.
16
Institutional Review Boards
Adopting the principles of the Belmont Report, the Common Rule 
requires that protocols for human subjects research be reviewed by an IRB 
15
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.116 (2005).
16
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.116(b) (2005).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
(Box 3-4) before research may begin.
17
 The IRB must meet certain member
-ship requirements, including having members with different expertise and 
at least one member who is not af˜liated with the investigator™s institution. 
The Common Rule speci˜es which level of IRB review is needed for vari
-ous types of research and provides criteria for the IRB to consider during 
the review. Although the Common Rule does not specify the procedures 
an IRB must follow in its review of protocols, it does require the IRB to 
have written procedures for how it will review protocols and document 
IRB decisions.
The Common Rule requires that an IRB determine the following factors 
are satis˜ed to approve proposed research:
Ł Risks to subjects are minimized;
Ł Risks to subjects are reasonable in relation to anticipated bene˜ts, 
if any, to subjects, and the importance of the knowledge that may 
reasonably be expected to result;
Ł The selection of subjects is equitable;
Ł Informed consent will be sought in accordance with the rules and 
will be documented;
Ł When appropriate, the research plan makes adequate provision for 
monitoring the data collected to ensure the safety of subjects; and
Ł When appropriate, adequate provisions are in place to protect the 
privacy of subjects and to maintain the con˜dentiality of data.
18
An IRB may waive the requirement to obtain informed consent or 
approve an alteration of the consent form for some minimal risk research. 
The IRB may also waive the requirement for signed consent in certain 
circumstances.
19
Anonymized Data
As noted above, the Common Rule considers use of ﬁprivate identi˜
-able informationﬂ to be human subjects research. Data are considered 
personally identi˜able if the identity of the subject is or may be readily 
ascertained by the investigator or associated with the information accessed 
by the researcher.
20
 However, the Common Rule exempts from its require
-ments research that involves:
17
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.103 (2005).
18
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.111 (2005). There are additional factors if the study includes subjects 
who are likely to be vulnerable to coercion or undue in˚uence. 
19
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.116(d); 46.117(c) (2005).
20
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.102(f) (2005).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 129
BOX 3-4
 Institutional Review Boards
 According to the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) guidebook, ﬁthe IRB is an administrative body established to 
protect the rights and welfare of human research subjects recruited to participate 
in research activities conducted under the auspices of the institution with which 
it is af˜liated. The IRB has the authority to approve, require modi˜cations in, or 
disapprove all research activities that fall within its jurisdiction as speci˜ed by both 
the federal regulations and local institutional policy.ﬂ
 Therefore, IRBs have enormous responsibility in determining whether health 
research projects are planned and orchestrated in a way that minimizes or elimi
-nates the potential risk to human research participants, including direct physical 
harms as well as nonphysical harms such as breach of privacy.
 An IRB must be made up of at least ˜ve members with varying backgrounds 
who are suf˜ciently quali˜ed through experience and expertise, and the diversity 
of the members must be suf˜cient to analyze the proposed research project. The 
IRB cannot consist entirely of members from one profession. At least one member 
must be unaf˜liated with the institution conducting the research, and must not be 
part of the immediate family of someone af˜liated with the institution. Members 
cannot have con˚icts of interest with regard to the proposed research project. 
Also, there must be one member whose primary concerns are scienti˜c, and one 
member whose primary concerns are nonscienti˜c on each IRB.
SOURCE: OHRP (2008a).
[T]he collection or study of existing data, documents, records, pathological 
specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if these sources are publicly available 
or if the information is recorded by the investigator in such a manner that 
subjects cannot be identi˜ed, directly or through identi˜ers linked to the 
subjects.
21
Otherwise identi˜able data may be deidenti˜ed or ﬁanonymizedﬂ for 
purposes of the Common Rule if it is coded and certain other conditions 
are met (HHS, 2004). Under Guidance issued by the Of˜ce for Human 
Research Protection, information is ﬁcodedﬂ if identifying information 
(such as name or Social Security number) that would enable the investiga
-tor to readily ascertain the identity of the individual to whom the private 
information or specimens pertain has been replaced with a number, letter, 
symbol, or combination thereof (the code), and a key to decipher the code 
21
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.101(b)(4) (2005).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
exists, enabling linkage of the identifying information to the private infor
-mation or specimen.
Research involving only coded private information or specimens is not 
considered to involve human subjects under the Common Rule if the follow
-ing conditions are met:
Ł The private information or specimens were not collected speci˜
-cally for the currently proposed research project through an inter
-action or intervention with living individuals; and
Ł The investigator(s) cannot readily ascertain the identify of the 
individual(s) to whom the coded private information or specimens 
pertain because, for example:
Š The key to decipher the code is destroyed before the research 
begins;
Š The investigators and the holder of the key enter into an agree
-ment prohibiting the release of the key to the investigators 
under any circumstances, until the individuals are deceased;
Š IRB-approved written policies and operating procedures for 
a repository or data management center prohibit the release 
of the key to investigators under any circumstances, until the 
individuals are deceased; or
Š Other legal requirements prohibit the release of the key to the 
investigators, until the individuals are deceased.
Under this standard, when a researcher accesses or receives data that 
have been coded and does not have access to the identifying key, the 
research is not considered human subjects research and is not subject to 
the Common Rule™s requirements of informed consent or IRB review and 
approval of protocol.
Enforcement of the Common Rule
The Common Rule requirements for informed consent do not preempt 
any applicable federal, state, or local laws that require additional informa
-tion to be disclosed to a subject in order for informed consent to be legally 
effective.
22
Federal funding can be suspended or withdrawn from an institution 
when it is found to be in material violation of the Common Rule.
23
 There 
is no authority to impose penalties directly on individual researchers for 
violations. Neither does the Common Rule expressly provide a research 
22
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.116(e) (2005).
23
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.123 (2005). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 131
participant with a private right of action. It should be noted, however, 
that recent cases indicate that courts may be willing to hold an institu
-tion liable under common law negligence theories where the approved 
informed consent form is determined to be less than adequate (Shaul et 
al., 2005).
24
FDA Protection of Human Research Subjects
Some health research is also subject to FDA regulations. The FDA 
is charged by statute with ensuring the protection of the rights, safety, 
and welfare of human subjects who participate in clinical investigations
25
 involving articles subject to the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
26
 (the Act), as well as clinical investigations that support applications for 
research or marketing permits for products regulated by the FDA, including 
drugs, medical devices, and biological products for human use (Box 3-5).
In January 1981, the FDA adopted regulations governing informed 
consent of human subjects
27
 and regulations establishing standards for the 
composition, operation, and responsibilities of IRBs that review clinical 
investigations involving human subjects.
28
 At the same time, HHS adopted 
the Common Rule regulations on the protection of human research sub
-jects.
29
 The FDA™s regulations were harmonized with the Common Rule 
in 1991 to the extent permitted by statute. Key differences between FDA 
and HHS regulations include that the FDA does not allow for waiver or 
alteration of informed consent and requires that subjects be informed that 
the FDA may inspect their medical records. In addition, studies of ef˜cacy 
based solely on medical records research are not permitted to support reg
-istration. Remaining differences in the rules are due to differences in the 
statutory scope or requirements (Lee, 2000).
DISTINGUISHING
 H
EALTH
 R
ESEARCH
 FROM
 P
RACTICE
The Common Rule and Privacy Rule make a somewhat arti˜cial distinc
-tion between health research and some closely related health care practices, 
such as public health practice, quality improvement activities, program 
24
 See also 
Grimes v. Kennedy Krieger Institute
, 782 A. 2d 807 (Md. Ct. App. 2001); 
Gelsinger v. University of Pennsylvania
 (Philadelphia County Court of Common Pleas ˜led 
September 18, 2000), available at 
http://www.sskrplaw.com/links/healthcare2.htm
l.25
 The FDA has de˜ned ﬁclinical investigationﬂ to be synonymous with ﬁresearch.ﬂ
26
 The Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act Section 505(i), 507(d), or 520(g) of 21 U.S.C. 355(i), 
357(d), or 360j(g) (1972).
27
 See 21 C.F.R. part 50 (2008); 46 Fed. Reg. 8942 (1981).
28
 See 21 C.F.R. part 56 (2008); 46 Fed. Reg. 8958 (1981).
29
 See 45 C.F.R. part 46 (2005); 46 Fed. Reg. 8366 (1981).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX 3-5
 FDA Protection of Human Subjects Regulations
 The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Protection of Human Subjects Regu
-lations aim to protect the rights of human subjects enrolled in research involv
-ing products that the FDA regulates (i.e., drugs, medical devices, biologicals, 
foods, and cosmetics). For example, the regulations set out a number of steps 
researchers must go through before conducting drug research on human subjects. 
Researchers must submit a brief statement to the FDA promising that they will 
uphold ethical research standards, and identifying the Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) that will review the study prior to its start date. Sponsors of the study are 
required to submit to the FDA the results of any chemical and animal studies 
conducted on the new drug, provide the proposed study procedures for using 
human subjects, and ensure that the researchers™ designated IRB will review the 
proposed study. The FDA will then review this information to ensure that there 
are no unacceptable risks to human subjects, that the project is ethically sound, 
and that the research is likely to achieve the study™s objectives. The regulations 
give the FDA the right to request modi˜cations to the proposed study, or the right 
to reject the proposal as presenting an unacceptable risk to human subjects.
 Additionally, the FDA Protection of Human Subjects Regulations allow the FDA 
to conduct onsite inspections of IRBs to determine whether they are adhering to 
the requirements of the regulation. This portion of the regulation provides the FDA 
with the ability to examine IRB minutes, IRB written operating procedures, and 
other documents that substantiate the IRB™s review of the research project. The 
FDA can also ensure that the IRB reviewing the study meets the membership 
requirements stipulated in the regulations, and that the consent forms contain all 
the required elements and are signed by all the subjects.
SOURCE: GAO (1996).
evaluations,
30
 and utilization reviews,
31
 all of which may involve collec
-tion and analysis of personally identi˜able health information. However, 
determining which activities meet the de˜nition of ﬁresearchﬂ is a major 
30
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention de˜nes program evaluation as the ﬁsys
-tematic investigation of the merit, worth, or signi˜cance of organized public health action,ﬂ 
noting that such evaluations are ﬁsystematic ways to improve and account for public health 
actions by involving procedures that are useful, feasible, ethical, and accurate.ﬂ They can be 
based on goals, processes, outcomes, or value (
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
rr4811a1.ht
m).
31
 The Utilization Review Accreditation Commission de˜nes utilization review as ﬁthe 
evaluation of the medical necessity, appropriateness, and ef˜ciency of the use of health care 
 
services, procedures, and facilities under the provisions of the applicable health bene˜ts plansﬂ 
(http://www.urac.org/about
/).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 133
challenge for IRBs, Privacy Boards,
32
 investigators, and health care prac
-titioners because neither the regulations nor their interpretations by HHS 
provide clear guidance on how to distinguish research from activities that 
use similar techniques to analyze health information (IOM, 2000a).
It is important for IRBs and Privacy Boards to correctly distinguish 
among activities that are or are not subject to the various provisions of the 
Privacy Rule and the Common Rule. Only research requires formal IRB or 
Privacy Board review and informed consent.
33
 Inappropriate classi˜cation 
of an activity as research can make it dif˜cult or impossible for important 
health care activities, such as public health practice and quality improve
-ment, to be undertaken. On the other hand, failure to correctly identify an 
activity as research could potentially allow improper disclosure of person
-ally identi˜able health information without suf˜cient oversight.
Thus, standard criteria are urgently needed for IRBs and Privacy Boards 
to use when making distinctions between health research and related activi
-ties, and the committee recommends that HHS consult with relevant stake
-holders to develop such standard criteria.
 HHS is aware of this need, and 
created a working document titled ﬁWhat Is Research?ﬂ However, the 
work on this project apparently has been delayed for unknown reasons 
(NCURA, 2007).
34
 As described below, a number of other models have 
already been proposed to help determine whether activities should be clas
-si˜ed as research in the ˜elds of public health and quality improvement, 
and these could be instructive for developing HHS guidance. Any criteria 
adopted by HHS should be regularly evaluated to ensure that they are help
-ful and producing the desired outcomes.
The following sections describe some ongoing efforts to develop such 
criteria in the ˜elds of public health and quality improvement. The intent 
of the committee is not to endorse these particular models, but rather 
to illustrate the challenges associated with making these distinctions and 
establishing standard criteria.
Public Health Practice Versus Public Health Research
The Belmont Report de˜ned 
health practice
 as ﬁinterventions designed 
solely to enhance the well-being of the person, patient or client, and which 
have reasonable expectation of successﬂ (CDC, 1999). To apply this de˜ni
-tion to ﬁpublicﬂ health practice, the targeted bene˜ciary of the intervention 
must be expanded to include bene˜t to the community, rather than just a 
particular person. Neither the Common Rule nor the Privacy Rule provides 
32
 Another type of oversight board de˜ned by the Privacy Rule. See Chapter 4.
33
 Under the Privacy Rule, consent is referred to as authorization. See Chapter 4.
34
 Personal communication, C. Heide, Of˜ce for Civil Rights, HHS, May 29, 2008. 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
a speci˜c de˜nition for public health research; rather public health research 
is included in the general de˜nition of research. However, the Privacy Rule 
regulates public health practice differently from public health research (see 
Chapter 4).
An early model for distinguishing public health research from public 
health practice focused on the intent for which the activity was designed, 
noting that the intent of public health research is to ﬁcontribute to or gener
-ate generalizable knowledge,ﬂ while the intent of public health practice is to 
ﬁconduct programs to prevent disease and injury and improve the health of 
communitiesﬂ (Snider and Stroup, 1997). The Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention developed a similar method with an expanded assessment 
of intent. For example, the model posits that in public health research, the 
intended bene˜ts of the project extend beyond the study participants, and 
the data collected exceed the requirements for the care of the study partici
-pants. But for public health practice, the intended bene˜ts of the project are 
primarily for the participants in the activity, or for the participants™ com
-munity, and the only data collected are those needed to assess or improve a 
public health program or service, or the health of the participants and their 
community. The model also assumes that public health practice is based 
on well-established medical interventions and is nonexperimental (CDC, 
1999). However, these models both have been criticized as too subjective 
and too dependent on the opinion of the person conducting the activity 
(Gostin, 2008; Hodge, 2005).
A new, more comprehensive model incorporating much of the previous 
two was recently proposed as a more objective checklist to be used by IRBs, 
Privacy Boards, and interested parties (Hodge, 2005; Hodge and Gostin, 
2004). The foundations for this model are speci˜c de˜nitions of public 
health research: ﬁthe collection and analysis of identi˜able health data by 
a public health authority for the purpose of generating knowledge that will 
bene˜t those beyond the participating community who bear the risks of 
participation,ﬂ and public health practice: ﬁthe collection and analysis of 
identi˜able health data by a public health authority for the purpose of pro
-tecting the health of a particular community, where the bene˜ts and risks 
are primarily designed to accrue to the participating community.ﬂ
The model is based on two primary assumptions. First, the actor per
-forming the activity in question is a governmental public health of˜cial, 
agent, agency, or entity at the federal, tribal, state, or local level. Second, 
the activity in question involves the acquisition, use, or disclosure of per
-sonally identi˜able health data. The model is then divided into two stages. 
Stage 1 is applied to all activities, and can be used to distinguish practice 
from research in the easiest cases. Stage 2 is only applied to those cases 
that are hard to distinguish, and where Stage 1 failed to lead to a de˜nitive 
IRB/Privacy Board decision (Box 3-6).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 135
BOX 3-6
 A Model for Distinguishing Public 
Health Practice from Research
Stage 1
Public health practice:
Ł ﬁInvolves speci˜c legal authorization for conducting the activity as public health 
practice at the federal, state, or local levels;
Ł Includes a corresponding governmental duty to perform the activity to protect 
the public™s health;
Ł Involves direct performance or oversight by a governmental public health 
authority (or its authorized partner) and accountability to the public for its 
performance;
Ł May legitimately involve persons who did not speci˜cally volunteer to partici
-pate (i.e., they did not provide informed consent);
Ł Supported by principles of public health ethics that focus on populations while 
respecting the dignity and rights of individuals.ﬂ
Public health research:
Ł ﬁInvolves living individuals;
Ł Involves, in part, identi˜able private health information;
Ł Involves research subjects who voluntarily participate (or participate with the 
consent of their guardian) absent a waiver of informed consent;
Ł Supported by principles of research ethics that focus on the interests of indi
-viduals while balancing the communal value of research.ﬂ
Stage 2
Legal authority:
 If authorized by a speci˜c legal authority, the activity is health 
care practice. If authorized by general legal authority, analysis depends on whether 
the scope and limits of the authorization include research.
Speci˜c intent: 
The intent of research is to ﬁtest a hypothesis and seek to gen
-eralize the ˜ndings or acquired knowledge beyond the activity™s participants.ﬂ The 
intent of public health practice is ﬁto assure the conditions in which people can 
be healthy through public health efforts that are primarily aimed at prevention of 
known or suspected injuries, diseases, or other conditions, or promoting the health 
of a particular community.ﬂ If the intent of an activity meets both de˜nitions, the 
activity should follow research provisions.
Responsibility: 
In research, the principal investigator is responsible for the 
ﬁhealth, safety, and well-beingﬂ of the research participants. In public health prac
-tice, a government entity often takes that responsibility.
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Participant bene˜ts: 
In research, participants usually do not receive or expect 
any direct bene˜t from the activity. Public health practice is premised on providing 
some bene˜t to the participants or the population involved in the activity.
Experimentation:
 Research is experimental, and usually involves a no
nstandard 
intervention or data analysis. Public health practice uses ﬁstandard, accepted, and 
proven interventions to address known or suspected public health problems.ﬂ
Subject selection:
 In research, subjects are often selected randomly to ensure 
the generalizability of the results and reduce the potential for selection bias. Par
-ticipants are selected for public health practice because they have or are at risk of 
having a particular disease or condition, and can likely bene˜t from the activity.
SOURCES: Hodge (2005); Hodge and Gostin (2004). 
BOX 3-6
 Continued
Quality Improvement Versus Health Research
Quality improvement has been de˜ned as ﬁsystematic, data-guided 
activities designed to bring about immediate, positive change in the delivery 
of health care in a particular settingﬂ (Baily, 2008). Quality improvement 
activities do not require IRB or Privacy Board approval under the
 Common 
Rule or the Privacy Rule, which classify quality improvement as a compo
-nent of health care operations.
35
However, in many cases, it is dif˜cult for health care providers, IRBs, 
and Privacy Boards to determine whether a particular activity is purely 
for quality improvement, or whether it also entails research. One survey
36
 exploring opinions in the health care community about the need for IRBs 
to review various quality-related activities found that physicians conducting 
quality improvement were less likely than IRB chairs to believe that IRB 
35
 The Privacy Rule de˜nes the term ﬁhealth care operationsﬂ by listing a number of speci˜c 
activities that qualify as health care operations. These include ﬁconducting quality assessment 
and improvement activities, population-based activities relating to improving or reducing 
health care costs, and case management and care coordination.ﬂ See 45 C.F.R. § 164.501 
(2006).
36
 A total of 444 surveys were mailed to the medical directors of quality improvement and 
IRB chairs at hospitals with 400 or more beds that belong to the Council of Teaching Hos
-pitals of the Association of American Medical Colleges, and to the editors of all U.S.-based 
medical journals that publish original research and appear in the Abridged Index Medicus. 
236 surveys were returned, for a 53 percent response rate. The survey consisted of six brief 
scenarios that asked respondents to determine whether the described project needed IRB 
review and informed consent.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 137
review was required for a given hypothetical activity, or that informed con
-sent was necessary (Lindenauer et al., 2002). Recently, a highly publicized 
case has again brought the issue to the forefront for all the stakeholders 
(Box 3-7).
Some members of the health care community have proposed requir
-ing that all prospective quality improvement activities go through external 
review (Bellin and Dubler, 2001), while others have outlined speci˜c criteria 
to differentiate quality improvement activities from research.
For example, Casarett and colleagues developed a two-part test to iden
-tify quality improvement activities. The ˜rst test is whether the majority of 
BOX 3-7
 A Case Study of Quality Improvement and Research
 Peter Pronovost of Johns Hopkins University (JHU) led a quality improve
-ment effort at 103 intensive care units (ICUs) in Michigan hospitals to reduce the 
number of catheter-related bloodstream infections. This effort relied on promoting 
˜ve medical procedures recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) to reduce infection. The investigators recorded the number of 
infections that occurred at the ICU level; no data were recorded at the individual 
level.
 Prior to starting the quality improvement effort, the investigators submitted 
an application to the Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Board (IRB), and clas
-si˜ed the project as exempt from the requirements of the Common Rule. The 
IRB approved the project as exempt, and did not review the proposal further. 
After a description of the quality improvement effort was published in the 
New 
England Journal of Medicine
, the Of˜ce for Human Research Protections (OHRP) 
received a letter of complaint that this was research without IRB approval and 
without informed consent. OHRP opened a compliance oversight evaluation, and 
initially determined that the project was research and needed to go through the 
IRB review process. OHRP stated that ﬁquality improvement activities can also be 
research activitiesﬂ and that ﬁJHU failed to ensure the requirements for obtaining 
and documenting the legally effective informed consent of the subjects.ﬂ
 On February 15, 2008, OHRP reversed its initial decision, and concluded that 
this activity was a quality improvement effort and was not required to comply 
with the regulations governing human subjects research. The Michigan hospitals 
have been allowed to continue implementing and studying the effectiveness of 
the CDC-recommended procedures in ICUs, and have not been required to get 
IRB approval or informed consent. Also at this time, OHRP announced that it was 
going to review its policies on quality improvement.
SOURCE: OHRP (2008b).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
patients are expected to bene˜t directly from ﬁthe knowledge to be gainedﬂ 
from the initiative. This means that the patients must actually bene˜t from 
the 
knowledge
 learned during the evaluation, not just from being a recipi
-ent of the protocol itself. If the patients are generally expected to directly 
bene˜t from the knowledge gained during the activity, then the activity 
is quality improvement. If not, the activity is research. The second test is 
whether the participants would be subjected to additional risks or burdens, 
including the risk of privacy breach, beyond the usual clinical practice in 
order to make the results of the initiative generalizable. If yes, then the 
initiative should be reviewed as research (Casarett et al., 2000).
More recently, the Hastings Center published a report exploring the 
similarities and differences between research and quality improvement. The 
report emphasized three fundamental characteristics of quality improve
-ment and three fundamental characteristics of research. The authors argue 
that individuals have a responsibility to participate in the quality improve
-ment activities because all patients have an interest in receiving high-
quality medical care, and the success of a quality improvement activity 
depends on the cooperation of all patients. In addition, the report notes 
that quality improvement activities are a low risk to the patient, so there 
is little justi˜cation for not participating. The report also assumes that 
 
quality improvement activities are based on existing knowledge about 
human health and should lead to immediate local improvements in the 
provision of medical care.
In contrast, the report notes that participation in research should be 
voluntary, and decisions to participate should be based on researchers™ full 
disclosure of all the potential risks and bene˜ts. In addition, the authors 
assert that research is designed to create new knowledge about human 
health, rather than relying solely on existing knowledge, and that most 
research does not result in any direct bene˜t to the institution where the 
research is being conducted.
The authors concluded that IRBs are not the appropriate body for the 
ethical oversight of quality improvement activities. They argue that IRBs 
unnecessarily impose high transaction costs on these activities because 
of the difference in the way they are conducted compared to research. 
For example, in research, any changes in methodology require further 
IRB approval. In contrast, quality improvement activities involve frequent 
adjustments in the intervention, measurement, and goals of the activity 
based on the experience of the investigators. Requiring the investigator to 
revisit an IRB every time a small adjustment is needed in such an activity 
signi˜cantly increases the amount of time and effort required to conduct the 
initiative and to produce meaningful data. Also, the investigators involved 
in quality improvement activities ordinarily are already involved in the 
clinical care of participants and bear responsibility for the quality and 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 139
safety of an intervention. Thus, the authors argue that there is no need for 
the additional oversight by an IRB to protect participant safety.
Rather, the report recommended integrating the ethical oversight of 
quality improvement activities into the ongoing management of an insti
-tution™s health care delivery system, suggesting that oversight of quality 
improvement could be left with the managers of clinical care organizations, 
and that consent to receive treatment should include consent to participate 
in any quality improvement project that is minimal risk. However, the 
report stated that if a project has the characteristics of both quality improve
-ment and research, the project should be reviewed as both human subjects 
research and quality improvement (Baily et al., 2006; Lynn et al., 2007).
In response to the ongoing confusion over when quality improvement 
rises to the level of research and requires IRB review, the IOM jointly 
hosted a meeting with the American Board of Internal Medicine in May 
2008 to discuss this issue. Key members of the quality improvement com
-munity attended, and short- and long-term solutions to this problem were 
proposed. However, no written report from this meeting was produced and 
no general consensus was reached.
THE
 I
MPORTANCE
 OF
 E
FFECTIVE
 COMMUNICATION
 WITH
 THE
 P
UBLIC
As noted previously in this chapter, surveys indicate that the vast major
-ity of Americans believe that health research is important and are interested 
in the ˜ndings of research studies. The majority of patients also appear to 
be willing to participate in health research, either by volunteering for a 
study to test a medical intervention or by allowing access to their medical 
records or stored biospecimens, under certain conditions. Their willingness 
to participate depends on trust in researchers to safeguard the rights and 
well-being of patients, including assurance of privacy and con˜dentiality, 
and the belief that it is a worthwhile endeavor that warrants their involve
-ment. Yet patients often lack information about how research is conducted, 
and are rarely informed about research results that may have a direct 
impact on their health. The committee™s recommendations in this section 
are intended to address both the public™s desire for more information about 
health research and to help ful˜ll two of the committees overarching goals 
of the report: (1) improving the privacy and security of health information, 
and (2) improving the effectiveness of health research.
Disseminating Health Research Results
Ethicists have long suggested greater community involvement in health 
research studies, including more communication about research results 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
(reviewed by Shalowitz and Miller, 2008a,b). In addition, the IOM commit
-tee identi˜ed transparencyŠthe responsibility to disclose clearly how and 
why personally identi˜able information is being collectedŠas an important 
component of comprehensive privacy protections. A previous IOM report 
also recommended improved communication with the public and research 
participants to ensure that the protection process is open and accessible to 
all interested parties (IOM, 2002). Effective communication would build 
the public™s trust of the research community and is consistent with the 
principles of fair information practices.
When patients consent to the use of their medical records in a particu
-lar study, health researchers should make greater efforts at the conclusion of 
the study to inform study participants about the results, and the relevance 
and importance of those results. 
Learning about clinically relevant ˜ndings 
from a study in which a patient has participated could make patients feel 
more integrated into the process and could encourage more to participate 
in future studies. A recent United Kingdom report on the use of personal 
data in health research concluded that public involvement in research is 
necessary for the success of information-based research, and that a public 
informed about the value of research is likely to have greater enthusiasm 
and con˜dence in research and the research community (AMS, 2006). 
Moreover, direct feedback with study participants could lead to improved 
health care for the individuals if the results indicate that an altered course 
of care is warranted.
Nonetheless, there are multiple impediments, beyond cost, to providing 
meaningful feedback to participants. A summary of the results alone, while 
necessary and reasonable, can be seen as a token, and also raises questions 
about issues such as how best to write summaries, the stage at which results 
should be disseminated, and how to present research with uninformative 
outcomes. For example, one recent study found that sharing results directly 
with study participants was met with overwhelmingly favorable reactions 
from patients, but the study also revealed some obstacles (Partridge et al., 
2008). In a survey of women who had participated in a randomized trial 
of breast cancer therapy and had received a summary of the study results 
by mail, 95 percent reported that they were glad they received the results. 
Most respondents interpreted the results correctly, although incorrect inter
-pretation of the results was associated with increased anxiety, as was dis
-satisfaction with treatment.
Although some guidelines for providing and explaining study results 
to research participants have been proposed, they differ in details because 
limited data are available on this subject, and thus standards are lacking 
(Partridge and Winer, 2002; Partridge et al., 2008; Shalowitz and Miller, 
2008b; Zarin and Tse, 2008). Because transparency is best achieved by 
providing graded levels of information and guidance to interested parties 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 141
(IOM, 2002), it will be important to develop effective and ef˜cient ways 
to communicate with various sectors of the population. A commitment to 
the principles of ﬁplain languageﬂ
37
 will be important. Broader adoption of 
electronic medical records may also be helpful in accomplishing this goal.
Research Registries
One way to make information about research studies more broadly 
available to the public is through registration of trials and other studies 
in public databases. 
HHS should encourage such registration of trials and 
other studies, particularly when research is conducted with an IRB/Privacy 
Board approved waiver of consent or authorization 
(see Chapter 4). Numer
-ous clinical trial registries already exist, and registration has increased in 
recent years (reviewed by Zarin and Tse, 2008). In 2000, the National 
Library of Medicine established a clinical trials registry (ClinicalTrials.gov), 
which has expanded to include information from several other trial regis
-tries and to serve as the FDA-required site for submissions about clinical 
trials subject to the FDA databank requirement. The FDA Amendments Act 
of 2007
38
 expanded the scope of required registrations at ClinicalTrials.gov 
and provided the ˜rst federally funded trials results database. It mandates 
registrations of controlled clinical investigations, except for Phase I trials, 
of drugs, biologics, and devices subject to FDA regulation.
A policy of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors 
(ICMJE), adopted in fall 2005, also requires prospective trial registration 
as a precondition for publication (DeAngelis et al., 2004). This policy led 
to a 73 percent increase in trial registrations of all intervention types from 
around the world (Zarin et al., 2005). Nearly 45,000 trials had been reg
-istered by fall 2007.
However, although the development of such registries is an important 
˜rst step toward providing high-quality clinical trial information to the 
public, no centralized system currently exists to disseminate information 
about clinical trials of drugs or other interventions, making it dif˜cult 
for consumers and their health care providers to identify ongoing studies. 
The current statutory requirements for registration and data reporting 
in the United States are not as broad as the transnational policies of the 
ICMJE or the World Health Organization, which call for the registration 
of all interventional studies in human beings regardless of intervention type 
(Laine et al., 2007; Sim et al., 2006). Moreover, noninterventional stud
-ies, such as observational studies that play an increasingly critical role in 
biomedical research, are not generally included in these databases. Because 
37
 See http://plainlanguage.gov/index.cfm.
38
 FDA, Public Law 110Œ85 § 801 (2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
many noninterventional studies are conducted with an IRB/Privacy Board 
approved waiver of consent or authorization, including those studies in a 
registry could be an important method for increasing public knowledge of 
such studies.
Informing the Public About the Methods and Value of Research
As noted previously, clinical trials are the most visible of the various 
types of health research, but a great deal of information-based health 
research entails analysis of thousands of patient records to better under
-stand human diseases, to determine treatment effectiveness, and to identify 
adverse side effects of therapies. This form of research is likely to increase in 
frequency as the availability of electronic records continues to expand. As 
we move toward the goal of personalized medicine, research results will be 
even more likely to be directly relevant to patients, but more study subjects 
will be necessary to derive meaningful results.
However, many patients probably are not aware that their medical 
records are being used in information-based research. For example, the 
recent study that used focus groups to examine the views of veterans 
toward the use of medical records in research found that the majority of 
participants (75 percent) were not aware that ﬁunder some circumstances, 
[their] medical records could be used in some research studies without 
[their] permission,ﬂ despite the fact that a notice of privacy practices, which 
included a statement that such research could occur, had been mailed to 
all participants less than a year prior to the study (Damschroder et al., 
2007).
Moreover, surveys show that many patients desire not only notice, but 
also the opportunity to decide whether to consent to such research with 
medical records. Those surveys further indicate that patients who wish to be 
asked for consent for each study are most concerned about the potentially 
detrimental affects of inappropriate disclosure of their personally identi˜
-able health information, including discrimination in obtaining health or life 
insurance or employment.
As noted in Chapter 2, strengthening security protections of health data 
should reduce the risk of security breaches and their potential negative con
-sequences, and thus should help to alleviate patient concerns in this regard. 
But educating patients about how health research is conducted, monitored, 
and reported on could also help to ease patient concerns about privacy and 
increase patients™ trust in the research community, which as noted above is 
important for the public™s continued participation in health research. For 
example, datasets are most often provided to researchers without direct 
identi˜ers such as name and Social Security number. Furthermore, identi
-˜ers are not included in publications about research results. Also, under 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 143
both the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule, a waiver of consent and 
authorization is possible only under the supervision of an IRB or Privacy 
Board, and a waiver is granted only when the research entails minimal risk 
and when obtaining individual consent and authorization is impracticable 
(see the previous section and also Chapter 4). Finally, professional ethics 
dictate that researchers safeguard data and respect privacy.
Conveying the value of medical records research to patients will be 
important. Surveys show that people are more supportive of research that 
is relevant to them and their loved ones. At the same time, educational 
efforts should stress the negative impact of incomplete datasets on research 
˜ndings. Representative samples are essential to ensure the validity and 
generalizability of health research (Box 3-8), but datasets will not repre
-sent the entire population if some people withhold access to their health 
information.
In addition, an educated public could also decrease the potential for 
biased research samples. A universal requirement for consent or authoriza
-tion in medical records research leads to incomplete datasets, and thus to 
biased results and inaccurate conclusions. Some large medical institutions 
with a strong research history and reputation (e.g., Mayo Clinic) can obtain 
authorization and consent rates as high as 80 percent, but the 20 percent 
BOX 3-8
 Selection Bias in Health Research
 When researchers are required to obtain consent or authorization to access 
each individual™s medical record for a research study, it is likely that individuals™ 
willingness to grant access will not be random, and will vary in a way that may 
bias the study resultsŠa phenomenon known as selection bias. A study sample 
is biased if certain members are underrepresented or overrepresented relative to 
others in the population. A biased sample causes problems because any statistic 
computed from that sample has the potential to be consistently erroneous. The 
bias can lead to an over- or underrepresentation of the corresponding parameter 
being studied in the population. Typically this causes measures of statistical sig
-ni˜cance to appear much stronger than they are, but it is also possible to cause 
completely illusory artifacts. In either case, conclusions drawn from a biased 
sample are likely to be invalid. The requirement to obtain consent or authoriza
-tion may lead to a biased study sample because those who decline to participate 
may be more or less likely than average to have a particular health problem. This 
may be especially problematic if the research topic entails sensitive or potentially 
embarrassing information, such as HIV infection.
SOURCES: Casarett et al. (2005); Jacobsen et al. (1999).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
who refuse have distinct demographic and health characteristics. In fact, 
even a refusal rate of less than 5 percent can create selection bias in the data 
(Jacobsen et al., 1999; see Chapter 5 for more detail). Conveying to the 
public the importance of health care improvements derived from medical 
records research and stressing the negative impact of incomplete datasets 
on research ˜ndings may increase the public™s participation in research and 
their willingness to support information-based research that is conducted 
with IRB or Privacy Board oversight, under a waiver of patient consent or 
authorization.
Numerous examples of important research ˜ndings from medical 
records research would not have been possible if direct patient consent and 
authorization were always required (Box 3-1). For example, analysis of 
medical records showed that infants exposed to diethylstilbesterol (DES) 
during the ˜rst trimester of pregnancy had an increased risk of breast, 
vaginal, and cervical cancer as well as reproductive anomalies as adults. 
Similarly, studies of medical records led to the discovery that folic acid 
supplementation during pregnancy can prevent neural tube defects.
Thus, HHS and the health research community should work to edu
-cate the public about how research is done and the value it provides.
 All 
stakeholders, including professional organizations, nonpro˜t funders, and 
patient organizations, have different interests and responsibilities to make 
sure that their constituencies are well informed. For example, the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology and the American Heart Association already 
have some online resources to help patients gather information about 
research that may be relevant to their conditions. But coordination and 
identi˜cation of best practices by HHS would be helpful, and research is 
needed to identify which segments of the population would be receptive to 
and bene˜t from various types of information about how research is done 
and its value in order to create and implement an effective plan.
Greater use of community-based participatory research, in which 
 
community-based organizations or groups bring community members into 
the research process as partners to help design studies and disseminate 
the knowledge gained,
39
 could help achieve this goal. These groups help 
researchers to recruit research participants by using the knowledge of the 
community to understand health problems and to design activities that 
the community is likely to value. They also inform community members 
about how the research is done and what comes out of it, with the goal of 
providing immediate community bene˜ts from the results when possible.
39
 See http://www.ahrq.gov/research/cbprrole.htm.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 145
CONCLUSIONS
 AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on its review of the information described in this chapter, the 
committee agreed on a second overarching principle to guide the formation 
of recommendations. The committee af˜rms the importance of maintaining 
and improving health research effectiveness. Research discoveries are central 
to achieving the goal of extending the quality of healthy lives. Research into 
causes of disease, methods for prevention, techniques for diagnosis, and 
new approaches to treatment has increased life expectancy, reduced infant 
mortality, limited the toll of infectious diseases, and improved outcomes 
for patients with heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and other chronic diseases. 
Patient-oriented clinical research that tests new ideas makes rapid medical 
progress possible. Today, the rate of discovery is accelerating, and we are at 
the precipice of a remarkable period of investigative promise made possible 
by new knowledge about the genetic underpinnings of disease. Genomic 
research is opening new possibilities for preventing illness and for develop
-ing safer, more effective medical care that may eventually be tailored for 
speci˜c individuals. Further advances in relating genetic information to 
predispositions to disease and responses to treatments will require the use 
of large amounts of existing health-related information and stored tissue 
specimens. The increasing use of electronic medical records will further 
facilitate the generation of new knowledge through research and acceler
-ate the pace of discovery. These efforts will require broad participation of 
patients in research and broad data sharing to ensure that the results are 
valid and applicable to different segments of the population. Collaborative 
partnerships among communities of patients, their physicians, and teams 
of researchers to gain new scienti˜c knowledge will bring tangible bene˜ts 
for people in this country and around the world.
Surveys indicate that the majority of Americans believe that health 
research is important, are interested in the ˜ndings of research studies, and 
are willing to participate in health research. But patients often lack infor
-mation about how research is conducted and are rarely informed about 
research results that may have a direct impact on their health. Effective 
communication could build the public™s trust of the research community, 
which is important because trust is necessary for the public™s continued 
participation in research. Moreover, direct feedback could lead to improved 
health care for study participants if the results indicate that an altered 
course of care is warranted.
Thus, the committee recommends that when patients consent to the 
use of their medical records in a particular study, health researchers should 
make greater efforts when the study ends to inform study participants about 
the results, and the relevance and importance of those results.
 Broader adop
-tion of electronic health records may be helpful in accomplishing this goal, 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
but standards and guidelines for providing and explaining study results to 
research participants or various sectors of the public are needed.
HHS should also encourage registration of trials and other studies in 
public databases, particularly when research is conducted with an IRB/
Privacy Board approved waiver of consent or authorization, as a way to 
make information about research studies more broadly available to the 
public.
 Numerous clinical trial registries already exist, and registration has 
increased in recent years, but no centralized system currently exists for dis
-seminating information about clinical trials of drugs or other interventions, 
making it dif˜cult for consumers and their health care providers to identify 
ongoing studies. Moreover, noninterventional studies, such as observational 
studies that play an increasingly critical role in biomedical research, are not 
generally included in these databases. Because many noninterventional stud
-ies are conducted with an IRB/Privacy Board approved waiver of consent 
or authorization, including such studies in a registry could be an important 
method for increasing public knowledge of those studies.
Interventional clinical trials are the most visible of the various types 
of health research, but a great deal of information-based health research 
entails
 analysis of thousands of patient records to better understand human 
diseases, to determine treatment effectiveness, and to identify adverse side 
effects of therapies. This form of research is likely to increase in frequency 
as the availability of electronic health records continues to expand. As we 
move toward the goal of personalized medicine, research results will be 
even more likely to be directly relevant to patients, but more study partici
-pants will be necessary to derive meaningful results.
However, many patients are likely not aware that their medical records 
are being used in information-based research, and surveys show that many 
patients desire not only notice, but also the opportunity to decide about 
whether to consent to such research with medical records. As noted in 
Chapter 2, strengthening security protections of health data should reduce 
the risk of security breaches and their potential negative consequences, and 
thus should help to alleviate patient concerns in this regard. But educating 
patients about how health research is conducted, monitored, and reported 
could also increase patients™ trust in the research community. 
Thus, HHS 
and the health research community should work to educate the public 
about how research is done.
It will also be important for HHS and researchers to convey the value 
of health care improvements derived from medical records research, and 
to stress the negative impact of incomplete datasets on research ˜ndings. 
Representative samples are essential to ensure the validity and generalizabil
-ity of health research, but datasets will not be representative of the entire 
population if some people withhold access to their health information. A 
universal requirement for consent or authorization in information-based 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 147
research may lead to incomplete datasets, and thus to biased results and 
inaccurate conclusions. Numerous examples of important research ˜ndings 
from medical records research would not have been possible if direct patient 
consent and authorization were always required.
To ensure that bene˜cial health research and related activities continue 
to be undertaken with appropriate oversight under federal regulations, it 
will be important for HHS to also provide more guidance on how to distin
-guish the various activities. The Privacy Rule makes a distinction between 
health research and some closely related endeavors, such as public health 
and quality improvement activities, which also may involve collection and 
analysis of personally identi˜able health information. Under the Privacy 
Rule (as well as the Common Rule), these activities, which aim to 
protect
protect 
the public™s healt
handimprovethequalityofpatientcare,areconsidered
 and improve the quality of patient care, are considered 
health care ﬁpracticeﬂ rather than health research. Therefore, they can be 
undertaken without consent or authorization, or an IRB/Privacy Board 
waiver of consent or authorization. However, it can be a challenge for IRBs 
and Privacy Boards to distinguish among activities that are or are not sub
-ject to the various provisions of the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule, 
and inappropriate decisions may prevent important activities from being 
undertaken or could potentially allow improper disclosure of personally 
identi˜able health information.
To address these dif˜culties, a number of models have been proposed 
that outline the criteria IRBs and Privacy Boards should use to distinguish 
practice and research. For example, one recent model provides a detailed 
checklist for IRBs and Privacy Boards to use in determining whether an 
activity is public health research and required to comply with the research 
provisions of the Privacy Rule, or public health practice that does not need 
IRB/Privacy Board review. The committee believes that standardizing the 
criteria is essential to support the conduct of these important health care 
activities.
Thus, HHS should convene the relevant stakeholders to develop 
standard criteria for IRBs and Privacy Boards to use when making deci
-sions about whether protocols entail research or practice.
 There should 
be ˚exibility in the regulation to allow important activities to go forward 
with appropriate levels of oversight. Also, it will be important to evaluate 
whether these criteria are effective in aiding IRB/Privacy Board reviews 
of proposed protocols, and whether they lead to appropriate IRB/Privacy 
Board decisions.
These changes suggested above could be accomplished without any 
changes to HIPAA by making them a condition of funding from HHS and 
other research sponsors and by providing some additional funds to cover 
the cost.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
REFERENCES
AMS (Academy of Medical Sciences). 2006. 
Personal data for public good: Using health 
 
information in medical research. 
http://www.acmedsci.ac.uk/images/project/Personal.pd
f (accessed August 28, 2008).
Baily, M. A. 2008. Harming through protection? 
New England Journal of Medicine
 258(8):768Œ769.
Baily, M. A., M. Bottrell, J. Lynn, and B. Jennings. 2006. The ethics of using QI methods 
to
 improve health care quality and safety. 
A Hastings Center Special Report
 36(4):
S1ŒS40.
Bates, D. W., L. L. Leape, D. J. Cullen, N. Laird, L. A. Petersen, J. M. Teich, E. Burdick, M. 
Hickey, S. Klee˜eld, B. Shea, V. M. Vander, and D. L. Seger. 1998. Effect of computer
-ized physician order entry and a team intervention on prevention of serious medication 
errors. 
JAMA
 280(15):1311Œ1316.
Bellin, E., and N. N. Dubler. 2001. The quality improvement-research divide and the need for 
external oversight. 
American Journal of Public Health
 91(9):1512Œ1517.
Big Health. 2008. 
Big health consortium. 
http://www.bighealthconsortium.org/about/
 (accessed 
October 29, 2008).
Braunstein, J. B., N. S. Sherber, S. P. Schulman, E. L. Ding, and N. R. Powe. 2008. Race, medi
-cal researcher distrust, perceived harm, and willingness to participate in cardiovascular 
prevention trials. 
Medicine
 87(1):1Œ9.
Brown, D. R., M. N. Fouad, K. Basen-Engquist, and G. Tortolero-Luna. 2000. Recruitment 
and retention of minority women in cancer screening, prevention and treatment trials. 
Annals of Epidemiology
 10:S13ŒS21.
Burris, S., L. Gable, L. Stone, and Z. Lazzarini. 2003. The role of state law in protecting hu
-man subjects of public health research and practice. 
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 31:654.
Casarett, D., J. Karlawish, and J. Sugarman. 2000. Determining when quality improvement 
initiatives should be considered research: Proposed criteria and potential implications. 
JAMA
 284(7):2275Œ2280.
Casarett, D., J. Karlawish, E. Andrews, and A. Caplan. 2005. Bioethical issues in pharmaco
-epidemiological research. In 
Pharmacoepidemiology, 
4th ed., edited by B. L. Strom. West 
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Pp. 417Œ432.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 1999. 
Guidelines for de˜ning public 
health research and public health non-research. 
http://www.cdc.gov/od/science/regs/hrpp
/researchde˜nition.htm (accessed March 4, 2008).
CHSR (Coalition for Health Services Research). 2008. 
Framework for health services research 
policy for 
200
8. 
http://www.chsr.org/Policy_Priorities.pdf (accessed August 21, 2008).
Comis, R. L., C. R. Aldige, E. L. Stovall, L. U. Krebs, P. J. Risher, and H. J. Taylor. 2000. 
A quantitative survey of public attitudes towards cancer clinical trials.
 Philadelphia, PA: 
Coalition of National Cancer Cooperative Groups, Cancer Research Foundation of 
America, Cancer Leadership Council, and Oncology Nursing Society.
Corbie-Smith, G., S. B. Thomas, M. V. Williams, and S. Moody-Ayers. 1999. Attitudes 
and
 beliefs of African Americans towards participation in medical research. 
Journal of 
 
General Internal Medicine
 14:537Œ546.
Damschroder, L. J., J. L. Pritts, M. A. Neblo, R. J. Kalarickal, J. W. Creswell, and R. A. 
Hayward. 2007. Patients, privacy and trust: Patients™ willingness to allow researchers to 
access their medical records. 
Social Science & Medicine
 64(1):223Œ235.
DeAngelis, C. D., J. M. Drazen, F. A. Frizelle, C. Haug, J. Hoey, R. Horton, S. Kotzin, C. 
Laine, A. Marusic, A. J. P. M. Overbeke, T. V. Schroeder, H. C. Sox, and M. B. Van Der 
Weyden. 2004. Clinical trial registration: A statement from the International Committee 
of Medical Journal Editors. 
JAMA
 292(11):1363Œ1364.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 149
Farmer, D., S. A. Jackson, F. Camacho, and M. A. Hall. 2007. Attitudes of African American 
and low socioeconomic status white women toward medical research. 
Journal of Health 
Care for the Poor and Underserved
 18:85Œ99.
FDA (Food and Drug Administration). 1971. Certain estrogens for oral or parenteral 
use. Drugs for human use; drug ef˜cacy study implementation. 
Federal Register
 36(217):21537Œ21538.
FDA. 2005. 
FDA public health advisory, deaths with antipsychotics in elderly patients 
with
 behavioral disturbances. 
http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/advisory/antipsychotics.
ht
m (accessed August 18, 2008).
FDA. 2008. FDA alert [6/16/2008]: 
Information for healthcare professionals. Antipsychotics
. http://www.fda.gov/cder/drug/infosheets/hcp/antipsychotics_conventional.htm (accessed 
August 18, 2008).
Finkelstein, E. A., I. C. Fiebelkorn, and G. Wang. 2003. National medical spending attributable 
to overweight and obesity: How much, and who™s paying? 
Health Affairs Web Exclusive. 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/cgi/content/abstract/hlthaff.w3.219v1 (accessed August 21, 
2008).
Furrow, B. R., T. L. Greaney, S. H. Johnson, T. S. Jost, and R. L. Schwartz. 2004. 
Bioethics: 
Health care law and ethics. 
5th ed. St. Paul, MN: Thomson/West.
GAO (Government Accountability Of˜ce). 1996. 
Scienti˜c research: Continued vigilance criti
-cal to protecting human subjects. 
Washington, DC: GAO.
Genetics & Public Policy Center. 2007. 
U.S. public opinion on uses of genetic information 
and genetic discrimination. 
http://www.dnapolicy.org/resources/GINAPublic_Opinion_
Genetic_Information_Discrimination.pdf (accessed August 21, 2008).
Gill, S., S. Bronskill, S. Normand, G. Anderson, K. Sykora, K. Lam, C. Bell, P. Lee, H. Fischer, 
N. Herrmann, J. Gurwitz, and P. Rochon. 2007. Antipsychotic drug use and mortality in 
older adults with dementia. 
Annals of Internal Medicine
 146:775Œ786.
Giuliano, A. R., N. Mokuau, C. Hughes, G. Tortelero-Luna, B. Risendal, R. C. S. Ho, 
T. E. Prewitt, and W. J. McCaskill-Stevens. 2000. Participation of minorities in cancer 
research: The in˚uence of structural, cultural, and linguistic factors. 
Annals of Epidemi
-ology
 10:S22ŒS34.
Goldman, J., and A. Choy. 2001. Privacy and con˜dentiality in health research. In 
Ethical and 
policy issues in research involving human participants
. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics 
Advisory Commission. Pp. C1ŒC34.
Gostin, L. O. 2008. Surveillance and public health research: Personal privacy and the ﬁright 
to know.ﬂ In 
Public health law: Power, duty, restraint
. Berkeley, CA: University of Cali
-fornia Press.
Grady, C., L. A. Hampson, G. R. Wallen, M. V. Rivera-Goba, K. L. Carrington, and B. B. 
Mittleman. 2006. Exploring the ethics of clinical research in an urban community. 
Ameri
-can Journal of Public Health
 96(11):1996Œ2001.
Hat˜eld, M., H. F. Sonnenschein, and L. E. Rosenberg. 2001. 
Exceptional returns: The eco
-nomic value of America™s investment in medical research.
 http://www.laskerfoundation.
org/advocacy/pdf/exceptional.pdf (accessed August 21, 2008).
Herbst, A. L., H. Ulfelder, and D. C. Poskanzer. 1971. Adenocarcinoma of the vagina. Asso
-ciation of maternal stilbestrol therapy with tumor appearance in young women. 
New 
England Journal of Medicine 
284(15):878Œ881.
HEW (Department of Health, Education and Welfare). 1979. 
The Belmont Report: Ethical 
principles and guidelines for the protection of human subjects of research. 
http://ohsr.
od.nih.gov/guidelines/belmont.html (accessed August 21, 2008).
HHS (Department of Health and Human Services). 2003. 
Institutional review boards and 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule. 
http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pdf/IRB_Factsheet.pd
f (accessed August 21, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
HHS. 2004. 
Guidance on research involving coded private information or biological speci
-mens. 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/cdebiol.pdf (accessed August 
21, 2008).
Hodge, J. G., Jr. 2005. An enhanced approach to distinguishing public health practice and 
human subjects research. 
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 33(1):125Œ141.
Hodge, J. G., and L. O. Gostin. 2004. 
Public health practice vs. research: A report for public 
health practitioners including cases and guidance for making distinctions. 
Atlanta, GA: 
Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 1995. 
Health services research: Work force and educational 
 
issues. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2000a. 
Protecting data privacy in health services research. 
Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press.
IOM. 2000b. 
To err is human: Building a safer health system. 
Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press.
IOM. 2002. 
Responsible research: A systems approach to protecting research participants. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Jacobsen, S., Z. Xia, M. Campion, C. Darby, M. Plevak, K. Seltman, and L. Melton, 3rd. 
1999. Potential effect of authorization bias on medical record research. 
Mayo Clinic 
Proceedings 
74:330Œ338.
Laine, C., R. Horton, C. D. DeAngelis, J. M. Drazen, F. A. Frizelle, F. Godlee, C. Haug, 
P. C. Hébert, S. Kotzin, A. Marusic, P. Sahni, T. V. Schroeder, H. C. Sox, M. B. Van 
Der
 Weyden,andF.W.A.Verheugt.2007.ClinicaltrialregistrationŠlookingbackand
Weyden, and F. W. A. Verheugt. 
2007.ClinicaltrialregistrationŠlookingbackand
2007. Clinical trial registrationŠlooking back and 
 
moving ahead. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 356(26):2734Œ2736.
Lee, B. 2000. 
Comparison of FDA and HHS human subject protection regulations. 
http://
www.fda.gov/oc/gcp/comparison.html (accessed August 21, 2008).
Lindenauer, P. K., E. M. Benjamin, D. Naglieri-Prescod, J. Fitzgerald, and P. Pekow. 2002. 
The role of the institutional review board in quality improvement: A survey of quality 
of˜cers, institutional review board chairs, and journal editors. 
The American Journal of 
Medicine 
113:575Œ579.
Lowrance, W. W. 2002. 
Learning from experience, privacy and the secondary use of data in 
health research. 
London: The Nuf˜eld Trust.
Lowrance, W. W., and F. S. Collins. 2007. Identi˜ability in genomic research.
 Science
 317:600Œ602.
Lynn, J., M. A. Baily, M. Bottrell, B. Jennings, R. J. Levine, F. Davidoff, D. Casarett, J. 
 
Corrigan, E. Fox, M. K. Wynia, G. J. Agich, M. O™Kane, T. Speroff, P. Schyve, P. 
Batalden, S. Tunis, N. Berlinger, L. Cronenwett, M. Fitzmaurice, N. N. Dubler, and B. 
James. 2007. The ethics of using quality improvement methods in health care. 
Annals of 
Internal Medicine 
146(6):666Œ674.
Mandelblatt, J., S. Saha, S. Teutsch, T. Hoerger, A. L. Siu, D. Atkins, J. Klein, and M. 
 
Helfand. 2003. The cost-effectiveness of screening mammography beyond age 65: 
A systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 
Annals of Internal 
Medicine 
139:835Œ842.
Mick, S., L. L. Morlock, D. Salkever, G. de Lissovoy, F. Malitz, C. G. Wise, and A. Jones. 
1994. Strategic activity and ˜nancial performance of U.S. rural hospitals: A national 
study, 1983 to 1988. 
Journal of Rural Health 
10(3):150Œ167.
Mosconi, P., P. Poli, A. Giolo, and G. Apolone. 2005. How Italian health consumers feel 
about clinical research: A questionnaire survey. 
European Journal of Public Health
 15(4):372Œ379.
Murphy, K., and R. Topel. 1999. 
The economic value of medical research. 
Chicago, IL: Uni
-versity of Chicago Press.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH RESEARCH
 151
NCI (National Cancer Institute). 2008. 
Getting connected with caBIG: Data sharing and 
 
security framework. 
https://cabig.nci.nih.gov/working_groups/DSIC_SLWG/data
_sharing_
polic
y/ (accessed October 27, 2008).
NCURA (National Council of University Research Administrators). 2007. 
Report on research 
compliance. 
http://www.reportonresearchcompliance.com (accessed March 4, 2008).
NCVHS (National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics). 2007a. Enhanced protections 
for uses of health data: A stewardship framework for ﬁsecondary usesﬂ of electroni
-cally collected and transmitted health data. http://ncvhs.hhs.gov/071221lt.pdf (accessed 
December 19, 2007).
NCVHS, Ad Hoc Work Group on Secondary Uses of Health Data. 2007b. Testimony of the 
cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid (caBIG) Data Sharing and Intellectual Capital (DSIC) 
workspace. August 1, 2007.
Needleman, J., P. Buerhaus, S. Mattke, M. Stewart, and K. Zelevinsky. 2002. Nurse-
 
staf˜ng levels and the quality of care in hospitals. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 346(22):1715Œ1722.
NSF (National Science Foundation). 2006. Science and technology: Public attitudes and under
-standing. In 
Science and Engineering Indicators 
200
6. 
Arlington, VA: National Science 
Foundation. Chapter 7.
OHRP (Of˜ce for Human Research Protections). 2008a. 
IRB guidebook, part I.A. 
http://www.
hhs.gov/ohrp/irb/irb_guidebook.htm (accessed August 21, 2008).
OHRP. 2008b. 
OHRP concludes case regarding Johns Hopkins University research on hos
-pital infections. 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/news/recentnews.html#20080215 (accessed 
August 21, 2008).
Partridge, A., and E. Winer. 2002. Informing clinical trial participants about study results. 
JAMA
 288:363Œ365.
Partridge, A. H., A. C. Wolff, P. K. Marcom, P. A. Kaufman, L. Zhang, R. Gelman, C. Moore, 
D. Lake, G. F. Fleming, H. S. Rugo, J. Atkins, E. Sampson, D. Collyar, and E. P. Winer. 
(2008). The impact of sharing results of a randomized breast cancer clinical trial with 
study participants. 
Breast Cancer Research and Treatment
 June 10.
Pitkin, R. 2007. Folate and neural tube defects. 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition
 85(1):285SŒ288S.
Pritts, J. 2008. 
The importance and value of protecting the privacy of health information: 
Roles of HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule in health research.
 http://www.iom.
edu/CMS/3740/43729/53160.aspx (accessed March 15, 2008).
Research!America. 2007. 
America speaks: Poll summary.
 Vol. 7. Alexandria, VA: United 
Health Foundation.
Schneeweiss, S., S. Setoguchi, A. Brookhart, C. Dormuth, and P. Wang. 2007. Risk of death 
associated with the use of conventional versus atypical antipsychotic drugs among elderly 
patients. 
Canadian Medical Association Journal
 176:672Œ632.
Shalowitz, D. I., and F. G. Miller. 2008a (May 13). Communicating the results of clinical 
research to participants: Attitudes, practices, and future directions. 
PLoS Medicine 
5(5):
e91.
Shalowitz, D. I., and F. G. Miller. 2008b (September). The search for clarity in communicating 
research results to study participants. 
Journal of Medical Ethics
 34(9):e17.
Shaul, R. Z., S. Birenbaum, and M. Evans. 2005. Legal liability in research: Early lessons from 
North America. 
BMC Medical Ethics
 6(4):1Œ4.
Shavers, V. L., C. F. Lynch, and L. F. Burmeister. 2002. Racial differences in factors that in˚u
-ence the willingness to participate in medical research studies. 
Annals of Epidemiology
 12:248Œ256.
Sim, I., A.-W. Chan, A. M. Gülmezoglu, T. Evans, and T. Pang. 2006. Clinical trial registra
-tion: Transparency is the watchword. 
The Lancet
 367(9523):1631Œ1633.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Slamon, D., G. Clark, S. Wong, W. Levin, A. Ullrich, and W. McGuire. 1987. Human breast 
cancer: Correlation of relapse and survival with ampli˜cation of the her-2/neu oncogene. 
Science
 235(4785):177Œ182.
Snider, D. E., and D. F. Stroup. 1997. De˜ning research when it comes to public health. 
Public
 Health Reports
 112:29Œ32.
Thorpe, K. E., C. S. Florence, D. H. Howard, and P. Joski. 2004. The impact of obesity in 
rising medical spending. 
Health Affairs Web Exclusive. 
http://content.healthaffairs.org/
cgi/content/abstract/hlthaff.w4.480v1 (accessed August 21, 2008).
Trauth, J. M., D. Musa, L. Siminoff, I. K. Jewell, and E. Ricci. 2000. Public attitudes regard
-ing willingness to participate in medical research studies. 
Journal of Health & Social 
Policy
 12(2):23Œ43.
Veurink, M., M. Koster, and L. Berg. 2005. The history of DES, lessons to be learned. 
 
Pharmacy World & Science
 27(3):139Œ143.
Wendler, D., R. Kington, J. Madans, G. Van Wye, H. Christ-Schmidt, L. A. Pratt, O. W. 
Brawley, C. P. Gross, and E. Emanuel. 2006. Are racial and ethnic minorities less willing 
to participate in health research? 
PLoS Medicine
 3(2):201Œ210.
Westin, A. 2007. 
How the public views privacy and health research.
 http://www.iom.edu
/Object.File/Master/48/528/%20Westin%20IOM%20Srvy%20Rept
%2011-1107.pdf 
(accessed November 11, 2008).
Williams, E. D. 2005. 
Federal protection for human research subjects: An analysis of the Com
-mon Rule and its interactions with FDA regulations and the HIPAA Privacy Rule, CRS 
report for Congress. 
Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.
Williams, I. C., and G. Corbie-Smith. 2006. Investigator beliefs and reported success in recruit
-ing minority participants. 
Contemporary Clinical Trials
 27:580Œ586.
Winston, F. K., D. R. Durbin, M. J. Kallan, and E. K. Moll. 2000. The danger of premature 
graduation to seat belts for young children. 
Pediatrics
 105(6):1179Œ1183.
WMA (World Medical Association). 1964. 
Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical principles for 
medical research involving human subjects.
 http://ohsr.od.nih.gov/guidelines/helsinki.
html (accessed August 21, 2008).
Woolley, M., and S. M. Propst. 2005. Public attitudes and perceptions about health-related 
research. 
JAMA
 294(11):1380Œ1384.
Zarin, D. A., and T. Tse. 2008. Moving toward transparency of clinical trials. 
Science
 319:1340Œ1342.
Zarin, D. A., T. Tse, and N. C. Ide. 2005. Trial registration at ClinicalTrials.gov between May 
and October 2005. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 353(26):2779Œ2787.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.153
4HIPAA, the Privacy Rule, and 
 Its Application to Health Research
This chapter provides an overview of the development of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule and 
describes how it applies to health research. A section at the end of the 
chapter also describes the relationships between HIPAA and other federal 
and state laws. Because a great deal of health research in the United States 
is also subject to the Common Rule (described in Chapter 3), disparities 
between these two federal rules are also noted where relevant throughout 
the chapter.
OVERVIEW
 OF
 HIPAA
HIPAA was passed on August 21, 1996. It was intended to make health 
care delivery more ef˜cient and to increase the number of Americans with 
health insurance coverage. These objectives were pursued through three 
main provisions of the Act: (1) the portability provisions, (2) the tax provi
-sions, and (3) the administrative simpli˜cation provisions.
Portability and Tax Provisions
The portability provisions of HIPAA aimed to prevent individuals from 
losing health care coverage due to a preexisting condition when changing 
to a new employer™s health plan. The portability provisions also aimed to 
reduce the number of unemployed or self-employed individuals without 
health insurance by making it easier for individuals to purchase health 
insurance without their employer.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Similarly, the tax provisions of HIPAA were also intended to make 
it easier for individuals to maintain health insurance. The tax provisions 
pursued this goal by modifying existing tax laws to make health insurance 
more affordable. HIPAA does not regulate the price of health insurance, 
but rather, it relies on tax breaks and other tax incentives to reduce health 
care costs (Chaikind et al., 2005).
Administrative Simpli˜cation Provisions
The administrative simpli˜cation provisions of HIPAA instructed the 
Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to 
issue several regulations concerning the electronic transmission of health 
information. These provisions were included in the ˜nal version of HIPAA 
because health plans had requested federal legislation in this area from 
Congress. The use of electronic health information was expanding in the 
early 1990s, and the health care industry was unable to standardize the 
process and use of electronic health information without federal action.
1The security standards are one set of regulations mandated by the 
administrative simpli˜cation provisions of HIPAA. The Act instructed the 
Secretary of HHS to develop nationwide security standards and safeguards 
for the use of electronic health care information. The resulting HHS regu
-lations spell out speci˜c administrative, technical, and physical security 
procedures that healthcare plans, providers and clearinghouses must incor
-porate into their operations to prevent unauthorized access, use, and dis
-closure of protected health information (CMS, 2005). HHS published the 
˜nal HIPAA Security Rule in the 
Federal Register
 on February 20, 2003. 
Health plans and providers were required to be in compliance with these 
measures by April 2004 (see Box 2-2).
The administrative simpli˜cation provisions of HIPAA also directed 
the Secretary to develop standards for unique health identi˜ers for patients, 
employers, health plans, and providers. Unique health identi˜ers are 
national numbers that could be used to identify the individual or organiza
-tion in standard health transactions. The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS) has issued standards for the unique health identi˜ers for 
employers and providers, and unique health identi˜ers for health plans are 
under development. However, Congress has prevented CMS from imple
-menting a standard for the unique health identi˜er for patients by inserting 
language into the annual appropriations bill every year since HIPAA was 
enacted (Chaikind et al., 2005).
Finally, the administrative simpli˜cation provisions of HIPAA man
-dated the creation of privacy standards for the protection of personally 
1 
Personal communication, M. Wilder, Hogan and Hartson, March 17, 2007.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 155
identi˜able medical information. Although privacy protections were not 
a primary objective of the Act, Congress recognized that advances in 
electronic technology could erode the privacy of health information, and 
included the privacy provision in HIPAA (IOM, 2006). In accordance with 
the administrative simpli˜cation provisions, HHS developed the Privacy 
Rule, which constitutes a broad-ranging federal health privacy regulation 
(see Table 4-1). Incorporating many of the basic fair information practices,
2 the Privacy Rule generally restricts the use or disclosure of protected health 
information, except as permitted by the individual or as authorized or 
required by the Privacy Rule. Its provisions also impose on covered entities 
af˜rmative requirements to safeguard the information in their possession. 
The Privacy Rule gives individuals certain rights with respect to their health 
information (reviewed by Pritts, 2008).
DEVELOPMENT
 OF
 THE
 P
RIVACY
 R
ULE
 R
EGULATIONS
Congress did not include detailed privacy requirements in HIPAA. The 
terms of HIPAA required the Secretary of HHS to submit detailed recom
-mendations to Congress by August 1997 on ways to protect the privacy of 
personally identi˜able health information. These recommendations were 
to include suggestions on ways to protect individuals™ rights concerning 
their personally identi˜able health information, procedures for exercising 
such rights, and the uses and disclosures of information that should be 
authorized or required under HIPAA.
3 If Congress did not enact privacy 
legislation within 3 years of the passage of HIPAA, the Act required 
the Secretary of HHS to issue privacy regulations for the protection of 
personally identi˜able health information within 42 months of HIPAA™s 
enactment.
4In response to this mandate, HHS submitted recommendations for pro
-tecting the privacy of personally identi˜able health information to Congress 
in September 1997. In these recommendations, Secretary Shalala advocated 
for the passage of federal privacy legislation, rather than relying on HHS to 
pass a set of privacy regulations. Shalala™s report stated, ﬁThis report rec
-ommends that Congress enact national standards that provide fundamental 
privacy rights for patients and de˜ne responsibilities for those who service 
themﬂ (Shalala, 1997).
Although numerous bills that attempted to address health information 
2 
U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
Recommendations on the Con˜dentiality 
of Individually-Identi˜able Health Information to the Committees on Labor and Human 
Resources
 (September 11, 1997), and Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health 
Information: Proposed Rule, 64 Fed. Reg. 59918, 59923 (1999).
3 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 45 C.F.R. § 264(a)Œ(b) (2006).
4 
See 45 C.F.R. § 264(c)(1) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
TABLE 4-1
 Timeline of the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Date
Action
August 1996
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) was 
signed into law by President Clinton
September 1997
Donna Shalala, Secretary of the Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS), made recommendations to Congress on the privacy 
standards mandated in HIPAA
September 1999
Congress failed to enact federal privacy legislation within the 3-year 
time limit set by HIPAA
November 1999
HHS issued a proposed version of the privacy regulation for public 
comment
December 2000
HHS published the original Privacy Rule, titled 
Standards for Privacy 
of Individually Identi˜able Health Information
March 2002
HHS published a proposed modi˜cation to the Privacy Rule and 
accepted additional public comments
August 2002
HHS published the Final Privacy Rule
April 2003
Covered entities were required to be in compliance with the Privacy 
Rule (except small health plans)
The Association of American Medical Colleges launched a survey 
examining how research has been affected by the Privacy Rule and 
proposed recommendations for changes to the Privacy Rule
In 
South Carolina Medical Association v. Tommy Thompson
, plaintiffs 
lost constitutional challenge to HIPAA
March 2004
The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics sent a letter to 
HHS giving detailed recommendations on ways to improve the Privacy 
Rule™s application to research
April 2004
Small health plans were required to be in compliance with the Privacy 
Rule
September 2004
The Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections 
sent a letter to the Secretary of HHS with recommendations for 
changes to the Privacy Rule as applied to research
March 2005
In 
Citizens for Health v. Michael O. Leavitt
, plaintiffs unsuccessfully 
challenged the Privacy Rule as being invalid
privacy were introduced, Congress was unable to ˜nalize privacy legislation 
on the time schedule mandated in HIPAA. During the 1999 congressional 
session alone, eight such bills were introduced. However, none of these 
bills was passed. As a result, Congress passed the responsibility of creating 
health privacy protections to HHS.
Over the course of developing the current Privacy Rule, HHS went 
through four iterations of the Rule. HHS followed Secretary Shalala™s 
1997 recommendations to Congress in shaping the regulations (Redhead, 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 157
2001). First, HHS issued a proposed version of the Privacy Rule for public 
comment on November 3, 1999, that drew more than 50,000 comments 
(Stevens, 2000). Based on these comments, HHS issued the second version 
of the Privacy Rule, titled 
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able 
Health Information
, in December 2000.
5 Before this version of the Privacy 
Rule could take effect, the Secretary of HHS was inundated with
 unsolicited 
public comments and criticism regarding the Privacy Rule. Health care 
insurers and providers were concerned that the Privacy Rule would make 
health care industry operations less ef˜cient. They were particularly con
-cerned about the requirement that they obtain authorization prior to mak
-ing any routine disclosure of personally identi˜able health information for 
health care operations, treatment, or payment. The comments received also 
suggested that this version of the Privacy Rule would prevent pharmacists 
from ˜lling prescriptions and searching for potential drug interactions 
before patients arrived at pharmacies; interfere with providing emergency 
medicine in situations where it would be impossible to obtain patient 
authorization before treatment; and delay the scheduling and preparation of 
hospital procedures until the doctor could obtain patient authorization.
6In March 2002, HHS, under the Bush Administration, published 
a proposed modi˜cation to the Privacy Rule, which reopened the rule-
making process and created a new period for submitting public comments. 
This version of the Privacy Rule drew more than 24,000 comments. Incor
-porating the suggestions collected through the second notice of proposed 
rule-making period, HHS issued the ˜nal version of the Privacy Rule in 
August 14, 2002.
7 This is the current, effective, and codi˜ed version of the 
Privacy Rule (45 C.F.R. parts 160 and 164). Most health care providers 
and health plans were required to be in compliance with this version of 
the Privacy Rule by April 14, 2003. Small health plans were given until 
April 14, 2004, to be in compliance.
OVERVIEW
 OF
 THE
 HIPAA P
RIVACY
 R
ULE
8Entities Subject to the Privacy Rule
The Privacy Rule applies to ﬁcovered entities,ﬂ
9 which are ind
ividuals 
or organizations that electronically transmit health information in the 
5 
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: Final Rule, 65 Fed. 
Reg. 82461 (2000).
6 
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: Final Rule, 67 Fed. 
Reg. 53181, 53209 (2002). 
7 
See 67 Fed. Reg. 53181 (2002). 
8 
Some material in this section is adapted from a background paper by Pritts (2008).
9 
See 45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
course of normal health care practices. Covered entities include health care 
providers, health plans, and health care clearinghouses. Health plans are 
entities that provide or pay the cost of medical care, such as private health 
insurers or managed care organizations, and governmental payors and 
health programs such as Medicaid, Medicare, or Veterans Affairs. Health 
care clearinghouses generally refer to billing services, and health care pro
-viders include hospitals, doctors, and other health care professionals and 
facilities that provide treatment (Table 4-2).
If an entity that meets one of the categories of a covered entity also 
performs functions unrelated to health care, it can become a hybrid entity 
by designating in writing its ﬁhealth care components.ﬂ
10
 Only these health 
care components are then bound by the Privacy Rule. For example, if a 
university includes an academic medical center with a hospital, the entire 
university will be classi˜ed as a covered entity unless the university elects 
to be a hybrid entity by designating only the hospital as the health care 
component. By doing this, only the hospital has to comply with the Privacy 
Rule. The classi˜cation of researchers within a hybrid entity depends on 
the nature of the work performed (e.g., whether the researchers are within 
the health care component, providing health care, or conducting electronic 
transactions) (HHS, 2004c).
Type of Information Protected
The Privacy Rule protects all personally identi˜able health informa
-tion, known as protected health information (PHI), created or received 
by a covered entity. Personally identi˜able health information is de˜ned 
as information, including demographic information, that ﬁrelates to past, 
present, or future physical or mental health or condition of an individual, 
the provision of health care to an individual, or the past, present, or future 
payment for the provision of health care for the individualﬂ that either 
identi˜es the individual or with respect to which there is a reasonable basis 
to believe the information can be used to identify the individual.ﬂ
11
The Privacy Rule does not protect personally identi˜able health infor
-mation that is held or maintained by an organization other than a covered 
entity (HHS, 2004c). It also does not apply to information that has been 
deidenti˜ed in accordance with the Privacy Rule
12
 (see later section on 
Deidenti˜ed Information).
10
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.105(a)(2)(iii)(c) (2006).
11
 See 45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006).
12
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.502(d) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 159
TABLE 4-2
 The Uneven Application of the HIPAA Privacy Rule: 
Examples of HIPAA Covered Entities and Non-Covered Entities
Covered Entities
Non-Covered Entities
Ł Health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs)
Ł Group health plans
Ł Medicare and Medicaid programs
Ł Veterans health care program
Ł Civilian Health and Medical Program of 
the Uniformed Services
Ł Indian Health Service program under the 
Indian Health Care Improvement Act
Ł Pharmacies
Ł Researchers who are employed by a 
covered entity
Ł Some universities (or parts of universities, 
such as health centers)
Ł A public health clinic that is part of a 
public health agency
Ł Independent consent management 
companies
Ł Contract research organizations
Ł Research foundations
Ł Data warehousing/data management 
companies
Ł Student health services (if they do not 
bill for services)
Ł Pharmaceutical companies
Ł Researchers who are not employed by a 
covered entity
Ł Some universities (or parts of 
universities)
Ł A public health agency that does not 
perform activities subject to the 
provisions of the Privacy Rule
Restrictions on Use and Disclosure
Covered entities may not use or disclose PHI except as permitted or 
required by the Privacy Rule.
13
 A covered entity may disclose PHI without 
the individual™s permission for treatment, payment, and health care opera
-tions purposes. For other uses and disclosures, the Privacy Rule generally 
requires the individual™s written permission, which is an ﬁauthorizationﬂ 
that must meet speci˜c content requirements. The Privacy Rule then estab
-lishes a number of exceptions to this general rule, allowing covered entities 
to use and disclose PHI without the individual™s authorization in certain 
situations. For example, the Privacy Rule permits the disclosure of PHI 
without the individual™s authorization in the following circumstances:
Ł To business associates
14
Ł For public health purposes as required by state and federal law
15
Ł To public agencies for health oversight activities, such as audits; 
13
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.502(a) (2006). A covered entity is required to make a reasonable 
effort to use and disclose only the minimum amount of PHI needed for the intended purpose. 
See 45 C.F.R. § 164.502(b) (2006).
14
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.506(e) (2006). 
15
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.510(b) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
inspections; civil, criminal, or administrative proceedings; and other 
activities necessary for the oversight of the health care system
16
Ł To law enforcement of˜cials
17
Ł For judicial and administrative proceedings, if the request for infor
-mation is made through a court order
18
Ł For research
19
Most of these permitted uses and disclosures are subject to detailed 
conditions. For example, the Privacy Rule allows covered entities to disclose 
PHI without individual authorization to its ﬁbusiness associates,ﬂ which 
are de˜ned as persons or entities that perform, on behalf of the covered 
entity, certain functions or services
20
 that require the use or disclosure of 
PHI, provided adequate safeguards are in place.
21
 As a general rule, these 
safeguards take the form of a business associate agreement whereby the 
business associate agrees not to use or disclose the PHI it receives except as 
permitted by the agreement or by law (Box 4-1).
In the case of public health practice, the Privacy Rule notes that there is a 
legitimate need for public health authorities and others working to ensure the 
health and safety of the public to have access to PHI. As a result, the Privacy 
Rule permits, but does not require,
22
 covered entities to disclose PHI without 
authorization for speci˜ed public health purposes (Box 4-2). Disclosures for 
research are discussed in detail in subsequent sections of this chapter.
Individual Rights
The Privacy Rule also confers rights on individuals with respect to their 
PHI (reviewed by Pritts, 2008). Under the Privacy Rule, individuals have 
the right to
23
:Ł Receive a notice of privacy practices from a health care provider 
or a health plan that must, among other things, inform patients of 
16
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.510(c) (2006).
17
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.510(f) (2006). 
18
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.510(d) (2006).
19
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512 (2006).
20
 Some common functions that business associates perform for covered entities include 
recruiting subjects, data analysis, processing, or administration; utilization review; quality 
assurance; and practice management.
21
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.502(e) (2006).
22
 Only states have the authority to require mandatory public health reporting.
23
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.520 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 161
BOX 4-1
 Business Associate Agreements
 A covered entity must obtain assurances in writing that the business associate 
will: (1) use the information only for the purposes for which it was engaged by 
the covered entity; (2) safeguard the information from misuses; and (3) help the 
covered entity comply with some of the covered entity™s duties under the Privacy 
Rule. Business associate agreements must include:
Ł A description of the permitted and required uses of the PHI by the business 
associate.
Ł A statement that the business associate will not use or disclose the PHI other 
than as permitted or required by the contract, or as required by law.
Ł A statement that the business associate will use appropriate safeguards to pre
-vent the use or disclosure of PHI other than as provided for by the contract.
SOURCE: 45 C.F.R. § 160.103 (2006).
BOX 4-2
 The HIPAA Privacy Rule and Public Health Practice
 The Privacy Rule de˜nes public authorities as any ﬁfederal, tribal, or local 
agency or person or entity acting under a grant of authority or contract with 
the agency, including state and local health departments, the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration.ﬂ
 A covered entity can release PHI to a public health authority, without authoriza
-tion or waiver of authorization, in the following circumstances:
Ł Monitoring health threats and diseases
Ł Child abuse or neglect
Ł Products regulated by the FDA
Ł Persons at risk of contracting or spreading a disease
Ł Workplace surveillance
State laws may also permit or require the release of PHI for activities other than 
those listed above.
SOURCES: 45 C.F.R. § 164.501 (2006); 45 C.F.R. 164.512(b)(i)Œ(v) (2006); 45 
C.F.R. 160.203(c) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the anticipated uses and disclosures of their health information that 
may be made without the patients™ consent or authorization.
24
Ł See and obtain a copy of their own health information.
25
Ł Request an amendment of information that is incomplete or 
inaccurate.
26
Ł Obtain an accounting of certain disclosures that the covered entity 
made of their PHI over the past 6 years.
27
HIPAA 
AND
 R
ESEARCH
Although health research was not a focus of HIPAA, Congress rec
-ognized the important role that health records play in conducting health 
research and wanted to ensure that privacy protections would not impede 
researchers™ continued access to such data. This is re˚ected in two House 
Reports on HIPAA with identical language, stating:
ﬁThe conferees recognize that certain uses of individually identi˜able 
information are appropriate, and do not compromise the privacy of an 
individual. Examples of such use of information include . . . the transfer 
of information from a health plan to an organization for the sole purpose 
of conducting health care-related research. As health plans and providers 
continue to focus on outcomes research and innovation, it is important 
that the exchange and aggregated use of health care data be allowedﬂ (U.S. 
Congress, 1996a,b).
In creating the current research provisions of the Privacy Rule, HHS 
considered several options. One option considered was exempting PHI used 
in research from the regulations, but HHS rejected this option, noting some 
reported shortcomings of the protection of the privacy and con˜dential
-ity of health information in research (reviewed by Pritts, 2008).
28
 A U.S. 
General Accounting Of˜ce report prepared in anticipation of federal health 
privacy legislation noted that con˜dentiality protections were not a major 
thrust of the Common Rule, and oversight boards tended to give con˜den
-tiality less attention than other research risks because they had the ˚exibil
-ity to decide when it was appropriate to review con˜dentiality protection 
issues (GAO, 1999). The report noted that although ﬁ[t]he actual number 
of instances in which patient privacy is breached is not fully known . . . in 
24
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.520 (2006).
25
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.524 (2006).
26
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.526 (2006).
27
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.528 (2006).
28
 U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
Recommendations on the Con˜dentiality 
of Individually-Identi˜able Health Information to the Committees on Labor and Human 
Resources
 (September 11, 1997) (hereinafter ﬁSecretary Recommendationsﬂ); 64 Fed. Reg. 
59918, 59968 (1999); 65 Fed. Reg. 82461, 82691 (2000).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 163
an NIH [National Institutes of Health] sponsored study, IRB [Institutional 
Review Board] chairs reported that complaints about the lack of privacy 
and con˜dentiality were among the most common complaints made by 
research subjects.ﬂ In addition, the compliance staff of the HHS Of˜ce for 
Protection from Research Risks (now Of˜ce of Human Research Protec
-tions) related that they had investigated several allegations involving human 
subjects protection violations resulting from a breach of con˜dentiality over 
the past several years and that the complaints related to (1) research subject 
to IRB review and (2) research outside federal protection (GAO, 1999).
HHS also considered requiring researchers to obtain individual autho
-rization in all situations where a covered entity might want to disclose 
PHI for research. But this option would have made many research projects 
nearly impossible to carry out. Instead, HHS created the current system, 
which attempted to protect individual privacy while still allowing research
-ers access to data.
In proposing the Privacy Rule, HHS acknowledged that ideally, it 
would have preferred to directly regulate researchers by extending the pro
-tections of the Common Rule to nonfederally funded research and imposing 
additional criteria for the waiver of authorization in research.
29
 However, 
HHS recognized that it did not have the authority to do so, and therefore, 
it attempted to protect the health information released to researchers indi
-rectly (but within the scope of its limited authority) by imposing disclosure 
restrictions on covered entities.
The following sections provide a detailed overview of the Privacy Rule 
provisions regulating research, along with comparisons to the provisions 
of the Common Rule (see Chapter 3 for a general overview of the Com
-mon Rule).
Research Uses and Disclosures with Individual Authorization
Individuals may voluntarily authorize the use and disclosure of their 
PHI for essentially any reason, including for research purposes. To be 
valid under the Privacy Rule, an authorization must be ﬁspeci˜c and 
 
meaningfulﬂ
30
Šthat is, it must provide a clear description of the infor
-mation to be used or disclosed. The authorization must also be written 
in plain language, and contain core elements (e.g., signature of the indi
-vidual, description of purpose of requested use or disclosure) and state
-ments addressing the individual™s right to revoke authorization, as well as 
29
 See Secretary Recommendations (1997) and 64 Fed. Reg. 59918, 59968 (1999). 
30
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(c)(1)(i) (2006). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
circumstances under which services or payment may be conditioned on 
signing the authorization.
31
Authorization under the Privacy Rule differs from informed consent in 
research (reviewed by Pritts, 2008). Authorization states how, why, and to 
whom the PHI will be used and/or disclosed for research, and seeks permis
-sion for that use or disclosure. In contrast, informed consent describes the 
potential risks and bene˜ts of research and seeks permission to involve the 
subject, although it also provides research participants with a description 
of how the con˜dentiality of the research records will be protected. The 
Privacy Rule permits, but does not require, review of authorization forms 
by an IRB or a Privacy Board (see Box 4-3). In contrast, under the Common 
Rule, IRBs are required to review and approve informed consent documents 
for human subjects research. However, if the authorization is combined in 
the same document as the informed consent document, then IRB approval 
must be sought for the combination (HHS, 2004c).
Authorization of Future Research
Under the Common Rule, it is permissible to obtain patient consent for 
future research with biological samples or information stored in databases, 
with oversight by an IRB, if such future uses are described in suf˜cient 
detail to allow an informed consent. Historically, IRBs typically have tried 
to craft informed consent language on a case-by-case basis to allow for 
some measure of consent to future, largely unspeci˜ed research uses, but 
also to require some level of detail with respect to the categories of types 
of uses of the information or specimens, and to emphasize con˜dentiality 
protections for identi˜ed data and tissues (Barnes and Heffernan, 2004). 
For example, a consent form may specify that the tissue will be kept for 
research to learn about, prevent, or treat the type of cancer that affects 
the subject.
However, such language is too general to comply with the more strin
-gent HIPAA authorization requirements. Under the Privacy Rule, authoriza
-tions for the use or disclosure of PHI must include ﬁ[a] description of each 
purpose of the requested use or disclosure.ﬂ
32
 In the August 2002 Final 
Rule, HHS commented that research-related purposes described in the 
authorization must be ﬁstudy speci˜cﬂ and indicated that authorizations 
for ﬁunspeci˜ed future researchﬂ would be considered overly broad and 
31
 As a general rule, covered entities may not condition the provision of treatment payment 
or eligibility for bene˜ts on the provision of an authorization (with the exception of research-
related treatment). See 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(b)(4) (2006).
32
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(c)(1)(iv) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 165
BOX 4-3
 IRBs and Privacy Boards
 Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) and Privacy Boards have different scopes 
of review. The Common Rule requires IRBs to review research projects involving 
human subjects for risk of harm to the subjects and to ensure that the appropri
-ate process of informed consent is followed for all research participants. The 
Privacy Rule added to IRBs™ jurisdiction by giving them the responsibility of grant
-ing
 waivers of authorization. In contrast, Privacy Boards did not exist under the 
Common Rule. Privacy Boards were created by the Privacy Rule and only have 
authority to review applications for waivers of authorization.
 The Privacy Rule did not change the IRB membership requirements from 
the Common Rule (see also Box 3-3). Privacy Boards have similar membership 
requirements to IRBs, and must be made up of members with varying back
-grounds and have appropriate professional competency to review the research 
protocol. There must be one member who is not af˜liated with any entity conduct
-ing or sponsoring the research project and not related to any person who is af˜li
-ated with any of these entities. Also, all members with con˚icts of interest must 
be removed.
SOURCE: 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(1)(i)(A) and (B) (2006).
invalid.
33
 In other words, HHS regards all future uses of PHI as inherently 
nonspeci˜c, and the Privacy Rule does not permit an individual to grant 
authorization to nonspeci˜c research.
For example, the creation and maintenance of a biospecimen bank or 
database is considered a speci˜c research activity under the Privacy Rule, 
but authorization for any future studies undertaken with the data or mate
-rials cannot be sought at the time of collection. However, the process of 
recontacting individuals whose biospecimens are stored to obtain consent 
for each and every research project for which the samples could be used is 
widely viewed as impractical, if not impossible, especially as more and more 
samples are collected. This situation can be quite problematic for studies 
using stored biological samples (Barnes and Heffernan, 2004; Bledsoe, 
2004; Rosati, 2008; Rothstein, 2005).
HHS received comments suggesting that general descriptions of future 
research could meet the requirement of ﬁmeaningful and speci˜cﬂ autho
-rization, but HHS noted that the Privacy Rule does not require IRB or 
Privacy Board review of uses and disclosures made with individual authori
-33
 See 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53226 (2002).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
zation, and thus covered entities would be left to decide whether or not the 
initial authorization was broad enough to cover subsequent research.
34
 The 
HHS response went on to note that authorization for future research would 
not be required if a waiver of authorization was granted for a subsequent 
study by an IRB or a Privacy Board (see the section regarding Waiver of 
Authorization).
However, the committee recommends that this discordance between 
the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule be eliminated through guidance 
explicitly stating that future research may go forward if the authorization 
describes the types or categories of research that may be conducted with 
the PHI stored in a biospecimen bank or database, and if an IRB or Privacy 
Board determines that the proposed new research is not incompatible with 
the initial consent and authorization and poses no greater than minimal risk 
to the privacy of individuals 
(Wendler, 2006). Future consent for research 
is ethically valid if appropriate security measures are in place, donors have 
the right to withdraw consent, and new studies are reviewed and approved 
by an IRB or Privacy Board (Hansson et al., 2006). Furthermore, a prohi
-bition on future consent actually limits individual autonomy. If individuals 
desire to authorize the use of their PHI for future research, they should be 
able to do so.
Compound Authorization
If a covered entity plans to collect and store PHI in a research reposi
-tory in conjunction with a clinical trial, HHS has stated that the HIPAA 
authorization for storage of the PHI in the repository must be separate from 
the HIPAA authorization for disclosure of PHI associated with participa
-tion in the clinical trial. HHS came to this conclusion through a complex 
series of interpretive steps (reviewed by Rosati, 2008). First, it is generally 
not permissible to condition treatment on the provision of an authoriza
-tion, although the Privacy Rule does permit a covered entity to condition 
treatment in a clinical trial on signing an authorization.
35
 Second, although 
the Privacy Rule generally permits researchers to combine an authoriza
-tion form with any other type of written permission (including another 
authorization), the Privacy Rule prohibits combining authorizations where 
the covered entity conditions the provision of treatment on signing only 
one of the authorizations, but not the other.
36
 Because HHS has concluded 
that collection of PHI for a clinical trial and for a repository are separate 
research activities, researchers cannot condition participation in the clini
-34
 Id.
35
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(b)(4)(i) (2006).
36
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.508(b)(3) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 167
cal trial on signing authorization to include PHI in the repository (HHS, 
2004d). Thus, HHS has determined that the two authorizations cannot be 
combined in one form unless the form has separate signature lines for each 
authorization, and the text clearly delineates the two activities and states 
that the participant is not required to sign the portion authorizing the con
-tribution of PHI to the repository.
Ideally, all relevant information pertaining to authorization should be 
integrated into one simple document, but there is much confusion about 
these complex provisions of the HIPAA Privacy Rule (Rosati, 2008). 
Misperceptions about restrictions on individuals™ ability to provide com
-pound authorization for the related activities of clinical trial participation 
and biospecimen donation are widespread. Some institutions require two 
complete authorization forms with all the attendant language rather than 
two signature lines on the same form. The excess paperwork that results is 
burdensome for patients, can reduce the informed nature of authorization 
by confusing patients, and may reduce patient participation in research. 
The committee believes that guidance from HHS to clearly indicate that 
a single authorization form with two signature lines is permissible in such 
circumstances would reduce variability and increase the informed nature 
of authorization.
Research Uses and Disclosures Without Individual Authorization
Documented IRB or Privacy Board Approval of Such Use or Disclosure
In crafting the Privacy Rule, HHS acknowledged that it is not always 
possible to obtain authorization for using or disclosing PHI for research, 
particularly in ˜elds such as health services research and epidemiological 
research, where thousands of records may be involved (Pritts, 2008). It also 
recognized the potential for selection bias (see Box 3-8) when authorization 
is required. In light of these factors, HHS concluded that there were circum
-stances under which it is appropriate to disclose PHI for research without 
authorization. HHS noted, however, ﬁ[T]he privilege of using individually 
identi˜able health information for research purposes without individual 
authorization requires that the information be used and disclosed under 
strict conditions that safeguard individuals™ con˜dentiality.ﬂ
37
One situation in which the Privacy Rule permits a covered entity to use 
and disclose PHI for research purposes without obtaining authorization 
from each patient is when an IRB or a Privacy Board (Box 4-3) reviews a 
37
 See 64 Fed. Reg. 59918, 59967 (1999).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
research proposal to use PHI and determines whether to grant a ﬁwaiverﬂ 
of authorization to the researcher for that particular research protocol.
38
The Privacy Rule sets out complex standards for IRBs and Privacy 
Boards to apply in deciding whether to grant a waiver of authorization for 
a particular research study. The IRBs and Privacy Boards must determine 
whether a study meets all of the following criteria
39
:(A)
 The use or disclosure of PHI involves no more than a minimal risk 
to the privacy of individuals, based on, at least, the presence of the 
following elements:
(1)
 An adequate plan to protect the identi˜ers from improper use 
and disclosure;
(2)
 An adequate plan to destroy the identi˜ers at the earliest oppor
-tunity consistent with conduct of the research, unless there is 
a health or research justi˜cation for retaining the identi˜ers or 
such retention is otherwise required by law; and
(3)
 Adequate written assurances that the PHI will not be reused 
or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required 
by law, for authorized oversight of the research study, or for 
other research for which the use or disclosure of PHI would be 
permitted by this subpart;
(B)
 The research could not practicably be conducted without the waiver 
or alteration; and
(C)
 The research could not practicably be conducted without access to 
and use of the PHI.
An IRB or a Privacy Board may waive the authorization requirement 
in whole or in part. A complete waiver of authorization means that no 
authorization is required for the covered entity to use and disclose PHI. 
A partial waiver means that the IRB or Privacy Board determined that a 
covered entity does not need authorization for the uses and disclosure of the 
PHI for one part of a research project, but does need to obtain authoriza
-tion from patients for another part of the project. For example, an IRB or a 
Privacy Board often grants a partial waiver to allow PHI to be disclosed to 
researchers to access PHI to identify potential subjects for a study. However, 
if only a partial waiver of authorization is granted, the researchers will need 
to obtain HIPAA authorization before the PHI for each individual patient is 
used for the research project. An IRB or Privacy Board may also approve a 
request for an alteration that removes some, but not all, required elements 
of an authorization, using the same criteria for a waiver of authorization.
38
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(1)(i) (2006).
39
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(2)(ii) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 169
The ˜nal and codi˜ed provisions above share only some of the language 
used in the Common Rule
40
 to determine whether it is allowable to alter 
the elements of informed consent or to waive the requirement of obtain
-ing informed consent. This difference can create a challenge for the IRB 
 
decision-making process (Rothstein, 2005).
The concept of ﬁpracticabilityﬂ is used in both the Common Rule 
and in the HIPAA authorization criteria, but there is no guidance as to 
what
 factors (e.g., feasibility or cost) should be considered in determining 
whether the criteria are met (IOM, 2006; IPPC, 2008; Rothstein, 2005). 
HHS commentary in the December 2000 Final Rule brie˚y mentioned cost 
as one factor that could be considered in determining practicability
41
 (HHS, 
2000), but guidance documents do not de˜ne what is ﬁpracticableﬂ or 
ﬁimpracticable.ﬂ As a result, institutions apply varying standards indepen
-dently, often too conservatively to allow even low-risk research to proceed 
(see also Chapter 5). For example, some institutions interpret impracticable 
as ﬁnot at all possibleﬂ and require researchers to demonstrate that a study 
will fail without a waiver of authorization.
Moreover, stakeholders across the board, from researchers to ind
ividual 
patients, have questioned the meaning of the ﬁpracticabilityﬂ standard (Pritts 
et al., 2008; Tovino, 2004). One focus group study indicated that patients 
may ˜nd it appropriate to consider two factors in determining whether it 
is practicable to conduct the research without the waiver of authorization: 
whether having to contact each patient ˜rst would (1) make the study less 
scienti˜cally valid or (2) make the results less useful in improving medical 
care (i.e., would produce selection bias) (Pritts et al., 2008).
There are also no clear standards regarding what constitutes adequate 
protection of privacy, or what constitutes a minimal risk to privacy. The 
concept of minimal risk implies that there is a risk threshold, above which 
protections should be stricter. However, clearly de˜ning the threshold is 
problematic. The terms ﬁadequate planﬂ and ﬁadequate written assuranceﬂ 
are highly subjective, and thus different institutions are likely to set varying 
thresholds for ﬁminimal risk.ﬂ 
Thus, to facilitate appropriate authoriza
-tion requirements for responsible research, the committee recommends 
that HHS simplify the criteria that IRBs and Privacy Boards use in making 
determinations for when they can waive the requirements to obtain autho
-rization from each patient whose PHI will be used for a research study.
In the 2000 version of the Privacy Rule, one of the criteria for waiver 
of authorization was that ﬁthe privacy risks to individuals whose PHI is to 
be used or disclosed are reasonable in relation to the anticipated bene˜ts, if 
any, to the individual, and the importance of the knowledge that may rea
-40
 See 45 C.F.R. § 116(d) (2005).
41
 See 65 Fed. Reg. 82461, 82697 (2000).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
sonably be expected to result from the research.ﬂ
42
 In 2002, HHS deleted 
this criterion from the Final Rule, stating that it was ﬁunnecessarily dupli
-cative of other provisions to protect patients™ con˜dentiality interests.ﬂ
43
 It may have been more appropriate to retain this criterion and omit the 
criteria for impracticability.
If the current waiver criteria are to be retained, the IOM committee 
believes that a clear and reasonable de˜nition of practicability, along with 
speci˜c case examples of what should or should not be considered imprac
-ticable or of minimal risk, could perhaps reduce variability and overly 
conservative interpretation of these provisions.
Simpli˜cation or clari˜cation of the waiver criteria would be especially 
helpful for multi-institutional studies, which fall under the jurisdiction of 
multiple IRBs or Privacy Boards. Covered entities are permitted to rely on 
a waiver of authorization approved by a single IRB or Privacy Board with 
jurisdiction. However, covered entities often decide to require approval 
from their own IRB or Privacy Board prior to disclosing PHI to the request
-ing researcher, regardless of whether another IRB or Privacy Board already 
granted a waiver of authorization. This leads to delays and variability in the 
protocol at different sites (see also Chapter 5). Simpli˜cation would also be 
very helpful for smaller or community-based institutions that do not have 
internal counsel or regulatory affairs specialists, and are thus more likely to 
opt out of research that requires decisions about authorizations.
Activities Preparatory to Research
A second situation where a covered entity is permitted to use and disclose 
PHI without obtaining authorization is for activities that are preparatory 
to research.
44
 Review by an IRB or a Privacy Board is also not required for 
activities preparatory to research. A covered entity may permit researchers to 
look through its medical records in order to develop research protocols and 
to aid the recruitment of research participants if it obtains from the researcher 
representations that the information sought is necessary for the research pur
-pose, that information will be reviewed only for the stated purposes prepara
-tory to research, and that no PHI will be removed from the covered entity by 
the researcher in the course of the review
45
 (HHS, 2004a,c).
Many research studies, especially those focused on rare conditions 
with limited eligible patient populations, rely on large-scale medical chart 
reviews and searches of patient databases to identify patients who might 
42
 See 65 Fed. Reg. 82461, 82816 (2000).
43
 See 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53229 (2002).
44
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(1)(ii) (2006). 
45
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(ii) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 171
be eligible for and might bene˜t from a particular study. Suf˜cient patient 
enrollment in a timely fashion is essential to ensure the meaningfulness and 
reliability of the research results. However, confusion regarding what is per
-mitted under this component of the Privacy Rule is widespread (SACHRP, 
2004), and surveys and studies indicate that patient recruitment has become 
more dif˜cult and costly under the varying interpretations of the Privacy 
Rule (see Chapter 5).
HHS has issued multiple guidance statements on this topic, but these 
statements, some of which have been contradictory, have failed to eliminate 
confusion (reviewed by SACHRP, 2004). According to current HHS guid
-ance on the Privacy Rule, researchers (both internal and external to a cov
-ered entity) may conduct a review of medical records under the preparatory 
to research exception. However, only internal researchers (an employee or 
member of the covered entity™s workforce) may contact potential subjects 
about the possibility of enrolling in a study under this provision of the 
Privacy Rule. HHS guidance on the Privacy Rule indicates that external 
researchers are not allowed under the preparatory to research exception 
to record or remove contact information of patients from a covered entity. 
External researchers must get an IRB/Privacy Board approved waiver of 
authorization to perform any recruitment activities. This creates an arti
-˜cial distinction between internal and external researchers that actually 
provides less privacy protection than that afforded by the Common Rule, 
which requires that any activities preparatory to research involving human 
subjects, or related to initial recruitment of subjects for research studies, be 
reviewed and approved by an IRB (HHS, 2003). Thus, the Privacy Rule per
-mits conduct that is prohibited by the Common Rule (Rothstein, 2005).
IRBs historically have required all communications about an avail
-able research study to come from the individual™s caregivers, not from an 
investigator unknown to the potential subjects (SACHRP, 2004). Moreover, 
research shows that patients prefer to be approached by their clinician or an 
associated nurse as opposed to a stranger 
(Damschroder et al., 2007; Kass 
et al., 2003; Robling et al., 2004; Westin, 2007; Willison et al., 2007), and 
HHS has reported that most allegations of violations of the Privacy Rule 
related to research come from patients upset at receiving recruitment calls 
from unknown researchers (Heide, 2007).
According to the Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research 
Protections (SACHRP), ﬁThe consequence of these confused and complex 
interpretations of research recruitment requirements has been to layer unnec
-essary, and extremely burdensome, tasks onto human subjects research. It 
appears, for example, that in some institutions, boilerplate business associate 
contracts are being signed, and that template applications for partial
 waivers 
of authorization are being routinely granted, as methods of perfunctory 
compliance with these confusing Privacy Rule requirements. Another effect 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
of the enormous confusion has been that other institutions are hesitant to 
permit many recruitment activities critical to the continuation of the research 
enterprise, out of fear that they are in some way misinterpreting the govern
-ment™s current positions on research recruitment. SACHRP is very concerned 
that the bureaucratic complexities here undermine, rather than enhance, the 
attention that needs to be paid to the welfare and interests of subjects in the 
research recruitment processﬂ (SACHRP, 2004).
The IOM committee believes that new guidance documents from HHS 
that clarify and simplify the rules for activities preparatory to research, 
and harmonize them with the Common RuleŠby requiring IRB/Privacy 
Board approval for all researchers (internal and external) prior to contact
-ing potential subjectsŠwould help to eliminate this confusion and facilitate 
ethical research that protects patient privacy.
Research on Protected Health Information of Decedents
The third situation where a covered entity is permitted to disclose PHI 
without authorization is for research using the PHI of decedents. Covered 
entities are not required to obtain authorization from the personal repre
-sentative or next of kin to conduct research on a decedent™s PHI, nor are 
they required to receive a waiver of authorization. These provisions are 
similar to the Common Rule, which de˜nes a ﬁhuman subjectﬂ as a ﬁliving 
individual.ﬂ
46
However, the Privacy Rule does require that researchers make several 
representations, either in writing or orally, to the covered entity prior to 
the covered entity granting the researcher access to a decedent™s PHI. These 
representations include:
Ł The use or disclosure being sought is solely for research on the PHI 
of decedents
Ł The PHI is necessary for research
Ł The death of the individual is documented, if requested by the 
covered entity
47
Apparently some covered entities interpret the Privacy Rule more con
-servatively by requiring researchers to obtain authorization from next of 
kin, or a waiver of authorization from an IRB or Privacy Board, in order 
to access the PHI of decedents (Ness, 2007).
48
46
 See 45 C.F.R. § 102(f) (2005).
47
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(i)(1)(iii) (2006). 
48
 Personal communication, J. Bailey-Wilson, National Institutes of Health, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, April 29, 2007. Personal communication, Rachel Nosowsky, 
Miller, Can˜eld, Paddock and Stone, PLC, October 23, 2008.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 173
Deidenti˜ed Information
Researchers can also access deidenti˜ed health information stored by 
covered entities without obtaining authorization, waiver of authorization, 
or IRB/Privacy Board approval. Deidenti˜ed information does not qualify 
as PHI, and therefore is not protected under the Privacy RuleŠit can be 
disclosed to researchers at any time (HHS, 2004c). The Privacy Rule offers 
two methods to deidentify personal health information. Under the statisti
-cal method, a statistician or person with appropriate training veri˜es that 
enough identi˜ers have been removed that the risk of identi˜cation of the 
individual is very small. Under the ﬁsafe harborﬂ method, data are consid
-ered deidenti˜ed if the covered entity removes 18 speci˜ed personal identi
-˜ers from the data (Box 4-4).
49
 In the process of deidentifying information, 
the covered entity may assign a code to the deidenti˜ed information so 
that it may reidentify it, but the code may not be derived from information 
related to the individual (e.g., Social Security number). Furthermore, the 
covered entity may not disclose the key to the code to anyone else.
50
 These 
provisions of the Privacy Rule are based on the federal statistical agencies™ 
policy of using statistical methods to assess and protect the con˜dentiality 
of individuals™ data they collect and release (Interagency Con˜dentiality 
and Data Access Group, 1999; Subcommittee on Disclosure Limitation 
Methodology, 1994).
These provisions are more stringent than those of the Common Rule, 
leading to situations in which some coded data might be subject to the 
Privacy Rule, but not the Common Rule (Rothstein, 2005). The Common 
Rule does not apply to research if ﬁthe identity of the subject is [not] or 
may [not] be readily ascertained by the investigator or associated with the 
information accessed by the researcherﬂ (see Chapter 3).
51
 In practice, 
this can mean that a covered entity may no longer routinely disclose for 
research data that have been anonymized according to the Common Rule 
(Pritts, 2008). This discrepancy between deidenti˜cation standards under 
the two rules can give rise to situations in which research with anonymized 
data that are exempt from IRB oversight under the Common Rule may still 
require a decision by an IRB or a Privacy Board to determine if a waiver of 
individuals™ authorization of disclosure for the use of their information for 
research purposes is appropriate under the Privacy Rule. But because IRBs 
have not had to review these protocols in the past, they may ˜nd it dif˜cult 
to make appropriate decisions about waivers.
The Privacy Rule restrictions put greater emphasis on the possibility 
that health data could be reidenti˜ed using publicly available databases. 
49
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(b) (2006). 
50
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(c) (2006).
51
 See 45 C.F.R. § 46.102(f) (2005).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX 4-4
 HIPAA ﬁSafe Harborﬂ Deidentification Method
 The HIPAA ﬁsafe harborﬂ method of deidenti˜cation requires that each of the 
following identi˜ers of the individual or of relatives, employers, or household 
members of the individual must be removed from medical record information in 
order for the records to be considered deidenti˜ed:
 1.
 Names.
 2.
 All geographical subdivisions smaller than a state, including street address, 
city, county, precinct, ZIP Code, and their equivalent geocodes, except for 
the initial three digits of a ZIP Code, if according to the current publicly avail
-able data from the Bureau of the Census: (1) the geographic unit formed 
by combining all ZIP Codes with the same three initial digits contains more 
than 20,000 people; and (2) the initial three digits of a ZIP Code for all such 
geographic units containing 20,000 or fewer people is changed to 000.
 3.
 All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual 
(including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death) and all 
ages over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) indicative of such 
age, except that such ages and elements may be aggregated into a single 
category of age 90 or older.
 4.
 Phone numbers.
 5.
 Fax numbers.
 6.
 Electronic mail addresses.
 7.
 Social Security numbers.
 8.
 Medical record numbers.
 9.
 Health plan bene˜ciary numbers.
10.
 Account numbers.
11.
 Certi˜cate/license numbers.
12.
 Vehicle identi˜ers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers.
13.
 Device identi˜ers and serial numbers.
14.
 Web Uniform Resource Locators.
15.
 Internet Protocol address numbers.
16.
 Biometric identi˜ers, including ˜nger and voice prints.
17.
 Full-face photographic images and any comparable images.
18.
 Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (note this does 
not mean the unique code assigned by the investigator to code the data).
SOURCE: 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(b) (2006).
Determining what information can be released without inappropriately 
compromising the privacy of the individual respondents is inherently a 
statistical issue (Fienberg, 2005) (see also discussion on privacy
-preserving 
data mining and statistical disclosure limitation in Chapter 2). Record 
linkage technology has advanced rapidly in the past 10 years, and large 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 175
public list searches are readily available for integration with ﬁdeidenti˜edﬂ 
data, making it easier to reidentify data than when the Common Rule was 
implemented (De Wolf et al., 2006; Pritts, 2008). For example, an academic 
exercise showed that it was possible to identify the names and addresses 
of 97 percent of the registered voters in Cambridge, Massachusetts, using 
the birth date and full postal code (Sweeney, 1997). In a nonacademic set
-ting, 
New York Times
 reporters were also able to identify ﬁanonymousﬂ 
AOL clients whose search habits had been posted on the web for research 
projects by linking their search history to other available data (Barbarq 
and Zeller, 2006).
Studies indicate that even after removal of the 18 identi˜ers required 
under the safe harbor method of the Privacy Rule, recipients could reiden
-tify individuals in a study dataset with a moderately high expectation of 
accuracy by applying only diagnosis and medication combinations (Clause 
et al., 2004). In short, even the Privacy Rule™s deidenti˜cation standard may 
not be stringent enough to protect the anonymity of data in today™s tech
-nological environment (Pritts, 2008). However, strong security measures 
(as recommended in Chapter 2) and the implementation of legal sanctions 
against the unauthorized reidenti˜cation of deidenti˜ed data (as recom
-mended in subsequent sections of this chapter) may be more effective in 
protecting privacy than more stringent deidenti˜cation standards.
Limited Datasets
Many researchers have argued that removal of all 18 data categories as 
required by the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s deidenti˜cation standards can render 
the dataset unusable for many research projects (Casarett et al., 2005; HHS, 
2002; Kulynych and Korn, 2002; SACHRP, 2004) (see also Chapter 5).
52
 For example, general areas of origin, residence, and work may be essential 
to epidemiological and other studies of topics such as disease incidence. 
Likewise, treatment dates are essential information for determining treat
-ment effects, including adverse side effects. Concerns were also raised 
that deidenti˜cation would impede longitudinal studies, and subsequent 
research has indicated that information deidenti˜ed using the safe harbor 
method of removing all of the listed identi˜ers results in lost chronological 
spacing of episodes of care (Clause et al., 2004).
Because of these concerns, some stakeholders urged HHS ﬁto permit 
covered entities to disclose PHI for research if the protected information 
is facially deidenti˜ed, that is, stripped of direct identi˜ers, so long as the 
research entity provides assurances that it will not use or disclose the infor
-mation for purposes other than research and will not identify or contact 
52
 See 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53232 (2002). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the individuals who are subjects of the information.ﬂ
53
 Others were more 
speci˜c and requested that the Privacy Rule be amended to allow the use 
of keyed-hash message authentication code (HMAC), asserting that this 
mechanism would be valuable for researchers because it allows the recipient 
to link clinical information about the individual from multiple entities over 
time. In direct response to these requests, HHS modi˜ed the Privacy Rule 
and created a category
54
 of partially deidenti˜ed data called the ﬁlimited 
dataset,ﬂ which may be used and disclosed for research without obtaining 
individual authorization or IRB/Privacy Board approval.
55
To qualify as a limited dataset, 16 of the more direct identi˜ersŠ
such as names, addresses, Social Security numbers, and medical telephone 
 
numbersŠmust be removed from the data. However, the following ele
-ments may be included in a limited dataset: city, state, ZIP Code, elements 
of date, and other numbers, characteristics, or codes not listed as direct 
identi˜ers in the regulation (including HMAC). A limited dataset may be 
created by a covered entity or the covered entity can enter into a business 
associate agreement with another party, including the intended recipient, to 
create the limited dataset on its behalf.
56
To disclose a limited dataset for research without individual authori
-zation, the covered entity must enter into a data use agreement with the 
recipient. These contracts specify the recipient of the limited dataset and 
require the recipient to agree to a number of conditions, including:
Ł Not to use or disclose the limited dataset other than as permitted 
by the agreement or as required by law
Ł To use appropriate safeguards to prevent the use or disclosure of the 
information other than as provided for in the data use agreement
Ł To report to the covered entity any use or disclosure of the infor
-mation not provided for by the data use agreement of which the 
recipient becomes aware
Ł To ensure that any agents to whom the recipient provides the lim
-ited dataset agree to the same restrictions and conditions as the 
original recipient
Ł Not to identify the information or contact the individuals whose 
records are included in the dataset
57
53
 See 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53234 (2002).
54
 See
  
 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(e)(3)(i) (2006).
55
 See
  
 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53234 (2002).
56
 See
  
 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(e)(3)(ii) (2006).
57
 See
  
 45 C.F.R. § 164.514(e)(1) (2006). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 177
Although some researchers have indicated that the use of limited data
-sets may be ﬁenticingﬂ (Pace et al., 2005), there do not appear to be any 
studies about the use of limited datasets in the United States (Pritts, 2008). 
France reportedly uses the equivalent of limited datasets from numerous 
hospitals to conduct epidemiologic research (Berman, 2002), but the French 
health care system and legal environment are quite different than in the 
United States. In testimony at an Institute of Medicine workshop on the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule and health research, legal experts noted the shortcom
-ings of the limited dataset (IOM, 2006). For example, in some health care 
settings, it can be challenging to identify an individual who will sign a data 
use agreement on behalf of the covered entity and thus manage the contract 
according to the perceived risk and obligation to monitor how that lim
-ited dataset is used. At the other extreme, it was noted that some covered 
entities were signing data use agreements as a matter of course, and thus 
providing little meaningful privacy protection to the patient (IOM, 2006).
Thus, the committee recommends that HHS encourage greater use of 
limited datasets and develop clear guidance on how to set up and comply 
with the associated data use agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively.
Linking Data from Multiple Sources
A single database may not provide a complete picture of a patient™s con
-dition or health history, so combining information from multiple sources 
is often necessary (IOM, 2000). HHS stated that one intent of the limited 
dataset provisions was to permit data to be used and disclosed in a coded 
manner such that the recipient of the data could link one person™s data 
longitudinally over multiple settings.
58
 However, linking data continues to 
be problematic for researchers under the HIPAA Privacy Rule (IOM, 2006; 
IPPC, 2008).
The Privacy Rule addresses data aggregation only with respect to 
health care operations,
59
 not research. However, it is possible in prin
-ciple under the Privacy Rule for a researcher to aggregate PHI from 
multiple covered entities with authorization or IRB/Privacy Board waiver 
of authorization. Obtaining individuals™ authorization for research that 
entails the review of thousands of medical records is unrealistic, though, 
and even with a waiver of authorization, covered entities with large 
datasets are often reluctant to allow researchers access to PHI, as noted 
above (see also Chapters 5 and 6). More commonly, data are provided 
to researchers with direct identi˜ers removed. But because datasets from 
multiple sources cannot be linked to generate a more complete record of 
58
 See
  
 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53235 (2002).
59
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.501 and 164.504(e)(2)(i) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
a patient™s health history without a unique identi˜er, such datasets often 
are of minimal value to researchers and are not frequently used. A third 
party may also collect PHI from covered entities and aggregate the data 
for research by establishing business associate agreements (BAs) with 
the various data sources, but in practice, BAs are used infrequently for 
this purpose (AcademyHealth, 2008). This approach is complicated and 
impractical to set up for individual research projects. Moreover, BAs can 
be established by covered entities to gain competitive advantage, rather 
than to collaborate in research.
The committee believes that a better approach would be to establish 
secure, trusted, noncon˚icted intermediaries that could develop a protocol, 
or key, for routinely linking data without direct identi˜ers from different 
sources and then provide more complete and useful deidenti˜ed datasets to 
researchers. 
One way this could be accomplished, for example, might be 
through data warehouses that are certi˜ed for the purpose of linking data 
from different sources (IOM, 2000). The organizations responsible for such 
linking would be required to use strong security measures and would main
-tain the details about how this linkage was done, should another research 
team need to recreate the linked dataset. Using such intermediaries would 
increase patient privacy protections and allay concerns of covered entities, 
and thus would facilitate greater use of health data for research and also 
lead to more meaningful study results.
CMS provides a similar service for Medicare and Medicaid data, via 
contractors who create standardized data ˜les that are tailored for research 
(Box 4-5). The agency has begun pilot projects to aggregate Medicare claims 
data with data from commercial health plans and, in some cases, Medicaid, 
in order to calculate and report quality measures for physician groups. A 
broader effort to link data from diverse sources has been initiated by the 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), called the National 
Health Data Stewardship Entity.
60
 AHRQ is also involved in implementing 
the Patient Safety and Quality Improvement Act of 2005, which encourages 
creation of Patient Safety Organizations to receive information from hos
-pitals, doctors, and health care providers on a privileged and con˜dential 
basis, for analysis and aggregation.
61
 Although the purpose of the latter two 
initiatives is for monitoring health care quality, they could provide a model 
for data aggregation applicable to health research as well.
The HIPAA administrative simpli˜cation provisions speci˜cally pro
-vided for the creation of a unique individual identi˜er, but work on this 
project has been halted because there is a great deal of controversy regard
-ing how it could be implemented without comprising individual privacy. 
60
 National Health Data Stewardship: Request for Information, 72 Fed. Reg. 30803 
(2007).
61
 Patient Safety and Quality Improvement: Final Rule, 73 Fed. Reg. 70732 (2008). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 179
BOX 4-5
 The Chronic Conditions Warehouse
 Section 723 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Moderniza
-tion Act of 2003 instructed the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services to make Medicare data more readily available to researchers 
studying chronic illness in the Medicare population, with the intent to help ﬁidentify 
areas for improving the quality of care provided to chronically ill Medicare bene˜
-ciaries, [and] reduce program spending.ﬂ The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services (CMS) contracted with the Iowa Foundation for Medical Care to create 
the Chronic Conditions Warehouse (CCW) to implement the requirements of the 
Act.
 The Data: 
The CCW contains fee-for-services claims, enrollment/eligibility, 
and assessment data. Researchers can ef˜ciently access data on 21 prede˜ned 
chronic health conditions, such as diabetes, breast cancer, Alzheimer™s, and 
depression. Data ˜les can also be extracted for other cohorts on request. Every 
data ˜le includes a unique, encrypted CCW bene˜ciary identi˜er that allows the 
researcher to link a bene˜ciary™s data across data sources and types within the 
CCW system.
 The Process: 
A researcher must submit to CMS a data release request that 
includes a research design and objectives, which are reviewed by a CMS Privacy 
Board to ensure that the project will assist CMS ﬁin monitoring, managing, and 
improving the Medicare and Medicaid programs or the services provided to ben
-e˜ciaries.ﬂ The Privacy Board is instructed to ﬁbalance the potential risks to the 
bene˜ciary con˜dentiality with the probable bene˜ts gained from the completed 
research,ﬂ as well as to consider the researchers™ demonstrated expertise and 
experience in conducting such a study.
 Once the request for data release is approved, the researcher must sign a 
CMS data use agreement that describes how the data can be used and how the 
data should be destroyed or returned to CMS at the conclusion of the study. If a 
researcher wishes to publish the study results, the manuscript must be submitted 
to CMS for review prior to publication to ensure that the privacy of all bene˜ciaries 
is maintained.
SOURCES: CMS (2008); IFMC (2008).
Federal agencies are also under pressure from the Of˜ce of Management 
and Budget to reduce the use of Social Security numbers as unique identi
-˜ers. But the development of some type of linking key (not based on Social 
Security numbers) would make linkages more ef˜cient, standardized, and 
reliable and less costly. Moreover, this type of linkage could greatly facili
-tate many types of information research, provide more extensive health 
histories and facilitate public health surveillance, and improve quality of 
care (HHS, 1998; Hillestad et al., 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Genetic Information and the Privacy Rule
Research involving genetic information presents perhaps some of the 
most challenging areas for protecting the privacy of health information 
(Bregman-Eschet, 2006; Farmer and Godard, 2007; Greely, 2007; NBAC, 
1999). With recent technological advances in biomedical research, it is 
now possible to learn a great deal about disease processes and individ
-ual variations in treatment effectiveness or susceptibility to disease from 
genetic analyses because the DNA sequences comprising a person™s genome 
strongly in˚uence a person™s health. New knowledge of the human genome, 
combined with advances in computing capabilities, are expected to help 
decipher the roles that genetics and the environment play in the origins of 
complex but common human diseases, such as cancer, heart disease, and 
diabetes. In this genomic age of health research, patient samples stored 
in biospecimen banks can provide a wealth of information for addressing 
long-standing questions about health and disease, and efforts are underway 
to create large genomic databases for that purpose (Adams, 2008; Greely, 
2007; Lowrance, 2002; Lowrance and Collins, 2007). However, it is par
-ticularly dif˜cult to assess the potential harms to individuals who are the 
subjects of research in these rapidly advancing areas (NBAC, 1999; Pritts, 
2008), and precedent does not appear to provide suf˜cient guidance in 
this relatively uncharted territory (Lowrance, 2002; Lowrance and Collins, 
2007). Moreover, HHS has not issued clear guidance on how the Privacy 
Rule applies to DNA samples or sequences (IOM, 2005).
HHS guidance documents indicate that tissue or blood itself is not 
protected under the Privacy Rule unless it contains or is associated with 
HIPAA identi˜ers (HHS, 2004b). HHS has further stated that the results of 
an analysis of blood or tissue, if containing or associated with personally 
identi˜able information, would be PHI. However, the research community 
remains uncertain about whether genetic information accompanying bio
-specimens is protected under the Privacy Rule because the list of identi˜ers 
includes ﬁbiometric identi˜ersﬂ and ﬁunique identifying characteristicsﬂ
62
 (NCVHS, 2004).
The European Union, which has a more restrictive privacy regime than 
the United States, does not consider DNA in and of itself to be a direct 
identi˜er (DPWP, 2007). Genetic information does not itself identify an 
individual in the absence of other identifying information. However, in 
some circumstances, a
 person™s genetic code could be construed as a unique 
identi˜er in that it could be used to match a sequence in another biospeci
-men bank or databank that does include identi˜ers (Lin et al., 2004; Malin 
and Sweeney, 2004).
62
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.514 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 181
As genetic information becomes more prevalent in research and health 
care, the latter scenario is more likely to occur. For example, in January 
2008, the NIH began requiring data from the Genome Wide Associa
-tion Study
63
 to be submitted to a central databank in an anonymous and 
aggregated form. That database was publicly accessible until August 2008 
when of˜cials at NIH removed the database from the public Website, cit
-ing concerns about patient con˜dentiality (Couzin, 2008; Zerhouni and 
Nabel, 2008). Those concerns stemmed from a study showing that a new 
type of DNA analysis could con˜rm the identity of an individual in a pool 
of similarly masked data if that person™s genetic pro˜le was already known 
(Homer et al., 2008). NIH intends to move the aggregate genotype data to 
a secure, controlled-access database with policies for review and approval 
of data access requests (Zerhouni and Nabel, 2008).
Also, as we enter the era of personalized medicine, genetic informa
-tion is more likely to be included in a person™s health records. But at 
the same time, realization of the promises of personalized medicine will 
require research on DNA from a great many diverse individuals whose 
medical histories are well documented. Therefore, the committee believes 
that the establishment of consistent standards for use and protection of 
genetic information is important and advocates a focus on strong security 
measures. 
To facilitate appropriate use of DNA in health research, the 
committee recommends that HHS clarify the circumstances under which 
DNA samples or sequences are considered PHI.
 In addition, it recommends 
the adoption of strict prohibitions on the unauthorized
 reidenti˜cation of 
individuals by anyone from DNA sequences.
Regardless of how genetic information is regulated under the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule, a federal prohibition of genetic discrimination is necessary 
to allay privacy concerns and diminish potential negative consequences of 
unintended disclosure of genetic information. Many people are concerned 
about genetic discriminationŠthe misuse of genetic information by insur
-ance companies, employers, and others to make decisions based on a 
person™s DNAŠso it is important both to protect the privacy of genetic 
information and to protect people against such discrimination. The Genetic 
Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA), recently signed into law, hope
-fully will begin to address some of these concerns.
Accounting of Research Disclosures
The ﬁaccounting of disclosuresﬂ provision of the HIPAA
 Privacy Rule 
gives individuals the right to receive a list of certain disclosures that a cov
-ered entity has made of their PHI in the past 6 years, including disclosures 
63
 See http://www.genome.gov/20019523/.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
made for research purposes.
64
 The accounting of disclosures (AOD) must 
also include certain substantive information related to each disclosure, 
including the date of the disclosure, the identity of the person who received 
the information, a description of the information disclosed, and a statement 
of the purpose of the disclosure.
The AOD requirement was intended ﬁas a means for the individual to 
˜nd out the nonroutine purposes for which his or her PHI was disclosed by 
the covered entity, so as to increase the individual™s awareness of persons 
or entities other than the individual™s health care provider or health plan 
in possession of this information.ﬂ
65
 This requirement does not actually 
protect privacy; it merely requires covered entities to record disclosures 
that have already happened. In addition, the AOD requirement does not 
constitute an audit trail, as there are numerous exceptions to the require
-ment, including disclosures for health care operations, pursuant to an 
authorization, as part of a limited dataset, for national security or intelli
-gence purposes, and to correctional institutions or law enforcement of˜cial. 
Therefore, AOD cannot provide individuals with some of the information 
they may want, such as a list of employees who looked at their medical 
record when they were in the hospital (AHIC, 2007; Pritts, 2008).
Disclosures made for research purposes under a waiver of authoriza
-tion, or for public health purposes as required by law, must be included in 
the AOD. In fact, HHS has noted that ﬁmaking a set of records available 
for review by a third party constitutes a disclosure of the PHI in the entire 
set of records, regardless of whether the third party actually reviews any 
particular record.ﬂ The Privacy Rule has an exception for research involv
-ing groups of 50 or more subjects, which allows the generation of a general 
list of all protocols for which a person™s PHI may have been disclosed, but 
even in that case, there is a considerable administrative obligation. Fur
-thermore, in many medical facilities, that list is very extensive, and thus is 
relatively meaningless to a particular patient.
This aspect of the Privacy Rule places a heavy administrative burden 
on health systems and health services research that achieves little in terms 
of protecting privacy. Moreover, HHS has not given covered entities any 
guidance on practical ways to ful˜ll this requirement in an ef˜cient manner. 
Annual surveys of health care privacy of˜cers undertaken by the American 
Health Information Management Association (AHIMA) since 2004 have 
found that many facilities report dif˜culties with the AOD requirement 
(AHIMA, 2006). Furthermore, the surveys have found that the demand 
for AOD is extremely low. Two-thirds of respondents reported receiving no 
requests at all. Nearly a third indicated that they would like to see a change 
64
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.528 (2006).
65
 See 67 Fed. Reg. 53181, 53245 (2002).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 183
to the AOD provisionsŠthe most frequently cited Privacy Rule provision 
among all respondents, and by far among those with more than 20,000 
admissions/discharges per year. Based on these results, AHIMA concluded 
that ﬁfor many, this provision is not only burdensome but also signi˜cantly 
inef˜cient.ﬂ
The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics (NCVHS), the 
Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), and SACHRP have all 
recommended changes to the AOD provisions (see Appendix A). Witnesses 
at the ˜rst public hearing held by the NCVHS Subcommittee on Privacy and 
Con˜dentiality, held in August 2001, suggested that covered entities were 
likely to refuse to share PHI because of the burden of the AOD provisions. 
NCVHS stated that it supported an individual™s right to an AOD, but sug
-gested that HHS issue guidance to provide covered entities with ways to 
ful˜ll this requirement in a convenient and practical manner. To date, no 
efforts have been undertaken to identify organizations that have success
-fully implemented the AOD requirement, or the practices that they have 
put in place (Pritts, 2008).
Case reports gathered for AAMC™s database also indicated that this pro
-vision is a tremendous burden to providers and researchers and has resulted 
in many covered entities refusing to make PHI available to
 researchers. 
AAMC recommended that the AOD requirement be eliminated for research, 
if IRB/Privacy Board approval is given, asserting that most AOD do not 
provide any meaningful information to the individual and that it would be 
better to investigate any questionable disclosures as they occur.
SACHRP made a similar recommendation, stating that the Privacy Rule 
imposes suf˜cient privacy protections without applying this portion of the 
Privacy Rule to research. Indeed, SACHRP concluded that the cost and 
burden of compliance with AOD requirements was so high that institutions 
were likely to accept the risk of noncompliance rather than incur the cost 
of compliance. Noting that researchers must establish a certain standard of 
privacy protections before an IRB or a Privacy Board will grant a waiver of 
authorization, or before a covered entity will permit a researcher to access 
PHI preparatory to research, SACHRP recommended that covered entities 
should inform patients in the HIPAA ﬁNotice of Privacy Practicesﬂ that 
their PHI may be used and disclosed for research purposes without their 
authorization if suf˜cient privacy safeguards are in place. The IOM com
-mittee concurs, and 
recommends that HHS reform the requirements for the 
accounting of disclosures of protected health information for research.
 In 
the interest of transparency, institutions should maintain a list, accessible 
to the public, of all studies approved by an IRB or Privacy Board, in place 
of the AOD requirement. However, as the health care system moves toward 
broader implementation of electronic health records, automatic tracking of 
audit trails will be an important component to incorporate.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
ENFORCEMENT
 OF
 THE
 P
RIVACY
 R
ULE
The Privacy Rule sets out both civil and criminal penalties for covered 
entities that breach the Rule.
66
 The civil penalty provision allows a $100 
˜ne per violation for disclosure made in error, with a maximum ˜ne of up to 
$25,000 per year. The criminal penalties for persons who knowingly obtain 
or disclose personally identi˜able information include ˜nes of up to $50,000 
and imprisonment for up to 1 year. If the crime is committed under false 
pretenses, the individual or organization faces ˜nes up to $100,000 and 5 
years of imprisonment. Penalties for the sale or use of PHI for commercial 
advantage, personal gain, or malicious harm are ˜nes of up to $250,000 and 
10 years of imprisonment.
The Privacy Rule does not provide for a private right of action by 
patients or research participants.
67
 Thus, an individual whose privacy is 
violated under the Privacy Rule cannot sue the covered entity or individual 
who breached his or her privacy. Rather, an individual can ˜le a claim with 
HHS™s Of˜ce for Civil Rights (OCR). OCR is in charge of enforcement and 
decides whether and when to pursue a regulatory investigation and penal
-ties against a covered entity (Stevens, 2003). In addition, it is important to 
note that this does not prevent an individual from pursuing a private right 
of action under state law (Pritts, 2008).
The Compliance and Enforcement regulations stress cooperative com
-pliance over the imposition of penalties (reviewed by Pritts, 2008). The 
regulations speci˜cally provide that the Secretary will, to the extent practi
-cable, seek the cooperation of the covered entity in obtaining compliance.
68
 If an investigation indicates a failure to comply, the regulations provide that 
the Secretary will ˜rst attempt to resolve the matter by informal means.
69
 Such informal resolutions include demonstrating compliance, a completed 
corrective action plan, or a resolution agreement (HHS, 2007).
70
 Only if a 
covered entity does not take action to resolve the noncompliance will HHS 
contemplate imposing civil monetary penalties on the covered entity.
71
66
 See 45 C.F.R. part 160, subparts C and E (2006). 
67
 See, for example, 
Doe v. Bd. of Trustees of Univ. of Illinois
, 429 F. Supp. 2d 930, 944 
(N.D. Ill. 2006
); 
Poli v. Mt. Valley™s Health Ctrs., Inc.
, 2006 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 2559, No. 
05-2015, 2006 WL 83378, at 13-14 (E.D. Cal. January 11, 2006
); 
Haranzo v. Dep™t of 
 
Rehabilitative Servs.
, 2005 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 27302, No. 7:04-CV-00326, 2005 WL 3019240, 
at 4 (W.D. Va. November 10, 2005
); 
Dominic J. v. Wyo. Valley West High Sch.
, 362 F. Supp. 
2d 560, 573 (M.D. Pa. 2005
); 
Univ. of Colo. Hosp. Auth. v. Denver Publ. Co.
, 340 F. Supp. 
2d 1142 (D. Colo. 2004
); 
O™Donnell v. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Wyo.
, 173 F. Supp. 2d 1176, 
1179-80 (D. Wyo. 2001
).68
 See 45 C.F.R. §160.304 (2006).
69
 See 45 C.F.R. §160.312(a)(1) (2006).
70
 Id.
71
 Id.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 185
Also, a covered entity that is itself in compliance with the Privacy Rule 
will not be held liable for the actions of a business associate that breaches 
the terms of its business associate agreement. A covered entity that knows 
of a pattern of activity or practice of a business associate that constitutes a 
material breach of its contract must take reasonable steps to cure the breach 
or end the violation.
72
 If such efforts are unsuccessful, the covered entity must 
terminate the contract if feasible.
73
 If termination is not feasible, the covered 
entity must report the problem to the Secretary.
74
 So long as a covered entity 
complies with these procedures, it is not liable for the actions of its business 
associates and will not be assessed civil monetary penalties (HHS, 2006).
75
Between April 2003 and March 2008, OCR received more than 33,000 
complaints alleging violations of the Privacy Rule (Barr, 2008). Most of the 
complaints have been ˜led against health care providers, including physi
-cian practices, general hospitals, pharmacies, and outpatient clinics, and 
largely deal with health information uses, disclosures, and safeguards. The 
number of complaints OCR has received that relate to research is unclear 
(NCVHS, 2005). In the majority of cases, OCR determined that the com
-plaint did not present an eligible case for enforcement, either because OCR 
lacked jurisdiction, the complaint was untimely, or the activity did not 
violate the Privacy Rule.
To date, there have been no civil penalties imposed against any cov
-ered entity for breaching the Privacy Rule. Similarly, there have only been 
three criminal prosecutions under the Privacy Rule of ind
ividuals involved 
in medical identity theft (Rahman, 2006).
76
 In spite of this enforcement 
record, many covered entities remain hesitant to share health information 
due to concerns about liability (Pritts, 2008).
In surveys, many providers and payors self-report that they are not in 
compliance with the Privacy Rule. In a recent survey by Phoenix Health 
Systems, 20 percent of providers and 13 percent of payors reported that 
they have had insuf˜cient incentives to incur the cost of implementing all 
the requirements of the Privacy Rule. In the survey, none of the participat
-ing providers was able to show that it had complied with every provision 
of the Privacy Rule. Payors only reported doing marginally better (Phoenix 
Health Systems, 2006). In surveys by AHIMA, about 40 percent of hospi
-tals and health systems reported full compliance with HIPAA regulations, 
while about 15 percent believed they were less than 85 percent compliant 
(AHIMA, 2006). More than half the respondents indicated that resources 
72
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.504(e)(1)(ii) (2006).
73
  Id.
74
 Id.
75
 See 
 45 C.F.R. § 160.402(b) (2006).
76
 See 
U.S. v. Gibson
, 2004 WL 2188280 (W.D. Wash. 2004) and 
U.S. v. Ramirez
, Warrant, 
Criminal No. M-05-708, McAllen Division.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
were the most signi˜cant barrier to full privacy compliance, noting a par
-ticular need to support education and training of new staff.
RELATIONSHIP
 BETWEEN
 HIPAA 
AND
 O
THER
 L
AWS
Federal Research Statutes
Several other federal statutes regulate research and affect the types of 
research projects that can be carried out in the United States. The federal 
regulations most relevant to health research are the Common Rule
77
 and 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Protection of Human Subjects 
Regulations, which have similar origins and intent
78
 (see Chapter 3). Both 
the Common Rule and the FDA regulations are concerned primarily with 
the physical risks to humans associated with participation in a research 
study. Neither set of regulations provides detailed and prescriptive regula
-tions for the protection of privacy (HHS, 2002). Nonetheless, there are 
numerous instances in which the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule 
diverge, as described above.
General Federal Laws
The Privacy Rule also often interacts with other federal laws. In the 
preamble to the Privacy Rule, HHS stated that there should be few instances 
where the Privacy Rule con˚icts with existing statutes or regulations. Where 
potential con˚icts do exist, HHS stated that an attempt should be made 
to resolve the con˚ict so that both laws apply. For example, if a statute or 
regulation permits the dissemination of PHI, but the Privacy Rule
 prohibits 
the use or disclosure of PHI without authorization, the covered entity is 
able to comply with both sets of laws. The entity could obtain HIPAA 
authorization prior to disseminating the information as permitted by the 
other law (HHS, 2000).
The fact that a covered entity is permitted to use or disclose PHI ﬁas 
required by lawﬂ under the Privacy Rule reduces a number of potential 
con˚icts between the Privacy Rule and other federal rules.
79
 HHS pro
-vided an example to explain this point. If a previous statute or regulation 
requires a speci˜c use or disclosure of PHI that the Privacy Rule appears 
to prohibit, the section of the Privacy Rule that permits uses or disclosures 
ﬁas required by lawﬂ would allow this disclosure to be made. Also, HHS 
speci˜cally stated that if a statute or regulation prohibits a use or disclo
-77
 See 45 C.F.R. part 46(a) (2005).
78
 See 21 C.F.R. parts 50 and 56 (2008).
79
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.512(a) (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 187
sure of PHI that the Privacy Rule permits, the earlier, more speci˜c statute 
applies (HHS, 2000).
As a result, covered entities are often subject to both the Privacy Rule 
and other federal statutes and regulations simultaneously. In many situa
-tions, researchers must comply with the Privacy Rule and the Common 
Rule or the FDA Protection of Human Subjects Regulations. Medicare 
providers must comply with the requirements of the Privacy Rule and the 
Privacy Act of 1974. Health care providers in schools, colleges, and uni
-versities must comply with the Privacy Rule and the Family Educational 
Rights and Privacy Act. Substance abuse treatment facilities must comply 
with the Privacy Rule and the Substance Abuse Con˜dentiality provisions 
of the Public Health Service Act, Section 543 and its regulations. There are 
innumerable examples where the Privacy Rule and another federal statute 
both must be followed (HHS, 2000).
State Laws
Similar to the Privacy Rule™s relationship to other federal statutes, the 
relationship between the Privacy Rule and state privacy laws is also com
-plicated. In general, the Privacy Rule preempts contrary state laws relat
-ing to the privacy of health information. Generally, this means that if it is 
impossible for a covered entity to comply with both the Privacy Rule and 
the state law in question, the Privacy Rule will be applied in the situation 
and the state law will be considered void.
80
This general rule has three exceptions. First, any state law that is not 
contrary to the Privacy Rule is not preempted. If it is possible for a covered 
entity to comply with both the Privacy Rule and the state law simultane
-ously, there is no preemption of the state law, and the covered entity must 
comply with both sets of privacy rules.
Second, state laws that are contrary to the Privacy Rule, but provide 
more protection to the privacy of health information, are not preempted by 
the Privacy Rule. The Privacy Rule sets a national ˚oor for the protection 
of PHI, not a national ceiling. More stringent means that the state law: 
(1) prohibits or restricts a use or disclosure in circumstances that would be 
permitted under HIPAA; (2) permits greater rights of access or amendment 
for the individual who is the subject of the PHI; (3) provides an individual 
with a greater amount of information regarding disclosure, rights, and rem
-edies; (4) narrows the scope or duration of any legal permission to use PHI, 
or increases the privacy protections afforded to PHI; (5) provides for the 
retention or reporting of more detailed information for longer durations; 
80
 See 45 C.F.R. part 160, subpart B (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
or (6) provides greater privacy protection for the individual with respect 
to any other matter.
The third exception to the general preemption rule is in the public 
health arena. State laws that are contrary to the Privacy RuleŠbut provide 
for the reporting of disease or injury, child abuse, birth, or death, or for 
conducting public health surveillance, investigation, and interventionŠare 
not preempted by the Privacy Rule. States are permitted to set their own 
rules regarding what type of information can be collected by public health 
agents and how that information is used (HHS, 2004c).
Applying this preemption rule and determining what privacy laws must 
be followed in any given state can be a dif˜cult task for covered entities. 
All states provide some protection for the privacy of health information. 
However, they differ greatly in what type of protection they provide, and 
thus, interact differently with the federal Privacy Rule. To successfully 
conduct a preemption analysis, a covered entity must become familiar with 
both the state laws and the Privacy Rule, interpret how the state and federal 
regulations interact with each other, and correctly determine the situations 
in which the Privacy Rule preempts state law. Many of the provisions in 
the Privacy Rule do not have directly corresponding provisions in state 
laws. This makes comparing the two sets of rules a technical and tedious 
task. One of the main impediments to a covered entity complying with the 
Privacy Rule is likely the lack of understanding of what the Privacy Rule 
actually requires in each state (Pritts, 2002).
CONCLUSIONS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
The HIPAA Privacy Rule was written to provide consistent standards 
in the United States for the use and disclosure of PHI by covered entities, 
including the use and disclosure of such information for research purposes. 
In its current state, however, the HIPAA Privacy Rule is dif˜cult to reconcile 
with other federal regulations, including HHS regulations for the protec
-tion of human subjects (the Common Rule), FDA regulations pertaining to 
human subjects,
81
 and other applicable federal or state laws.
Inconsistencies, for example, in federal regulations and their inter
-pretations governing the deidenti˜cation of personal health information, 
obtaining individuals™ consent for future research, and the recruitment of 
research volunteers make it challenging for health researchers seeking to 
comply with all these regulations to undertake important research activities. 
In addition, there is substantial variation in the way in which institutions 
interpret and apply the Privacy Rule (see also Chapter 5).
Additional guidance from HHS, along with some changes in interpreta
-81
 See 21 C.F.R. parts 50 and 56 (2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 189
tion by HHS, would reduce misunderstandings of the Privacy Rule provi
-sions by covered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards and help to harmonize 
federal regulations governing health research, which would in turn reduce 
complexity for researchers and covered entities, and thereby help to ensure 
consistent and appropriate privacy protections for patients. 
Thus, HHS 
should develop revised and expanded guidance materials for the Privacy 
Rule.
For example, HHS should develop guidance to clearly state that future 
research with repositories can go forward under the Privacy Rule with 
IRB/Privacy Board oversight. Many institutions create and maintain data
-bases with patient health information as well as repositories with biological 
materials collected from patients, and use them for many types of health 
research, including studies to understand diseases or to compare patient 
outcomes following different treatments. Once created, these collections 
offer a cost-effective resource for rapidly addressing new research ques
-tions as technologies and knowledge advance. Collecting the samples and 
data necessary to address each new research question as it arises could take 
years, or even decades, at great expense. Thus, the pace and ef˜ciency of 
medical progress is signi˜cantly enhanced by using established resources 
whenever feasible. Under the Common Rule, it is permissible to obtain 
patient consent for future research, with IRB oversight, as long as such 
future uses are described in suf˜cient detail to allow an informed consent.
However, the provisions of the Privacy Rule, as interpreted by HHS, 
have made it more dif˜cult to effectively use these valuable resources for 
research. As a result, patients must be recontacted to obtain individual 
authorization for any additional studies undertaken with the data and 
samples collected unless the researchers obtain a waiver or alteration of 
authorization from an IRB or a Privacy Board. Recontacting patients for 
additional authorization is not only impractical, but even in those instances 
when it is possible, it can be intrusive and burdensome for patients and their 
families. The committee believes that authorization for future use of these 
databases and biospecimen banks should be appropriate for protecting pri
-vacy as long as there is an IRB or a Privacy Board overseeing the research. 
Thus, HHS should eliminate the discordance between the Privacy Rule and 
the Common Rule through guidance explicitly stating that future research 
may go forward if the authorization describes the types or categories of 
research that may be conducted with the PHI stored in the bi
ospecimen 
bank and if an IRB or a Privacy Board determines that the proposed new 
research is not incompatible with the initial consent and authorization, and 
poses no greater than minimal risk.
Because science is evolving very quickly, one cannot adequately antici
-pate what knowledge will be gained in the future, and signi˜cant opportu
-nities for bene˜cial research could be lost without some alterations to the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
way in which this portion of the Privacy Rule is interpreted. Databanks and 
biospecimen banks created and maintained with federal funds in particular 
should be used for multiple studies as often as feasible, given the high cost 
of such activities and the high value of investigating and comparing mul
-tiple scienti˜c questions from the same pool of data.
Additional guidance from HHS is also needed to clarify the circum
-stances under which DNA samples or sequences are considered PHI.
 The 
research community remains uncertain about whether genetic information 
accompanying biospecimens is protected under HIPAA because the list of 
HIPAA identi˜ers includes ﬁbiometric identi˜ersﬂ and ﬁunique identifying 
characteristics.ﬂ
82
 Although genetic information does not itself identify an 
individual, a
 person™s genetic code could be construed as a unique identi˜er 
in that it could be used to match sequence in another biospecimen bank 
or databank that does include identi˜ers. As genetic information becomes 
more prevalent in research and health care, concerns regarding genetic 
privacy and discrimination are likely to intensify. Thus, the establishment 
of consistent standards for use and protection of genetic information is 
important. The committee advocates a focus on strong security measures, 
with the goal of realizing the full potential of personalized medicine. 
In 
addition, unauthorized reidenti˜cation of individuals from DNA sequences, 
by anyone, should be strictly prohibited.
The committee also recommends that HHS issue guidance to clearly 
indicate that when researchers seek to store data and materials collected in 
conjunction with a clinical trial, a single authorization form with two sig
-nature lines is permissible if the text clearly delineates the two activities and 
states that the participant is not required to sign the portion authorizing the 
contribution of PHI to the repository.
 Informed consent and authorization 
are essential for the protection of individuals who volunteer to participate 
in clinical trials. Thus, it is imperative that the informed consent and 
authorization documents are easily understood and meaningful to the indi
-viduals involved. Ideally, all relevant information should be integrated into 
one simple document, but the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s complex provisions 
have generated misperceptions about restrictions on individuals™ ability to 
provide compound authorization for the related activities of clinical trial 
participation and biospecimen donation, and some institutions require two 
complete authorization forms with all the attendant language rather than 
two signature lines on the same form. Such misperceptions can diminish 
the informed nature of consent and authorization because they can lead to 
patient confusion and misunderstanding.
HHS should also simplify the procedures for the identi˜cation and 
recruitment of potential research participants and harmonize them with the 
82
 See 45 C.F.R. § 164.514 (2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 191
Common Rule.
 The provisions regarding these activities that are prepara
-tory to research are complex, confusing, and actually provide less privacy 
protection than the Common Rule. The committee believes that IRBs and 
Privacy Boards can protect research participants, including their privacy 
and con˜dentiality interests, and thus recommends that IRB/Privacy Board 
approval (as required under the Common Rule) should be required for all 
researchers (internal and external to the covered entity) prior to contact
-ing potential subjects. When making a decision about whether to approve 
research projects, the IRB or Privacy Board should review and consider 
the investigator™s plans for contacting patients, and also ensure that the 
information will be used only for research projects approved by the IRB or 
Privacy Board and not be disclosed to anyone else.
HHS should also take steps to facilitate greater use of data with direct 
identi˜ers removed.
 Because the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule de˜ne 
personally identi˜able information and deidenti˜cation differently, there is 
a discrepancy between what research is exempt from the Common Rule and 
what research is exempt from the Privacy Rule. This discrepancy can give 
rise to situations in which research with anonymized data that are exempt 
from IRB oversight under the Common Rule may still require a decision by 
an IRB or a Privacy Board to determine if a waiver of individuals™ authori
-zation for the use of their information for research purposes is appropriate 
under the Privacy Rule.
Also, there appears to be a great deal of confusion about how to meet 
conditions of data use agreements for limited datasets, which have been 
stripped of the 16 most direct identi˜ers and can be used and disclosed for 
research without obtaining individuals™ authorization or an IRB/Privacy 
Board waiver of authorization. 
HHS could help to ameliorate this situa
-tion by issuing clear guidance on how to set up and comply with data use 
agreements more ef˜ciently and effectively.
New tools are also needed to facilitate important health research by 
allowing new hypotheses to be tested with existing data. One major chal
-lenge of using data from which direct identi˜ers have been removed is that 
a patient™s health information is rarely stored in one single location, and 
data from multiple sources cannot be linked to generate a more complete 
record of a patient™s health history without a unique identi˜er. As a result, 
these datasets often are of minimal value to researchers and are not fre
-quently used. A trusted intermediary that could link data from different 
sources and then provide more complete and useful deidenti˜ed datasets to 
researchers would facilitate the greater use of health data for research and 
lead to more meaningful study results while also increasing patient privacy 
protections and allaying concerns of covered entities. 
Thus, HHS should 
develop a mechanism for linking data from multiple sources so that more 
useful datasets can be made available for research in a manner that protects 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
privacy, con˜dentiality, and security
. Similar efforts have been initiated by 
AHRQ for the purpose of monitoring health care quality.
The committee also concluded that for some provisions of the Privacy 
Rule the burdens are heavy and the privacy protections are small. Recon
-sideration of such provisions may be necessary if society is to derive maxi
-mal bene˜ts from health research. In particular, the required accounting 
of disclosures entails a heavy administrative burden on health systems and 
health services research that achieves little in terms of protecting privacy. 
The committee recommends that the Privacy Rule permit medical facilities 
to inform patients in advance that PHI might be used for health research 
(with IRB/Privacy Board oversight) or for public health purposes, and 
the Privacy Rule should be altered to exempt these activities from AOD 
requirements.
Robust safeguards are already in place to protect the privacy of PHI 
disclosures in health research via IRBs and Privacy Boards. As the health 
care system moves toward broader implementation of electronic health 
records, however, automatic tracking of audit trails will be important to 
incorporate. Technology advances will likely make automatic AOD track
-ing feasible, affordable, and widely available in the future. 
Until then, the 
committee recommends that disclosures of PHI made for health research 
and public health purposes be exempted from the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s 
AOD requirement. However, in the interest of transparency, institutions 
should maintain a list, accessible to the public, of all studies approved by 
its IRB or Privacy Board.
HHS should also simplify the criteria that IRBs and Privacy Boards 
use in making determinations for when they can waive the requirements 
to obtain authorization from each patient whose PHI will be used for a 
research study.
 If the current criteria for waiver of authorization are to be 
retained, a clear and reasonable de˜nition of impracticability from HHS, 
along with speci˜c case examples of what should or should not be consid
-ered impracticable or of minimal risk, could reduce variability and overly 
conservative interpretations among IRBs and Privacy Boards.
Case examples should help delineate what IRBs and Privacy Boards 
should do to facilitate research, rather than just de˜ning what is permis
-sible. For example, it is appropriate to allow use of registries, clinical data
-bases, and biospecimen banks for justi˜able scienti˜c inquiries. HHS should 
clearly state that IRBs and Privacy Boards should not impede research that 
is permissible under the Privacy Rule without a compelling concern (for 
example, if participant solicitation plans are inappropriate or if the princi
-pal investigator is unquali˜ed).
Simpli˜cation or clari˜cation of the waiver criteria would be especially 
helpful for multi-institutional studies, which fall under the jurisdiction of 
multiple IRBs or Privacy Boards, and for smaller or community-based insti
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 193
tutions that do not have internal counsel or regulatory affairs specialists, 
and are thus more likely to opt out of research that requires decisions about 
authorizations. With better guidance, all covered entities would have more 
con˜dence in their decisions, and might be more willing to rely on a lead 
IRB/Privacy Board decision in the case of multi-institutional studies.
REFERENCES
AcademyHealth. 2008. PowerPoint presentation to the Institute of Medicine Committee on 
Health Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule, on 
AcademyHealth survey results.
Adams, R. 2008. Progress vs. privacy. 
CQ Weekly
 May 26, 1404.
AHIC (American Health Information Community). 2007. 
Con˜dentiality, privacy, and security 
workgroup, summary of the 
14
th web conference.
 http://137.187.25.8/healthit/ahic
/materials/summary/cpssum_100407.html (accessed August 27, 2008).
AHIMA (American Health Information Management Association). 2006. 
The state of 
HIPAA privacy and security compliance.
 http://www.ahima.org/emerging_issues/
2006StateofHIPAACompliance.pdf (accessed April 20, 2008).
Barbarq, M., and T. Zeller, Jr. 2006. 
Con˜dentialityissuesfordataminers.
Con˜dentiality issues for data miners. 
Arti˜cial Intel
-ligence in Medicine
 26:25Œ36.
Barnes, M., and K. G. Heffernan. 2004. The ﬁfuture usesﬂ dilemma: Secondary uses of data 
and materials by researchers and commercial research sponsors. 
Medical Research Law 
and Policy Report
 3:440Œ452.
Barr, S. 2008. HIPAA enforcement of Privacy Rule stresses voluntary compliance, HHS of˜cial 
says. 
BNA Privacy and Security Law Report
 7(13):479.
Berman, J. J. 2002. Con˜dentiality issues for data miners. 
Arti˜cial Intelligence in Medicine
 26(1):25Œ36.
Bledsoe, M. 2004. HIPAA models for repositories. 
ISBER Newsletter: International Society 
for Biological and Environmental Repositories
 4(1):1Œ4.
Bregman-Eschet, Y. 2006. Genetic databases and biobanks: Who controls our genetic privacy? 
Santa Clara Computer & High Technology Law Journal
 23:1.
Casarett, D., J. Karlawish, E. Andrews, and A. Caplan. 2005. Bioethical issues in pharmaco
-epidemiological research. In 
Pharmacoepidemiology
, 4th ed., edited by B. L. Strom. West 
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Pp. 417Œ432.
Chaikind, H., J. Hearne, B. Lyke, and C. S. Redhead. 2005. 
CRS report for congress: The 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 
1996
: Overview 
and guidance on frequently asked questions.
 http://www.law.umaryland.edu/marshall
/crsreports/crsdocuments/RL3163401242005.pdf (accessed August 27, 2005).
Clause, S. L., D. M. Triller, C. P. H. Bornhorst, R. A. Hamilton, and L. E. Cosler. 2004. Con
-forming to HIPAA regulations and compilation of research data. 
American Journal of 
Health-System Pharmacy
 61(10):1025Œ1031.
CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services). 2005. 
Overview: Security standards.
 http://
www.cms.hhs.gov/SecurityStandard/ (accessed March 27, 2007).
CMS. 2008. 
Criteria for review of requests for CMS research identi˜able data.
 http://www.
cms.hhs.gov/PrivProtectedData/02_Criteria.asp#TopOfPage (accessed April 23, 2008).
Couzin, J. 2008. Whole-genome data not anonymous, challenging assumptions. 
Science
 321:1278.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Damschroder, L. J., J. L. Pritts, M. A. Neblo, R. J. Kalarickal, J. W. Creswell, and R. A. 
Hayward. 2007. Patients, privacy and trust: Patients™ willingness to allow researchers to 
access their medical records. 
Social Science & Medicine
 64(1):223Œ235.
De Wolf, V. A., J. E. Sieber, P. M. Steel, and A. O. Zarate. 2006. Part II: HIPAA and disclosure 
risk issues. 
IRB: Ethics and Human Research
 28(1):6Œ11.
DPWP (Data Protection Working Party). 2007. 
Opinion 
4/200
7 on the concept of personal data.
 http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2007/wp136_en.pdf
 (accessed 
August 28, 2008).
Farmer, Y., and B. Godard. 2007. Public health genomics (PHG): From scienti˜c consider
-ations to ethical integration. 
Genomics, Society and Policy
 3:14Œ27.
Fienberg, S. E. 2005. Con˜dentiality and disclosure limitation. 
Encyclopedia of Social Mea
-surement
 1:463Œ469.
GAO (Government Accounting Of˜ce). 1999. 
Medical records privacy: Access needed for 
health research but oversight of privacy protections is limited.
 Washington, DC: GAO.
Greely, H. 2007. The uneasy ethical and legal underpinnings of large-scale genomic biobanks. 
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics
 8:346.
Hansson, M., J. Dillner, C. Bartram, J. Carlson, and G. Helgesson. 2006. Should
 donors 
be allowed to give broad consent to future biobank research? 
Lancet Oncology
 7(3):266Œ269.
Heide, C. 2007. PowerPoint presentation to the Institute of Medicine Committee on Health 
Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule, on the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule & research:
 Update from HHS Of˜ce for Civil Rights.
HHS (Department of Health and Human Services). 1998. White paper on unique identi˜ers.
HHS. 2000. Standards for privacy of individually identi˜able health information; Final Rule. 
65
 Fed. Reg. 
82462
.HHS. 2002. 
OCR guidance explaining signi˜cant aspects of the Privacy Rule. 
http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/hipaa/privacy.html (accessed August 27, 2008).
HHS. 2003. 
Institutional review boards and the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 http:/
/privacyruleandresearch.
nih.gov/pdf/IRB_Factsheet.pdf (accessed August 21, 2008).
HHS. 2004a. 
Clinical research and the HIPAA Privacy Rule
. http://privacyruleandresearch.
nih/gov/pdf/clin_research.asp (accessed August 27, 2008).
HHS. 2004b. 
Guidance on research involving coded private information or biological speci
-mens.
 http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/guidance/cdebiol.pdf (accessed August 
21, 2008).
HHS. 2004c. 
Protecting personal health information in research: Understanding the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule.
 http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pr_02.asp (accessed April 17, 2007).
HHS. 2004d. 
Research repositories, databases, and the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 http:/
/privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/research_repositories.asp (accessed August 27, 2008).
HHS. 2006. 
Frequently asked questions: Is a covered entity liable for, or required to moni
-tor, the actions of its business associates? 
http://www.hhs.gov/hipaafaq/providers
/business/236.html (accessed August 27, 2008).
HHS. 2007. 
How OCR enforces the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/
enforcement/hipaarule.html (accessed August 27, 2008).
Hillestad, R., J. H. Bigelow, B. Chaudhry, P. Dreyer, M. D. Greenberg, R. C. Meili, M. S. 
Ridgely, J. Rothenberg, and R. Taylor. 2008. 
Identity crisis: An examination of the 
costs and bene˜ts of a unique patient identi˜er for the U.S. health care system.
 RAND 
Corporation.
Homer, N., S. Szelinger, M. Redman, D. Duggan, W. Tembe, J. Muehling, J. V. Pearson, 
D. A. Stephan, S. F. Nelson, and D. W. Craig. 2008. Resolving individuals contributing 
trace amounts of DNA to highly complex mixtures using high-density SNP genotyping 
microarrays. 
PLoS Genetics
 4(8):e1000167. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000167.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 195
IFMC (Iowa Foundation for Medical Care). 2008. 
Chronic condition data warehouse: User 
manual.
 Version 1.3. http://www.ccwdata.org/downloads/CCW%20User%20Manual.
pdf (accessed August 27, 2008).
Interagency Con˜dentiality and Data Access Group. 1999. 
Checklist on disclosure potential 
of proposed data releases.
 http://www.fcsm.gov/committees/cdac/checklist_799.doc (ac
-cessed January 13, 2009).
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2000. 
Protecting data privacy in health services research.
 Wash
-ington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2005. 
Implications of genomics for public health: Workshop summary.
 Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2006. 
Effect of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research: Proceedings of a work
-shop presented to the National Cancer Policy Forum.
 Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
IPPC (International Pharmaceutical Privacy Consortium). 2008. Comments to the Institute 
of Medicine Committee on Health Research and the Privacy of Health Information: 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule, on the impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on pharmaceutical 
research.
Kass, N. E., M. R. Natowicz, S. C. Hull, R. R. Faden, L. Plantinga, L. O. Gostin, and J. 
Slutsman. 
2003.Theuseofmedicalrecordsinresearch:Whatdopatientswant?
2003. The use of medical records in research: What do patients want? 
Journal 
of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 31:429Œ433.
Kulynych, J., and D. Korn. 2002. The effect of the new federal medical-Privacy Rule on 
 
research. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 346(3):201Œ204.
Lin, Z., A. B. Owen, and R. B. Altman. 2004. Genomic research and human subject privacy. 
Science
 305(5681):183.
Lowrance, W. W. 2002. 
Learning from experience, privacy and the secondary use of data in 
health research.
 London: The Nuf˜eld Trust.
Lowrance, W. W., and F. S. Collins. 2007. Identi˜ability in genomic research. 
Science
 317:600Œ602.
Malin, B., and L. Sweeney. 2004. How (not) to protect genomic data privacy in a distributed 
network: Using trail re-identi˜cation to evaluate and design anonymity protection sys
-tems. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics
 37:179Œ192.
NBAC (National Bioethics Advisory Commission). 1999. 
Research involving human
 biological 
materials: Ethical issues and policy guidance, report and recommendations.
 Vol. 1. 
Rockville, MD: NBAC.
NCVHS (National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics). 2004. 
Letter to Secretary 
ThompsonŠrecommendation on the effect of the Privacy Rule.
 http://ncvhs.hhs.gov/
040305l2.htm (accessed August 27, 2008).
NCVHS. 2005. 
Seventh annual report to congress on the implementation of the administra
-tive simpli˜cation provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
 (HIPAA)
. http://ncvhs.hhs.gov/050908rpt.htm (accessed August 27, 2008).
Ness, R. 2007. In˚uence on the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research. 
JAMA
 298(18): 
2164Œ2170.
Pace, W. D., E. W. Staton, and S. Holcomb. 2005. Practice-based research network studies in 
the age of HIPAA. 
Annals of Family Medicine
 3(Supp. 1):S38ŒS45.
Phoenix Health Systems. 2006. 
US healthcare industry HIPAA compliance survey results: 
 
Summer 
200
6. 
http://www.hipaadvisory.com/action/surveynew/ (accessed April 5, 2007).
Pritts, J. 2002. 
Testimony before the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, 
Subcommittee on Privacy and Con˜dentiality: Implementation of the federal standards 
for privacy of individually identi˜able health information.
 http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/
021030p6.htm (accessed August 27, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Pritts, J. 2008. 
The importance and value of protecting the privacy of health information: 
Roles of HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule in health research.
 http://www.iom.
edu/CMS/3740/43729/53160.aspx (accessed March 15, 2008).
Pritts, J., M. Neblo, L. Damschroder, and R. Hayward. 2008. Veterans™ views on balancing 
privacy and research in medicine: A deliberative democratic study. 
Michigan State Uni
-versity Journal of Medicine and Law
 12:17Œ31.
Rahman, N. 2006. Medical: Re˚ections on privacy: Recent developments in HIPAA Privacy 
Rule. 
I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society
 2(3):685.
Redhead, C. S. 2001. 
CRS report for congress: Health information standards, privacy and 
security: HIPAA™s administrative simpli˜cation regulations.
 Washington, DC: Congres
-sional Research Service.
Robling, M. R., K. Hood, H. Houston, R. Pill, J. Fay, and H. M. Evans. 2004. Public attitudes 
towards the use of primary care patient record data in medical research without consent: 
A qualitative study. 
Journal of Medical Ethics
 30:104Œ109.
Rosati, K. 2008. PowerPoint presentation to the Institute of Medicine Committee on Health 
Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule, on the chal
-lenges with biorepositories, databases, and future research.
Rothstein, M. A. 2005. Research privacy under HIPAA and the Common Rule. 
Journal of 
Law, Medicine & Ethics
 33(1):154Œ159.
SACHRP (Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections). 2004. 
Letter 
to Secretary Thompson.
 http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/sachrp/hipaalettertosecy090104.html 
(accessed
 August 27, 2008).
Shalala, D. E. 1997. 
Con˜dentiality of individually-identi˜able health information: Recom
-mendations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services, pursuant to section 
264
 of 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 
1996
. http://aspe.hhs.gov
/admnsimp/pvcrec0.htm (accessed August 27, 2008).
Stevens, G. M. 2000. 
CRS report for Congress: Summary of the proposed rule for the privacy 
of individually identi˜able health information.
 Washington, DC: Congressional Research 
Service.
Stevens, G. M. 2003. 
CRS report for Congress: Compliance with the HIPAA medical Privacy 
Rule.
 Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.
Subcommittee on Disclosure Limitation Methodology, Federal Committee on Statistical 
 
Methodology. 1994. 
Statistical policy working paper 
22
: Report on statistical disclosure 
limitation methodology. 
http://www.ciser.cornell.edu/NYCRDC/helpful_links/WP-22-
OMB-totalreport.pdf (accessed January 13, 2009).
Sweeney, L. 1997. Weaving technology and policy together to maintain con˜dentiality. 
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 25:98Œ110.
Tovino, S. A. 2004. The use and disclosure of protected health information for research under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Unrealized patient autonomy and burdensome government 
regulation. 
South Dakota Law Review
 49(3):447Œ502.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee of Conference. 
Health Insurance Porta
-bility and Accountability Act of 
1996
. 104th Cong., 2d Sess. July 31, 1996.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means. 
Health Coverage 
Availability and Affordability Act of 
1996
. 104th Cong., 2d Sess. March 25, 1996.
Wendler, D. 2006. One-time general consent for research on biological samples: Is it compat
-ible with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act? 
Archives of Internal 
Medicine
 166(14):1449Œ1452.
Westin, A. 2007. 
How the public views privacy and health research.
 http://www.iom.edu
/Object.File/Master/48/528/%20Westin%20IOM%20Srvy%20Rept%2011-1107.pdf 
 
(accessed November 11, 2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPLICATION TO HEALTH RESEARCH
 197
Willison, D. J., L. Schwartz, J. Abelson, C. Charles, M. Swinton, D. Northrup, and L. 
 
Thabane. 2007 (September 25Œ28). 
Alternatives to project-speci˜c consent for access to 
personal information for health research. What do Canadians think?
 Paper presented at 
29th International Conference of Data Protection and Privacy Commissioners, Montreal, 
Canada.
Zerhouni, E. A., and E. G. Nabel. 
2008.Protectingaggregategenomicdata.
2008. Protecting aggregate genomic data. 
Science
 322:44.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.199
5Effect of the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
 on Health Research
Since the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
Privacy Rule was implemented by the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) in April 2003, health researchers have asserted 
that the Privacy Rule has had a negative effect on researchers™ abilities to 
conduct meaningful research. The purpose of this chapter is to review the 
currently available evidence on the effect of the Privacy Rule on research, 
including surveys as well as other types of studies to measure impact. The 
chapter begins with an overview of several surveys that examined health 
researchers™ personal experiences with and opinions about the Privacy 
Rule. Many issues identi˜ed by survey respondents were also the focus of 
other types of studies, so the remainder of the chapter consists of a topical 
review of the available evidence regarding the effect of the Privacy Rule, 
and its interpretation, on health research. The following issues are reviewed 
in detail: (1) selection bias, (2) research ef˜ciency, (3) abandoned research, 
(4) deidenti˜ed information, (5) the authorization process, and (6) concerns 
about potential legal consequences.
OVERVIEW
 OF
 S
URVEY
 R
ESULTS
As noted in previous chapters (Chapter 1 in particular), the informa
-tion gained by opinion surveys has limitations. The potential for bias exists 
because of the way the questions are worded and framed, and respondents 
may have self-motivated reasons for responding in a particular fashion. For 
example, individuals responding to surveys conducted by professional soci
-eties may be more likely to have encountered dif˜culties with the Privacy 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Rule than those who did not respond. Thus, information gathered from 
surveys is anecdotal and based on individual™s personal opinions; it does 
not constitute systematic data on the experience of all researchers.
Before discussing the relevant surveys in detail in this chapter, it is also 
important to recognize the strengths and weaknesses of these survey data. 
One strength is that multiple surveys addressed similar topics, and many 
respondents were af˜liated with different institutions and different ˜elds 
of health research. The fact that the respondents to the different surveys 
reported similar problems with conducting research under the Privacy Rule 
makes it more likely that results can be generalized and are not speci˜c to 
a particular institution. Weaknesses include the size and low response rates 
of some surveys and, in some cases, the lack of a denominator, making it 
impossible to determine a response rate, which is an important measure 
to assess the representativeness of the results. Also, three of the surveys 
discussed below were conducted immediately or shortly after the Privacy 
Rule was implemented, before covered entities and other stakeholders 
had adequate time to adapt to the new regulation. However, more recent 
surveys of researchers™ experiences with the Privacy Rule, two of which 
were commissioned by the Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee, found 
that researchers were still reporting negative effects of the Privacy Rule on 
health research (Box 5-1).
Surveys to gauge the impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health 
research have been undertaken by numerous agencies and organizations 
with various constituencies, including the Association of American Medical 
Colleges (NCVHS, 2003), the National Cancer Advisory Board (Ramirez 
and Niederhuber, 2003), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
(Walker, 2005), Epidemiological Societies (Ness, 2007), the HMO Research 
Network (Greene et al., 2008), AcademyHealth (Helms, 2008), the Ameri
-can Heart Association (Ring, 2007), and the North American Associa
-tion of Central Cancer Registries (Deapen, 2006). In addition, structured 
interviews were undertaken by the American Society for Clinical Oncology 
(ASCO, 2008), and focus groups were organized by the Association of 
Academic Health Centers (AAHC, 2008). An overview of these projects is 
provided below (also see Table 5-1).
Association of American Medical Colleges Survey
In 2003, on the day that covered entities were required to be in compli
-ance with the Privacy Rule, the Association of American Medical Colleges 
(AAMC) launched a survey to examine the Privacy Rule experiences of 
investigators, Institutional Review Board (IRB) personnel, privacy of˜cials, 
research administrators, and deans. AAMC then created a database of case 
reports and research functions affected by the Privacy Rule based on 331 
individuals™ responses. After analyzing the database, AAMC concluded that 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 201BOX 5-1
 Health Researchers™ Experience with the Privacy Rule: 
 Survey Results in 2003Œ2004 and 2007Œ2008
Ł The Privacy Rule has increased the cost and time it takes to conduct a 
research project from start to ˜nish (AAMC, NCAB, AHRQ, Ness, Academy
-Health, HMORN, AHA/ACC, AAHC)
Ł Institutional differences in interpretation of the Privacy Rule have made con
-ducting health research more dif˜cult than in the pre-Privacy Rule era (AAMC, 
NCAB, AHRQ, Ness, AcademyHealth, HMORN, AAHC)
Ł The Privacy Rule has made recruitment of research participants more dif
-˜cult and has increased the likelihood of selection bias (AAMC, AHRQ, Ness, 
AcademyHealth, AHA/ACC, AAHC)
Ł The Privacy Rule has increased research participants™ confusion regarding 
their rights and protections (NCAB, Ness, HMORN)
Ł The Privacy Rule™s standards for deidenti˜cation have not created an effective 
way for researchers to collect data (AAMC, AHRQ, Ness, AcademyHealth, 
HMORN, AHA/ACC)
Ł The Privacy Rule has led researchers to abandon studies (AAMC, AHRQ, 
AcademyHealth, HMORN, ASCO)
Ł The Privacy Rule has created new barriers to the use of patient specimens 
collected during clinical trials (NCAB, AAHC, ASCO)
Survey Institutions: Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), National 
Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB), Agency for Healthcare Research and
 Quality 
(AHRQ), HMO Research Network (HMORN), American Heart Association
/American College of Cardiology (AHA/ACC), Association of Academic Health 
Centers (AAHC), American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO).
SOURCES: AAHC (2008); ASCO (2008); Greene et al. (2006); Helms (2008); 
NCVHS (2003); Ness (2007); Ramirez and Niederhuber (2003); Ring (2007); 
Walker (2005).
the Privacy Rule affects many types of health research, including clinical, 
health services, epidemiological, behavioral, biomedical, health economics, 
and outcomes research. The most common effects of the Privacy Rule on 
research reported were that the Privacy Rule: (1) reduced patient recruit
-ment, (2) increased the likelihood of selection bias, (3) increased the costs 
of conducting research by requiring more paperwork and complicating the 
IRB approval process, (4) increased the number of errors in research when 
deidenti˜ed information was used, (5) made multisite trials more dif˜cult 
because of variations in IRB interpretation of the Rule, and (6) caused 
researchers to abandon projects because of the increased number of rules 
for operating a research study (NCVHS, 2003).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
TABLE 5-1
 Summary of Relevant Surveys
Survey
Year
Survey Participants
Response Rate
aAssociation of 
American Medical 
Colleges
2003
Targeted investigators, institutional 
review board (IRB) personnel, 
privacy of˜cials, research 
administrators, and deans
331 respondents
b National Cancer 
Advisory Board
2003
Individuals suggested from cancer 
center directors, clinical cooperative 
group chairs, and principal 
investigators of Special Programs of 
Research Excellence
39% (89/226)
Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality
2004
16 health services researchers, and 17 
privacy of˜cers, research compliance 
of˜cers, and IRB directors
77% (33/43)
National Survey of 
Epidemiologists
2007
Professional members of 13 
epidemiological societies 
1,527 
respondents
cHMO Research 
Network (HMORN): 
survey of investigators
2008
Scientists working in the 15 
HMORN research centers
43% (89/235)
HMORN: survey of 
IRB administrators
2008
IRB administrators at the 15 
HMORN research centers
73% (11/15)
AcademyHealth
2007
Professional members of 
AcademyHealth
396 respondents
dAmerican Heart 
Association/American 
College of Cardiology
2007
Professional members of the 
American Heart Association and the 
American College of Cardiology
656 respondents
eNorth American 
Association of Central 
Cancer Registries
2006
Membership of the North American 
Association of Central Cancer 
Registries
66% (47/77)
American Society for 
Clinical Oncology
2008
27 compliance of˜cials and 
investigators from 13 institutions
27 respondents 
(structured 
interviews)
Association of 
Academic Health 
Centers
2007
Researchers and compliance 
personnel from 5 institutions
5 focus groups
Total Number of Responses from All Entities
3,211 
respondents
 aWhere the data are available, the response rate includes the number of survey respondents 
divided by the total number of individuals invited to participate in the survey.
 bThe total number of individuals invited to complete this survey is unknown.
 cThe epidemiological societies e-mailed the survey to 10,347 e-mail addresses. However, a 
substantial number of epidemiologists belong to more than one organization, and as a result 
it is impossible to calculate a response rate. Also, only those members who had submitted an 
application to an IRB since the Privacy Rule was implemented met the criteria for inclusion 
in the analysis.
notes continue
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 203 d All 3,461 AcademyHealth members were invited to participate in the survey, but only 
members who were principal investigators met the criteria for inclusion in the survey analysis. 
Calculating a response rate was impossible because the total number of eligible survey partici
-pants was unknown.
 eAll 18,261 professional members of the American Heart Association and the American 
 
College of Cardiology were invited to complete this survey. Many of these members are prac
-ticing physicians, not researchers, and thus were not the intended audience for the survey. 
As a result, it was impossible to calculate the total number of eligible individuals invited to 
participate in the survey, or the response rate.
TABLE 5-1
 Notes continued
National Cancer Advisory Board Survey
The National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB)
1 conducted a survey 
of health researchers™ experiences with the Privacy Rule in 2003. NCAB 
requested the names of Privacy Rule experts from cancer center directors, 
clinical cooperative group chairs, and principal investigators of Special Pro
-grams of Research Excellence. A total of 226 experts were identi˜ed. These 
experts were invited to visit a website and submit public comments on the 
effect of the Privacy Rule on cancer research. NCAB received 89 responses 
to the survey, for a 39 percent response rate. The survey showed that the 
majority of respondents believed that: (1) the Privacy Rule increased patient 
confusion, (2) the Privacy Rule™s complex documentation requirements 
delayed research, (3) differing interpretations of the Privacy Rule made 
conducting health research more challenging, and (4) the Privacy Rule cre
-ated new barriers to the use of patient specimens collected during clinical 
trials (Ramirez and Niederhuber, 2003).
AHRQ Survey
In 2004, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
interviewed 33 senior health care researchers, privacy of˜cers, research 
compliance of˜cers, and IRB directors representing a variety of health 
settings in 18 states that covered all regions of the United States. With a 
77 percent response rate, 92 percent of respondents reported an impact of 
the Privacy Rule on health research. Those reporting substantial impact 
were often involved in multisite studies where follow-up information from 
many patients was needed from many sources. Many respondents reported 
1 
NCAB was appointed by the President of the United States to advise the HHS Secretary 
and the National Cancer Institute Director regarding the activities of the Institute and policies 
regarding these activities.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
con˚icting IRB decisions, dif˜culties with authorization as well as access to 
deidenti˜ed data, increased cost and time, and lack of participation from 
small hospitals and provider groups due to lack of resources. More than 
half of respondents thought that misinterpretations and overly conserva
-tive interpretations of the Privacy Rule were the cause of the dif˜culties 
(Walker, 2005).
National Survey of Epidemiologists
The IOM committee commissioned a survey by Roberta Ness at the 
University of Pittsburgh. In 2007, Dr. Ness conducted a web-based survey 
of 1,527 epidemiologists who had submitted a new application to an IRB 
for a research project involving human subjects research since the Privacy 
Rule was implemented (see Appendix B for methodological details). The 
survey asked respondents to answer a number of questions on a 5-point 
Likert scale (1 = none, 5 = a great deal). More than 84 percent of respon
-dents ranked the statement ﬁthe Privacy Rule made research easierﬂ as a 
1 or 2. In contrast, 68 percent of respondents ranked the statement ﬁthe 
degree to which the Rule made research more dif˜cultﬂ as a 4 or 5. Only 
11 percent of respondents stated that the Privacy Rule strengthened public 
trust in research, and 26 percent responded that the Privacy Rule did a great 
deal to enhance participant con˜dentiality and privacy (Figure 5-1).
This survey also provided respondents with the opportunity to write 
in comments regarding their experiences conducting research under the 
Privacy Rule. A total of 427 comments were received; 90 percent were 
negative, 5 percent were neutral, and 5 percent were positive. The common 
themes in the comments were: (1) the Privacy Rule added patient burden 
without enhancing privacy protections, (2) institutions vary greatly in their 
interpretations of the Privacy Rule, and (3) many government agencies are 
confused about the demarcation between public health surveillance, which 
is exempt from the Privacy Rule, and health research. Finally, the survey 
found that many respondents believed the Privacy Rule added to research 
costs, caused delays to research projects, and made recruitment of research 
participants much more dif˜cult (Ness, 2007).
HMO Research Network Survey
The IOM committee also commissioned data-gathering efforts from 
the HMO Research Network (HMORN) of investigator and IRB members™ 
experiences operating under the Privacy Rule (see Appendix B for method
-ological details). The HMORN is a consortium of more than 250 scientists 
who work in 15 research centers based in health care delivery systems. The 
data collection efforts consisted of a web-based survey of investigators in 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 205Figure 
5-
1.
eps010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
1Œ
23
4Œ
5D
on
't
kn
ow
1 = no
ne
         5 = a grea
t deal
% Repo
rt
ing
Strengthened public
trus
tEn
hanced
co
nfidentialit
yMa
de
 resear
ch
 easier
Ma
de
 resear
ch
 ha
rder
Has the Privacy Rule:FIGURE 5-1
 National Survey of Epidemiologists: Scaled perceptions of the impact 
of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Privacy Rule.
SOURCE: Ness (2007). 
the Cancer Research Network (conducted in fall 2007), a follow-up tele
-phone survey of those investigators who reported having a study affected 
by the Privacy Rule, and a mailed survey to IRB administrators at the 15 
HMORN sites (conducted in early 2008). The response rate for the inves
-tigator survey was 43 percent (235 investigators were invited to participate 
in the survey, and 89 responses were received). Respondents were mostly 
doctoral-level scientists, and 72 percent of them had been in research for 
10 or more years. Twelve respondents completed telephone interviews. The 
response rate for the IRB administrator survey was 73 percent (11 of the 
15 sites submitted responses).
The results of these surveys are consistent with those of previous sur
-veys. Respondents reported numerous dif˜culties with conducting health 
research since the implementation of the Privacy Rule, including increased 
time required to conduct research, problems with gaining IRB approval for 
studies, impediments to multicenter research, confusion over the autho
-rization process, and problems with the use of deidenti˜ed data. Of the 
investigators who responded, 74 percent reported having a study affected 
by the Privacy Rule. Of these respondents, 61 percent reported having a 
study affected more than once. In addition, 60 percent of the investigators 
reported dif˜culty conducting research under the requirements of the Pri
-vacy Rule. On the other hand, 59 percent of the investigators reported that 
the Privacy Rule has strengthened patient privacy.
The IRB administrators were more positive than the investigators 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
regarding the Privacy Rule. Ninety percent of IRB administrators reported 
that the Privacy Rule strengthened patient privacy. In addition, 46 percent 
of IRB administrators said it was easy to work within the privacy regula
-tions, as opposed to 36 percent of IRB administrators who said it was not 
easy to work within the regulations. Nonetheless, 63 percent of IRB admin
-istrators reported that the Privacy Rule has made conducting research more 
dif˜cult. More than 72 percent of IRB administrators reported that the 
federal government needs to give more guidance to IRBs about interpreting 
and implementing the Privacy Rule (Greene et al., 2008).
AcademyHealth Survey
To provide input to the IOM study, AcademyHealth conducted a sur
-vey in 2007 of researchers™ experiences operating under the Privacy Rule. 
AcademyHealth is a professional society for health services researchers 
and health policy analysts. Its mission is to strengthen the research infra
-structure, promote the use of the best available research, and assist health 
policy and practice leaders in addressing major health care challenges. The 
organization conducted a web-based survey of principal investigators. All 
3,461 AcademyHealth members were invited to participate in the survey 
by e-mail. A total 696 members responded. Out of this group, 396 mem
-bers were principal investigators and met the criteria for inclusion in the 
survey analysis. In general, 75 percent of the survey respondents reported 
that their experiences with the Privacy Rule were negative. Only 6 per
-cent of respondents reported that their experiences were positive. Nearly 
halfŠ48 percentŠreported that their institution provided support to assist 
researchers with HIPAA compliance and IRB issues, and 77 percent of the 
researchers at these institutions indicated that they used these resources. 
Respondents were also asked whether they believe the Privacy Rule strikes 
the correct balance between protecting individual privacy and allowing 
research to be conducted. A majorityŠ63 percentŠof the respondents 
reported that the Privacy Rule provides protection to individuals at the 
expense of access to research data; 28 percent reported that the Privacy 
Rule strikes the right balance between these two goods; and only 1 per
-cent reported that the Privacy Rule provides access to research data at the 
expense of privacy protection for individuals (Figure 5-2) (Helms, 2008).
American Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Survey
The American Heart Association (AHA) and the American College of 
Cardiology (ACC) also conducted a survey in 2007. The 18,261 profes
-sional members of AHA and ACC were invited to complete a question
-naire by e-mail, and 656 individuals completed the survey. However, it 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 207is important to note that many professional members of AHA and ACC 
are practicing physicians, not researchers, and thus were not the intended 
audience for the survey. Of the individuals completing the survey, 61 per
-cent reported that they had submitted an IRB application since the Privacy 
Rule was implemented. In general, the respondents indicated that the Pri
-vacy Rule had a negative impact on research and did not improve patient 
privacy. Only 22 percent of respondents reported that the Privacy Rule 
increased public trust in research, 44 percent reported that it increased 
con˜dentiality, 9 percent reported that it decreased privacy breaches, and 
14 percent reported that patients™ privacy was better protected than before 
the Privacy Rule. Respondents also indicated that the Privacy Rule had a 
negative impact on research recruitment, the IRB approval process, the cost 
and time to conduct research, multicenter research, and the use of deidenti
-˜ed information (Ring, 2007).
North American Association of Central Cancer Registries
In 2006, the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries 
(NAACCR) conducted a survey of its memberships™ experience operating 
Figure 
5-
2.
eps01
02
03
04
05
06
07
0Pr
ot
ect individuals 
at 
th
eex
pense of access to research data
Stri
ke
 the right balanc
eUnsure 
Allo
w access 
to resear
ch
 data at
 the 
ex
pense of priv
acy protec
tion
s% Re
po
rt
in
gDoes the Privacy Rule:between privacy and researchFIGURE 5-2
 AcademyHealth Survey: Perspective on the balance of individual 
protections and research access.
SOURCE: Helms (2008). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
under the Privacy Rule. NAACCR members represent population-based 
state, regional, and provincial cancer registries in Canada, the United States 
and its territories. These registries provide cancer incidence data for public 
health surveillance and research purposes. All 71 members of NAACCR 
were invited to participate in the survey and 55 responses were received, 
however, many of the members are not HIPAA covered entities. In general, 
the respondents indicated that the Privacy Rule has interfered with both 
basic cancer surveillance and registry-based research (Deapen, 2006).
American Society of Clinical Oncology Interviews
The American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) gathered quali
-tative information through structured interviews in early 2008 with 27 
compliance of˜cials and investigators from 13 institutions about their 
attitudes toward the Privacy Rule. Participants were presented with three 
research scenarios prior to their interviews: (1) communication with cancer 
survivors™ family members to request their participation in genetic studies 
intended to investigate familial cancer syndromes, (2) establishment and use 
of tissue and data banks that would contain protected health information 
(PHI), and (3) identi˜cation and consent of cancer survivors to participate 
in long-term survivorship studies. These scenarios were then discussed dur
-ing the interviews to explore how the Privacy Rule standards are applied at 
the different institutions, and to gauge the opinions of the researchers and 
compliance of˜cers toward the regulation.
Unlike some of the surveys, many of the ASCO interview participants 
indicated that the Privacy Rule had a positive effect on privacy by trigger
-ing a reconsideration of how con˜dential health information is handled in 
research. However, they also noted that different institutions™ IRBs have 
very different approaches to complying with the Privacy Rule, and this can 
impede important research. They identi˜ed the authorization process as the 
most signi˜cant challenge to complying with the Privacy Rule, especially 
for future research projects relying on stored tissue and databases. Com
-pliance
 of˜cers and researchers disagreed on the possibility of obtaining 
authorization for ﬁfuture research.ﬂ Other problems identi˜ed included 
abandoned studies, a lack of training and useful guidance documents on 
the requirements of the Privacy Rule, and concerns about the security of 
research databases (ASCO, 2008).
Association of Academic Health Centers Focus Groups
The Association of Academic Health Centers (AAHC) organized focus 
groups in fall 2007 at ˜ve institutions to examine researchers™ experiences 
operating under the HIPAA Privacy Rule. Each focus group included both 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 209researchers and compliance personnel from the institution, and all groups 
were asked the same set of questions. The focus groups reported problems 
with the Privacy Rule™s regulation of research similar to those found in 
the surveys. Major issues identi˜ed included overly conservative inter
-pretation of the Privacy Rule by institutions, diminished ability to recruit 
research participants, obstacles in accessing stored tissue and genetic data
-sets, increased cost and time to conduct research, and increased complexity 
in the IRB review procedures. Participants also indicated that some hos
-pitals and community physicians were opting out of research, rather than 
attempting to comply with the Privacy Rule (AAHC, 2008)
SELECTION BIAS
Selection bias is created when data are more likely to be collected from 
one subset of the population than from a representative sample of the entire 
population (see Box 3-8). This can cause a systematic difference between 
the characteristics of the individuals included in a study and the individuals 
not included. Selection bias is problematic for research because it can lead 
to inaccurate results and it reduces the generalizability of research results to 
the general population, as indicated by the examples described below.
The Privacy Rule has the potential to contribute to selection bias 
because it requires researchers to seek patient authorization to access their 
health records in most situations (see Chapter 4). Selection bias occurs if the 
individuals who give permission for researchers to access their medical data 
differ from the group of individuals who are unwilling to give permission 
for their health information to be used in research. This section provides 
a detailed overview of the evidence regarding the Privacy Rule™s impact on 
selection bias. It starts with a description of relevant survey data from the 
researcher surveys described above, then provides a summary of several 
systematic studies that examined the effect of consent and authorization on 
selection bias. It concludes with a section summarizing several studies that 
speci˜cally examined the Privacy Rule™s effect on research samples.
Two surveys provide evidence that researchers are concerned about the 
Privacy Rule introducing selection bias into research. In the AHRQ survey, 
74 percent of respondents reported that they had experienced problems 
with sample representation and bias. One of the most commonly cited rea
-sons for selection bias was that fewer patients have agreed to participate in 
research since the Privacy Rule was implemented. Respondents indicated 
that the complicated and lengthy authorization forms required by the Pri
-vacy Rule create an impediment to subject recruitment. Also, 42 percent of 
respondents reported that many small health care entities and other entities 
serving disadvantaged populations are not participating in research because 
of an inability to meet all of the Privacy Rule requirements. This results in 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the underrepresentation of minority populations in many research studies 
(Walker, 2005).
A survey of NAACCR found similar results, with 36 percent of respon
-dents reporting that the Privacy Rule had introduced selection bias into a 
research project. The response rate for this survey was 66 percent (Deapen, 
2006). A new privacy policy of Veterans Affairs has deepened concern 
about bias in cancer registries (Kolata, 2007; see also Chapter 6). This 
policy goes beyond the requirements of the Privacy Rule by requiring each 
state to sign a national directive setting privacy standards for the use of 
patients™ health information. Some states have refused to sign the direc
-tive, asserting that it is not feasible to meet the requirements. As a result, 
cancer registries will not be representative of the entire U.S. population, 
and researchers and public health of˜cials will have dif˜culty interpreting 
annual cancer statistics published by the National Cancer Institute.
General Studies of Consent and Selection Bias
Numerous studies have directly examined the effect of consent and autho
-rization requirements on selection bias in a systematic manner (Al-Shahi et 
al., 2005; Harris and Levy, 2008; McCarthy et al., 1999; Trevena et al., 2006; 
Tu et al., 2004; Ward et al., 2007; Woolf et al., 2000). Woolf and colleagues 
(2000) at Virginia Commonwealth University studied the effect of requiring 
patients to give consent on the demographics of research participants at an 
urban family practice center. Patients were recruited to complete the Health 
Assessment Survey (HAS). At the end of the HAS, patients were asked to give 
the researchers permission to contact them by phone or mail, and to review 
their medical records. Of patients who completed the HAS survey, 67 percent 
granted researchers consent to complete the follow-up activities, 25 percent 
actively denied consent, and 8 percent did not answer the question. Patients 
who gave consent were older, and included fewer women and African Ameri
-cans than patients who did not give consent. Patients who actively denied 
consent were younger, included more women, and were more educated than 
patients giving consent. Also, patients who gave consent differed in health 
status from patients who denied consent. The researchers concluded that 
patients willing to release personal health information for health services 
research differed on important characteristics from patients denying consent 
(Woolf et al., 2000).
A study conducted by Jack Tu and colleagues (2004) examined the 
effect of requiring consent on the representativeness of the Registry of the 
Canadian Stroke Network of the entire population of individuals with 
stroke. The researchers found that requiring consent before enrollment 
created a database that was not representative. Patients who agreed to 
participate in the stroke database were younger, more likely to be alert at 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 211
admission to the hospital, more likely to be alive at discharge, and were 
more likely to speak English or French than those patients who did not 
agree to participate in the database.
In addition, the in-hospital discharge rates differed signi˜cantly between 
enrolled patients (7 percent) and unenrolled patients (22 percent). This dif
-ference was likely due to the dif˜culty in approaching critically ill patients 
and their family members for recruitment during the ordeal of a stroke. 
Also, many stroke patients were unable to give or decline to give consent 
because they were cognitively impaired. The selection bias occurred at 
hospitals with both high and low participation rates. Based on this study™s 
results, the Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network switched from a 
 
consent-based system to a system that uses deidenti˜ed patient data and 
does not require patient consent, to ensure the universality of the registry 
(Tu et al., 2004). This change, however, eliminated the possibility of follow-
up interviews with patients.
In Scotland, a study conducted by Rustam Al-Shahi and colleagues 
(2005) evaluated the effect of requiring consent on prospective, observa
-tional research. The researchers attempted to obtain informed consent to 
review the medical records and conduct annual follow-up questionnaires 
of all patients residing in Scotland who presented with intracranial vas
-cular malformation between 1999 and 2002. An ethics board gave the 
 
researchers permission to collect baseline and follow-up data on those 
patients who did not give consent. The researchers found that adults who 
consented to participate in the study differed on important prognostic vari
-ables from patients who did not consent. For example, patients who gave 
consent were signi˜cantly less likely to have intracranial hemorrhage, or to 
be dependent at presentation. During the yearly follow-ups, patients who 
gave consent were signi˜cantly more likely to have received interventional 
treatment, less likely to have died, and more likely to have had an epileptic 
seizure than nonconsenters. The researchers concluded that requiring con
-sent for observational research produced signi˜cant selection bias (Al-Shahi 
et al., 2005).
McCarthy and colleagues (1999) studied a Minnesota law that required 
patient-informed consent before medical records were permitted to be used 
by researchers. In this pharmacoepidemiologic study, 73 of 140 potential 
research participants responded to a request for informed consent, with 
26 of the potential research participants authorizing the use of their medi
-cal records for the study, and 47 declining. Although it is unclear whether 
there were important differences between the group of individuals granting 
informed consent and the group of individuals declining to give informed 
consent, the authors concluded that the low response rate compromised the 
generalizability of the study results. In contrast, the researchers achieved a 
93 percent recruitment rate for this study in states without a privacy law 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
requiring informed consent, where health care providers could grant access 
to patient medical records based on a general enrollment authorization. 
The low participation rate in Minnesota was directly attributed to the state 
privacy law (McCarthy et al., 1999).
Similar results were found in the study that examined the effect of the 
recent Australian privacy legislation on selection bias in health research. 
Trevena and colleagues (2006) conducted a randomized trial comparing 
recruitment under an opt-out and an opt-in methodology. In the opt-out 
condition, potential research participants were informed that their physi
-cian was participating in a research study, and if they did not wish to be 
contacted by the researchers they should inform their physician and their 
contact information would be withheld. Under the opt-in condition, poten
-tial research participants could only be contacted by researchers if they 
af˜rmatively gave permission in writing, over the phone, or via e-mail to the 
researchers. This study found that a smaller percentage of potential research 
participants participated under the opt-in methodology (47 percent) com
-pared to the opt-out methodology (67 percent). Although there was no 
difference in the age, sex, health status, or socioeconomic status between 
the opt-in and opt-out populations, individuals in the opt-in group were 
more likely (75 percent) to prefer an active role in making health care deci
-sions than individuals in the opt-out group (45 percent). The
 researchers 
concluded that the opt-in method produced a sample of research partici
-pants who differed in important behavioral characteristics from the opt-out 
method participants (Trevena et al., 2006).
In a study of the United Kingdom Data Protection Act of 1998, epi
-demiological researchers assessed their ability to recruit potential research 
participants under this Act. The researchers wrote to a number of phy
-sicians and recruited them to participate in the study. If the physicians 
agreed to participate, the researchers requested the physicians to randomly 
select 20 of their patients and ask them to consent to being contacted by 
the
 researchers. Those individuals granting consent to be contacted were 
then invited by the researchers to participate in the study. Following this 
methodology, the researchers were only able to obtain consent from 16 
percent of the patients approached. They concluded that such a low par
-ticipation rate led to selection bias, as well as inadequate statistical power 
and
 statistical signi˜cance. They documented that health care workers were 
ove
rrepresented in the resulting study population (Ward et al., 2007).
HIPAA Authorization and Selection Bias
Several studies have explicitly examined whether the provisions of the 
Privacy Rule contribute to biased research samples. Armstrong and col
-leagues (2005) at the University of Michigan conducted a 6-month follow-
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 213
up questionnaire for the Acute Coronary Syndrome Registry. They then 
compared the percentage of patients who gave consent pre-HIPAA and 
post-HIPAA for participation in the follow-up survey. In the pre-HIPAA 
time period, informed consent for the follow-up questionnaire was given 
over the phone by the patient. In the post-HIPAA era, written informed 
consent and authorization were required. The percentage of patients con
-senting to complete the questionnaire decreased from 96 percent in the pre-
HIPAA era to 34 percent in the post-HIPAA era. Patients who gave consent 
post-HIPAA were more likely to be older, married, and white than those 
who refused to provide consent or did not respond. Patients who gave con
-sent also had lower mortality rates at 6 months than patients who refused 
consent. The results suggest that implementation of the Privacy Rule led to 
selection bias in the Registry (Armstrong et al., 2005).
Beebe and colleagues (2007) at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
in Rochester, MN, followed up on the Armstrong study and conducted a 
randomized clinical trial that examined the effect of the Privacy Rule on 
response rate and selection bias. In this study, 6,939 research participants 
were randomly assigned to one of two research conditions: (1) one condi
-tion required patients to complete and return a HIPAA authorization form 
in order to participate in the study, and (2) in the second condition, patients 
were not required to complete a HIPAA authorization form to participate. 
The response rates were signi˜cantly different between the condition requir
-ing an authorization form (38 percent) and the condition not requiring an 
authorization form (55 percent). However, unlike the studies described 
above, the researchers did not ˜nd that the lower response rate translated 
into a detectable selection bias (Beebe et al., 2007).
The lack of detectable selection bias in this study could be the result of 
the authorization form used. Beebe and colleagues used a simple one-page 
authorization form. In the other studies discussed in this section, the autho
-rization forms were much longer than one page and were often written in 
complex language. Simplifying the authorization form likely minimized the 
effect of requiring patient authorization on potential research participants™ 
willingness to participate in a study. However, as will be discussed below 
in the chapter section on the authorization process, a majority of covered 
entities require lengthy and highly legalistic authorization forms.
Another study that examined the effect of the Privacy Rule on selection 
bias was conducted by Dunlop and colleagues (2007) at Emory University 
in Atlanta. In this study the researchers investigated the impact of includ
-ing an authorization form on the willingness of African Americans to 
participate in a clinical study of an antihypertensive medication. Research 
 
participants were randomly assigned to one of two study conditions in 
which they received either (1) an informed consent form (informed consent 
condition), or (2) an informed consent form and an authorization form 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
(authorization condition). The researchers recorded the reasons that poten
-tial research participants gave for declining to participate in the study.
The study found that a smaller percentage of research participants in 
the authorization condition indicated a willingness to participate in the 
study than in the informed consent condition (27 percent versus 39 per
-cent). This was especially true for individuals over 40 years of age with a 
high school education or less, and in men. In addition, individuals required 
to complete an authorization form were more likely to report the following 
reasons for declining to participate in the study: (1) concerns related to mis
-trust or fear of research, researchers, or research institutions, and (2) poor 
comprehension of forms. The researchers concluded that the Privacy Rule™s 
authorization requirement acted as a deterrent for African American par
-ticipation in research (Dunlop et al., 2007).
EFFICIENCY OF RESEARCH
Substantial evidence indicates that many institution™s implementation 
and interpretation of the Privacy Rule have had a detrimental effect on 
health researchers™ ability to ef˜ciently conduct information-based research. 
This section reviews the available evidence on the effect of the Privacy Rule, 
and its interpretation, on the ef˜ciency of research in terms of (1) cost and 
time, (2) research participant recruitment, (3) IRB oversight of research 
projects, (4) international collaboration between researchers, and (5) the 
use of business associate agreements.
Cost and Time
In the 2000 version of the Privacy Rule, HHS estimated that the Pri
-vacy Rule would cost the health care industry more than $17.6 billion to 
implement.
2 The expected costs for research were projected to be more 
than $40 million the ˜rst year, and $585 million over 10 years. The 2002 
version of the Privacy Rule reduced the projected costs for implementing 
the research provisions by $10 million the ˜rst year, and $146 million over 
10 years.
3 HHS stated that it was dif˜cult to conduct a true costŒbene˜t 
analysis of the Privacy Rule because the value of protecting health privacy 
is dif˜cult to quantify.
4 However, in implementing the Privacy Rule, the 
agency clearly decided that the bene˜ts of protecting privacy outweighed 
the economic costs of the Privacy Rule. The aggregate cost to research has 
2 
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: Final Rule, 67 Fed. 
Reg. 53,255 (August 24, 2002) (codi˜ed at 45 C.F.R. parts 160 and 164). 
3 
Id.
 at 53,258.
4 Id.
 at 53,255.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 215
not been measured or estimated since April 2003, and as outlined below, 
researchers™ estimates of the increase in cost and time attributable to the 
Privacy Rule vary widely.
In a recent article published in the 
Annual Review of Medicine
, Nosowsky 
and Giordano (2006) reviewed the existing evidence on the effect of the 
Privacy Rule on research, and concluded that the costs projected by HHS 
have more than been realized by covered entities,
 researchers, and IRBs, 
although no ˜gures were cited. They attributed the increased research costs 
to the large amounts of paperwork required by the Privacy Rule, increased 
staff time, and dif˜culties in recruiting research participants. They con
-cluded that these additional burdens on research have pushed
 researchers 
to reformulate and abandon many studies. Furthermore, the authors specu
-lated that these changes have increased the need for
 researchers to obtain 
additional funding, discouraged investigator-initiated research, and caused 
many smaller research projects to end (Nosowsky and Giordano, 2006).
Many researchers report that the implementation of the Privacy Rule 
increased the cost of conducting health research and increased the time 
 
necessary to conduct a research project from start to ˜nish. The national 
survey of epidemiologists found that most respondents believe the Privacy 
Rule increased the cost and time of conducting health research. In this sur
-vey, 90 percent of the respondents reported an increase in resource expen
-diture, with 40 percent indicating that the Privacy Rule increased research 
costs a great deal (i.e., 4Œ5 on the Likert scale). Half of the respondents 
indicated that the additional time required to comply with the Privacy 
Rule was great (4Œ5 on the Likert scale) (Figure 5-3a) (Ness, 2007). In the 
AHA/ACC survey, 78 percent of respondents reported that the Privacy Rule 
increased the cost of research, and 79 percent reported that it increased the 
time to conduct research (Ring, 2007).
The AcademyHealth survey results were similar, with 86 percent of 
respondents reporting that the Privacy Rule increased the time necessary 
for research, and 8 percent of those reporting that the increase was so great 
that it led some researchers to forego projects. In terms of cost, 73 percent 
of respondents reported that the Privacy Rule increased the cost of research 
(4 percent much more, 24 percent signi˜cantly more, and 45 percent some
-what more) (Helms, 2008) (Figure 5-3b).
In the HMORN survey of investigators, 55 percent of respondents 
reported that study time lines were negatively affected by the Privacy 
 Rule (Figure 5-4). A third of the investigators indicated that the Privacy Rule 
delayed their research by 1 to more than 3 months. Also, investigators 
reported that the Privacy Rule led to a median of 20 additional staff hours 
required to comply with the requirements of the regulation. Twelve percent 
of respondents reported that 100 or more staff hours were required. In one 
extreme case in the structured interview portion of this survey, an inves
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Figure 
5-
3a
.e
ps
010
20
30
40
50
60
1Œ
23
4Œ
5D
on
't
kn
ow
1 = no
ne
           5 = a grea
t deal
% Repo
rt
in
gAd
de
d cost
 to resear
ch
Dela
ye
d time to stud
ycomple
tion
Has the Privacy Rule:Figure 
5-
3b
.e
ps
01
02
03
04
05
0Much more
; proj
ec
tmust be forgon
eSignificantly more
Some
what more
Li
tt
le
/n
o ef
fe
ct
% Repo
rt
in
gTime
 Cost
 Has the Privacy Rule affected research:FIGURE 5-3a
 National Survey of Epidemiologists: Impact on cost and time to 
complete research.
SOURCE: Ness (2007).
FIGURE 5-3b
 AcademyHealth Survey: Impact on cost and time to complete 
research.
SOURCE: Helms (2008).
tigator said that compliance with the HIPAA procedures required about 
1,000Œ2,000 additional hours of staff time, and added $100,000Œ$200,000 
in unanticipated costs (Greene et al., 2008). In the NAACCR survey of 
cancer registries, 68 percent of respondents reported that the Privacy Rule 
delayed a research project or caused it to take longer than it would have 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 217
FIGURE 5-4
 HMO Research Network Survey of Institutional Review Board 
 
Administrators. Responses to the question: Taken as a whole, do you think the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Privacy Rule has added to. . . .
SOURCE: Greene et al. (2008).
Figure 
5-
4.
ep
s02
46
81
01
2IR
B st
af
f time needed to 
ex
plai
nTh
e nu
mber
 of 
iterations
 of IR
BTh
e time required to re
vi
ew IRBFr
equenc
yYe
sNo
Has the Privacy Rule added to:taken pre-HIPAA. In addition, 66 percent of respondents indicated that the 
Privacy Rule had been cited as the reason for actions that interfered with 
nonresearch operations of the cancer registry, such as basic surveillance 
(Deapen, 2006).
A number of researchers have attempted to quantitatively document 
the increased time and cost of research attributable to the implementa
-tion of the Privacy Rule at their institutions. It is important to note that 
these
 studies are site speci˜c and depend on how institutions interpret and 
implement the Privacy Rule. A recent letter to the editor of
 Anesthesiology
 reported on the amount of research staff hours spent per month on recruit
-ment and follow-up activities in a randomized clinical trial at the University 
of Pittsburgh, before and after the Privacy Rule went into effect. Implemen
-tation of the Privacy Rule led to a 75-hour increase per month in staff time 
spent updating work logs, and a 77-hour increase in time spent on HIPAA 
implementation tasks. According to the authors™ calculations, this was a 
70 percent increase in staff hours above the monthly base workload. The 
authors did not try to determine which aspects of the Privacy Rule were 
responsible for the recorded increases (Williams et al., 2007).
Similarly, the Armstrong study on the Acute Coronary Syndrome 
 
Registry documented that the incremental cost for this registry at the Uni
-versity of
 Michigan of complying with the Privacy Rule was $8,704.50 for 
the ˜rst year, and an additional $4,558.50 for each year thereafter. The 
authors did not report the total expenditure of the study but suggested 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
that this was a substantial increase in the study™s budget (Armstrong et al., 
2005). 
Johns Hopkins University estimates that the cost of complying with the 
Privacy Rule is about $2 million annually (Friedman, 2006). Since the Pri
-vacy Rule was implemented, the institution calculated that it has required 
nearly 26,000 of its faculty and staff to pass a written test on their under
-standing of the Privacy Rule.
Recruitment
A number of researchers have also demonstrated that many interpre
-tations of the Privacy Rule have made research recruitment more dif˜cult 
(Table 5-2). During a clinical trial evaluating the ef˜cacy of an educational 
strategy to inform veterans about the National Cancer Institute
/Department 
of Veterans Affairs Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial 
(SELECT), Wolf and Bennett (2006) monitored the recruitment of research 
participants before and after implementation of the Privacy Rule. Several 
recruitment methods were used throughout this clinical trial, depending on 
the phase of HIPAA implementation. Before the Privacy Rule was imple
-mented, potential research participants were directly approached by research 
assistants for informed consent. After the Privacy Rule was implemented, 
research assistants could no longer approach potential research partici
-pants; recruitment was done by hospital staff. The post-HIPAA recruit
-ment protocol was modi˜ed once to increase participation rates. Under the 
modi˜ed protocol, potential research participants were introduced to the 
study by desk staff at the medical clinic where the study was conducted, all 
clinic staff members were reminded of the study, and a research assistant 
was stationed prominently in the medical clinic.
The researchers were able to recruit seven patients a week in the pre-
HIPAA phase. The average time to recruit a patient was 4.1 hours, for an 
average cost of $49 per patient. The study was on target to complete recruit
-ment in 60 weeks. Immediately after the Privacy Rule was implemented, 
recruitment decreased by 73 percent to 1.9 patients per week. The average 
time to recruit each new patient was 14.1 hours, for a cost of $169 per 
patient. Meeting the recruitment goals of the study at this rate would require 
158 weeks. The modi˜ed recruitment protocol increased recruitment to 7.1 
patients a week, required 3.9 hours, and cost $52 per patient. The modi˜ed 
recruitment strategy was measured again at a later date in the study to assess 
whether the modi˜ed protocol could be maintained. During this time period, 
5.2 patients were recruited per week. Research assistants needed an average 
of 5.4 hours to recruit each patient, for a cost of $65 per patient.
The authors concluded that the Privacy Rule dramatically hindered 
researchers™ ability to recruit research participants. Implementation of the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 219
TABLE 5-2
 Research Participant Recruitment Before and After 
Implementation of the Privacy Rule
Wolf and Bennett: Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial in Veterans (2006)
 Pre-HIPAA
 7 patients recruited per week
 Post-HIPAA
 1.9 patients recruited per week
 Modi˜ed protocol (time period 1)
 7.1 patients recruited per week
 Modi˜ed protocol (time period 2)
 5.2 patients recruited per week
Roberta Ness: Pregnancy Exposures and Preeclampsia Prevention (2005)
 Pre-HIPAA (1997Œ2001)
 12.4 patients recruited per week
 HIPAA implementation (2002)
  
0.0 patients recruited per week
 No waivers 1 (4/03Œ9/03)
  2.5 patients recruited per week
 Waivers of authorization (10/03Œ6/04)
  
5.7 patients recruited per week
 No waivers 2 (6/04)
  3.3 patients recruited per week
Beebe and Colleagues: HIPAA Authorization and Willingness to Participate (2007)
 No authorization
 55.0% of potential research subjects participated
 Authorization
 39.8% of potential research subjects participated
Dunlop and Colleagues: HIPAA Authorization and Willingness to Participate (2007)
 No authorization
 39% of potential research subjects participated
 Authorization
 27% of potential research subjects participated
SOURCES: Beebe et al. (2007); Dunlop et al. (2007); Ness (2005); Wolf and Bennett (2006).
Privacy Rule increased the cost and time required for recruitment and made 
it more dif˜cult to achieve an appropriate-sized research sample. Although 
the modi˜ed protocol increased recruitment, the fact that the initial recruit
-ment level could not be maintained over time suggests that the new protocol 
required a great deal of effort and did not completely solve recruitment 
dif˜culties. In addition, an intensive evaluation of a study™s recruitment 
process to devise a new strategy, as was required to develop the modi˜ed 
protocol, costs money, takes time, and may not always be possible (Wolf 
and Bennett, 2006).
A reduced rate of recruitment following implementation of the Pri
-vacy Rule was also documented by Roberta Ness in the course of a study 
on pregnancy exposures and preeclampsia prevention at the University 
of Pittsburgh. Again, the recruitment methods were divided into several 
different time periods: (1) pre-HIPAA (1997Œ2001), (2) 2002, (3) April 
2003ŒSeptember 2003, (4) October 2003ŒMay 2004, and (5) June 2004. In 
the pre-HIPAA time period, researchers recruited an average of 12.4 women 
a week. In 2002 recruitment was shut down completely for 4 months while 
the covered entity where the study was being conducted decided how to 
implement the requirements of the Privacy Rule.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
From April 2003 to September 2003, recruitment was allowed to 
continue, but the covered entity was unwilling to grant any waivers of 
authorization. Researchers recruited only 2.5 women a week. In October 
2003, the covered entity allowed waivers of authorization to be issued, 
and the researchers were able to review potential research participants™ 
medical records without obtaining authorization. However, the waivers 
of authorization required that the researchers obtain the consent of the 
potential research participants™ health care providers before the researchers 
could approach individuals for participation in the study. Approximately 
5.7 women a week were recruited following this protocol. The need for 
the health care providers™ permission prevented recruitment from reaching 
pre-HIPAA levels. The covered entity merged with another covered entity 
in June 2004, and the waiver of authorization was retracted. Recruitment 
immediately fell to 3.3 women a week (Ness, 2005). These recruitment 
numbers clearly demonstrate that the implementation and interpretation 
of the Privacy Rule, and the availability of waivers of authorization, can 
have an enormous in˚uence on recruitment success. They also show that 
conducting research under changing policies, organization, or interpreta
-tions of the Privacy Rule can be problematic.
Several studies that were discussed previously provide further evi
-dence that many interpretations of the Privacy Rule have made research 
recruitment more dif˜cult. The Beebe study found that the percentage of 
potential research participants willing to participate declined when HIPAA 
authorization was required at the Mayo Clinic College of
 Medicine. More 
than halfŠ55 percentŠof potential research participants participated in 
the study when authorization was not required, but only 39.8 percent of 
potential research participants took part if they were required to complete 
an authorization form (Beebe et al., 2007). In the Dunlop study, 39 percent 
of potential research participants indicated a willingness to participate in 
a clinical trial of a hypertensive medication when authorization was not 
required. Only 27 percent indicated a willingness to participate when 
 
authorization was required (Dunlop et al., 2007).
Also, the national survey of epidemiologists found Privacy Rule modi
-˜cations were needed in 84.8 percent of proposed research protocols. Of 
these cases, 68 percent of respondents reported that these modi˜cations 
increased recruitment dif˜culties a great deal (4Œ5 on the Likert scale) (Ness, 
2007). In the
 AcademyHealth survey, 47 percent of respondents reported 
that the Privacy Rule decreased recruitment (Helms, 2008). Similarly, the 49 
percent of respondents to the AHA/ACC survey reported that the Privacy 
Rule decreased recruitment by more than 10 percent (Ring, 2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 221
IRB and Privacy Board Oversight
A previous IOM report noted that the workload of IRBs, and the com
-plexity of their work, has been steadily increasing as a result of new and 
evolving requirements for research regulation and documentation (IOM, 
2002), including the HIPAA Privacy Rule. This heavy burden has increased 
the dif˜culty of both recruiting knowledgeable IRB members and allowing 
them suf˜cient time for the necessary ethical re˚ection to make appropriate 
decisions about human research projects. In addition, the report noted that 
the extreme variability in the approval decisions and regulatory interpreta
-tions among IRBs is one of the weaknesses in the current protection system 
(IOM, 2002). Recent ˜ndings from surveys and other studies indicate that 
these issues are a continuing concern for both IRBs and Privacy Boards. 
This section provides a detailed review of the evidence that the Privacy 
Rule, and its interpretation, has had a detrimental effect on the oversight 
process for reviewing research proposals, including information on: (1) IRB 
approval, (2) exemption from full IRB review, (3) waiver of authorization, 
(4) differentiating types of research, and (5) inconsistent interpretation 
of the Privacy Rule by IRBs and Privacy Boards in multicenter research 
projects.
IRB Approval
Recent surveys provide evidence that the Privacy Rule, or its interpreta
-tion, has reduced the ef˜ciency of health research by affecting researchers™ 
ability to move a study through the IRB approval process. In the AHRQ 
survey, 94 percent of respondents stated that the Privacy Rule impacted 
the design and conduct of health services research. The respondents who 
reported that the Privacy Rule had no impact on study design were all 
researchers who used only deidenti˜ed data and were not required to go 
through the IRB/Privacy Board review process under the Privacy Rule 
(Walker, 2005). Similarly, in the national survey of epidemiologists, 87 per
-cent of respondents reported an increase in the time required for preparing 
a research proposal for review by an IRB (Ness, 2007).
The AcademyHealth survey found that 69 percent of respondents 
reported dif˜culty gaining approval from IRBs to collect PHI. Respondents 
also reported dif˜culty gaining approval to collect PHI from health plans 
(32 percent), institution lawyers (29 percent), and physicians (25 percent). 
In the HMORN survey of investigators, respondents reported that they 
were required to submit a research project for a median of two additional 
IRB iterations after the Privacy Rule was implemented. Twenty percent of 
investigators reported that four or more IRB iterations were required. Also, 
investigators reported that in one-third of study protocols, modi˜cations 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
were due to an IRB requirement. In that survey, 29 percent of investiga
-tors reported that an IRB required them to modify their planned method 
of identifying potential research participants, 29 percent reported that an 
IRB put restrictions on the kind of identi˜ers that could be collected, and 
59 percent reported that an IRB required a study to be modi˜ed to include 
additional consent and/or authorization language (Greene et al., 2008). The 
AHA/ACC survey also found that 67 percent of respondents reported that 
the IRB submission process was made more complex by the Privacy Rule 
(Ring, 2007).
Exemption from Full IRB Review
Certain types of research that pose minimal risk to human subjects are 
exempt from IRB review under the Common Rule (45 C.F.R. § 46.101). 
For these studies, an IRB chair or member can review an application for 
exemption and determine if the study meets the criteria for exemption. If 
the study quali˜es for exemption, then no further IRB review is necessary. 
Expedited IRB review is a process allowed by the Common Rule (45 C.F.R. 
§ 46.110) in which an IRB chair or member reviews the entire study pro
-tocol. A study conducted by O™Herrin and colleagues (2004) examined the 
effect of the Privacy Rule on applications for IRB exemption for proposed 
research projects at the University of Wisconsin. This study was broken 
down into three time periods: (1) September 1999ŒDecember 2000, during 
which there was no speci˜c process for handling requests for IRB exemp
-tion for medical records studies; (2) January 2001ŒDecember 2002, during 
which the institution followed a standardized procedure for Applications 
for Exemption; and (3) January 2003ŒMarch 2003, during which the IRB 
became fully compliant with the Privacy Rule.
During Period 1, all the medical records research projects submitted 
to the IRB were approved under ﬁexpeditedﬂ IRB review procedures. In 
Period 2, 89 percent of the applications received an IRB exemption with
-out revision. Of the applications that required revision, 36 percent were 
revised and successfully approved for exemption within 75 
 64 days of the 
original submission. The remaining applications required review by the full 
IRB committee, but were all ultimately given approval. In Period 3, when 
the covered entity was in full compliance with the Privacy Rule, 59 percent 
of proposals received exemption from full IRB review without revision in 
12 
 23 days. Of the projects requiring revision, 50 percent were revised 
and approved within 29 
 35 days of the initial submission.
The percentage of projects that required full IRB committee review 
increased from 0 percent in Period 1, to 7 percent in Period 2, to 16 per
-cent in Period 3. The authors of this study concluded that the Privacy Rule 
complicated the IRB review process because a larger percentage of studies 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 223
became ineligible for IRB exemption or expedited IRB review. Also, the 
complexity of the IRB approval process discouraged many researchers from 
completing their proposed research study. Of the applications that required 
full IRB committee review, 77 percent were abandoned by the researchers 
in Period 3. Most of the abandoned studies were chart reviews, and there 
was no evidence that the full IRB committee review was justi˜ed or a nec
-essary change that safeguarded research participants™ privacy (O™Herrin et 
al., 2004).
Waiver of Authorization
The Privacy Rule allows a covered entity to use and disclose PHI for 
research purposes without patient authorization if an IRB or Privacy Board 
determines that a research project meets three criteria, including minimal 
risk to patient privacy, and whether the study could practicably be con
-ducted without the waiver of authorization and without access to and use 
of PHI (see Chapter 4). However, surveys indicate that many researchers 
have experienced dif˜culty in obtaining a waiver of authorization. In the 
national survey of epidemiologists, 40 percent of respondents reported that 
they had attempted to obtain a waiver of authorization under the Privacy 
Rule. Of these researchers, 31 percent reported a high level of dif˜culty in 
obtaining a waiver (4Œ5 on the Likert scale) (Ness, 2007).
The AcademyHealth survey also examined this issue, with 62 percent 
of respondents reporting that they had been involved in one or more 
studies requiring waivers or alterations of authorization requirements by 
IRBs (65 percent had been involved in 2Œ5 studies, and 3 percent had been 
involved in more than 20 studies). Among respondents who had requested 
waivers or alteration of waivers from IRBs or Privacy Boards, 59 percent 
reported that the availability of existing datasets has been impacted by 
the Privacy Rule. Only 40 percent of the respondents who had requested 
 
waivers or alterations of authorization reported that they were successful 
in accessing data from an existing dataset in its original form under an 
approved waiver of authorization (Helms, 2008). In the AHA/ACC sur
-vey, 59 percent of respondents reported attempting to obtain a waiver of 
authorization. Of those respondents, 69 percent reported the waiver was 
hard to attain (Ring, 2007).
Differentiating Various Types of Research
Scienti˜c and ethical dif˜culties may arise when rules that were devel
-oped to guide clinical research are applied to other kinds of research 
 
(Casarett et al., 2005). Under the Privacy Rule, IRBs are charged with 
reviewing different types of health research that were previously not in their 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
purview, including many types of health services research that use data that 
have been anonymized and are thus exempt under the Common Rule, so 
making judgments about approval and determining which research studies 
require a waiver of authorization is a challenge. Some evidence indicates 
that IRBs do not recognize important differences among various types of 
health research. In the AcademyHealth survey, 44 percent of the respon
-dents reported that IRBs did not correctly differentiate between clinical 
research and health services research (and 25 percent were unsure). Clinical 
research often involves the study of a new drug or experimental treatment 
on human subjects. In contrast, respondents to the AcademyHealth survey 
reported that most of health services research involves survey or question
-naire data (82 percent), medical record review (70 percent), and admin
-istrative data (66 percent). Only a small portion of respondents reported 
doing health research studies that involved direct human contact; 9 percent 
reported conducting research that required the collection of specimens, and 
5 percent reported conducting research on existing specimens. Also, survey 
respondents indicated that IRBs often did not differentiate between the cost 
and time required to conduct health services research compared to clinical 
research (Helms, 2008).
Inconsistent Interpretation of the Privacy Rule: Multicenter Research
Research studies that entail the collection of data from multiple sites 
involve the jurisdiction of multiple IRBs or Privacy Boards. The Privacy 
Rule does not require a researcher to obtain a waiver of authorization from 
the IRB or Privacy Board of every entity that is contributing PHI. Covered 
entities are permitted to rely on a waiver of authorization approved by as 
few as one IRB or Privacy Board with jurisdiction. However, a covered 
entity may decide to require approval from its own IRB or Privacy Board 
prior to disclosing PHI to the requesting researcher, regardless of whether 
another IRB or Privacy Board had already granted a waiver of authoriza
-tion. The Privacy Rule does not address potential disagreements between 
IRBs or Privacy Boards, but HHS ﬁstrongly encouragesﬂ researchers to 
notify IRBs and Privacy Boards of any prior reviews of a research protocol 
to reduce the chance of IRBs and Privacy Boards disagreeing.
Surveys indicate that the Privacy Rule has had a detrimental effect 
on the ef˜ciency of multicenter health research because the participat
-ing covered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards interpret the Privacy Rule 
differently (AAHC, 2008; Ring, 2007). Researchers conducting a single 
study at different locations are routinely required to go through multiple 
IRB/Privacy Board review processes, and to use different authorization 
forms and methodology across the various sites, even though the Privacy 
Rule permits reliance on the review or decision of one IRB or Privacy 
Board for all sites.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 225
In the AHRQ survey, 65 percent of respondents reported problems 
satisfying the requirements of multiple IRBs for multisite studies. One area 
with which researchers reported signi˜cant frustration was the lack of 
consistent consent and authorization forms (Walker, 2005). The Academy
-Health survey found that 28 percent of researchers who required a waiver 
of authorization to conduct a study were required to get the waiver from 
all research sites involved. Only 9 percent of the respondents reported that 
the same waiver was used at all sites, and 6 percent reported the waivers 
were required from more than one, but not all, sites. Three percent of 
the respondents reported that they were unable to proceed with a multi
-site study because they were unable to resolve disagreement among sites 
(Helms, 2008).
In the HMORN survey of investigators, 78 percent of respondents 
reported participating in multicenter research. Of these respondents 54 per
-cent indicated that different IRBs raised different concerns about the same 
study protocol, and 45 percent of respondents reported that these different 
concerns led to protocol variability across the different sites (Figure 5-5). 
The HMORN survey of IRB administrators found that 4 of the 11 IRBs 
reported requiring proof of Privacy RuleŒrelated training for all partici
-pating investigators in a study, even if they were from another site. This 
requirement is not a provision of the Privacy Rule (Greene et al., 2008).
The national survey of epidemiologists also con˜rms that many 
researchers are frustrated with the process of conducting research at mul
-tiple covered entities. In the survey, 76.8 percent of respondents reported 
dif˜culties with the Privacy Rule when conducting multicenter research. 
The problems related to site-speci˜c variability in the research design and 
method in 40 percent of studies. The survey further explored this issue by 
presenting survey participants with ˜ve case studies that should have been 
approved without patient authorization either unconditionally or with a 
waiver of authorization under the Privacy Rule. However, on each of the 
case studies, 4.7 to 33.8 percent of respondents reported that their IRB 
would disapprove the study. Only 4.9 to 33.8 percent believed that their 
IRB would unconditionally approve the studies, and 13.3 to 26.7 percent 
reported that they did not know what their IRB would require. To further 
complicate multicenter research, a minority of respondents (17.3 percent) 
knew of covered entities unwilling to do any clinical research, regardless of 
the IRB™s interpretation of the Privacy Rule (Ness, 2007).
In addition to the survey results, several studies have directly exam
-ined the effect of the Privacy Rule, or its interpretation, on multicenter 
research. Lydon-Rochelle and Holt (2004) at the University of Washington 
documented their experience in attempting to access medical records from 
19 area hospitals during the Privacy Rule implementation period, for a 
study designed to assess the accuracy of maternally linked birth records. 
They explained to the participating hospitals that their study protocol met 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Figure 
5-
5.
eps010
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Do
n™
tkn
ow
No
Ye
s% Re
po
rt
in
gDid di
ff
erent IRBs
raise di
ff
eren
tHI
PA
A-relate
dconc
er
ns
?Did HI
PA
A-relate
dconc
er
ns result in
the pr
ot
ocol
di
ff
ering from sit
e-
to
-site?
FIGURE 5-5
 HMO Research Network Survey of Researchers: Multisite research.
NOTE: HIPAA = Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act; IRB = Insti
-tutional Review Board.
SOURCE: Greene et al. (2008).
the Privacy Rule waiver of authorization requirement and encouraged the 
hospitals™ IRBs to rely on their IRB™s approval of the study. However, the 19 
IRBs displayed great variability in their willingness to approve the study.
None of the 19 hospitals agreed to rely on the researchers™ own institu
-tion™s IRB approval of the study. Ten hospitals used an expedited in-house 
IRB review process for the study, and 9 required a full IRB review of the 
study. The 9 IRBs requiring full review of the study cited concerns over the 
Privacy Rule™s civil and criminal penalties as the main reason for denying 
expedited review or for not honoring another IRB™s decisions. All 19 of the 
reviewing IRBs required different application forms, content, and proce
-dures for complying with the Privacy Rule. The authors concluded that the 
Privacy Rule has increased the dif˜culty of conducting multicenter health 
research because of the challenges of navigating through many IRBs™ review 
processes (Lydon-Rochelle and Holt, 2004).
A second study that examined the institutional variability in IRB 
approval processes was conducted by Newgard and colleagues (2005). 
The researchers sent 27 hospitals an identical research protocol for a study 
examining a decision rule to identify children seriously injured in motor 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 227
vehicle crashes in Los Angeles County. This was a minimal risk observa
-tional study and clearly met the requirements for a waiver of authorization. 
However, 6 of the 27 hospitals refused to participate in the study at all. Of 
the remaining 21 hospitals, the median time for the study to be approved by 
the covered entities™ IRBs was 118 days. Signi˜cant differences in approval 
times were seen across the different covered entities.
The researchers recognized they could not conclusively attribute the 
hospitals™ refusals to participate in the study and the long IRB review pro
-cesses to the Privacy Rule itself. However, they believed the Privacy Rule 
was largely responsible for the results. They compared their experience to 
a previous study conducted in Los Angeles County before the implemen
-tation of the Privacy Rule. The same 27 hospitals were approached for 
participation in a randomized, controlled, interventional trial for emergent 
airway management in children with a waiver of consent. All 27 hospitals 
approved the airway protocol without change, while only 21 of the same 
27 hospitals approved Newgard and colleagues™ minimal risk, noninterven
-tional study. The authors believed this difference was directly attributable 
to the complex requirements of the Privacy Rule and the perceived institu
-tional risks associated with research (Newgard et al., 2005).
A third study that examined the impact of allowing multiple IRBs 
to review the same research proposal was conducted by Greene and col
-leagues (2006). Participants were recruited through a mailed invitation 
for a survey of psychosocial outcomes after prophylactic mastectomy. A 
second mailing and a follow-up phone call were made to nonresponders. 
The study™s protocol was reviewed by six IRBs. All of the IRBs requested 
that the
 protocol, letters, and phone call script be modi˜ed. Resolving all 
of the IRBs™ concerns took two to eight iterations at each site, and achiev
-ing a uniform study methodology across the sites was impossible. Also, the 
response rates at the six institutions varied greatly, ranging from 40.9 to 
70.8 percent among living individuals, to 60.7 to 84.6 percent among living 
individuals with physician consent and correct address.
The authors concluded that having multiple IRBs review the same study 
protocol lengthened the study time line, adversely affected the budget, and 
created protocol variability that may have affected response rate (Greene et 
al., 2006). This study did not speci˜cally focus on the Privacy Rule. How
-ever, as demonstrated by the other studies discussed in this section, since 
the Privacy Rule was implemented, IRBs are often unwilling to honor the 
decisions of other IRBs. The Privacy Rule likely contributed to the six IRBs 
in this study all insisting on reviewing the same research protocol and for 
the resulting variability in study design.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Business Associate Agreements
The AcademyHealth survey indicated that most health services 
 
researchers do not use business associate agreements to gain access to 
health data, but when they do, dif˜culties often arise. Twenty-two per
-cent of the respondents reported using a business associate agreement to 
conduct research, and of these respondents, most reported that the busi
-ness associate agreement negatively impacted research activities because 
it complicated the research process, made research more time consuming, 
and added more paperwork. Of the respondents who reported that they 
have used an existing dataset to conduct research, 28 percent indicated 
that they had to develop a business associate relationship with the covered 
entity to gain access to the dataset. Another 14 percent reported use of an 
intermediary organization that had a business associate relationship with 
the covered entity to gain access to an existing dataset (Helms, 2008).
International Collaboration
A report by Dutch researchers suggests that the Privacy Rule, or its 
interpretation, has made it more dif˜cult for international researchers to 
collaborate with U.S. research centers (Kompanje and Maas, 2006). The 
authors recorded their experiences operating under the Privacy Rule in an 
international, multicenter, Phase III trial on the safety and ef˜cacy of a 
neuroprotective agent in traumatic brain injury. The researchers compared 
the completion of screening logs between research centers in the United 
States and Europe. Because of the Privacy Rule, many of the U.S. screening 
logs had a large amount of missing data. All the European sites reported 
the actual age of the research participants on their screening logs, but only 
5 of the 15 U.S. sites reported the age. The remaining 10 U.S. sites only 
reported whether the patient met the inclusion criteria for the study. Also, 
all the European sites reported the date and time of the injury, while only 
10 U.S. sites provided this information. Information on secondary insults 
and the Glasgow Coma Scale were often omitted from the screening logs 
of U.S. sites.
Overly conservative or variable interpretations of the Privacy Rule pre
-vented many U.S. sites from providing the requisite data to the researchers 
and made it dif˜cult for the researchers to monitor their study for selection 
bias and quality (Kompanje and Maas, 2006). In many situations, having 
international data is important to study a health problem. How often the 
Privacy Rule, or its interpretation, hinders U.S. collaboration in interna
-tional research is unclear. But it is very conceivable that other international 
researchers have experienced frustrations similar to the Dutch researchers 
over collecting data from U.S. sites, or have even abandoned attempts to 
work with U.S. research centers due to the restrictions of the Privacy Rule.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 229
ABANDONED STUDIES
Some evidence, mostly in the form of case studies and survey results, 
shows that researchers have abandoned research studies that they would 
have pursued prior to the Privacy Rule. The paucity of systematic analysis is 
likely because abandoned research studies are more dif˜cult to measure and 
to conclusively document than the other aspects of research that have been 
affected by the Privacy Rule. Documenting something that did not happen 
(i.e., an abandoned study) is more challenging than measuring something 
that did happen (e.g., selection bias, increased inef˜ciency). One study 
that examined abandoned studies in a systematic manner was the study by 
O™Herrin et al. (2004), discussed previously. The researchers determined 
that 77 percent of research proposals at the University of Wisconsin that 
were required to be reviewed by the full IRB, rather than being exempted 
from IRB review or receiving expedited review, were abandoned by inves
-tigators. The study did not try to tease out the reasons for abandonment or 
the appropriateness of abandonment (O™Herrin et al., 2004).
A well-publicized instance of the Privacy Rule leading to studies being 
abandoned was outlined in the 
San Francisco Chronicle
. Reporting of
 cancer 
cases to the State of California Cancer Registry is required by law and should 
not have been affected by the implementation Privacy Rule. However, after 
the Privacy Rule became effective, 17 hospitals in the Bay area restricted the 
registry™s access to patient data, endangering many
 studies that relied on the 
California Cancer Registry for data. For example, a study examining why 
African Americans in the Bay Area have a higher risk of lung cancer than 
other racial and ethnic groups was nearly abandoned after the Privacy Rule 
came into effect because of the dif˜culty of collecting data (Russell, 2004b). 
This problem was created by the hospitals™ overly conservative interpreta
-tion of the Privacy Rule, not the actual requirements of the Privacy Rule. 
A settlement was eventually reached after 2 years of disagreement, and the 
California Cancer Registry now has full access to the ˜les and records of 
cancer patients, as is required in all states (Russell, 2004a).
A second instance of an institution™s interpretation of the Privacy Rule 
leading to an abandoned study was reported in the Minneapolis 
Star
 Tribune
. For more than 25 years, researchers at the University of
 MinnesotaŒTwin 
Cities were allowed to access more than 40,000
 Minnesotans™ medical 
records as part of a longitudinal study into heart attacks and cholesterol-
lowering drugs. This study depended on researchers viewing the medical 
records of patients without the individuals™ consent. After the Privacy Rule 
was implemented, data collection for this study was put on hold because the 
researchers were unable to obtain a waiver of authorization. The
 researchers 
decided not to seek additional grant money for the study because it was 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
unclear whether they could continue without a seriously modi˜ed protocol 
under the Privacy Rule (Kaiser, 2006; Shaffer, 2006).
In addition, a signi˜cant number of researchers surveyed attribute 
abandoned studies to the Privacy Rule. In the NAACCR survey, 19 percent 
of respondents cited the Privacy Rule as a reason for stopping or preventing 
a research project (Howe et al., 2006). In the AHRQ survey, 45 percent of 
respondents described a study that had been stopped or altered because the 
respondents found it was not possible to redesign a study protocol to com
-ply with the Privacy Rule. Examples of studies that were ended included: 
(1) follow-up studies where patients were tracked through a number of 
health facilities for services; (2) studies involving community health centers, 
community-based mental health and substance abuse programs, and rural 
sites; (3) longitudinal studies, where the Privacy Rule requires researchers 
to obtain multiple authorizations; and (4) research evaluating government 
programs and clinical interventions in order to improve patient population 
health (Walker, 2005).
In the HMORN survey of investigators, 65 percent of respondents 
agreed that they were hesitant to pursue new study ideas due to the
 Privacy 
Rule (Figure 5-6) (Greene et al., 2008). In the AcademyHealth survey, 
13 percent of respondents reported that an IRB or Privacy Board has pre
-vented a study in which they were involved from moving forward due to 
the IRB or Privacy Board™s concern about violating the Privacy Rule. Ten 
percent of respondents said they considered or developed a study, but did 
not submit it to the IRB or Privacy Board because they thought it would not 
be approved due to their IRB or Privacy Board™s conservative interpretation 
of the Privacy Rule (Helms, 2008). In addition, in the ASCO survey, six 
investigators said they had abandoned genetic studies on family members of 
individuals diagnosed with
 cancer because of dif˜culty in moving the proj
-ects through the IRB approval process. IRBs were most concerned about 
the privacy of the
 cancer patients (ASCO, 2008).
DEIDENTIFIED INFORMATION
In drafting the Privacy Rule, HHS speci˜cally excluded
 deidenti˜ed infor
-mation from the de˜nition of PHI (see Chapter 4). In principle, researchers 
can access and use deidenti˜ed information without patient authorization. 
However, many researchers have reported that the deidenti˜c
ation provisions 
of the Privacy Rule do not provide an effective way to obtain health data 
for research. The two major problems reported are that researchers have dif
-˜culty obtaining deidenti˜ed information from covered entities and that data 
that have been deidenti˜ed according to the Privacy Rule provisions (which 
are more stringent than the Common Rule provisions) are of poor quality 
and dif˜cult to use in research.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 231
FIGURE 5-6
 HMO Research Network Survey of Researchers. Responses to the 
question: There are study ideas that I have considered pursuing, but am hesi
-tant to do so because of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
regulations.
SOURCE: Greene et al. (2008).
Figure 
5-
6.
eps01
02
03
04
05
0Strongly
disa
gree
Disa
gree
some
whatNo opinion
Agre
esome
whatStrongly agre
e% Re
po
rt
in
gThe Privacy Rule makes researchers hesitant to pursue new studies:Access to Deidenti˜ed Data
Survey data indicate that researchers often have dif˜culty obtaining 
deidenti˜ed information from covered entities. In the national survey of epi
-demiologists, half of the respondents reported accessing
 deidenti˜ed infor
-mation since the Privacy Rule was implemented. Of this half, 40 percent 
reported a high level of dif˜culty in gaining access to this deidenti˜ed infor
-mation (i.e., 4Œ5 on the Likert scale) (Ness, 2007). In addition, the AHRQ 
survey found that 39 percent of respondents reported problems obtaining 
deidenti˜ed data from covered entities or had problems creating deidenti
-˜ed datasets. Most respondents to the survey also reported concerns about 
the use of the statistical method to certify deidenti˜ed data. Many were 
looking for an alternative option to the ﬁsafe harborﬂ process of deidenti
-˜cation because they believed the resultant datasets were too restrictive for 
health services research (Walker, 2005).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
The HMORN survey of investigators also found similar results. Of 
the respondents, 42 percent reported that accessing deidenti˜ed data had 
occasionally been dif˜cult, and 13 percent reported that it was ﬁroutinely 
dif˜cult.ﬂ However, in the HMORN survey of IRB administrators, 4 of 
the 11 sites reported having individuals on staff who could assist with the 
deidenti˜cation of data using the statistical method (Greene et al., 2008). 
In the AHA/ACC survey, only 32 percent of respondents reported attempt
-ing to use deidenti˜ed data for research. Of these respondents, 76 percent 
reported that the process was dif˜cult (Ring, 2007).
Quality of Deidenti˜ed Data
Clause and colleagues (2004) at the Albany College of Pharmacy 
designed a study to measure the amount of data that is lost when PHI is 
deidenti˜ed under the safe harbor provision of the Privacy Rule (see Chap
-ter 4). For this study, the researchers ˜rst created a limited dataset from 
the pharmacy, administrative, and ˜nancial ˜les of patients discharged 
from hospitals within the Northeast Health System. A limited dataset is a 
collection of health information compiled for research in which 16 direct 
identi˜ers are removed from the PHI (see Chapter 4). A limited dataset 
allows researchers to access more information than deidenti˜ed information 
because the Privacy Rule requires that researchers using a limited dataset 
enter into a data use agreement specifying the permitted uses and disclo
-sures of the limited dataset. The researchers then converted the limited 
dataset into deidenti˜ed information under the safe harbor provision of 
the Privacy Rule, which requires removal of 18 personal identi˜ers. They 
measured data lost as a function of unique data elements (UDEs) for both 
the limited dataset and the deidenti˜ed information.
This study found that a large percentage of data was lost when infor
-mation was deidenti˜ed. The limited dataset represented 4,738 patient dis
-charges and contained 810,456 UDEs in 322,657 records. The deidenti˜ed 
dataset represented 4,733 patient discharges but only contained 562,171 
UDEs. This means that the deidenti˜ed dataset contained 31 percent fewer 
UDEs than the limited dataset. The researchers reported that much of the 
information lost when the information was deidenti˜ed was of the type 
that is of the most interest to researchers, such as time between episodes of 
care. The researchers concluded that deidenti˜ed data removes too much 
information to produce data useful for conducting good research (Clause 
et al., 2004).
Results from the AcademyHealth survey also indicate concern about 
the usefulness of deidenti˜ed data for research. In this survey, 62 percent 
of the respondents reported that the use of deidenti˜ed data had a negative 
impact on research, 38 percent reported that the removal of the required 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 233
identi˜ers interfered somewhat with research, and 21 percent reported 
that the removal of identi˜ers interfered signi˜cantly with research. Only 3 
percent of the respondents reported that the removal of identi˜ers did not 
interfere with research (Helms, 2008).
AUTHORIZATION PROCESS
The authorization provisions of the Privacy Rule are relevant to health 
researchers because although there are some situations in which
 researchers 
can obtain PHI without authorization (i.e., by obtaining an IRB/Privacy 
Board waiver of authorization, or using limited datasets or deidenti˜ed 
information), for many research projects, researchers must obtain a signed 
authorization form from each research participant (see Chapter 4). Many 
researchers have expressed dissatisfaction with how the authorization pro
-cess has been interpreted and implemented by covered entities. Researchers 
report that many IRBs and Privacy Boards require lengthy and complex 
wording to describe the authorization within consent forms. They claim 
that the extra language added to consent forms is confusing to research par
-ticipants, burdens the informed consent process, and undermines research 
recruitment (AAHC, 2008; Shalowitz and Wendler, 2006).
In the HMORN survey of investigators, 76 percent of respondents 
reported that they had incorporated the Privacy Rule™s requirements 
for authorization directly into their informed consent forms. However, 
in the structured interviews of investigators, all four respondents who 
conducted primary data collection reported that they were obliged by 
their IRB to augment the consent and authorization procedures for their 
studies after the Privacy Rule was implemented. All four investigators 
also stated that the Privacy Rule authorization language had an adverse 
effect on research recruitment because it increased patient confusion 
and frustration. Likewise, in the HMORN survey of IRB administra
-tors, 54.6 percent of respondents stated that study participants are 
unduly burdened by the complexity of authorization forms (Greene et 
al., 2008).
Studies analyzing the readability of Privacy RuleŒcompliant autho
-rization forms document the effect of complex authorization forms on 
individuals™ willingness to participate in research. In a letter to the editor 
of the 
Annals of Internal Medicine
, Breese and colleagues (2004) outlined 
an evaluation of the readability and length of authorization forms. The 
researchers analyzed the authorization templates from the 125 academic 
medical centers receiving the most funding from the National Institutes of 
Health and from 31 independent IRBs. First, the authors determined that 
the authorization form added an average of two pages of additional mate
-rial to the informed consent form, or about 744 extra words.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Next, the researchers looked at the authorization forms™ readability using 
three formulas: the Simple Measure of Gobbledegook (SMOG), the Flesch-
Kincaid reading level, and the Flesch Reading Ease Score. Using the SMOG 
formula to evaluate the authorization forms, the researchers found that the 
median reading level for the authorization templates was 13th grade (i.e., 
freshman year in college). All of the forms scored above the eighth-grade 
reading level. Under the Flesch-Kincaid reading-level formula, the research
-ers found that 97 percent of the forms were written above the eighth-grade 
reading level. Similarly, using the Flesch Reading Ease Score, the researchers 
found that 86.5 percent of the forms were ﬁdif˜cultﬂ or ﬁvery dif˜cultﬂ to 
read. Only 3 of 111 authorization forms scored at the ﬁstandard Englishﬂ 
reading level. The authors concluded that these results are problematic for 
researchers because half of the U.S. adult population reads at or below the 
eighth-grade level. A large percentage of potential research participants are 
likely unable to comprehend much of the information contained in authori
-zation forms. The authors believe that many institutions view authorization 
forms as liability protection, rather than as a mechanism to inform research 
participants about a study (Breese et al., 2004).
A similar study was conducted by Nosowsky and Giordano (2006) 
at the University of Michigan. They analyzed the National Institutes of 
Health™s model authorization form using Microsoft™s Flesch-Kincaid scale 
and found that it was written at a 12th-grade reading level. The authors 
concluded that many research participants cannot understand the forms 
they are required to sign. Thus, it is not surprising that researchers are 
reporting that the authorization process is causing confusion for research 
participants (Nosowsky and Giordano, 2006).
Another study that examined whether the Privacy Rule authorization 
requirement has created a barrier to research was conducted by Shen et al. 
at Governors State University, University Park, IL. The researchers followed 
the authorization process in a school-based educational program for child
-hood obesity prevention as a case study. The authorization form used in 
this case study was as simple as possible. Most of the sentences on the form 
were taken directly out of the Privacy Rule regulation, and any additional 
sentences were required by the local IRB. However, despite an attempt to 
simplify the authorization form, only 21 percent of parents granted authori
-zation for their children to participate in the school-based obesity program. 
The researchers concluded that the authorization form was overly complex, 
making many parents reluctant or unwilling to sign it. The authors noted, 
however, that the low recruitment rate recorded perhaps could have been 
more easily solved through better communication about the program with 
the students™ parents than through modi˜cation of the authorization forms 
(Shen et al., 2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 235
CONCERNS ABOUT POTENTIAL LEGAL CONSEQUENCES
Because many institutions are risk averse, the AcademyHealth survey 
examined the impact of concerns about the penalty provisions of the Pri
-vacy Rule on research. Nineteen percent of the respondents reported that 
the penalties had no effect on efforts to obtain data from a covered entity, 
and 24 percent reported that penalties were considered by covered entities 
but ultimately did not prevent researchers from obtaining data. However, 
26 percent of respondents reported that concerns about penalties have 
impeded access to dataŠ16 percent reported that fear of penalties has pre
-vented covered entities from providing data to researchers, and 10 percent 
reported that covered entities™ concerns about data privacy caused them to 
forego research activities. Nearly 30 percent of respondents were unsure 
what impact, if any, penalties have had on efforts to obtain data from 
covered entities (Helms, 2008). Similar concerns were reported for a study 
using data from 19 hospitals near the University of Washington, as noted 
previously. The nine IRBs requiring full review of a study already approved 
by the IRB of the University cited concerns over the Privacy Rule™s civil and 
criminal penalties as the main reason for denying expedited review or for 
not honoring another IRB™s decisions (Lydon-Rochelle and Holt, 2004).
Fear of civil suits could also lead IRB and Privacy Board members to be 
overly conservative in their decisions about research proposals brought before 
them, and could be a signi˜cant deterrent in recruiting quali˜ed volunteers 
to serve on IRBs and Privacy Boards. Effective oversight of health research 
depends on the recruitment of quali˜ed and knowledgeable volunteers to 
serve on IRBs and Privacy Boards, but the growth over the past decade of 
lawsuits naming individual IRB members as defendants
5 has created a chill 
that threatens the willingness of volunteers to serve on IRBs (Hoffman and 
Berg, 2005; Icenogle, 2003; IPPC, 2008; Rose and Lodato, 2004; Shaul et 
al., 2005). Members of IRBs and Privacy Boards are generally indemni˜ed by 
their institutions, but they are not immune from being named in a suit. There
-fore they could still have to devote time and resources to defending themselves 
for decisions made by an IRB or a Privacy Board on which they served.
POTENTIAL
 W
AYS
 TO
 R
EDUCE
 INTERPRETIVE V
ARIABILITY
 AMONG
 IRB
S, P
RIVACY
 B
OARDS
, 
AND
 C
OVERED
 E
NTITIES
HHS intended to allow covered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards to 
have some local control in implementing and interpreting the Privacy Rule 
as it applies to the use and disclosure of PHI for research. Sensitivity to local 
5 
For examples of speci˜c cases naming IRB members as individual defendants, see 
 
Robertson 
v. McGee
 (2001), 
Guckin v. Nagle
 (2002), and 
Scheer v. Burke
 (2003), available at http://
www.sskrplaw.com/gene/index.html.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.236
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
issues can be a desirable feature, particularly when institutions serve special 
populations or under unusual circumstances. However, variations in IRB 
and Privacy Board oversight may relate less to true local differences in the 
research environment than to the administrative differences and
 variability 
in the skills and resources of IRBs and Privacy Boards (Casarett et al., 
2005). There is no required certi˜cation process to ensure that IRB/Privacy 
Board members have suf˜cient knowledge and understanding of research 
ethics and regulation, and funding is often through indirect sources, such 
as grants.
Based on the evidence presented in this chapter, it is clear that over
-interpretation of the Privacy Rule is common and that the substantial 
variability in interpretation among covered entities and oversight boards is 
detrimental to health research. More consistent application of the Privacy 
Rule would facilitate responsible research and also provide more meaning
-ful protection of patient privacy. One potential way to begin to address 
this issue would be for HHS to regularly identify and disseminate ﬁbest 
practicesﬂ for responsible research (IOM, 2000). Guidance materials and 
models or templates for things such as the authorization form (written 
at an appropriate reading level), waiver of authorization form, data use 
agreements, and business associate agreements would make it easier for 
investigators to appropriately design research projects and put institutions 
at ease about decisions their IRBs and Privacy Boards make with regard 
to privacy concerns. This endeavor could perhaps be accomplished as an 
activity of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Roadmap,
6 under the 
direction of the Of˜ce for Civil Rights. An informative precedent for this 
activity is the 
National Practitioner Data Bank Guidebook
7 of the Health 
Resources and Services Administration, established through Title IV of the 
Healthcare Quality Improvement Act of 1986, Public Law 99Œ660. That 
guidebook, which is frequently updated, provides many case examples of 
what should be done in various situations.
StakeholdersŠincluding researchers; research institutions, IRBs, and 
Privacy Boards; sponsors of research; public health practitioners and agen
-cies; patient and consumer organizations; and privacy expertsŠcould have 
considerable in˚uence on the adoption of best practices once they have been 
identi˜ed and thus could help to make privacy protections and IRB/Privacy 
Board decisions more uniform. For example, Requests for Proposals and 
other funding mechanisms could be more instructive on this point. Many 
6 
The NIH Roadmap was initiated in 2004 as ﬁan integrated vision to deepen our under
-standing of biology, stimulate interdisciplinary research teams, and reshape clinical research 
to accelerate medical discovery and improve people™s health.ﬂ See http://nihroadmap.nih.
gov/overview.asp (accessed January 13, 2009).
7 
See http://www.npdb-hipdb.hrsa.gov/npdbguidebook.html (accessed January 13, 2009).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 237
academic researchers depend on their ability to procure funding from a 
source external to their institutions, and research sponsors also have obliga
-tions to protect research participants. As a result, major nonfederal funders 
could be a powerful force for adherence to ethical guidelines, even in the 
absence of strong federal regulations and enforcement.
Organizations whose primary missions are focused on promoting 
responsible and ethical research, such as Public Responsibility in Medi
-cine and Research (PRIM&R) and the Association for the Accreditation 
of Human Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP), featured in Boxes 
5-2 and 5-3, could contribute much to the dynamic and ongoing process 
of developing best practices. These organizations educate IRB profession
-als, offer voluntary certi˜cation programs, and have hosted conferences to 
address ethical and legal challenges in research, including those related to 
HIPAA. Increased participation in PRIM&R and AAHRPP could extend 
understanding of regulatory requirements and foster national discourse 
about issues of interpretation and application of the Privacy Rule.
An important point to remember is that HHS™s policy is to seek compli
-ance ˜rst, rather than penalties, when a concern is brought to the agency™s 
attention (see Chapter 5). Institutions might be less inclined to be overly 
conservative in interpreting the Privacy Rule if this were stated more clearly 
BOX 5-2
 Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research (PRIM&R)
 The mission of PRIM&R is to promote ethical research in humans and animals. 
It tracks and provides input to policy initiatives and regulatory changes relating to 
ethical standards in research and offers educational opportunities in the ˜elds of 
biomedical and social/behavioral/educational research. PRIM&R also offers two 
certi˜cation programs, one for administrators for animal care and use committees, 
and one for IRB professionals.
 The latter is designed speci˜cally for individuals participating in and/or over
-seeing the daily operations of IRBs, including IRB administrators, staff, chairs, 
and institutional of˜cials. Professionals from institutional IRBs, independent IRBs, 
and industry, as well as other institutions focused on either biomedical or social/
behavioral/educational research, are eligible. Candidates™ IRB experience must 
be ﬁsubstantial and ongoingﬂ and must re˚ect the applicant™s commitment to 
applied research ethics in human subjects protections. The exam for certi˜cation 
is administered by the Professional Testing Corporation and is offered at least 
twice yearly at testing sites across the United States and Canada. Certi˜cation is 
valid for 3 years and can be renewed via reexamination or once in a 6-year period 
with continuing education credits.
SOURCE: See http://www.primr.org.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX 5-3
 Association for the Accreditation of Human 
Research Protection Programs (AAHRPP)
 AAHRPP is an independent, nonprofit entity that accredits organiza
-tions™ human research protection programs. Its mission is to accredit ﬁhigh-
quality human research protection programs in order to promote excellent, 
ethically sound research. Through partnership with research organizations, 
researchers, sponsors, and the public, AAHRPP encourages effective, effi
-cient, and innovative systems of protection for human research participants.ﬂ 
To earn and maintain accreditation, an organization must provide evidence 
that its practices, policies, and procedures promote ethically sound and sci
-entific research every 3 years. AAHRPP provides print, online, and training 
resources to guide organizations through the accreditation process and to 
help organizations interpret the required accreditation standards.
SOURCE: See http://www.aahrpp.org/www.aspx.
in guidance materials. Simple clari˜cation and clear communication of 
the way HHS will enforce the Privacy Rule and seek penalties would be 
helpful.
In addition, some limited protection against civil suits brought pursu
-ant to federal or state law for members of IRBs and Privacy Boards for 
decisions made within the scope of their responsibilities under the Privacy 
Rule and the Common Rule could be bene˜cial. This limited protection 
should not include protection for willful and wanton misconduct in review
-ing the research. Members of IRBs or Privacy Boards who receive limited 
protection against lawsuits may be less likely to interpret the Privacy Rule 
too conservatively. A similar provision was incorporated into the Ontario 
Personal Health Information Protection Act of 2004, under which members 
of Research Ethics Boards are immune for acts done and omissions made in 
good faith that are reasonable under the circumstances (see also Chapter 6). 
This type of immunity for IRB and Privacy Board members would be simi
-lar to the precedent of protection for peer review members under state laws 
and under the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986.
Such protections might also facilitate multi-institutional research by 
reducing the variability among local IRBs and Privacy Boards because they 
might be more comfortable accepting the decision of a lead IRB
/Privacy 
Board. But even in the absence of this sort of regulatory or statutory 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 239
change, a clear statement from HHS regarding the acceptability, and thus 
the limits, of legal consequences of accepting the decision of another IRB or 
Privacy Board would help to facilitate multi-institutional research.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The evidence presented in this chapter demonstrates that implementa
-tion and interpretation of the Privacy Rule has had a signi˜cant effect on 
how health research is conducted in the United States. Although the Pri
-vacy Rule may have extended regulatory protections of privacy in health 
research that were desirable, the numerous studies reviewed here indicate 
that it has also had an unintended negative effect on health research, often 
due to variations in how covered entities, IRBs, and Privacy Boards inter
-pret the complex regulations. Nonetheless, even if the effect on research has 
been negative, carefully considering the effect on privacy of any changes 
to the Privacy Rule as well as the effect on research is important. Many 
problems identi˜ed in this chapter could potentially be improved by HHS 
without changing the Privacy Rule itself.
More consistent application of the Privacy Rule would facilitate 
responsible research and provide more meaningful protection of patient 
privacy. 
Thus, the committee recommends that HHS regularly convene 
consensus development conferences in collaboration with health research 
stak
eholders to collect and evaluate current practices in privacy protec
-tion in order to identify and disseminate best practices for responsible 
research.
 Stak
eholders can then enable and encourage researchers to use 
these best practices in designing and conducting research involving the 
use of PHI.
Current guidance from HHS addresses only what is permissible under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule; the guidance does not identify best practices. A 
dynamic, ongoing process for the identi˜cation and dissemination of best 
practices in privacy protection for various types of health research by HHS 
would facilitate reviews by IRBs and Privacy Boards and would lead to 
more consistent and appropriate decisions. Guidance materials with best 
practices and models or templates for things such as the authorization form, 
waiver of authorization form, data use agreements, and business associate 
agreements would make it easier for investigators to appropriately design 
research projects and put institutions at ease about decisions their IRBs and 
Privacy Boards make with regard to privacy concerns. Such guidance mate
-rials should be written as clearly and simply as possible, using an inclusive, 
dynamic, and transparent development process, and should override all 
prior guidance documents.
StakeholdersŠincluding researchers; research institutions, IRBs, and 
Privacy Boards; sponsors of research; public health practitioners and agen
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
cies; patient and consumer organizations; and privacy expertsŠcould have 
considerable in˚uence on the adoption of best practices once they have been 
identi˜ed and thus could help to make privacy protections and IRB/Privacy 
Board decisions more uniform. Organizations whose primary missions are 
focused on promoting responsible and ethical research, such as PRIM&R 
and AAHRPP, can contribute much to the process.
Another potential way to reduce inconsistency and overly conservative 
interpretation would be to provide some limited legal protection for IRB 
and Privacy Board members, who may be fearful of lawsuits pertaining to 
IRB/Privacy Board decisions. 
The committee recommends that HHSŠor, 
as necessary, CongressŠprovide reasonable protection against civil suits 
brought pursuant to federal or state law for members of IRBs and Privacy 
Boards for decisions made within the scope of their responsibilities under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule. The limitation on liability 
should not include protection for willful and wanton misconduct in review
-ing the research, but should instead be for good-faith decisions, backed by 
minutes or other evidence, in responsibly applying the legal requirements 
under the HIPAA Privacy Rule or the Common Rule.
Recommendations put forth in previous chapters should also help to 
reduce variability and overinpretation of the regulations. These include 
facilitating greater use of data with direct identi˜ers removed and facili
-tating appropriate IRB and Privacy Board oversight of identi˜cation and 
recruitment of potential research participants (see Chapter 4). Clarifying 
the distinction between ﬁresearchﬂ and ﬁpracticeﬂ to ensure appropriate 
ethical oversight of the use of protected health information would also help 
IRBs and Privacy Boards make decisions that adequately protect patient 
privacy and facilitate responsible research (see Chapter 3).
However, as indicated in Chapter 6, the committee believes that ideally, 
a bolder approach should be taken, with HHS developing a new approach 
to protecting privacy in health research that emphasizes privacy, security, 
accountability, and transparency and that is applicable to all health research 
in the United States.
REFERENCES
AAHC (Association of Academic Health Centers). 2008. 
HIPAA creating barriers to research 
and discovery: HIPAA problems widespread and unresolved since 
200
3. http://www.
aahcdc.org/policy/reddot/AAHC_HIPAA_Creating_Barriers.pdf (accessed September 2, 
2008).
Al-Shahi, R., C. Vousden, and C. Warlow. 2005. Bias from requiring explicit consent from 
all participants in observational research: Prospective, population based study. 
British 
Medical Journal
 331:942Œ945.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 241
Armstrong, D., E. Kline-Rogers, S. M. Jani, E. B. Goldman, J. Fang, D. Mukherjee, B. K. 
 
Nallamothu, and K. A. Eagle. 2005. Potential impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on data 
collection in a registry of patients with acute coronary syndrome. 
Archives of Internal 
Medicine
 165(10):1125Œ1129.
ASCO (American Society of Clinical Oncology). 2008. 
The impact of the Privacy Rule 
on
 cancer research: Variations in attitudes and application of regulatory standards.
  
Alexandria, VA: ASCO.
Beebe, T., N. Talley, M. Camilleri, S. M. Jenkins, K. J. Anderson, and G. R. Locke. 2007. The 
HIPAA authorization form and effects on survey response rate, nonresponse bias, and 
data quality. 
Medical Care
 45(10):959Œ965.
Breese, P., W. Burman, C. Rietmeijer, and D. Lezotte. 2004. The Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act and the informed consent process. 
Annals of Internal Medicine
 141:897Œ898.
Casarett, D., J. Karlawish, E. Andrews, and A. Caplan. 2005. Bioethical issues in pharmaco
-epidemiological research. In 
Pharmacoepidemiology
, 4th ed, edited by B. L. Strom. West 
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Pp. 417Œ432.
Clause, S. L., D. M. Triller, C. P. H. Bornhorst, R. A. Hamilton, and L. E. Cosler. 2004. Con
-forming to HIPAA regulations and compilation of research data. 
American Journal of 
Health-System Pharmacy
 61(10):1025Œ1031.
Deapen, D. 2006. 
Negative impact of HIPAA on population-based cancer registry research: A 
brief survey.
 Spring˜eld, IL: North American Association of Central Cancer Registries.
Dunlop, A., T. Graham, Z. Leroy, K. Glanz, and B. Dunlop. 2007. The impact of HIPAA 
authorization on willingness to participate in clinical research. 
Annals of Epidemiology
 17(11):899Œ905.
Friedman, D. S. 2006. HIPAA and research: How have the ˜rst two years gone? 
American 
Journal of Ophthalmology
 141(3):543Œ546.
Greene, S. M., A. M. Geiger, E. L. Harris, A. Altschuler, L. Nekhlyudov, M. B. Barton, S. J. 
Rolnick, J. G. Elmore, and S. Fletcher. 2006. Impact of IRB requirements on a multicenter 
survey of prophylactic mastectomy outcomes. 
Annals of Epidemiology
 16:275Œ278.
Greene, S. M., S. Bennett, B. Kirlin, K. R. Oliver, R. Pardee, and E. Wagner. 2008. 
Impact of 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule in the HMO Research Network.
 Seattle, WA: Group Health 
Cooperative Center for Health Studies.
Harris, M. A., and A. R. Levy. 2008. Personal privacy and public health: Potential impacts 
of privacy legislation on health research in Canada. 
Canadian Journal of Public Health
 99(4):293Œ296.
Helms, D. 2008 (February 14). PowerPoint presentation to the Institute of Medicine Com
-mittee on Health Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy 
Rule, on the AcademyHealth survey results. 
Hoffman, S., and J. W. Berg. 2005. The suitability of IRB liability. 
Case Legal Studies Research 
Paper No. 0
5-4. February. http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=671004 
(accessed September 2, 2008).
Howe, H. L., A. J. Lake, and T. Shen. 2006. Method to assess identi˜ability in electronic data 
˜les. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 
165(5):597Œ601.
Icenogle, D. L. 2003. IRBs, con˚ict and liability: Will we see IRBs in court? Or is it when? 
Clinical Medicine & Research
 1(1):63Œ68.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2000. 
Protecting data privacy in health services research.
 Wash
-ington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2002. 
Responsible research: A systems approach to protecting research participants.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
IPPC (International Pharmaceutical Privacy Consortium). 2008 (March 30). Comments to 
the Institute of Medicine Committee on Health Research and the Privacy of Health 
Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule, on the impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on 
pharmaceutical research.
Kaiser, J. 2006. Rule to protect records may doom long-term heart study. 
Science
 311:1547Œ1548.
Kolata, G. 2007. States and V.A. at odds on cancer data. 
The New York Times
, October 10.
Kompanje, E. J. O., and A. I. R. Maas. 2006. Is the Glasgow coma scale score protected 
health information? The effect of new United States regulations (HIPAA) on completion 
of screening logs in emergency research trials. 
Intensive Care Medicine
 32:313Œ314.
Lydon-Rochelle, M., and V. L. Holt. 2004. HIPAA transition: Challenges of a multisite medical 
records validation study of maternally linked birth records. 
Maternal & Child Health 
Journal
 8(1):35Œ38.
McCarthy, D. B., D. Shatin, C. R. Drinkard, J. H. Kleinman, and J. S. Gardner. 1999. 
Medical records and privacy: Empirical effects of legislation. 
Health Services Research
 34(1):417Œ425.
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, Subcommittee on Privacy and Con˜den
-tiality. 
Susan Ehringhaus™s testimony on behalf of the Association of American Medical 
Colleges. 
November 19, 2003.
Ness, R. 2005. A year is a terrible thing to waste: Early experience with HIPAA. 
Annals of 
Epidemiology
 15(2):85Œ86.
Ness, R. 2007. In˚uence of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research. 
JAMA
 298(18):2164Œ2170.
Newgard, C. D., S. H. Hui, P. Stamps-White, R. J. Lewis, C. D. Newgard, S.-H. J. Hui, 
P. Stamps-White, and R. J. Lewis. 2005. Institutional variability in a minimal risk, 
population-based study: Recognizing policy barriers to health services research. 
Health 
Services Research
 40(4):1247Œ1258.
Nosowsky, R., and T. J. Giordano. 2006. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications for clinical research. 
Annual Review of 
Medicine
 57(1):575Œ590.
O™Herrin, J. K., N. Fost, and K. A. Kudsk. 2004. Health Insurance Portability and Account
-ability Act (HIPAA) regulations: Effect on medical record research. 
Annals of Surgery
 239(6):772Œ778.
Ramirez, A. G., and J. E. Niederhuber. 2003 (November 5). Letter to the Honorable Tommy 
G. Thompson, Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Ring, J. 2007 (October 1Œ2). PowerPoint presentation to the Institute of Medicine Committee 
on Health Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule, on 
the American Heart Association survey results.
Rose, B. S., and V. Lodato. 2004. The role of class actions in litigation involving human 
 
research subjects. 
BNA Class Action Litigation Report
, March 12.
Russell, S. 2004a. Dispute on medical record access settled: Cancer researchers wanted UC 
data on new cases quicker. 
San Francisco Chronicle
, December 7, B1.
Russell, S. 2004b. Medical privacy law said to be chilling cancer studies: Scientists ˜ght for 
fast access to patient ˜les. 
San Francisco Chronicle
, September 26, A4.
Shaffer, D. 2006. Privacy laws jeopardize heart study: Researchers have put a well-known 
stroke and heart disease study on hold. 
Star Tribune
, February 12.
Shalowitz, D., and D. Wendler. 2006. Informed consent for research and authorization under 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Privacy Rule: An integrated 
 
approach. 
Annals of Internal Medicine
 144(9):685Œ688.
Shaul, R. Z., S. Birenbaum, and M. Evans. 2005. Legal liability in research: Early lessons from 
North America. 
BMC Medical Ethics
 6(4):1Œ4.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFECT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
 243
Shen, J. J., L. F. Samson, E. L. Washington, P. Johnson, C. Edwards, A. Malone, J. J. Shen, 
L. F. Samson, E. L. Washington, P. Johnson, C. Edwards, and A. Malone. 2006. Barriers 
of HIPAA regulation to implementation of health services research. 
Journal of Medical 
Systems
 30(1):65Œ69.
Trevena, L., L. Irwig, and A. Barratt. 2006. Impact of privacy legislation on the number and 
characteristics of people who are recruited for research: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of Medical Ethics
 32:473Œ477.
Tu, J. V., D. J. Willison, F. L. Silver, J. Fang, J. A. Richards, A. Laupacis, and M. K. Kapral. 
2004. Impracticability of informed consent in the registry of the Canadian stroke net
-work. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 350(14):1414Œ1421.
Walker, D. K. 2005. 
Impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health services research.
  
Philadelphia, PA: Abt Associates, Inc.
Ward, H. J. T., S. N. Cousens, B. Smith-Bathgate, M. Leitch, D. Everington, R. G. Will, and 
P. G. Smith. 2007. Obstacles to conducting epidemiological research in the UK general 
population. 
British Medical Journal
 329:277Œ279.
Williams, B. A., J. J. Irrgant, M. T. Bottegal, K. A. Francis, and M. T. Vogt. 2007. A post hoc 
analysis of research study staf˜ng: Budgetary effects of the Health Insurance
 Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) on research staff workload during a prospective, 
 
randomized clinical trial. 
Anesthesiology 
107(5):860Œ861.
Wolf, M. S., and C. L. Bennett. 2006. Local perspective of the impact of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule on research. 
Cancer
 106(2):474Œ479.
Woolf, S. H., S. F. Rothemich, R. E. Johnson, and D. W. Marsland. 2000. Selection bias from 
requiring patients to give consent to examine data for health services research. 
Archives 
of Family Medicine
 9:1111Œ1118.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.245
6A New Framework for Protecting 
Privacy in Health Research
In the previous chapters of this report, the committee put forth several 
recommendations that aim to improve the Privacy Rule and associated 
guidance in order to ease the impact on health research while still protect
-ing patient privacy. However, in the process of developing these recom
-mendations, the committee recognized that the Privacy Rule™s research 
provisions have many serious limitations and concluded that a new, more 
uniform approach is needed to accomplish the dual challenge of protecting 
privacy while facilitating bene˜cial and responsible research. In this chap
-ter, the committee recommends that the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) exempt health research from the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule and lays out the 
details of a bold and innovative framework for protecting privacy in health 
research.
The overall purpose of this Institute of Medicine (IOM) study was to 
examine the effects of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research and to 
recommend improvements to the legislative and regulatory system accord
-ingly. To achieve this task, the IOM convened a committee to include indi
-viduals with a broad range of expertise and experience relevant to the stated 
goal of the project, including individuals with knowledge of the various 
˜elds of health research, privacy and human research protections, health 
law, health center administration, use and protection of electronic health 
information, and patient advocacy (see Chapter 1 for complete statement 
of task and the Front Matter for committee membership).
The committee held a number of information-gathering meetings that 
were open to the public. During those meetings, the committee heard pre
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
sentations on privacy in research and public health; the use of information 
systems to protect privacy; the effect of the Privacy Rule on various research 
disciplines, including those that are exclusively information based, such as 
health services research; the Ontario health privacy law; harmonization of 
the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule (see Chapter 3); challenges associ
-ated with the Privacy Rule™s regulation of biorepositories, databases, and 
future research; and the relationship between privacy and autonomy in 
health research. The committee also reviewed the information presented in 
an earlier IOM workshop on the same topic (IOM, 2006) and conducted an 
extensive review of the literature. Members of the public were permitted to 
submit relevant references and written comments on their experiences with 
the Privacy Rule™s regulation of research and to speak at the committee™s 
public meetings. In addition, because there was a paucity of quantitative 
and systematic data on the effect of the Privacy Rule on research, the com
-mittee commissioned a number of large-scale, evidence-gathering projects 
to inform the committee™s deliberations (see Chapter 5 and Appendix B).
After reviewing the available evidence, the committee concluded that 
a new framework for protecting privacy in health research is needed. The 
current system of regulating research and protecting privacy under the 
Privacy Rule is not working as well as it should to protect patient privacy 
in research, and as currently implemented, it impedes important research. 
The committee believes a different system could work better and provide 
improved privacy protections and stronger data security while also facilitat
-ing bene˜cial and responsible research.
In thinking about a new framework, the committee recognized that the 
goals of safeguarding privacy and enhancing health research are sometimes 
in tension. Stringent measures to safeguard privacy can make it harder to 
conduct high-quality research, and research itself can pose a threat to pri
-vacy. Yet the committee believes that there is a synergy between the two, 
that facilitating both is desirable, and that it is possible to strengthen certain 
privacy protections while still facilitating important health research.
For that reason, the committee™s intent in developing the new framework 
was to advance both privacy and health research interests to the greatest 
extent possible. The committee understands that the lines are not neat, the 
questions are complex, and the challenges are formidable. Nevertheless, the 
new framework aims to strengthen health research regulations and practices 
that effectively safeguard personally identi˜able health information, and 
to facilitate data collection and use for bene˜cial and high-quality health 
research, with appropriate oversight, to advance knowledge about human 
health.
This chapter reviews the major goals the committee agreed on during 
its deliberations and describes how they should be incorporated into a new 
regulatory system for health research and privacy. First, the chapter will 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 247
highlight the major problems with the Privacy Rule™s regulation of health 
research, as identi˜ed in the earlier chapters of the report. Second, the 
chapter will lay out the details of the new framework that the committee is 
recommending. Third, the committee will explain its rationale for develop
-ing the proposed framework, address potential criticism of this model, and 
explain how the new framework avoids many of the problems associated 
with the Privacy Rule.
REVIEW
 OF
 THE
 L
IMITATIONS
 OF
 THE
 P
RIVACY
 R
ULE
In the earlier chapters of this report, the committee identi˜ed three 
overarching goals on which to ground the recommendations: (1) improve 
the privacy and data security of health information, (2) improve the effec
-tiveness of health research, and (3) improve the application of privacy 
protections for health research (see Box 6-1). In the process of recommend
-ing changes to the HIPAA Privacy Rule to achieve these three goals, the 
committee identi˜ed many serious problems with the current regulatory 
system. This section reviews the most serious problems with the Privacy 
Rule™s regulation of health research and protection of privacy in terms of 
these overarching goals.
Improve the Privacy and Data Security of Health Information
In the context of health research, the privacy goal entails the com
-mitment to handle personal information of patients and research partici
-pants in accordance with meaningful privacy protections. These protections 
should include strong security measures, disclosure of the purposes for 
which personally identi˜able health information
1 is used (transparency), 
and legally enforceable obligations to ensure information is secure and used 
appropriately (accountability). The Privacy Rule falls short of the privacy 
goal for health research in two important ways: (1) it overstates the ability 
of informed consent (authorization
2) to protect privacy, and (2) it does not 
provide other meaningful methods of protecting privacy, such as effective 
security, accountability, and transparency.
Overemphasis on Informed Consent
The principle of autonomy currently dominates the ethical landscape 
for both medical care and clinical research in the United States and serves as 
1 
The term ﬁpersonally identi˜able health informationﬂ is used when discussing individual™s 
health data in a context independent of the HIPAA Privacy Rule or any other body of law. 
2 
In the Privacy Rule, the informed consent concept is referred to as ﬁauthorization.ﬂ
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
BOX 6-1
 The Committee™s Three Overarching Goals
Improve the Privacy and Data Security of Health Information
 In the context of health research, protection of privacy includes a commit
-ment to handle personal information of patients and research participants with 
meaningful privacy protections, including strong security measures, transparency, 
and accountability. This commitment extends to everyone who collects, uses, or 
has access to personally identi˜able health information of patients and research 
participants.
 Practices of security, transparency, and accountability take on extraordinary 
importance in the health research setting: Researchers and other data users 
should disclose clearly how and why personally identi˜able health information is 
being collected, used, and secured, and should be subject to legally enforceable 
obligations to ensure that personal information is used appropriately and securely. 
In this manner, privacy protection will help to ensure research participant and 
public trust and con˜dence in medical research.
Improve the Effectiveness of Health Research
 Research discoveries are central to achieving the goal of extending the
 quality 
of healthy lives. Research into causes of disease, methods for prevention, tech
-niques for diagnosis, and new approaches to treatment has increased life expec
-tancy, reduced infant mortality, limited the toll of infectious diseases, and improved 
outcomes for patients with heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and other chronic 
diseases. Patient-oriented clinical research that tests new ideas makes rapid 
medical and public health progress possible.
 Today the rate of discovery is accelerating, and we are at the precipice of a 
remarkable period of investigative promise made possible by new knowledge 
about the genetic underpinnings of disease. Genomic research is opening new 
possibilities for preventing illness and for developing safer, more effective medi
-cal care that can be tailored for speci˜c individuals. Further advances in relating 
genetic information to predispositions to disease and responses to treatments 
will require use of large amounts of existing health-related information and stored 
biological specimens. The increasing use of electronic medical records will fur
-ther facilitate the generation of new knowledge through research and accelerate 
the pace of discovery. These efforts will require broad participation of patients in 
research to ensure that the results are valid and applicable to different segments 
of the population. Collaborative partnerships among communities of patients, their 
physicians, and teams of researchers to gain new scienti˜c knowledge will bring 
tangible bene˜ts for people in this country and around the world.
Improve the Application of Privacy Protections for Health Research
 The HIPAA Privacy Rule was written to provide consistent standards in the United 
States for the use and disclosure of protected health information (PHI) by covered 
entities, including the use and disclosure of such information for research purposes. 
In its current state, however, the HIPAA Privacy Rule is dif˜cult to reconcile with other 
federal regulations, including U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
regulations for the protection of human subjects (the Common Rule), Food and Drug 
Administration regulations pertaining to human subjects, and other applicable federal 
or state laws.
 Inconsistencies, for example, in federal regulations governing the deidenti˜ca
-tion of personally identi˜able health information, obtaining individuals™ consent for 
future research, and the recruitment of research volunteers make it challenging 
for health 
researchers seeking to comply with all these regulations to undertake 
important research activities. In addition, there is substantial variation in the way 
in which institutions interpret and apply the Privacy Rule. For example, the way in 
which Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) interpret the provisions when making deci
-sions about authorization requirements varies across institutions, and often is quite 
conservative. Especially for multisite research and studies that are reviewed by 
both IRBs and Privacy Boards, the inconsistent interpretation and application of the 
Privacy Rule™s provisions pertaining to research can create barriers to research and 
even lead to the discontinuation of ongoing research studies. Adding yet another 
layer of complexity and variability for health researchers is a lack of clarity in the way 
the Privacy Rule applies to various types of health research or closely related health 
care practices. Moreover, there are signi˜cant gaps in who and what is covered by 
current federal research regulations. Whether a research activity is subject to the 
provisions of the Privacy Rule or the Common Rule depends on a number of factors, 
including the source of funding, the source of the data, and whether the researcher 
meets the de˜nition of a covered entity.
 The situation in the United States is in stark contrast to the situation in most 
other countries, where uniform regulations apply to all research conducted in the 
country. The committee believes a new direction is needed, with a more uniform 
approach to patient protections, including privacy, in health research. Improved 
clarity, harmonization, and uniform application of regulations governing health 
research are needed to align the interests and understandings of the research 
community, the custodians of PHI, and other stakeholders, so that implementa
-tion of the privacy protections in health research can be achieved with accept
-ability by all.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 249
BOX 6-1
 The Committee™s Three Overarching Goals
Improve the Privacy and Data Security of Health Information
 In the context of health research, protection of privacy includes a commit
-ment to handle personal information of patients and research participants with 
meaningful privacy protections, including strong security measures, transparency, 
and accountability. This commitment extends to everyone who collects, uses, or 
has access to personally identi˜able health information of patients and research 
participants.
 Practices of security, transparency, and accountability take on extraordinary 
importance in the health research setting: Researchers and other data users 
should disclose clearly how and why personally identi˜able health information is 
being collected, used, and secured, and should be subject to legally enforceable 
obligations to ensure that personal information is used appropriately and securely. 
In this manner, privacy protection will help to ensure research participant and 
public trust and con˜dence in medical research.
Improve the Effectiveness of Health Research
 Research discoveries are central to achieving the goal of extending the
 quality 
of healthy lives. Research into causes of disease, methods for prevention, tech
-niques for diagnosis, and new approaches to treatment has increased life expec
-tancy, reduced infant mortality, limited the toll of infectious diseases, and improved 
outcomes for patients with heart disease, cancer, diabetes, and other chronic 
diseases. Patient-oriented clinical research that tests new ideas makes rapid 
medical and public health progress possible.
 Today the rate of discovery is accelerating, and we are at the precipice of a 
remarkable period of investigative promise made possible by new knowledge 
about the genetic underpinnings of disease. Genomic research is opening new 
possibilities for preventing illness and for developing safer, more effective medi
-cal care that can be tailored for speci˜c individuals. Further advances in relating 
genetic information to predispositions to disease and responses to treatments 
will require use of large amounts of existing health-related information and stored 
biological specimens. The increasing use of electronic medical records will fur
-ther facilitate the generation of new knowledge through research and accelerate 
the pace of discovery. These efforts will require broad participation of patients in 
research to ensure that the results are valid and applicable to different segments 
of the population. Collaborative partnerships among communities of patients, their 
physicians, and teams of researchers to gain new scienti˜c knowledge will bring 
tangible bene˜ts for people in this country and around the world.
Improve the Application of Privacy Protections for Health Research
 The HIPAA Privacy Rule was written to provide consistent standards in the United 
States for the use and disclosure of protected health information (PHI) by covered 
entities, including the use and disclosure of such information for research purposes. 
In its current state, however, the HIPAA Privacy Rule is dif˜cult to reconcile with other 
federal regulations, including U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
regulations for the protection of human subjects (the Common Rule), Food and Drug 
Administration regulations pertaining to human subjects, and other applicable federal 
or state laws.
 Inconsistencies, for example, in federal regulations governing the deidenti˜ca
-tion of personally identi˜able health information, obtaining individuals™ consent for 
future research, and the recruitment of research volunteers make it challenging 
for health 
researchers seeking to comply with all these regulations to undertake 
important research activities. In addition, there is substantial variation in the way 
in which institutions interpret and apply the Privacy Rule. For example, the way in 
which Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) interpret the provisions when making deci
-sions about authorization requirements varies across institutions, and often is quite 
conservative. Especially for multisite research and studies that are reviewed by 
both IRBs and Privacy Boards, the inconsistent interpretation and application of the 
Privacy Rule™s provisions pertaining to research can create barriers to research and 
even lead to the discontinuation of ongoing research studies. Adding yet another 
layer of complexity and variability for health researchers is a lack of clarity in the way 
the Privacy Rule applies to various types of health research or closely related health 
care practices. Moreover, there are signi˜cant gaps in who and what is covered by 
current federal research regulations. Whether a research activity is subject to the 
provisions of the Privacy Rule or the Common Rule depends on a number of factors, 
including the source of funding, the source of the data, and whether the researcher 
meets the de˜nition of a covered entity.
 The situation in the United States is in stark contrast to the situation in most 
other countries, where uniform regulations apply to all research conducted in the 
country. The committee believes a new direction is needed, with a more uniform 
approach to patient protections, including privacy, in health research. Improved 
clarity, harmonization, and uniform application of regulations governing health 
research are needed to align the interests and understandings of the research 
community, the custodians of PHI, and other stakeholders, so that implementa
-tion of the privacy protections in health research can be achieved with accept
-ability by all.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
the justi˜cation for the doctrine of informed consent (i.e., authorization) in 
the Privacy Rule. Historically, informed consent was based on the idea that 
ﬁevery human being of adult years and sound mind has a right to determine 
what shall be done with his own body.ﬂ
3 It was
 primarily considered a 
protection against physical harm, permitting informed, competent patients 
to refuse unwanted medical interventions, to choose among medically avail
-able alternatives, and to make choices that con˚ict with the wishes of family 
members or the recommendations of physicians (Buchanan, 1999; Lo, in 
press). Under this system, a great deal of information-based health research 
was conducted using personally identi˜able health records without the 
informed consent of the persons whose records were used.
Several recent developments have brought attention to this practice, 
and have focused attention on the historical absence of patient autonomy 
in information-based research. First, the increased used of electronic health 
records has made it signi˜cantly easier for researchers to access large quan
-tities of personally identi˜able data. Second, the move towards personal
-ized medicine, and the potential improvements to population health and 
health care that could be developed based on a better understanding of the 
determinants of health and illness, have increased researchers™ needs for 
personally identi˜able health information.
Under the Privacy Rule the concept of informed consent is extended 
beyond control of one™s body, to control of one™s health information in an 
attempt to address the historical lack of informational autonomy, and with 
the goal of protecting individuals against the nonphysical harm of unau
-thorized uses or disclosures of their protected health information. However, 
consent (authorization) itself cannot achieve the separate aim of privacy 
protection. The Privacy Rule, as currently de˜ned and operationalized in 
practice, does not provide effective privacy safeguards for information-
based research because of an over-reliance on informed consent, rather than 
comprehensive privacy protections.
The Limitations of Relying on Consent to Protect Privacy
As has been described above, the protection of medical privacy in 
the data processing environment requires the adoption of comprehensive 
privacy protections, which establish a variety of obligations on entities 
that collect and use personal information. These obligations to safeguard 
privacy, such as security, transparency, and accountability, are independent 
of patient consent. In fact, preventing the secondary use of personal data is 
the only privacy obligation that consent can potentially address. However, 
3 
Stated by Justice Benjamin Cardozo in 
Schloendorff v. Society of New York Hospital
, 105 
N.E. 92 (N.Y. 1914). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 251
informed consent has recently been put forward as an alternative to the 
adoption of comprehensive privacy protections, with the practical conse
-quence that many privacy obligations are ignored (Allen, 2007; Rotenberg, 
2001; Solove et al., 2006) (see the section on Other Federal Actions for 
examples of currently proposed bills). This section describes some of the 
major limitations of relying
 heavily on informed consent to protect infor
-mational privacy, as is done in the HIPAA Privacy Rule, rather than requir
-ing the implementation of a full range of privacy protections.
With a primary focus on informed consent in privacy laws, many 
entities that hold personal health data may have insuf˜cient incentives to 
implement comprehensive privacy protections. If compliance with con
-sent requirements frees the data holders from further privacy obligations, 
some organizations and researchers may be less likely to invest in privacy-
 
enhancing technologies or the infrastructure necessary to truly protect data. 
This emphasis also creates few reasons for organizations to make their 
activities transparent or to create institutional accountability (AHIC, 2008; 
Cate, 2008; CDT, 2008a,b; U.S. Congress, 2008a).
In addition, although informed consent can allow patients to control 
whether their information is used for any secondary purposes, such as 
research, few patients are suf˜ciently informed to make educated decisions 
about how their data should be used (Schneider, 2006). Studies indicate that 
many consumers do not read the details of informed consent forms, which 
are often lengthy documents, and even when they do read the forms they 
often do not comprehend all the details (Cate, 2008). Two separate stud
-ies have found that many consumers mistake the existence of any privacy 
policy for a guarantee that information will be strongly protected and with
-held from outside persons, even if the consent says differently (Good et al., 
2005; Turow et al., 2007). This dif˜culty is magni˜ed by the fact that often 
patients are asked to give informed consent at a time when they are not in 
good health and are not motivated or lack the ability to make these kinds 
of complicated decisions (CDT, 2008b; U.S. Congress, 2008a).
Relying heavily on informed consent rather than comprehensive privacy 
obligations may also lead to a shift from substantive privacy protections 
toward costly procedural requirements that actually provide consumers 
with few meaningful choices, especially if informed consent is required as 
a condition of obtaining services (Cate, 2008; Thomas and Walport, 2008). 
Data holders may offer blanket consents to shield themselves from liability 
without actually providing any substantial privacy protection. In these 
situations patients lack reasonable alternatives and are forced to relinquish 
control over how their health information is used (CDT, 2008a,b; Thomas 
and Walport, 2008; U.S. Congress, 2008a,b).
In the case of medical records research, it is questionable as to whether 
a reliance on informed consent actually fosters patient con˜dentiality and 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
protection (AMS, 2006, 2008; Casarett et al., 2005; Thomas and Walport, 
2008). For example, if individuals must be contacted each time their records 
may be used in a particular study in order to obtain informed consent, as 
the Privacy Rule requires, such contact could be considered intrusive and 
counter to the tenets of con˜dentiality. Also, a common methodological 
approach to studying disease is to compare people with a particular disease 
to people who do not have that diseaseŠknown as a case-control study. But 
people may become alarmed if they are asked to consent to their records 
being used in such a study on a particular disease (e.g., cancer) for which 
they have not been diagnosed (Casarett et al., 2005).
Because of these limitations, the committee believes it is important to 
shift the focus in privacy protections toward a set of more comprehensive 
privacy obligations. This will ensure that health information privacy pro
-tections are more robust and more likely to minimize the risks to personal 
privacy that result from the collection of personally identi˜able health 
information.
Failure to Incorporate Other Meaningful Privacy Protections
Implementation of the Privacy Rule does not ensure that covered enti
-ties or the research community will adopt a full range of measures to protect 
data; the security, transparency, and accountability provisions have proven 
ineffectual. As highlighted in Chapter 2, the HIPAA Security Rule does lay 
out a number of security requirements that covered entities must implement 
for protecting electronic protected health information. However, despite 
this regulation, there have been a number of highly publicized examples 
of data security breaches in health research, most often due to stolen or 
misplaced computers containing health data. A recent survey conducted by 
Campus Computing Project found that from 2006 to 2007, colleges of all 
types saw a 3.6 percent increase in the number of stolen computers with 
sensitive data. This problem was most prevalent at major research universi
-ties (Foster, 2008). Also, a report from the Identity Theft Resource Center 
found that identity thefts are up 69 percent for the ˜rst half of 2008, com
-pared to the same time period in 2007, and so the consequences of security 
breaches are more likely to lead to tangible harm than previously believed 
(ITRC, 2008). These facts suggest that holders of personally identi˜able 
health data should be required to implement security safeguards beyond 
what is provided for under the current HIPAA Security Rule.
In addition, as discussed in Chapter 4, it has been argued that the 
current interpretation of the Privacy Rule has not successfully resulted in 
accountability for misuses and unauthorized disclosures of protected health 
information. The regulation provides both civil and criminal penalties for 
covered entities that breach the Privacy Rule, but enforcement of the Pri
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 253
vacy Rule has been criticized as inadequate. To date, there have been no 
civil penalties imposed against any covered entity and only three criminal 
prosecutions, despite the fact that between April 2003 and August 2008, 
more than 38,000 complaints were received by HHS regarding alleged 
violations of the Privacy Rule. HHS has not provided information on how 
many of these alleged violations are in the context of health research (HHS, 
2008a; Rahman, 2006). On July 18, 2008, HHS required a monetary pay
-ment to settle potential violations of the Privacy and Security Rules for the 
˜rst time, signaling that HHS may start to take a more assertive approach 
to enforcement of the Privacy and Security Rules in the future (HHS, 
2008b). This agreement was in response to the covered entity allowing 
backup tapes, optical disks, and laptopsŠcontaining unencrypted protected 
health information on 386,000 patientsŠto be stolen or lost.
Finally, the accounting for disclosures provision of the Privacy Rule was 
intended to make covered entities™ actions open and transparent (discussed 
in Chapter 4). This provision gives individuals the right to receive a list of 
certain disclosures that a covered entity has made of their protected health 
information in the past 6 years, including disclosures made for research 
purposes.
4 However, this requirement has numerous exceptions. Also, for 
research involving groups of 50 or more, covered entities are only required 
to produce a general list of all protocols for which a person™s protected 
health information may have been disclosed, but do not have to provide 
any more speci˜c information. Therefore, the accounting for disclosures 
provision does not require covered entities to provide individuals with a 
clear description of how their health information is used, and does not 
provide individuals with the detailed information they may want (AHIC, 
2007; Pritts, 2008). At the same time, survey data show that this provision 
is a considerable administrative obligation for covered entities, and is rarely 
requested by patients (AHIMA, 2006; see also Chapter 4).
Improve the Effectiveness of Health Research
The health research goal emphasizes the importance of research in 
extending high-quality, healthy lives, and in leading to improved methods 
for prevention, diagnosis, and treatment. Unfortunately, the available evi
-dence indicates that the current interpretation and implementation of the 
Privacy Rule has had an unintended negative impact on health research. As 
discussed in Chapter 5, the Privacy Rule, as interpreted and implemented 
by covered entities, has:
4 
See 45 C.F.R. § 164.528 (2006). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Ł Increased the cost and time needed to conduct a research project 
from start to ˜nish
Ł Made recruitment of research participants more dif˜cult
Ł Increased the likelihood of selection bias and made it more dif˜cult 
to produce generalizable ˜ndings
Ł Increased research participants™ confusion regarding their rights 
and protections
Ł Led researchers to abandon important studies
Ł Created new barriers to the use of patient specimens collected dur
-ing clinical trials or treatment
Ł Failed to create an effective way for researchers to conduct studies 
using data with direct identi˜ers removed
These negative consequences are particularly problematic in light of 
recent trends in health care and research. Since the Privacy Rule was imple
-mented, health data have assumed an even greater role in health research, 
and will become more essential as health care administration moves toward 
personalized medicine, in which preventive and therapeutic interventions 
are tailored to the individual characteristics of patients. Developing drug 
therapies and treatment protocols that focus on smaller and smaller subsets 
of the population based on genetic makeup or health history and envi
-ronmental exposures requires access to more and more personal data to 
conduct effective health research. In addition, burgeoning health care costs 
and increasing limitations on expenditures by health care plans highlight 
the need for health services research to better determine which patients 
bene˜t from current approaches and which patients may even be harmed. 
If the current approach to privacy protection in research under the Privacy 
Rule continues unchanged, these advances will be burdened and potentially 
delayed, and opportunities for medical progress may be lost.
Alternative models
 The challenges described above are causing some lead
-ing scientists, legal experts, and privacy advocates to develop new para
-digms for determining when personally identi˜able health data, including 
biological samples, can be used for research. The recognition that a primary 
focus on consent is not always meaningful or protective of privacy, and that 
it impedes important information-based research, is gaining acknowledg
-ment in the United
 Kingdom and in other countries in Europe, as well as 
the United States (AMS, 2006, 2008; Thomas and Walport, 2008). The 
committee reviewed several alternative models and took them into consid
-eration in the development of the proposed new framework for protecting 
privacy in health research.
Ł Reciprocity, Solidarity, and Mutuality Models. 
These models 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 255
seek to address the situation where there is no consent for future 
research uses (whether speci˜ed or unspeci˜ed). Proponents of 
the reciprocity model argue that by accepting the bene˜t of past 
medical research (which is intrinsic in the use of medical ser
-vices), patients inherently agree to allow the use of their health 
information in future research for the common good (Knoppers 
and Chadwick, 2005; Liu, 2007). Critics of this approach argue 
that voluntary altruism by past research participants imposes no 
reciprocal obligation on the larger community (Jonas, 1991). Pro
-ponents of the solidarity model similarly argue that individual ties 
to society and social relationships require individuals to partici
-pate in research without informed consent for the common good 
(Chadwick and Berg, 2001). The mutuality model is based on the 
insurance industry™s concept of individuals entering a pool for 
sharing losses and known risks. In the research context, mutuality 
requires ind
ividuals to pool their health information for the bene˜t 
of all, rather than provide for discretionary control of individual 
information
 (Knoppers and Chadwick, 2005).
Ł Harms-Based Model. 
The harms-based model seeks to narrowly 
tailor the restrictions that are applied to the use of personally identi
-˜able health information based on the speci˜c risks associated with 
unauthorized use of that information. There are two categories of 
potential harm commonly cited with respect to
 unauthorized uses 
of personally identi˜able health information: (1) discrimination and 
stigmatization and (2) erosion of trust leading to compromises in 
health care (NCVHS, 2007). For example, such an approach would 
logically call for the adoption of nondiscrimination legislation and 
a requirement that entities with a legitimate need for personally 
identi˜able health information secure the information against further 
unauthorized access. This would arguably address directly the risks 
of harm to the individuals involved when their personally identi˜able 
health information is used for research, while recognizing the need 
for researchers™ access to information in order to achieve the public™s 
goals of improving individual and public health and advancing sci
-enti˜c knowledge.
Improve the Application of Privacy Protections for Health Research
The goal of improving the application of privacy protections for health 
research stresses the need for consistent standards for the use and disclosure 
of personally identi˜able health information in health research. The extent 
of privacy protections should not depend on the holder of the personally 
identi˜able health information, the source of the data, or what type of fund
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
ing is supporting the research project. In addition, all institutions required to 
comply with the privacy protections should ideally interpret and implement 
them in a consistent manner. Major problems identi˜ed with the Privacy 
Rule™s regulation of research under this principle include: (1) discrepancies 
between the Privacy Rule and other rules and regulations relevant to health 
research, (2) the Privacy Rule™s limitation in scope, and (3) large variations 
in interpretation and implementation by covered entities.
Discrepancies with Other Rules That Regulate Research
The Privacy Rule was intended to provide consistent standards in the 
United States for the use and disclosure of protected health information, 
including for research purposes. However, in the current state, the Privacy 
Rule is dif˜cult to reconcile with HHS regulations for the Protection of 
Human Subjects (45 C.F.R. 46), the Food and Drug Administration human 
subjects regulation (21 C.F.R. parts 50 and 56), and other applicable federal 
and state laws. For example, the provisions governing data deidenti˜cation, 
consent for future research, and recruitment of research volunteers vary 
among these regulations, making important research activities more chal
-lenging to undertake (see Chapter 4).
Limitation in Scope
The Privacy Rule pertains only to covered entities; thus this regula
-tion does not apply uniformly to all health research in the United States 
(see Chapter 4). Similarly, as described in Chapter 3, the Common Rule 
only applies to research conducted or supported by the U.S. government 
(although its in˚uence is broader because most institutions that accept 
federal funds sign a federalwide assurance to abide by the Common Rule 
requirements in all research conducted at the institution, regardless of 
funding source). Because both of these Rules are limited in scope, there are 
signi˜cant gaps in whom and what is covered by current federal research 
regulations. This is in stark contrast to most other countries, in which 
research regulations are not limited by provisions regarding funding or par
-ticular health care transactions, but instead apply to all research conducted 
in that country (Casarett et al., 2005).
Differences in Interpretation
Because the Privacy Rule is such a complex regulation, there is sub
-stantial variation across institutions in how the Privacy Rule has been 
interpreted and implemented (see Chapter 5). For example, the way in 
which Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) and Privacy Boards interpret 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 257
the concepts of impracticability and minimal risk when making decisions 
about authorization requirements varies across institutions, and often is 
quite conservative (see Chapter 4). Inconsistent interpretation and applica
-tion of the Privacy Rule research provisions by IRBs, Privacy Boards, and 
covered entities that hold the protected health information, especially for 
multisite research and studies that are reviewed by multiple IRBs and Pri
-vacy Boards, can create barriers to research such as variations in protocol 
at different institutions and, at times, discontinuation of studies. A lack of 
clarity in how the Privacy Rule applies to various types of health research 
or closely related health care practices adds another layer of complexity and 
variability (see Chapter 3). In fact, some covered entities are reluctant to 
permit access to data for research even when all provisions of the Privacy 
Rule are followed, out of fear of misinterpreting the Privacy Rule (Casarett 
et al., 2005; Rothstein, 2005).
THE
 N
EW
 F
RAMEWORK
Given the clear limitations of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, the commit
-tee concluded that a new approach to the regulation of health research 
is needed. The committee favors an approach in which both individual 
privacy and the societal value of research are carefully considered and 
supported. To achieve this goal, the committee identi˜ed a number of key 
concepts (CIHR, 2005; Gostin, 2001) to incorporate into the new frame
-work, including:
Ł All researchers should be required to follow the same set of privacy 
rules.
Ł Whenever possible, information-based research should be done 
using health data with direct identi˜ers removed.
Ł Access to personally identi˜able health data without patient con
-sent should require impartial, outside scienti˜c and ethical review 
that considers:
Š Measures taken to protect the privacy, security, and con˜den
-tiality of the data;
Š Potential harms that could result from disclosure of the data; 
and
Š Potential public bene˜ts of the research.
Ł Researchers should identify and document research objectives to 
justify the data they wish to use and/or collect.
Ł Researchers, institutions, and organizations that store personally 
identi˜able health data should establish security safeguards and set 
limits on access to data.
Ł Researchers who violate individuals™ privacy should be penalized.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
These concepts are intended to support the bene˜cial use of existing health 
data, as well as the collection and use of health data for research purposes, 
while protecting individuals™ privacy.
Examples of Informative Models
One informative example that incorporates many of the privacy prin
-ciples listed above is Ontario™s Personal Health Information Protection 
Act (PHIPA).
5 This provincial law governs the manner in which ﬁpersonal 
health informationﬂ
6 is collected, used, and disclosed within the Ontario 
health care system. PHIPA only applies to the province of Ontario (not 
the entire country) and operates in a universal health care system, so the 
legislation as a whole may not be easily transferable to the United States. 
However, many of the major concepts in PHIPA in˚uenced the committee™s 
deliberations regarding the new framework.
PHIPA shares a number of similarities with the Privacy Rule (Table 6-1). 
In general, both regulations require the holder of personally identi˜able 
health data to obtain informed consent (referred to as authorization in the 
Privacy Rule)
7 before using any personally identi˜able health information 
for a purpose other than providing services directly related to health care 
of the patient. If a researcher wishes to use personally identi˜able health 
data without informed consent, both regulations require the researcher to 
obtain a waiver of informed consent approved by an independent ethics 
board prior to the start of the study.
Despite these similarities, the Privacy Rule and PHIPA have some key 
differences that are important in research. One major difference is that 
unlike the Privacy Rule, which applies privacy obligations unevenly across 
the health care sector, PHIPA implements a more uniform approach. PHIPA 
applies to health information custodians (HICs) (e.g., providers, hospitals, 
and pharmacies) who collect, use, and disclose personal health informa
-tion and to non-HICs when they receive personal health information from 
a HIC. This means that the privacy protections follow the data, even after 
the data are no longer held by a HIC. All health researchers are required to 
comply with PHIPA when using personal health information. In contrast, 
the Privacy Rule fails to provide individuals with privacy protections if their 
information is held by an entity other than a covered entity. Only some 
researchers qualify as covered entities or are employed by covered entities 
5 
Personal Health Information Protection Act, Statutes of Ontario 2004, Ch. 3, Schedule A; 
Ontario Regulation 329/04.
6 
PHIPA de˜nes personal health information as ﬁidentifying information about an individual 
in oral or recorded formﬂ (PHIPA, Section 4).
7 
The remainder of this chapter uses the term ﬁinformed consentﬂ to refer to the requirement 
of obtaining permission to use personally identi˜able data. 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 259
TABLE 6-1
 The HIPAA Privacy Rule Versus PHIPA
HIPAA Privacy Rule
PHIPA
Entities 
Regulated
Covered entities: Includes health 
care providers, health plans, and 
health care clearinghouses that 
electronically transmit health 
information in the course of 
normal health care practices
Ł Health information custodians 
(HICs) that collect, use and 
disclose personal health 
information (PHI)
Ł Non-health information 
custodians who receive personal 
health information from an HIC
Information 
Protected
Protected health information 
(PHI): All personally identi˜able 
health information created or 
received by a covered entity
PHI: Identifying information about 
an individual in oral or recorded 
form that:
Ł Relates to his or her physical or 
mental health
Ł Relates to providing health care
Ł Relates to the donation of a body 
part or bodily substance
Consent
Express consent is required for 
the collection, use, and disclosure 
of PHI to researchers, except if 
waived by an International 
Review Board (IRB) or Privacy 
Board (express consent must be 
in writing)
In general, HICs must obtain 
express consent to share PHI 
outside the health care system, or to 
share PHI for any purpose other 
than one related to providing health 
care (NOTE: Express consent may 
be oral or written) 
Disclosures to 
Researchers 
Without
Consent
Covered entities may disclose 
PHI to researchers without 
obtaining authorization in the 
following circumstances:
Ł They have documentation that 
an IRB or Privacy Board 
waived the authorization 
requirement
Ł For activities that are 
preparatory to research
Ł For research on decedents
Ł Where the data are part of a 
limited dataset and the 
researcher enters into a data 
use agreement
Ł The information is deidenti˜ed 
Disclosure of PHI for research 
requires approval of researcher™s 
research plan by a Research Ethics 
Board (REB)
Researchers must agree to:
Ł Comply with the conditions 
imposed by the REB
Ł Use PHI only for purpose set out 
in the research plan
Ł Not publish information in a 
form that could identify an 
individual
Ł Not disclose information unless 
required by law and subject to 
prescribed exceptions and 
additional requirements
Ł Not make contact or attempt to 
make contact with the individual 
unless the HIC ˜rst obtains 
consent
Ł Notify the HIC of any breach
Ł Comply with the agreement 
entered into with the HIC
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
HIPAA Privacy Rule
PHIPA
Waiver of 
Informed 
Consent/
Authorization 
Standard
The use or disclosure of PHI 
involves no more than a minimal 
risk to the privacy of individuals, 
based on, at least, the presence of 
the following elements:
Ł An adequate plan to protect 
the identi˜ers from improper 
use and disclosure
Ł An adequate plan to destroy 
the identi˜ers at the earliest 
opportunity consistent with 
conduct of the research, unless 
there is a health or research 
justi˜cation for retaining the 
identi˜ers
Ł An adequate written assurance 
that PHI will not be reused or 
disclosed to any other person 
or entity
And, the research could not 
practicably be conducted without 
the waiver or alteration
And, the research could not 
practicably be conducted without 
access to and use of PHI
An REB shall consider the matters 
that it deems relevant, including:
Ł Whether the objectives of the 
research can reasonably be 
accomplished without using the 
PHI that is to be disclosed
Ł Whether, at the time the research 
is conducted, adequate 
safeguards will be in place to 
protect the privacy of the 
individuals whose PHI is being 
disclosed and to preserve the 
con˜dentiality of the information
Ł The public interest in conducting 
the research and in protecting the 
privacy of the individuals whose 
PHI is being disclosed
Ł Whether obtaining the consent of 
the individuals whose PHI is 
being disclosed would be 
impractical 
Immunity 
None
HICs and their agents are protected 
from liability for acts done and 
omissions made in good faith and 
reasonably in the circumstances in 
the exercise of powers or duties 
under PHIPA
TABLE 6-1
 Continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 261
HIPAA Privacy Rule
PHIPA
Certi˜ed 
Entities 
None 
HICs may disclose PHI to a 
ﬁprescribed person or entityﬂ 
without consent, for purposes of 
compiling or maintaining a registry 
of PHI intended to facilitate or 
improve the provision of health 
care, and for the purpose of 
analyzing or compiling statistical 
information with respect to the 
management, evaluation, or 
monitoring of the allocation of 
resources to, or planning for, all or 
part of the health system. 
Information compiled by 
ﬁprescribed persons and entitiesﬂ is 
permitted to be used for research, 
but must follow the same research 
rules as HICs in using or disclosing 
PHI for research
Deidenti˜cation
There are two methods to 
deidentify information:
Ł Under the statistical method, a 
statistician or person with 
appropriate training veri˜es 
that enough identi˜ers have 
been removed that the risk of 
identi˜cation of the individual 
is very small
Ł Under the safe harbor method 
data is considered deidenti˜ed 
if the covered entity removes 
18 speci˜ed personal 
identi˜ers from the data
To ﬁdeidentify,ﬂ in relation to the 
PHI of an individual, means to 
remove any information that 
identi˜es the individual or for which 
it is reasonably foreseeable in the 
circumstances that it could be 
utilized, either alone or with other 
information, to identify the 
individual, and ﬁdeidenti˜cationﬂ 
has a corresponding meaning. HICs 
and prescribed persons and entities 
must exercise their own judgment in 
removing identi˜ers
TABLE 6-1
 Continued
and are directly regulated by the Privacy Rule; for others, the Privacy Rule 
regulates access to protected health information held by covered entities but 
the researchers themselves are not subject to the provisions.
A second major difference is the Privacy Rule and PHIPA™s treat
-ment of deidenti˜ed information. Deidenti˜ed information is outside the 
scope of both rules. However, PHIPA provides a more vague de˜nition of 
 
ﬁdeidenti˜edﬂ than the Privacy Rule, de˜ning it to mean the removal of 
ﬁany information that identi˜es the individual or for which it is reasonably 
foreseeable in the circumstances that it could be utilized, either alone or 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
with other information, to identify the individual.ﬂ
8 Because of the lack of 
speci˜city in the de˜nition, and the fact that the Ontario Information and 
Privacy Commissioner has not issued any guidance on the deidenti˜ca
-tion process, HICs are required to exercise judgment in determining when 
enough identi˜ers have been removed that the information is deidenti˜ed. 
Many HICs take a very conservative approach to the disclosure of personal-
level, deidenti˜ed information for research and require Research Ethics 
Board approval (Canadian equivalent of an IRB or Privacy Board).
9 In 
contrast, the Privacy Rule provides two very detailed methods of deidenti
-fying health information: (1) the safe harbor method, and (2) the statistical 
method (see Chapter 4). If a covered entity complies with either of these 
methods, it may disclose the deidenti˜ed information to researchers without 
IRB or Privacy Board approval.
A third major difference is that under PHIPA, HICs are permitted to 
disclose personal health information without consent to ﬁprescribed per
-sons or entitiesﬂ that are prescribed by the legislation, including registries 
compiled or maintained for purposes of facilitating or improving the provi
-sion of health care or that relate to the storage or donation of body parts 
or bodily substances. In order to be designated as a prescribed person or 
entity, the person or entity must have in place practices, policies, and pro
-cedures to protect the privacy of individuals whose personal health infor
-mation it receives and to maintain the con˜dentiality of such information. 
These practices, policies, and procedures must be reviewed and approved 
by Ontario™s Information and Privacy Commissioner (IPC), an individual 
appointed by the Ontario Legislature, every 3 years. Prescribed persons and 
entities must also make public a description of the functions of the registry 
and a summary of its practices, policies, and procedures. Currently, ˜ve 
registries are designated as a ﬁprescribed personﬂ under PHIPA.
10
Once personal health information is held by a prescribed entity, the 
entity may use and disclose the information for research purposes in accor
-dance with the normal rules and restrictions on HICs disclosing informa
-tion for researchŠincluding the requirement for approval by a Research 
Ethics Board if the information is in identi˜able form. There are several 
advantages for researchers in obtaining information from prescribed enti
-ties, rather than other HICs. Prescribed entities collect personal health 
information from a wide range of sources and can link and match the per
-8 
PHIPA, Section 47(1) (2007).
9 
Personal communication, Ann Cavoukian, Ontario™s Of˜ce of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, October 20, 2008.
10
 The Cardiac Care Network of Ontario (Registry of Cardiac Services), INSCYTE (Infor
-mation System for Cytology), The Canadian Stroke Network (Canadian Stroke Registry), 
Cancer Care Ontario (Colorectal Cancer Screening Registry), and Hamilton Health Sciences 
Corporation (Critical Care Information System).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 263
sonal health information longitudinally. In addition, there is little danger 
of selection bias, because informed consent is not required in the collection 
of the data. Prescribed entities very rarely need to disclose information in 
identi˜able form for research, because researchers are given data that is 
already aggregated and linked. PHIPA instructs the prescribed entities to 
use their judgment in determining if information is deidenti˜ed. However, 
as noted above, all prescribed entities must have their policies and practices 
reviewed by the IPC, including their policies for the deidenti˜cation of data. 
As a result, prescribed entities are con˜dent in their deidenti˜cation process, 
and researchers obtaining data from prescribed persons are rarely required 
to obtain informed consent or Research Ethics Board approval.
Recently, a similar approach to prescribed entities was recommended 
in a report commissioned by the United Kingdom™s Prime Minister on sec
-ondary uses of personal information. This report suggested the creation of 
ﬁsafe harbors,ﬂ which have three de˜ning characteristics: (1) they provide 
a secure environment for processing personally identi˜able health data, 
(2) they are restricted to ﬁapproved researchersﬂ who meet relevant criteria, 
and (3) they implement penalties and allow for criminal sanctions against 
researchers who abuse their access to personally identi˜able data (Thomas 
and Walport, 2008).
The United Kingdom approach is also comparable to PHIPA, because 
both models incorporate the concept that personally identi˜able informa
-tion should only be disclosed for health research when the research is ben
-e˜cial to the public and has scienti˜c merit. PHIPA instructs Research Ethics 
Boards to consider both ﬁthe public interest in conducting the research and 
the public interest in protecting the privacy of the individuals whose PHI 
is being disclosedﬂ when reviewing research plans. The United Kingdom 
model identi˜es the principle of proportionality, de˜ned as ﬁan objective 
judgment as to whether the bene˜ts outweigh the risks,ﬂ as a key consid
-eration when deciding whether personal information may or may not be 
shared for health research (Thomas and Walport, 2008). There is also a 
precedence for weighing scienti˜c merit in the United StatesŠas previously 
noted in Box 4-5, Centers for Medicare & Medicaid™s (CMS™s) Privacy 
Boards are instructed to ﬁbalance the potential risks to the bene˜ciary con
-˜dentiality with the probable bene˜ts gained from the completed research,ﬂ 
as well as to consider the researchers™ demonstrated expertise and experi
-ence in conducting such a study.
The committee believes an approach similar to PHIPA and the recently 
proposed model from the United Kingdom, combined with strong security 
measures, offers adequate privacy protections for personally identi˜able 
health information, while greatly expanding research opportunities. In 
particular, the prescribed entity/safe harbor concept offers a useful way 
to conduct medical records research and effectively protect patient pri
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
vacy and con˜dentiality by facilitating greater use of deidenti˜ed data in 
research. Also, PHIPA, the United Kingdom model, and the CMS focus on 
only permitting the disclosure of personally identi˜able information for 
socially bene˜cial research that has scienti˜c merit ensures that approved 
research projects address important health questions and utilizes a scien
-ti˜cally rigorous methodology. In addition, PHIPA™s focus on transparency, 
by requiring prescribed persons and entities to post their research purpose, 
policies, and procedures, is consistent with desirable comprehensive privacy 
protections.
The Committee™s Recommendation
The committee recommends that Congress authorize HHS and other 
relevant federal agencies to develop a new approach to ensuring privacy 
in health research. When this new approach is implemented, HHS should 
exempt health research from the Privacy Rule.
 The committee suggests 
a two-part practical approach to protecting health information privacy 
because there are fundamental differences between information-based 
research and direct, interventional human subjects research. 
First, congres
-sional action should be taken to require all interventional research (e.g., 
Phase IŒIII clinical trials) to comply with the Common Rule, regardless of 
funding source.
 This would eliminate current gaps in oversight and pro
-vide protection for all patients who consent to participate in interventional 
clinical trials. In addition, all researchers who gain access to personally 
identi˜able health information as part of the interventional research should 
be required to protect that information with strong security measures, as 
recommended in Chapter 2. Research participants should be allowed to 
provide consent for future research uses of data and biological materials 
collected as part of the interventional study, as long as an IRB reviews and 
approves the future uses, ensuring that the new study is not incompatible 
with the original consent (as recommended in Chapter 4).
Second, Congress should authorize HHS and other relevant federal 
agencies to develop a new approach to uniform, goal-oriented oversight 
of information-based research, with a focus on best practices in privacy, 
security, and transparency as in PHIPA and the proposed United
 Kingdom 
model
 (CIHR, 2005; Thomas and Walport, 200
8) and minimizing
 ineffective 
and burdensome administrative tasks.
 This new approach should include 
a mechanism by which some programs or institutions could be certi˜ed 
by HHS or another accrediting body, similar to a prescribed entity as in 
PHIPA or a ﬁsafe harborﬂ as in the United Kingdom model.
 Such certi
-˜ed entities could then collect and analyze personally identi˜able health 
information for clearly de˜ned and approved purposes, without individual 
consent. Because of the administrative requirements in becoming certi˜ed, 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 265
this option is most appropriate for disease registries and other very large 
scale research databases. The regulations should require speci˜c privacy 
safeguards for certi˜ed entities, including mandatory privacy training for 
all staff/researchers; signing of con˜dentiality agreements; privacy breach 
policies and procedures; and mandatory privacy impact assessments. In 
addition, the regulations should require certi˜ed entities to publicize the 
scope and purpose of their data collection (e.g., the types of studies that 
may be undertaken with the data). The regulations could also require enti
-ties to provide details on what their database will not be used for, to assure 
the public that certain types of activities will not be conducted.
Certi˜ed entities could also link personally identi˜able data from mul
-tiple sources (see discussion on linking in Chapter 4) and then provide 
aggregated datasets to researchers with direct identi˜ers removed (see dis
-cussion on deidenti˜ed data and limited datasets in Chapter 4) (AMS, 
2008; Thomas and Walport, 2008). Aggregation would generate more 
complete datasets for analysis and thus lead to more meaningful research 
results. Data with direct identi˜ers removed would protect patient privacy 
in research and would also streamline research efforts by eliminating the 
need to undergo ethics board review, which is not required for research 
using deidenti˜ed data under the Privacy Rule, PHIPA, or the United King
-dom model. 
To further protect privacy, unauthorized reidenti˜cation of 
information that has had direct identi˜ers removed should be prohibited 
by law, and violators should face legal sanctions. In addition, researchers 
receiving information with direct identi˜ers removed should be required to 
establish security safeguards and to set limits on access to data.
In cases where researchers cannot use data with direct identi˜ers 
removed, and personally identi˜able health information is needed for 
research, approval and oversight by an ethics board should be required, 
partially analogous to what is now done under the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
and PHIPA. This ethics oversight board could perhaps entail a new body 
speci˜cally formulated to review medical records research, rather than rely
-ing on traditional IRBs that were created to review interventional research. 
If researchers seek a waiver of informed consent, an ethics oversight board 
should consider the measures the researchers have proposed to take to 
protect the privacy, security, and con˜dentiality of the data, the potential 
harms that could result from disclosure of the data, and the potential public 
bene˜ts of the proposed research study.
 Privacy should not automatically 
be a more compelling interest than improving health care. However, even 
research with little risk to privacy should not be conducted if the study has 
little scienti˜c merit or anticipated public bene˜t.
Under this new system, HHS should implement real consequences for 
any researcher or institution that mishandles personally identi˜able health 
information, regardless of whether it is obtained through informed consent 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
or under a waiver of informed consent. In order to facilitate consistent 
application of this option, HHS should issue clear guidance and best prac
-tices (as recommended in Chapter 4) on how to assess the potential harm, 
the proposed measures to protect privacy and con˜dentiality
, 
and the 
potential public bene˜ts of a research study,
 as has been done under PHIPA. 
For example, the Canadian Institute for Health Information has developed 
best privacy practices for research to provide guidance for determining 
whether or not a waiver of consent is warranted (CIHR, 2005).
The primary focus of many IRBs in reviewing research protocols in the 
past has been on risks to the physical safety of research participants. There 
is a great deal of variability in whether and how IRBs consider the public 
bene˜t and scienti˜c merit of research proposals. But the ˜rst rule of ethi
-cal research is that the research must have scienti˜c valueŠmeaning that 
it addresses an important question of human health and is designed and 
conducted using methodology that is appropriate and rigorous. The scien
-ti˜c merit of research varies by project, just as the potential risk to privacy 
of research varies across different protocols. The committee believes that 
when making decisions about whether a research protocol that entails the 
disclosure of personally identi˜able information should go forward, ethi
-cal oversight boards should take all these factorsŠpotential risks/harms to 
research participants™ privacy as well as scienti˜c merit and potential public 
bene˜t of the research proposalŠinto consideration.
In 2001, a previous IOM committee, the Committee on Assessing 
the System for Protecting Human Research Subjects, recommended that 
ﬁhuman research participant protection programsﬂ use distinct mechanisms 
for initial, focused reviews of scienti˜c merit and ˜nancial con˚icts of inter
-est and that these reviews should precede and inform the comprehensive 
ethical review of research studies. Ethical oversight board members them
-selves may not have the expertise to assess the merit of diverse research 
studies, but they should have access to evaluations by scienti˜c review com
-mittees or funder peer review panels. Input regarding the scienti˜c value of 
studies from these experts would help ethical oversight boards assess the 
anticipated bene˜ts of a proposed research project.
The Role of Informed Consent in the New Framework
Informed consent is intended to achieve two purposes: (1) protect 
research participants from harm and (2) provide respect for the person 
(including the person™s privacy, religious beliefs, cultural preferences, and 
world views). As outlined above, the framework maintains a requirement 
for informed consent for all interventional clinical research. The purpose 
of informed consent in this type of research is mainly to protect research 
participants from harm by providing a description of the potential risks and 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 267
bene˜ts of the study and to seek permission to involve the subject. Although 
privacy protection is a component of the risk/bene˜t considerations, the 
main focus traditionally has been on physical harms. One study found that 
con˜dentiality is one of the least important considerations for potential 
research participants in deciding whether to participate in interventional 
clinical research (Tait et al., 2002).
However, it is important to note that interventional researchers are 
expected to follow the principles of medical ethics, which require that infor
-mation disclosed in the course of medical treatment is kept as con˜dential 
as possible. Moreover, the committee™s framework includes the recommen
-dation that strong security safeguards be required for any data collected in 
conjunction with an interventional study. The framework™s permission of 
future consent for researchers™ use of data and biological materials, actually 
increases individuals™ ability to exercise control over their personally identi
-˜able information. Under the Privacy Rule, the requirement to obtain a new 
authorization form signed for each research study means that most future 
studies actually proceed under a waiver of authorization, and individuals 
are deprived of all input into future uses of their information (Nosowsky 
and Giordano, 2006). Thus, informed consent in this context addresses 
protection from both physical harm and dignitary harm.
In contrast, in information-based research that relies solely on medical 
records and stored biospecimens, the research participant faces no risk of 
physical harm. In this context, informed consent is intended to ensure that 
individuals are able to exercise control over their personally identi˜able 
health information that is held by third parties, and to give individuals the 
right to determine whether their personally identi˜able health information 
can be used in a particular research project (or a series of such projects, 
if consent for future research is permitted). However, a universal require
-ment for informed consent can lead to invalid results, because of signi˜cant 
differences between patients who do or do not grant consent, and missed 
opportunities to advance medical science because it can be prohibitively 
costly and dif˜cult to obtain consent for studies that require analysis of 
very large datasets. 
As a result, the framework includes two alternatives to requiring 
informed consent that can be used in certain circumstances (i.e., disclosure 
to a certi˜ed entity and waiver of informed consent by an ethics oversight 
board), which are intended to facilitate research that is in the public inter
-est. For research that makes use of these two alternatives, the framework 
counterbalances the absence of informed consent with an increase in secu
-rity, transparency, and accountability protections by: (1) requiring certi˜ed 
entities to protect the privacy and con˜dentiality of personally identi˜able 
health information records in a manner that is approved by an outside party 
(HHS or a different body), (2) requiring certi˜ed entities to fully disclose 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
what research is being conducted with its data, (3) requiring ethics oversight 
review for research that uses personally identi˜able data under a waiver of 
informed consent, (4) implementing clear and consistent consequences for 
researchers who are responsible for privacy or security breaches, and (5) 
encouraging the development and use of improved security protections for 
use in health research.
Public opinion polls indicate that a signi˜cant portion of the public 
would prefer to control all access to their medical records via informed 
consent. However, as noted above, a universal requirement for informed 
consent would impede important health research and lead to biased, 
ungeneralizable results, to the detriment of society. The committee believes 
that the new framework provides strong protections for data privacy and 
security, beyond that currently provided under the Privacy Rule, while 
increasing the opportunities for important health research by offering an 
alternative to informed consent under certain circumstances.
The Belmont Report, one of the most in˚uential reports on the advance
-ment of human research participant protections, recognizes that principles of 
respect for persons and autonomy are not absolutes and must be considered 
along with other ethical principles. It acknowledges that there may be com
-pelling reasons to limit autonomy, providing that ﬁTo show lack of respect 
for an autonomous agent is to repudiate that person™s considered judgments, 
to deny an individual the freedom to act on those considered judgments, or 
to withhold information necessary to make a considered judgment, 
when 
there are no compelling reasons to do so
ﬂ (emphasis added) (
HEW
, 1979). 
Similarly, a 1994 IOM report argued that existing health information, stored 
in medical records and biospecimen banks, should be released to research
-ers without informed consent if such studies were regarded as being in the 
public™s interest (IOM, 1994).
If society seeks to derive the bene˜ts of medical research in the form of 
improved health and health care, information should be shared to achieve 
that societal bene˜t (Chadwick and Berg, 2001; Knoppers and Chadwick, 
2005; Liu, 2007), and governing regulations should support the use of 
such information. Recent reports from the United Kingdom have come to a 
similar conclusion and recommend that the law allow the use of personally 
identi˜able health information without consent if the use of that informa
-tion is necessary and the potential bene˜ts to society outweigh the individual 
risks (AMS, 2006, 2008; Thomas and Walport, 2008). In the committee™s 
proposed new framework, the greater emphasis on ensuring the security pro
-tections of personally identi˜able health information, facilitating research 
using data with direct identi˜ers removed, and ensuring the scienti˜c merits 
of any proposed research should help to foster its acceptability. Nonetheless, 
to implement this new framework, effective communication with the public 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 269
regarding the value of this model will be important to address concerns and 
gain acceptance, as recommended in Chapter 3.
THE
 N
EW
 F
RAMEWORK
 A
DDRESSES
 THE
 O
VERARCHING
 GOALS
The committee supports its argument in favor of implementing a new 
framework for protecting privacy in health research by outlining how this 
approach achieves the committee™s three overarching goals: (1) improving 
the privacy and data security of health information, (2) improving the 
effectiveness of health research, and (3) improving the application of pri
-vacy protections for health research (see Box 6-1). The committee believes 
many of the limitations of the current federal regulation of research can be 
improved or solved by the proposed framework.
Improving the Privacy and Data Security of Health Information
The new framework includes a number of mechanisms to improve the 
protection of research participants™ privacy and security in health research. 
First, the privacy of research participants is improved because the new 
framework applies to all institutions and all health researchers who col
-lect, use, and disclose personally identi˜able health information. Similar to 
Ontario™s PHIPA, this means that the privacy protections follow the data. 
No matter what entity or individual holds the personally identi˜able data, 
the same set of privacy safeguards are required.
Second, the new framework maintains the requirement that
 researchers 
obtain informed consent for all interventional clinical research and 
 
strengthens the security protections of data collected in the course of a 
clinical trial. The new framework also permits research participants in 
interventional, clinical research to provide informed consent for future 
research uses of their data and biological materials collected as part of the 
study. The privacy of these individuals is protected by requiring an IRB 
to review any future studies and to determine that the future uses are not 
incompatible with the original informed consent. This aspect of the new 
framework actually promotes individuals™ ability to exercise control over 
their personally identi˜able information. As stated above, the requirement 
in the Privacy Rule that researchers must obtain new authorization for 
every use of protected health information means that most future studies 
proceed under a waiver of authorization, and individuals are deprived of 
all input into future uses of their information (Nosowsky and Giordano, 
2006).
Third, the new framework protects privacy by maintaining the default 
requirement that researchers must obtain informed consent to use person
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
ally identi˜able data for research. If researchers wish to use personally 
identi˜able data without obtaining informed consent for information-based 
research, they are required to identify and document their research objec
-tives to an ethics oversight board, and they must identify the measures by 
which they will protect the privacy, security, and con˜dentiality of the data. 
The ethics oversight boards provide impartial review, and are only permit
-ted to waive informed consent after considering the measures to protect 
the privacy, security, and con˜dentiality of the data; the risk of harm in 
conducting the research; and the potential public bene˜t of the research 
study.
Fourth, the new framework protects privacy by creating certi˜ed entities 
that facilitate researchers use of data with direct identi˜ers removed. One of 
the major problems with the deidenti˜cation provisions of the Privacy Rule 
is the dif˜culty in linking data from multiple sources to generate more com
-plete datasets or to follow patient outcomes longitudinally (see Chapter 5 
for more details). The new framework™s certi˜ed entity concept provides a 
solution to this problem; certi˜ed entities are able to link and match person
-ally identi˜able information longitudinally from multiple sources and can 
then disclose data with direct identi˜ers removed to researchers. Because 
the data provided by certi˜ed entities with direct identi˜ers removed has 
already been linked and aggregated, it is more useful for research. Thus, 
researchers will be able to make greater use of deidenti˜ed datasets and 
will need access to personally identi˜able data in fewer situations. Privacy 
is improved because there are fewer risks to privacy when researchers do 
not access or use personally identi˜able data.
In addition, the privacy of data held by certi˜ed entities is protected 
because certi˜ed entities are required to have their privacy and security 
policies approved and re-approved on a regular basis by an outside party 
(HHS or a different body). Certi˜ed entities are also required to implement 
speci˜c privacy safeguards including mandatory privacy training for all 
staff/researchers, signing of con˜dentiality agreements, privacy breach poli
-cies and procedures, mandatory privacy impact assessments, and security 
safeguards and limits on access to data.
Finally, the new framework protects privacy in health research by 
requiring the implementation of comprehensive privacy protections, includ
-ing transparency, accountability, and security. Transparency is improved by 
the new framework™s requirement that certi˜ed entities publicize the scope 
and purpose of their data collection and provide information on what 
uses of their data will not be permitted. Transparency is also achieved by 
requiring researchers to describe in detail their research plans and objec
-tives (either to potential research participants or to the ethics oversight 
board) and to justify the data they wish to use and/or collect. Account
-ability is improved by the new framework because it requires Congress 
and HHS to implement clear and consistent consequences for researchers 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 271
who are responsible for privacy or security breaches. The new framework 
also includes provisions for penalizing any individuals who attempt to re-
identify data that has had its direct identi˜ers removed. Security is improved 
in the new framework because all holders of health data, both personally 
identi˜able data and data with direct identi˜ers removed, are required to 
implement security safeguards, as described in Chapter 2, and to set limits 
on access to data. The committee also believes that the increased emphasis 
on accountability in the new framework will encourage researchers and 
other stakeholders to invest money in developing privacy-enhancing tech
-nologies for use in research, to reduce the risk of accidental breaches and 
the associated consequences.
Improving the Effectiveness of Health Research
The new framework is intended to provide a method of regulating health 
research, including the protection of individual privacy, in a way that mini
-mizes impediments to bene˜cial research. First, allowing patients to consent 
to the future use of specimens collected during the course of an interventional 
study or treatment will reduce many barriers to researchers™ use of existing 
biospecimen banks. Patient privacy is protected by requiring any future 
uses of these specimens to be approved by an IRB, which should determine 
whether a proposed study has scienti˜c merit, implements appropriate pri
-vacy protections, and is not incompatible with the original consent.
Second, the creation of certi˜ed entities that can receive personally 
identi˜able health information for information-based research without 
patient informed consent, similar to PHIPA™s prescribed entities and the 
United Kingdom™s safe harbors (Thomas and Walport, 2008), will result 
in more complete and representative datasets, and thus will result in more 
generalizable results. The creation of certi˜ed entities will also facilitate 
research using data with direct identi˜ers removed. As stated above, under 
the current system, researchers cannot link datasets from multiple covered 
entities without a unique identi˜er. If a certi˜ed entity performed this task, 
researchers could make greater use of data without identi˜ers.
Third, the goal-oriented framework with a focus on best practices 
should aid the work of both researchers and IRBs and reduce the variability 
across different institutions. For example, it should be easier for IRBs to 
make appropriate decisions regarding waivers of informed consent because 
the framework™s goal is to allow bene˜cial research to be conducted if com
-prehensive privacy and security safeguards are in place and privacy risks 
are minimized. Identi˜cation and dissemination of best practices in privacy 
protection for various types of health research would help delineate what 
IRBs should do to facilitate responsible research, rather than just de˜ning 
what is permissible.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.272
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Finally, the committee believes this framework will reduce some of 
the research costs and time that have increased since the Privacy Rule was 
implemented because the framework is designed to make research oversight 
more uniform and to reduce administrative burdens.
Improving the Application of Privacy Protections for Health Research
A recent report by the National Committee on Vital and Health 
 
Statistics (NCVHS) recognized the importance of having nationally uni
-form privacy protections for all secondary uses of health data, including 
research. The report criticized the Privacy Rule™s reliance on the cov
-ered entity construct and creation of business associate agreements to 
PHI (NCVHS, 2007). The framework proposed by the IOM committee 
addresses this criticism of the Privacy Rule, and provides for a compre
-hensive regulation of research that applies to all researchers and protects 
all personally identi˜able health data in research. It eliminates a primary 
problem of harmonization of privacy protections because the framework 
is intended to be the only regulation governing researchers™ use of health 
data. In addition, the implementation of this framework would improve 
the clarity of privacy protections because currently much of the confusion 
is due to the Privacy Rule™s complicated interactions with other existing 
privacy regulations, such as the Common Rule.
One potential challenge under the new framework is the need to de˜ne 
health research and to distinguish interventional research from information-
based research. HHS will need to develop clear guidelines to help research
-ers and ethics oversight boards consistently make this distinction. The 
identi˜cation and dissemination by HHS of best practices in research pro
-tections (as recommended in Chapter 5) will be important to ensure greater 
uniformity of goal-oriented research oversight and to ensure that the frame
-work is implemented in a way that facilitates research without undermining 
individual privacy. In addition, there will be some administrative burden in 
certifying and overseeing the certi˜ed entities.
RELEVANCE
 OF
 THE
 R
ECOMMENDATION
 TO
 O
THER
 F
EDERAL
 A
CTIONS
The committee™s recommendation for a new framework to regulate 
health research is particularly timely because new actions at the federal 
level are being considered or have already been taken to protect the pri
-vacy of electronic health records. These developments raise new concerns 
about potential impacts on health research. The committee believes this 
proposal will stimulate fresh ideas about the best ways to protect privacy 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 273
and improve research as the nation addresses these two interrelated values 
over the next several years.
An example of one of the recent developments affecting research is the 
Department of Veterans Affairs™ (VA™s) August 2007 directive. Outlining 
new conditions under which it would release data from VA hospitals to 
state central cancer registries, the directive requires states to sign a data 
use agreement with the VA and to agree to implement privacy and security 
protections above and beyond the protections required in the HIPAA Pri
-vacy and Security Rules. Among other requirements, state registries must 
agree not to release VA cancer data to persons outside the registry or to 
reuse the data for any purpose other than for maintaining cancer statistics 
(Kolata, 2007b).
Each state has a law establishing cancer surveillance programs that col
-lect information on every patient who is diagnosed with cancer in that state. 
Also, the National Cancer Institute (NCI) collects cancer statistics from 17 
U.S. regions in order to track national cancer rates. Prior to the VA direc
-tive, the state cancer surveillance programs and the NCI included informa
-tion gathered from VA hospitals. However, as of October 10, 2007, only a 
small percentage of the states had signed the VA directive, and most cancer 
surveillance programs were missing data on veterans (Kolata, 2007a).
In addition, the VA directive stipulates that researchers who want to use 
cancer statistics from VA hospitals must either obtain permission from the VA 
Under Secretary of Health or collaborate with a VA researcher on the project. 
Health researchers are ˜nding it hard to conduct cancer research under these 
conditions, which makes it dif˜cult to ˜nd VA researchers willing to col
-laborate on speci˜c projects. The directive also complicates the IRB approval 
process, often requiring researchers to obtain approval from their local IRB, 
the cancer registry IRB, and the VA Under Secretary (Kolata, 2007b). In 
addition, cancer researchers who either cannot meet the VA requirements 
or choose not to go through the additional procedural requirements, and do 
not include VA data in their study, risk having their results compromised by 
selection bias (see Chapter 5, section on Selection Bias).
Several recently proposed bills that address the use of electronic medi
-cal records also contain language regarding health privacy and health 
research (Table 6-2).
In 2004, President Bush issued an executive order calling for the wide
-spread adoption of an interoperable electronic health record system within 
10 years, arguing that health information technology (HIT) is a means of 
addressing rising health care costs and improving the quality and ef˜ciency 
of health care (Bush, 2004). In response, HHS has awarded a number of 
HIT grants to gather information on privacy and security issues in HIT, 
solicited recommendations from NCVHS, and created the American Health 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274
TABLE
 6-2
 Health Information Technology (HIT) Bills from the 110th Congress
Proposed Bill
Main Purpose(s)
Privacy Provisions
Research Provisions
Status
Wired for Health 
Care Quality Act 
(S 1693), 
sponsored by 
Sens. Kennedy 
[D-NY] and Enzi 
[R-WY]; 
Promoting 
Health 
Information 
Technology (HR 
3800), sponsored 
by Rep. Eshoo 
[D-CA]
To enhance the 
adoption of a 
nationwide, 
interoperable health 
information 
technology (HIT) 
system, and to 
improve the quality 
and reduce the costs 
of health care
Ł Establishes an advisory body 
to provide policy advice to the 
U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS) 
on the protection of 
personally identi˜able health 
information, including ways 
to notify individuals if their 
information is wrongfully 
disclosed
Ł Organizations competing for 
federal HIT grants must 
protect the privacy and 
security of health information 
and preserve an audit record
Ł Expands the de˜nition of 
ﬁcovered entityﬂ under HIPAA 
to include operators of HIT 
systems
Ł Gives researchers access to 
deidenti˜ed patient 
enrollment data, 
reimbursement claims, and 
survey data maintained by 
HHS or its contractors
Ł Also gives researchers 
access to deidenti˜ed data 
maintained by the federal 
government or government 
contractors where feasible
Ł In general, research is still 
governed by the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule 
In the Senate:
Ł Approved by the Health, 
Education, Labor and 
Pensions Committee on 
6/07
Ł Sen. Kennedy ˜led a written 
report on 10/07
Ł Placed on the unanimous 
consent calendar for a vote 
without debate or 
possibility of amendment
In the House: Referred to the 
Committee on Energy and 
Commerce 
Independent 
Health Record 
Trust Act of 
2007 (HR 2991), 
sponsored by 
Reps. Ryan [D-
OH] and Moore 
[D-KS]
To encourage the 
creation, use, and 
maintenance of 
electronic health 
records in 
independent health 
records trusts 
(IHRTs), and to 
provide a secure and 
privacy-protected 
framework in which 
health records are 
only made available 
by the af˜rmative 
consent of 
individuals 
Ł Participation in an IHRT must 
be voluntary
Ł IHRTs must have privacy 
protection agreements, which 
govern the access and transfer 
of individuals™ data
Ł Requires express informed 
consent before individuals™ 
information can be disclosed
Ł Gives IHRTs a ˜duciary duty 
to act for the bene˜t and 
interests of its participants; 
penalties for breach include 
loss of certi˜cation, ˜nes of 
$50,000 or less, prison terms 
of 5 years or less
Ł Requires an audit trail to be 
maintained
Ł Provides for individual 
noti˜cation of all breaches 
Ł Researchers may only 
access an individual™s health 
data stored in an IHRT 
when given express 
informed consent, and 
researchers may only access 
those portions of the record 
as speci˜ed by the 
participant
Referred to the House 
Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, and to the 
Committee on Ways and 
Means
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 275
TABLE
 6-2
 Health Information Technology (HIT) Bills from the 110th Congress
Proposed Bill
Main Purpose(s)
Privacy Provisions
Research Provisions
Status
Wired for Health 
Care Quality Act 
(S 1693), 
sponsored by 
Sens. Kennedy 
[D-NY] and Enzi 
[R-WY]; 
Promoting 
Health 
Information 
Technology (HR 
3800), sponsored 
by Rep. Eshoo 
[D-CA]
To enhance the 
adoption of a 
nationwide, 
interoperable health 
information 
technology (HIT) 
system, and to 
improve the quality 
and reduce the costs 
of health care
Ł Establishes an advisory body 
to provide policy advice to the 
U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS) 
on the protection of 
personally identi˜able health 
information, including ways 
to notify individuals if their 
information is wrongfully 
disclosed
Ł Organizations competing for 
federal HIT grants must 
protect the privacy and 
security of health information 
and preserve an audit record
Ł Expands the de˜nition of 
ﬁcovered entityﬂ under HIPAA 
to include operators of HIT 
systems
Ł Gives researchers access to 
deidenti˜ed patient 
enrollment data, 
reimbursement claims, and 
survey data maintained by 
HHS or its contractors
Ł Also gives researchers 
access to deidenti˜ed data 
maintained by the federal 
government or government 
contractors where feasible
Ł In general, research is still 
governed by the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule 
In the Senate:
Ł Approved by the Health, 
Education, Labor and 
Pensions Committee on 
6/07
Ł Sen. Kennedy ˜led a written 
report on 10/07
Ł Placed on the unanimous 
consent calendar for a vote 
without debate or 
possibility of amendment
In the House: Referred to the 
Committee on Energy and 
Commerce 
Independent 
Health Record 
Trust Act of 
2007 (HR 2991), 
sponsored by 
Reps. Ryan [D-
OH] and Moore 
[D-KS]
To encourage the 
creation, use, and 
maintenance of 
electronic health 
records in 
independent health 
records trusts 
(IHRTs), and to 
provide a secure and 
privacy-protected 
framework in which 
health records are 
only made available 
by the af˜rmative 
consent of 
individuals 
Ł Participation in an IHRT must 
be voluntary
Ł IHRTs must have privacy 
protection agreements, which 
govern the access and transfer 
of individuals™ data
Ł Requires express informed 
consent before individuals™ 
information can be disclosed
Ł Gives IHRTs a ˜duciary duty 
to act for the bene˜t and 
interests of its participants; 
penalties for breach include 
loss of certi˜cation, ˜nes of 
$50,000 or less, prison terms 
of 5 years or less
Ł Requires an audit trail to be 
maintained
Ł Provides for individual 
noti˜cation of all breaches 
Ł Researchers may only 
access an individual™s health 
data stored in an IHRT 
when given express 
informed consent, and 
researchers may only access 
those portions of the record 
as speci˜ed by the 
participant
Referred to the House 
Committee on Energy and 
Commerce, and to the 
Committee on Ways and 
Means
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276
Proposed Bill
Main Purpose(s)
Privacy Provisions
Research Provisions
Status
TRUST in Health 
Information Act 
of 2008 (HR 
5442), sponsored 
by Rep. Markey 
[D-MA]
To ensure privacy, 
security, and 
con˜dentiality in the 
creation of a 
nationwide, 
interoperable health 
information 
infrastructure, and 
to provide for the 
strong enforcement 
of these rights by 
creating criminal 
and civil penalties
Ł Outlines speci˜c requirements 
for maintaining a HIT system 
that is private, secure, and 
con˜dential
Ł Provides consumers with 
speci˜c privacy rights
Ł Requires express informed 
consent before individuals™ 
information can be disclosed 
for most purposes
Ł Creates an individual right of 
action for knowing or 
negligent violations of the Act
Ł Authorizes states™ attorney 
generals to bring civil actions 
on behalf of residents
Ł Leaves the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in place for health 
research
Ł Requires HHS to prepare a 
Report to Congress on 
whether informed consent 
should be required for the 
use of personal health 
information in research, 
and under what 
circumstances
Ł As soon as reasonably 
possible, researchers who 
receives personal health 
information must remove 
or destroy information that 
would enable an individual 
to be identi˜ed, unless 
otherwise approved by an 
IRB
Ł HHS will provide IRBs with 
periodic review and 
technical assistance 
Referred to the House 
Committees on Energy and 
Commerce, Ways and Means, 
Education and Labor, and 
Financial Services
Health 
Information 
Privacy and 
Security Act (S 
1814), sponsored 
by Sens. Leahy 
[D-VT] and 
Kennedy [D-MA]
To ensure the 
privacy of health 
information, to 
promote the use of 
deidenti˜ed 
information in 
health research, and 
to provide for the 
strong enforcement 
of these rights by 
creating criminal 
and civil penalties
Ł Creates the Of˜ce of Health 
Information Privacy to 
establish privacy and security 
standards for HIT products 
and to outline punishments 
for violations
Ł Provides consumers with 
speci˜c privacy rights
Ł Requires express informed 
consent before individuals™ 
information can be disclosed 
for most purposes
Ł Creates an individual right of 
action for knowing violations 
of the Act
Ł Leaves the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in place for health 
research
Ł Requires HHS to prepare a 
Report to Congress on 
whether informed consent 
should be required for the 
use of personal health 
information in research, 
and under what 
circumstances
Ł As soon as reasonably 
possible, researchers who 
receive personal health 
information must remove 
or destroy information that 
would enable an individual 
to be identi˜ed, unless 
otherwise approved by an 
IRB
Ł HHS will provide IRBs with 
periodic review and 
technical assistance
Read twice and referred to the 
Senate Health, Education, 
Labor and Pensions 
Committee on 7/18/2007
TABLE 6-2
 Continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 277
Proposed Bill
Main Purpose(s)
Privacy Provisions
Research Provisions
Status
TRUST in Health 
Information Act 
of 2008 (HR 
5442), sponsored 
by Rep. Markey 
[D-MA]
To ensure privacy, 
security, and 
con˜dentiality in the 
creation of a 
nationwide, 
interoperable health 
information 
infrastructure, and 
to provide for the 
strong enforcement 
of these rights by 
creating criminal 
and civil penalties
Ł Outlines speci˜c requirements 
for maintaining a HIT system 
that is private, secure, and 
con˜dential
Ł Provides consumers with 
speci˜c privacy rights
Ł Requires express informed 
consent before individuals™ 
information can be disclosed 
for most purposes
Ł Creates an individual right of 
action for knowing or 
negligent violations of the Act
Ł Authorizes states™ attorney 
generals to bring civil actions 
on behalf of residents
Ł Leaves the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in place for health 
research
Ł Requires HHS to prepare a 
Report to Congress on 
whether informed consent 
should be required for the 
use of personal health 
information in research, 
and under what 
circumstances
Ł As soon as reasonably 
possible, researchers who 
receives personal health 
information must remove 
or destroy information that 
would enable an individual 
to be identi˜ed, unless 
otherwise approved by an 
IRB
Ł HHS will provide IRBs with 
periodic review and 
technical assistance 
Referred to the House 
Committees on Energy and 
Commerce, Ways and Means, 
Education and Labor, and 
Financial Services
Health 
Information 
Privacy and 
Security Act (S 
1814), sponsored 
by Sens. Leahy 
[D-VT] and 
Kennedy [D-MA]
To ensure the 
privacy of health 
information, to 
promote the use of 
deidenti˜ed 
information in 
health research, and 
to provide for the 
strong enforcement 
of these rights by 
creating criminal 
and civil penalties
Ł Creates the Of˜ce of Health 
Information Privacy to 
establish privacy and security 
standards for HIT products 
and to outline punishments 
for violations
Ł Provides consumers with 
speci˜c privacy rights
Ł Requires express informed 
consent before individuals™ 
information can be disclosed 
for most purposes
Ł Creates an individual right of 
action for knowing violations 
of the Act
Ł Leaves the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule in place for health 
research
Ł Requires HHS to prepare a 
Report to Congress on 
whether informed consent 
should be required for the 
use of personal health 
information in research, 
and under what 
circumstances
Ł As soon as reasonably 
possible, researchers who 
receive personal health 
information must remove 
or destroy information that 
would enable an individual 
to be identi˜ed, unless 
otherwise approved by an 
IRB
Ł HHS will provide IRBs with 
periodic review and 
technical assistance
Read twice and referred to the 
Senate Health, Education, 
Labor and Pensions 
Committee on 7/18/2007
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278
Proposed Bill
Main Purpose(s)
Privacy Provisions
Research Provisions
Status
Health 
Information 
Technology Act 
(HR 6357), 
sponsored by 
Reps. Dingell [D-
MI], Barton [R-
TX], Pallone 
[D-NJ], and Deal 
[R-GA]
To encourage the 
use of HIT, develop 
technical standards, 
and improve the 
quality and reduce 
the costs of health 
care
Ł Provides for individual 
noti˜cation of all breaches
Ł Requires HHS to designate an 
individual in each regional 
of˜ce to offer guidance and 
education to covered entities, 
business associates, and the 
public on the rights and 
responsibilities related to PHI
Ł Encourages the use of limited 
datasets
Ł Requires an audit trail to be 
maintained
Ł Directs the Of˜ce of the 
National Coordinator of 
Health Information 
Technology to ﬁfacilitate 
health research and health 
care qualityﬂ
Ł Directs HHS to issue 
guidance on how to best 
implement the 
deidenti˜cation standards 
in the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Currently in draft form 
TABLE 6-2
 Continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 279
Information Community to provide policy advice (AHIC, 2006; GAO, 
2007; NCVHS, 2006).
But privacy concerns are emerging as a primary obstacle to implement
-ing a nationwide HIT system, with many privacy and consumer groups 
pushing for tighter privacy protections than offered under the Privacy Rule. 
In a 2006 poll, 62 percent of respondents stated that the use of electronic 
health records would pose new risks to privacy, and 42 percent answered 
that the privacy risks of HIT outweigh expected bene˜ts (Harris Interactive, 
2007). Another poll found that 80 percent of Americans say they are very 
concerned about identity theft or fraud in an HIT system (Markle Foun
-dation, 2006). The Government Accountability Of˜ce recently released 
a report that legitimized these concerns and criticized HHS for failing to 
de˜ne an overall approach for protecting privacy in a nationwide HIT 
system (GAO, 2007).
To address the privacy concerns, Congress has proposed a number of 
bills intended to advance the implementation of an HIT system and at the 
same time protect individual privacy
11
 (see Table 6-2). Several of these bills 
include new restrictions and rules governing researchers™ access to person
-ally identi˜able health information. It is unclear whether any of these bills 
will pass or what requirements a ˜nal law might include. However, because 
a nationwide HIT system has the potential to facilitate health research by 
making large amounts of health data available to study, and thus could 
lead to major advances in medicine, caution is warranted. Adoption of 
new, restrictive regulations might impede health research, to the detriment 
of patients and society. Therefore, a closer examination of some concepts 
that have been incorporated into these proposed bills, including autonomy 
and informed consent, is warranted. At the same time, it is clear there is 
a need to develop privacy safeguards that anticipate the risk of extensive 
electronic recordkeeping, as well as the growing problems of identity theft 
and security breaches.
CONCLUSION
S AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The primary justi˜cation for including research provisions in the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule was to remedy perceived shortcomings of federal 
privacy protections in health research under the Common Rule. But the 
Privacy Rule has numerous limitations of its own. In proposing the Privacy 
Rule, HHS acknowledged that, ideally, it would have preferred to regulate 
health researchers directly by extending the protections of the Common 
11
 A number of bills from the 110th Congress also address the implementation of HIT, but 
do not include comprehensive privacy or research provisions, including HR 1368, S 1408, 
and S 1455.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Rule to research that is not federally supported and by imposing additional 
criteria for the waiver of patient informed consent for the use of person
-ally identi˜able health information in research.
12
 But HHS recognized it 
did not have the authority to do this. For that reason, HHS attempted to 
protect the health information released to researchers indirectly (but within 
the scope of its limited authority) by imposing restrictions on information 
disclosures by covered entities. NCVHS and others have noted the limita
-tions of the Privacy Rule and have called for stronger protections of health 
privacyŠnotably, by expanding the purview of the Privacy Rule beyond 
the current covered entities.
However, the IOM committee believes an even bolder change is needed. 
The number of studies using medical records to address important ques
-tions about health and disease will likely increase with the growing avail
-ability of electronic health records. As the volume and importance of 
digital personally identi˜able health data increase exponentially, the public 
can be expected to heighten demands for a legal framework that provides 
meaningful safeguards to protect health information in the health research 
setting. 
Thus, the IOM committee recommends that Congress authorize 
HHS and other relevant federal agencies to develop a new framework for 
ensuring privacy that would apply uniformly to all health research and 
that will both protect individuals™ privacy and facilitate responsible and 
bene˜cial health research.
When this new approach is implemented, HHS should exempt health 
research from the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 The new approach would enhance 
privacy protections through improved data privacy and security, increased 
transparency of activities and policies, and greater accountability. The new 
approach should do all the following:
Ł Apply to any person, institution, or organization conducting health 
research in the United States, regardless of the source of data or 
funding.
Ł Entail clear, goal-oriented, rather than prescriptive, regulations.
Ł Require researchers, institutions, and organizations that store 
health data to establish strong data security safeguards.
Ł Make a clear distinction between the privacy considerations that 
apply to interventional research and research that is exclusively 
information based.
12
 U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services, 
Recommendations on the Con˜dentiality 
of Individually-Identi˜able Health Information to the Committees on Labor and Human 
Resources 
(1997), and Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information: 
Proposed Rule, 64 Fed. Reg. 59918, 59967 (1999) (for a discussion on the bene˜ts of health 
records research).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 281
Ł Facilitate greater use of data with direct identi˜ers removed 
in health research, and implement legal sanctions to prohibit 
 
unauthorized reidenti˜cation of information that has had direct 
identi˜ers removed.
Ł Require ethical oversight of research when personally identi˜able 
health information is used without informed consent. HHS should 
develop best practices for oversight that should consider:
Š Measures taken to protect the privacy, security, and con˜den
-tiality of the data;
Š Potential harms that could result from disclosure of the data; 
and
Š Potential public bene˜ts of the research.
Ł Certify institutions that have policies and practices in place to pro
-tect data privacy and security in order to facilitate important large-
scale information-based research for clearly de˜ned and approved 
purposes, without individual consent.
Ł Include federal oversight and enforcement to ensure regulatory 
compliance.
A new approach to protecting the privacy of personally identi˜
-able information used in health research that emphasizes privacy, secu
-rity,
 accountability, and transparency and that is applicable to all health 
research in the United States would eliminate the research community™s 
confusion, reduce institutional variability in research privacy practices, 
facilitate responsible research, and enhance the public™s trust in the research 
enterprise. Clear and simple regulations that are less subject to varying 
interpretation by ethical oversight boards, as well as federal oversight and 
enforcement of regulatory compliance, will be important to consistently 
and ef˜ciently ensure privacy and instill trust while enabling important 
research.
The new framework developed by HHS and other relevant federal 
agencies should provide strong and effective protection for often-sensitive 
personally identi˜able health information and facilitate scienti˜c discovery 
and medical innovation necessary to save lives and enhance the quality of 
the public™s health. And it should do so in a way that does not burden indi
-viduals with a ˚urry of health privacy notices and consent forms, or burden 
our health care system with a new level of bureaucracy and expense.
REFERENCES
AHIC (American Health Information Community). 2006. Letter to Michael Leavitt. http://
www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/061030lt.pdf (accessed September 3, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
AHIC. 2007. 
Con˜dentiality, privacy, and security workgroup, summary of the 
14
th web 
conference.
 http://137.187.25.8/healthit/ahic/materials/summary/cpssum_100407.html 
(accessed August 27, 2008).
AHIC. 2008. 
Con˜dentiality, privacy & security workgroup draft recommendation letter from 
September 
23
, 
200
8. 
http://www.hhs.gov/healthit/ahic/materials/08_08/cps/rec
_letter.
html (accessed September 19, 2008).
AHIMA (American Health Information Management Association). 2006. 
The state of 
HIPAA privacy and security compliance.
 http://www.ahima.org/emerging_issues/
2006StateofHIPAACompliance.pdf (accessed April 20, 2008).
Allen, A. 2007. 
Allen™s privacy law and society.
 Eagan, MN: Thomson-West.
AMS (Academy of Medical Sciences). 2006. 
Personal data for public good: Using health 
information in medical research.
 http://www.acmedsci.ac.uk/images/project/Personal.pdf 
(accessed August 28, 2008).
AMS. 2008. 
Submission to data sharing review.
 http://www.acmedsci.ac.uk/download.
php?˜le=
/images/publication/120341733123.pdf (accessed September 4, 2008).
Buchanan, A. 1999. An ethical framework for biological samples policy, National Bioethics 
Advisory Committee commissioned paper. In 
Research involving human biological mate
-rials: Ethical issues and policy guidance
. Vol. II. Washington, DC: National Bioethics 
Advisory Commission. Pp. B1ŒB31.
Bush, G. W. 2004. Executive Order 13335. 
69
 Fed. Reg. 
24
059
.Casarett, D., J. Karlawish, E. Andrews, and A. Caplan. 2005. Bioethical issues in pharmaco
-epidemiological research In 
Pharmacoepidemiology
, 4th ed., edited by B. L. Strom. West 
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Pp. 417Œ432.
Cate, F. 2008 (unpublished). 
The autonomy trap.
CDT (Center for Democracy & Technology). 2008a. 
Beyond consumer consent: Why we 
need a comprehensive approach to privacy in a networked world. 
http://www.cdt.org/
healthprivacy/20080221consentbrief.pdf (accessed September 4, 2008).
CDT. 2008b. 
Comprehensive privacy and security: Critical for health information technology.
 Version 1.0. http://www.cdt.org/healthprivacy/20080514HPframe.pdf (accessed Septem
-ber 4, 2008).
Chadwick, R., and K. Berg. 2001. Solidarity and equity: New ethical frameworks for genetic 
databases. 
Nature
 2:318Œ321.
CIHR (Canadian Institutes of Health Research). 2005. 
CIHR best practices for protecting 
privacy in health research.
 Ottawa, Ontario: Public Works and Government Services 
Canada.
Foster, A. L. 2008. Increase in stolen laptops endangers data security. 
The Chronicle of Higher 
Education
 July 4.
GAO (Government Accountability Of˜ce). 2007. 
Health information technology: Early efforts 
initiated but comprehensive privacy approach needed for national strategy.
 Washington, 
DC: GAO.
Good, N., R. Dhamija, J. Grossklags, D. Thaw, S. Aronowitz, D. Mulligan, and J.
 Konstan. 
2005. 
Stopping spyware at the gate: A user study of privacy, notice and spyware.
 http://cups.cs.cmu.edu/soups/2005/2005proceedings/p43-good.pdf (accessed September 
4, 2008).
Gostin, L. O. 2001. Health information: Reconciling personal privacy with the public good 
of human health. 
Health Care Analysis
 9:321.
Harris Interactive. 2007. 
The bene˜ts of electronic medical records sound good, but privacy 
could become a dif˜cult issue.
 http://www.harrisinteractive.com/news/printerfriend
/index.
asp?NewsID=1174 (accessed April 3, 2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A NEW FRAMEWORK FOR PROTECTING PRIVACY
 283
HEW (Department of Health, Education and Welfare). 1979. 
The Belmont Report: Ethical 
principles and guidelines for the protection of human subjects of research.
 http://ohsr.
od.nih.gov/guidelines/belmont.html (accessed August 21, 2008).
HHS. 2008a. 
Compliance and enforcement: Privacy Rule enforcement highlights. 
http://www.
hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/enforcement/ (accessed July 23, 2008).
HHS. 2008b. 
Resolution agreement.
 http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/enforcement/agreement.
pdf (accessed October 3, 2008).
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 1994. 
Health data in the information age: Use, disclosure, and 
privacy.
 Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2006. 
Effect of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research: Proceedings of a work
-shop presented to the National Cancer Policy Forum.
 Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
ITRC (Identity Theft Resource Center). 2008. 
Security breaches.
 http://www.idtheftcenter.
org/artman2/publish/lib_survey/ITRC_2008_Breach_List_printer.shtml (accessed July 22, 
2008).
Jonas, H. 1991. Philosophical re˚ections on experimenting with human subjects. In 
Biomedi
-cal ethics
, edited by T. A. Mappes and J. S. Zembaty. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Pp. 215Œ219.
Knoppers, B. M., and R. Chadwick. 2005. Human genetic research: Emerging trends in ethics. 
Nature Reviews Genetics
 6:75Œ79.
Kolata, G. 2007a. How data on cancer are collected and used. 
The New York Times
, October 
10.
Kolata, G. 2007b. States and V.A. at odds on cancer data. 
The New York Times
, October 
10.
Liu, E. T. 2007. 
The importance of research using personal information for scienti˜c discovery 
and the reduction of disease, in personal information for biomedical research. 
Annex A. 
http://www.bioethics-singapore.org/upload˜le/20013%20PMPI%20Annex%20A-3.pdf 
(accessed September 4, 2008).
Lo, B. 2009 (in press). 
Resolving ethical dilemmas: A guide for clinicians. 
4th ed. Philadelphia, 
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Markle Foundation. 2006. 
Survey ˜nds Americans want electronic personal health informa
-tion to improve own health care. 
http://www.markle.org/downloadable_assets/research_
doc_120706.pdf (accessed September 4, 2008).
NCVHS (National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics). 2006. 
Functional requirements 
needed for the initial de˜nition of a nationwide health information network. 
http://www.
ncvhs.hhs.gov/061030lt.pdf (accessed September 4, 2008).
NCVHS. 2007. Enhanced protections for uses of health data: A stewardship framework for 
ﬁsecondary usesﬂ of electronically collected and transmitted health data. http://ncvhs.hhs.
gov/071221lt.pdf (accessed December 19, 2007).
Nosowsky, R., and T. Giordano. 2006. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule: Implications for clinical research. 
Annual Review of 
Medicine
 57:575Œ590.
Pritts, J. 2008. 
The importance and value of protecting the privacy of health information: 
Roles of HIPAA Privacy Rule and the Common Rule in health research. 
http://www.iom.
edu/CMS/3740/43729/53160.aspx (accessed March 15, 2008).
Rahman, N. 2006. Medical: Re˚ections on privacy: Recent developments in HIPAA Privacy 
Rule. 
I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society
 2(3):685.
Rotenberg, M. 2001. Fair information practices and the architecture of privacy: (what 
Larry doesn™t get). 
Stanford Technology Law Review
 1. http://stlr.stanford.edu/STLR
/Articles/01_STLR_1 (accessed November 6, 2008).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284
 BEYOND
 THE
 HIPAA
 PRIVACY
 RULE
Rothstein, M. A. 2005. Research privacy under HIPAA and the Common Rule. 
Journal
 of
 Law,
 Medicine
 & Ethics
 33(1):154Œ159.
Schneider, C. E. 2006. After autonomy. 
Wake
 Forest
 Law
 Review
 41(2):411Œ444.
Solove, D. J., M. Rotenberg, and P. M. Schwartz. 2006. 
Information
 privacy
 law.
 2nd ed. 
New York: Aspen Publishers.
Tait, A. R., T. Voepel-Lewis, A. Robinson, and S. Malviya. 2002. Priorities for disclosure 
of the elements of informed consent for research: A comparison between parents and 
investigators. 
Paediatric
 Anaesthesia
 12:332Œ336.
Thomas, R., and M. Walport. 2008. 
Data
 sharing
 review
 report.
 http://www.justice.gov.uk/
docs/data-sharing-review.pdf (accessed September 4, 2008).
Turow, J., D. K. Mulligan, and C. J. Hoofnagle. 2007. 
Consumers
 fundamentally
 misunderstand
 the
 online
 advertising
 marketplace.
 http://groups.ischool.berkeley.edu
/samuelsonclinic/
˜les/annenberg_samuelson_advertising.pdf (accessed September 4, 2008).
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Energy and Commerce Committee. 2008a. Discus
-sion draft of health information technology and privacy legislation. 
Statement
 of
 Deven
  McGraw,
 Director,
 Health
 Privacy
 Project,
 Center
 for
 Democracy
 & Technology.
 June 4.
U.S. Congress, House of Representatives, Energy and Commerce Committee. 2008b. Discus
-sion Draft of Health Information Technology and Privacy Legislation. 
Statement
 of
 Byron
 Thames,
 AARP
 Board
 of
 Directors.
 June 4.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.285
Appendix A
Previous Recommendations 
to the Department of Health 
and Human Services
As a result of the reported concerns about the Privacy Rule™s effect on 
health research, several organizations have provided the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS) with recommendations on how to 
improve the way the Privacy Rule regulates research. Table A-1 describes 
the recommendations of the National Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics, the Association of American Medical Colleges, the Secretary™s 
Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections, and the National 
Cancer Advisory Board. A brief explanation of how these organizations 
generated their recommendations is provided below.
NATIONAL
 C
OMMITTEE
 ON
 V
ITAL
 AND
 H
EALTH
 S
TATISTICS
The U.S. Congress gave the National Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics (NCVHS) the responsibility of advising the Secretary of HHS on 
the adoption of the Privacy Rule standards, monitoring its implementation, 
and reporting annually to Congress on the progress made in its adoption. 
In accordance with this mandate, NCVHS has held a number of hearings 
on the Privacy Rule and the problems that the medical community has 
experienced in implementing the requirements of the Privacy Rule. One of 
the topics explored during these hearings was the obstacles associated with 
conducting research under the Privacy Rule. After each hearing, NCVHS 
subsequently issued a letter to the Secretary of HHS with a set of recom
-mendations for improving the Privacy Rule. The recommendations outlined 
in Table A-1 are based on the hearings held on August 21Œ23, 2001, and 
November 19Œ20, 2003 (NCVHS, 2001, 2004).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286
TABLE A-1
 Previous Recommendations to HHS Regarding Research and the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Topic
Issues
Recommendations
Organization
Accounting for disclosures of 
protected health information 
(PHI) for research purposes
Creates excessive paperwork for 
covered entities and has resulted in 
some covered entities refusing to 
make PHI available to researchers.
1. Eliminate the accounting for disclosures 
requirement for research (AAMC, SACHRP)
and
instead, inform patients that PHI might be used for 
research purposes (SACHRP).
2. HHS should issue guidance to provide covered 
entities with ways to ful˜ll this requirement in a 
convenient and practical manner (NCVHS).
NCVHS
AAMC
SACHRP
Standards for deidenti˜cation of 
data
Loss of ability to carry out research 
because of loss of information, 
cost, and administrative burden.
HHS should review standards to reduce the number 
of categories removed from deidenti˜ed data.
NCVHS
AAMC
SACHRP
Recruitment of research subjects 
1. Institutional Review Boards 
(IRBs) already consider recruitment 
as part of their study oversight.
2. Arti˜cial distinction between 
internal and external researchers 
exists.
3. Identi˜cation and contacting 
potential research participants are 
considered different activities.
4. Creation of biased populations 
in studies, especially too few less-
educated, low-income individuals.
1. HHS should classify research recruitment as a 
health care operation, obviating the need for 
authorization and allaying confusion (SACHRP).
2. If ﬁ1ﬂ is rejected, HHS should provide additional 
formal guidance on contacting potential research 
participants
and
HHS should end differential treatment of internal and 
external researchers for purposes of identifying and 
contacting potential participants (SACHRP, NCVHS).
NCVHS
SACHRP
Databases and tissue 
repositories: future uses of 
research data and biological 
materials
Loss of future research 
opportunities; confusion regarding 
combined authorization.
1. When an IRB has approved a consent form that 
permits future uses under the Common Rule 
standard, the same should apply under the Privacy 
Rule. Permit combining research authorization for a 
clinical trial and for banking data and materials 
collected as part of the trial in a single form 
(NCVHS, SACHRP).
2. Eliminate the restriction on the use of data for 
unspeci˜ed future research, or allow a less speci˜c 
description of the intended use (NCAB).
3. Clarify how identi˜ed datasets collected under a 
broad authorization to create a database could be 
released to researchers through the use of a waiver of 
authorization, a limited dataset, or by deidentifying 
the information.
NCVHS
SACHRP
NCAB
Research exempt under the 
Common Rule
Discrepancies between the 
Common Rule and the Privacy 
Rule create challenges for IRBs and 
Privacy Boards that must make 
decisions about such things as 
waivers of authorization.
1. Revise categories of research not requiring 
authorization to include research determined by IRB 
to be exempt from Common Rule requirements 
(SACHRP).
2. HHS should provide further interpretation, 
guidance, and technical assistance to help the research 
community to understand the relationship between 
the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule (NCVHS).
NCVHS
SACHRP
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 287
TABLE A-1
 Previous Recommendations to HHS Regarding Research and the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Topic
Issues
Recommendations
Organization
Accounting for disclosures of 
protected health information 
(PHI) for research purposes
Creates excessive paperwork for 
covered entities and has resulted in 
some covered entities refusing to 
make PHI available to researchers.
1. Eliminate the accounting for disclosures 
requirement for research (AAMC, SACHRP)
and
instead, inform patients that PHI might be used for 
research purposes (SACHRP).
2. HHS should issue guidance to provide covered 
entities with ways to ful˜ll this requirement in a 
convenient and practical manner (NCVHS).
NCVHS
AAMC
SACHRP
Standards for deidenti˜cation of 
data
Loss of ability to carry out research 
because of loss of information, 
cost, and administrative burden.
HHS should review standards to reduce the number 
of categories removed from deidenti˜ed data.
NCVHS
AAMC
SACHRP
Recruitment of research subjects 
1. Institutional Review Boards 
(IRBs) already consider recruitment 
as part of their study oversight.
2. Arti˜cial distinction between 
internal and external researchers 
exists.
3. Identi˜cation and contacting 
potential research participants are 
considered different activities.
4. Creation of biased populations 
in studies, especially too few less-
educated, low-income individuals.
1. HHS should classify research recruitment as a 
health care operation, obviating the need for 
authorization and allaying confusion (SACHRP).
2. If ﬁ1ﬂ is rejected, HHS should provide additional 
formal guidance on contacting potential research 
participants
and
HHS should end differential treatment of internal and 
external researchers for purposes of identifying and 
contacting potential participants (SACHRP, NCVHS).
NCVHS
SACHRP
Databases and tissue 
repositories: future uses of 
research data and biological 
materials
Loss of future research 
opportunities; confusion regarding 
combined authorization.
1. When an IRB has approved a consent form that 
permits future uses under the Common Rule 
standard, the same should apply under the Privacy 
Rule. Permit combining research authorization for a 
clinical trial and for banking data and materials 
collected as part of the trial in a single form 
(NCVHS, SACHRP).
2. Eliminate the restriction on the use of data for 
unspeci˜ed future research, or allow a less speci˜c 
description of the intended use (NCAB).
3. Clarify how identi˜ed datasets collected under a 
broad authorization to create a database could be 
released to researchers through the use of a waiver of 
authorization, a limited dataset, or by deidentifying 
the information.
NCVHS
SACHRP
NCAB
Research exempt under the 
Common Rule
Discrepancies between the 
Common Rule and the Privacy 
Rule create challenges for IRBs and 
Privacy Boards that must make 
decisions about such things as 
waivers of authorization.
1. Revise categories of research not requiring 
authorization to include research determined by IRB 
to be exempt from Common Rule requirements 
(SACHRP).
2. HHS should provide further interpretation, 
guidance, and technical assistance to help the research 
community to understand the relationship between 
the Privacy Rule and the Common Rule (NCVHS).
NCVHS
SACHRP
continued
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288
TABLE A-1
 Continued
Topic
Issues
Recommendations
Organization
Use and disclosure of PHI for 
research
The process for obtaining an 
authorization or waiver of 
authorization is burdensome, and 
discourages research from being 
conducted.
1. Authorization and waiver of authorization 
requirements should be eliminated for research 
purposes. Research disclosures are adequately 
protected by the Common Rule (AAMC).
2. Continue to require authorization or waiver of 
authorization for research, despite the administrative 
burden (NCVHS).
NCVHS
AAMC
NCAB
IRB waiver of authorization 
Authorization and informed 
consent can be combined into a 
single document. Under the 
Common Rule, IRBs must review 
informed consent documents. 
However, the Privacy Rule does not 
require IRBs to review 
authorization forms. 
HHS should clarify that nothing in the Privacy Rule 
prevents IRBs from reviewing authorization forms 
when considering the adequacy of privacy and 
con˜dentiality of subjects under the Common Rule. 
NCVHS 
Genetics research
It is unclear whether DNA samples 
can ever be deidenti˜ed because 
analyzing the samples could reveal 
unique DNA identi˜ers of the 
individual.
HHS should clarify whether DNA samples can be 
considered deidenti˜ed data.
NCVHS 
Types of covered entities
Academic medical centers cannot 
organize in a manner that re˚ects 
the functional operations of the 
medical school, af˜liated practice 
plans, and teaching hospital.
The covered entity status, hybrid entity status, and 
af˜liated covered entity status should be rede˜ned to 
re˚ect the function served by the different parts of the 
organization, not the organizational form of the 
organization.
AAMC 
Transition provisions
The implementation of the Privacy 
Rule could hamper studies already 
under way.
For research begun before the Privacy Rule took 
effect, grandfather research that did not receive IRB 
review or oversight because it was exempt under 
Common Rule.
SACHRP
International research
1. Different interpretations of the 
Privacy Rule lead to recruitment 
dif˜culties.
2. Tendency to abandon U.S. 
research sites for those with less 
stringent rules. (NOTE: This is not 
strictly a problem in international 
research.)
1. Clarify, if legally possible, that PHI from foreign 
nationals outside the United States collected by 
researchers from covered entities is not subject to the 
Privacy Rule solely because of the relationship with 
the covered entity.
2. More generally, clarify what the rules are regarding 
research on foreign nationals.
SACHRP
Public health research
Effect on registries and other public 
health tools.
Broaden the de˜nition of public health authority to 
ensure inclusion of federal and state agencies that are 
primarily responsible for the prevention and control 
of disease, injury, or disability, or the analysis of data 
in alliance with public health and public bene˜ts 
agencies.
SACHRP
NOTE: Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB), National Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics (NCVHS), and Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections (SACHRP).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 289
Topic
Issues
Recommendations
Organization
Use and disclosure of PHI for 
research
The process for obtaining an 
authorization or waiver of 
authorization is burdensome, and 
discourages research from being 
conducted.
1. Authorization and waiver of authorization 
requirements should be eliminated for research 
purposes. Research disclosures are adequately 
protected by the Common Rule (AAMC).
2. Continue to require authorization or waiver of 
authorization for research, despite the administrative 
burden (NCVHS).
NCVHS
AAMC
NCAB
IRB waiver of authorization 
Authorization and informed 
consent can be combined into a 
single document. Under the 
Common Rule, IRBs must review 
informed consent documents. 
However, the Privacy Rule does not 
require IRBs to review 
authorization forms. 
HHS should clarify that nothing in the Privacy Rule 
prevents IRBs from reviewing authorization forms 
when considering the adequacy of privacy and 
con˜dentiality of subjects under the Common Rule. 
NCVHS 
Genetics research
It is unclear whether DNA samples 
can ever be deidenti˜ed because 
analyzing the samples could reveal 
unique DNA identi˜ers of the 
individual.
HHS should clarify whether DNA samples can be 
considered deidenti˜ed data.
NCVHS 
Types of covered entities
Academic medical centers cannot 
organize in a manner that re˚ects 
the functional operations of the 
medical school, af˜liated practice 
plans, and teaching hospital.
The covered entity status, hybrid entity status, and 
af˜liated covered entity status should be rede˜ned to 
re˚ect the function served by the different parts of the 
organization, not the organizational form of the 
organization.
AAMC 
Transition provisions
The implementation of the Privacy 
Rule could hamper studies already 
under way.
For research begun before the Privacy Rule took 
effect, grandfather research that did not receive IRB 
review or oversight because it was exempt under 
Common Rule.
SACHRP
International research
1. Different interpretations of the 
Privacy Rule lead to recruitment 
dif˜culties.
2. Tendency to abandon U.S. 
research sites for those with less 
stringent rules. (NOTE: This is not 
strictly a problem in international 
research.)
1. Clarify, if legally possible, that PHI from foreign 
nationals outside the United States collected by 
researchers from covered entities is not subject to the 
Privacy Rule solely because of the relationship with 
the covered entity.
2. More generally, clarify what the rules are regarding 
research on foreign nationals.
SACHRP
Public health research
Effect on registries and other public 
health tools.
Broaden the de˜nition of public health authority to 
ensure inclusion of federal and state agencies that are 
primarily responsible for the prevention and control 
of disease, injury, or disability, or the analysis of data 
in alliance with public health and public bene˜ts 
agencies.
SACHRP
NOTE: Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC), National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB), National Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics (NCVHS), and Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections (SACHRP).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
ASSOCIATION
 OF
 A
MERICAN
 M
EDICAL
 C
OLLEGES
The Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) has publicly 
opposed the current research provisions of the Privacy Rule since the Final 
Rule was proposed in 2002. During the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking 
period, AAMC submitted a lengthy and detailed comment urging HHS not 
to apply the Privacy Rule to research. AAMC has continued to campaign 
for a change in the rule™s regulation of research since it became law. In 
spring 2003, AAMC conducted a survey of 331 investigators, Institutional 
Review Board personnel, privacy of˜cials, research administrators, deans, 
and others involved in research to gain knowledge about how the Privacy 
Rule has in˚uenced the research process. AAMC then created a database of 
qualitative case reports documenting research projects that were affected, 
delayed, hindered, bene˜ted, abandoned, or foregone because of the Privacy 
Rule (see also Chapter 5 for survey results). Based on the results of the 
survey, AAMC came up with a number of recommendations for improving 
the Privacy Rule™s regulation of research (NCVHS, 2003).
SECRETARY
™S A
DVISORY
 C
OMMITTEE
 ON
 HUMAN
 R
ESEARCH
 P
ROTECTIONS
The Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections 
(SACHRP) is charged with advising the Secretary of HHS on human sub
-jects research and the protection of human subjects. On March 30, 2004, 
SACHRP received presentations from a number of different medical experts 
on the Privacy Rule™s impact on human subjects research. Based on these 
presentations, SACHRP submitted recommendations to HHS on Septem
-ber 1, 2004, on areas of the Privacy Rule that it deemed in need of clari˜ca
-tion or modi˜cation (SACHRP, 2005).
NATIONAL
 C
ANCER
 A
DVISORY
 B
OARD
The National Cancer Advisory Board (NCAB) is appointed by the 
President to advise the Secretary of HHS and the Director of the National 
Cancer Institute with respect to the activities of the Institute. In 2003, 
NCAB undertook a survey to examine the impact that the Privacy Rule 
has had on cancer research. It requested the names of Privacy Rule experts 
from cancer center directors, Clinical Cooperative Group Chairs, and prin
-cipal investigators of Special Programs of Research Excellence. Through 
this process 226 Privacy Rule experts were identi˜ed. These experts were 
invited to visit a Website and submit public comments on the effect of the 
Privacy Rule on cancer research. A total of 89 responses were received (see 
also Chapter 5 for survey results). On November 5, 2004, NCAB sent a 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 291
set of recommendations to the Secretary of HHS. The recommendations 
listed ways to minimize the negative impact of the Privacy Rule on cancer 
research (NCI, 2003).
REFERENCES
NCI (National Cancer Institute). 2003. 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule: Feedback from NCI cancer 
centers, cooperative groups, and specialized programs of research excellence (spores).
NCVHS (National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics). 2001. Letter to Secretary 
Thompson on research recommendations as it relates to the new Privacy Rule. http://
www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/011121lt.htm (accessed September 11, 2008).
NCVHS, Subcommittee on Privacy and Con˜dentiality. 2003. 
Susan Ehringhaus™s testimony 
on behalf of the Association of American Medical Colleges. 
November 19, 2003.
NCVHS. 2004. Letter to Secretary Thompson, recommendation on the effect of the Privacy 
Rule. http://ncvhs.hhs.gov/040305l2.htm (accessed August 27, 2008).
SACHRP (Secretary™s Advisory Committee on Human Research Protections). 2005. 
Summary 
of SACHRP™s recommendations on the HIPAA Privacy Rule.
 http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/
sachrp/tableofrecommendations.html (accessed March 10, 2006).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.293
Appendix B
Commissioned Survey Methodology
A review of the literature demonstrated a dearth of systematic data to 
determine what impact the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule was having on health research. As a result, the 
Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee sought larger surveys with national 
coverage. In consultation with committee members, the IOM took the 
unusual step of commissioning
1 several surveys to assess current percep
-tions among health researchers of the effect of the Privacy Rule on research 
and to measure the public™s perception of and expectations for privacy in 
health research.
The ˜rst survey entailed a national web-based survey of U.S. epidemiol
-ogists, overseen by Dr. Roberta Ness at the University of Pittsburgh. A sec
-ond project, undertaken by Sarah Greene and Dr. Ed Wagner at the Group 
Health Center for Health Studies in Seattle, involved a survey of HMO 
Research Network (HMORN) investigators and a survey of HMORN 
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs). The third survey was a Harris Interac
-tive Poll of the public, developed by Alan Westin of the Privacy Consulting 
Group. The methods used in conducting these surveys are described below. 
The results are described in Chapters 2 and 5 of this report and are reported 
in more detail in Ness (2007), Westin (2007), and Greene et al. (2008).
1 
The surveys were commissioned with private funding. No federal funds were used to sup
-port collection of survey data.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
NATIONAL S
URVEY
 OF
 U.S. E
PIDEMIOLOGISTS
Participants
Epidemiologists were surveyed because they are an identi˜able profes
-sional group of scientists engaged in human subjects research, and their 
research often involves the use of medical records. Support was enlisted 
from all professional groups that were known to represent U.S. epidemi
-ologists employed in academia, industry, government, and nongovernment 
organizations. These included the American Academy of Pediatrics, Section 
on Epidemiology; American
 College of Epidemiology; American College of 
Preventive Medicine; American Diabetes
 Association, Council on Epidemi
-ology & Statistics; American Public Health Association, Epidemiology Sec
-tion; International Genetic Epidemiology Society; International Society for 
Environmental Epidemiology; International Society for Pharmacoepidemiol
-ogy; Society for Clinical
 Trials; Society for Epidemiologic Research; Society 
for Healthcare Epidemiology;
 Society for Pediatric and Perinatal Epidemiol
-ogy; and Society for the Analysis of
 African-American Public Health Issues. 
Of 14 societies approached, the 13 listed above participated.
Each society e-mailed all its active members and requested that they 
respond to a web-based survey on the Privacy Rule. E-mail lists are updated 
annually for dues collection. Identical e-mails requesting participation in 
the survey were sent to the membership of each society three times, once 
a month during a 3-month period (JanuaryŒApril 2007). In an effort to 
avoid response duplicationŠbecause a substantial number of epidemiolo
-gists belong to more than one organizationŠrespondents were asked, both 
in the cover e-mail and in the introduction to the survey, to respond only 
once. Individual responses were submitted anonymously over the Internet 
so that they could not be linked to any individual. IRB approval as an 
exempt protocol was obtained at the University of Pittsburgh and reviewed 
and approved by the National Academies™ IRB.
The 13 participating epidemiology societies sent e-mails to a total of 
10,347 individual addresses. A cover e-mail asked professionals who are 
engaged in the conduct of U.S.-based human subjects research and who 
recognized the term Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act or 
HIPAA to respond. A total of 2,805 individuals accessed the Website, and 
2,376 individuals answered a screening question that asked, ﬁSince HIPAA 
was implemented in April 2003, how many new applications involving 
human subjects have you submitted to a U.S. IRB?ﬂ Respondents answer
-ing zero were thanked for their time, and no further questions were asked. 
The 1,527 respondents who provided a response of one or more are the 
participants in these analyses.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 295
Survey Content
The survey questionnaire was developed by Roberta Ness with input 
and review by the IOM committee. Questions were asked about both posi
-tive and negative potential in˚uences of the HIPAA Privacy Rule, including 
the in˚uence of the Privacy Rule on participant privacy, con˜dentiality, and 
public trust, as well as on research procedures. Four general approaches 
were used to ascertain information. First, questions with quantitative 
response categories were asked. These questions addressed issues such as 
the frequency of various types of data collection undertaken by respondents; 
changes in participant recruitment before and after the implementation of 
the Privacy Rule; frequency of IRB modi˜cations secondary to Privacy Rule 
provisions and their effect; level of dif˜culty in obtaining deidenti˜ed data 
and waivers; familiarity with covered entities™ opting out of research because 
of the Privacy Rule; studies conceived but not submitted to IRBs because of 
Privacy Rule concerns; and perceived effect of the Privacy Rule on patient 
con˜dentiality. Survey respondents were also asked about their gender, train
-ing, employment, and sources of funding.
Second, researchers were asked for their perceptions rated on a 5-point 
Likert scale about issues such as the ease and dif˜culty of conducting 
research under the Privacy Rule and the effect the Privacy Rule has had on 
participant privacy/con˜dentiality. Third, respondents were asked whether 
and under what circumstances their IRB would approve each of ˜ve case 
studies. These involved retrieval of historical identi˜ed medical records; 
access to identi˜ed participants in a hospital-based cancer registry; access to 
deidenti˜ed data in a hospital-based tissue bank; review of medical records 
of deceased individuals; and request for a limited dataset (de˜ned by the 
Privacy Rule) from a nonaf˜liated hospital. Finally, respondents were asked 
open-ended qualitative questions, including a ˜nal request: ﬁPlease tell us 
your stories about HIPAA. These will help us to understand all of the cir
-cumstances in which HIPAA has affected your research.ﬂ
After development of a draft instrument, survey content was vetted 
and modi˜ed by members of the IOM committee. In a pilot phase, ques
-tions were distributed to 10 epidemiologists at the University of Pittsburgh. 
After completing the survey, the respondents were debriefed to identify 
ambiguities, streamline the instrument, and determine how readily a typical 
epidemiologist could answer questions. After the instrument was ˜nalized, 
timed pilot tests took 10 to 15 minutes to complete.
Statistical Analysis
Simple descriptive statistics, retaining each distinctive response cat
-egory, were used to analyze these data. The 5-point Likert scales that were 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
anchored by ﬁnoneﬂ and ﬁa great dealﬂ were collapsed into 1 to 2, 3, and 
4 to 5. Categories were reported rather than central tendencies in order to 
retain the full and unedited character of the data. Only univariate analyses 
were reported because the focus was on a description of the self-reported 
impact of the Privacy Rule, rather than predictors of responses.
HARRIS
 I
NTERACTIVE
 P
OLL
 OF
 THE
 P
UBLIC
Successive drafts of the survey questionnaire were prepared by Alan 
Westin, with input and review by the IOM committee members. The ˜nal 
version was then reviewed and edited by David Krane, vice president, 
Harris Interactive. The survey was conducted online by Harris Interactive 
between September 11 and 18, 2007, with 2,392 respondents. Both closed 
and open-ended questions were used. The results were adjusted by Harris 
to represent the total adult U.S. population in 2007, estimated at 225 mil
-lion persons, not just those who go online. Figures for age, gender, race/
ethnicity, education, region, and household income were weighted where 
necessary to bring them in line with their actual proportions in the popula
-tion. Propensity score weighting was also used to adjust for respondents™ 
propensity to using the Internet.
Respondents for this survey were selected from among those who have 
agreed to participate in Harris Interactive surveys. Because the sample is 
based on those who agreed to participate in the Harris Interactive panel, 
no estimates of theoretical sampling error can be calculated. According to 
Harris Interactive, all sample surveys and polls, whether or not they use 
probability sampling, are subject to multiple sources of error. These errors 
are most often not possible to quantify or estimate, including sampling 
error, coverage error, error associated with nonresponse, error associated 
with question wording and response options, and postsurvey weighting 
and adjustments. Therefore, Harris Interactive avoids the term ﬁmargin 
of errorﬂ because it is misleading. All that can be calculated are different 
possible sampling errors with different probabilities for pure, unweighted, 
random samples with 100 percent response rates. These are only theoretical 
because no published polls come close to this ideal.
For analytic purposes, standard demographics for cross-tabulations 
were collected for region, age, generation, gender, race, party af˜liation, 
education, income, marital status, children in the household, sexual ori
-entation, disabilities, political philosophy, and employment. In addition, a 
set of custom health demographics was created from respondents™ answers 
to questions about their overall health status, whether they have been care
-givers, whether they have or have had six speci˜ed types of health condi
-tions, and whether they have had a genetic test.
Generally, a group with a 5 percent or higher variation from the total 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 297
public™s response, from one of our demographic, health-aspect, or attitudi
-nal subsets, was reported as a signi˜cant demographic variation. When the 
 
public total is 18 percent or less, 3 or 4 percent higher variation was used.
SURVEY
 OF
 HMORN R
ESEARCHERS
 AND
 IRB A
DMINISTRATORS
Researcher Survey
A Web-based survey was used to collect data about researchers™ expe
-rience with the HIPAA Privacy Rule (e.g., how their research protocols 
may have been affected by HIPAA, knowledge of and attitudes toward the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule regulations, and limited demographic information). 
To be eligible, participants had to be members of the scienti˜c faculty 
(i.e., assistant, associate, or full investigator level, or the equivalent rank
-ing system, plus research associates or staff scientists) at one of the HMO 
Research Network sites listed below:
 1.
 Geisinger Health System, Center for Health Research and Rural 
Advocacy
 2.
 Group Health Center for Health Studies
 3.
 Harvard Pilgrim Health Care, Department of Ambulatory Care & 
Prevention
 4.
 HealthPartners Research Foundation
 5.
 Henry Ford Health System, Center for Health Services Research & 
the Research Epidemiology Programs in cancer and biostatistics
 6.
 Kaiser Permanente Colorado, Clinical Research Unit
 7.
 Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Division of Research
 8.
 Kaiser Permanente Northwest, The Center for Health Research 
(includes investigators from Kaiser Permanente Georgia & Kaiser 
Permanente Hawaii)
 9.
 Kaiser Permanente Southern California, Department of Research 
and Evaluation
10.
 Lovelace Clinic Research Foundation, Health Services Research 
Division
11.
 Marsh˜eld Clinic Research Foundation, Epidemiology Research 
Center
12.
 Meyers Primary Care Institute
13.
 Scott & White Health System, Research and Education Department
Successive drafts of the survey questionnaire were prepared by Sarah 
Greene, with input and review by the IOM committee. An invitation e-
mail was sent to all faculty members with a link to a web-based survey. 
Each respondent received a unique website address
 taking him/her to the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.298
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
survey, and once a respondent completed the survey the website address 
could not be reused. The recipients also received two e-mail reminders to 
complete the web-based survey. A total of 235 investigators were invited 
to complete the web-based survey. Of those, 26 of the e-mail invitations 
bounced back, and 2 individuals actively refused to complete the survey. 
A total of 89 individuals completed the survey, and the remaining 118 
individuals never responded to the invitations. The information obtained 
from the investigators included:
Ł The degree to which a study protocol was affected by the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule;
Ł Characteristics of the affected study;
Ł Attitudes toward the HIPAA Privacy Rule provisions;
Ł Speci˜c structures or personnel created at their site to address 
HIPAA;
Ł Studies considered, but not implemented due to real/perceived 
HIPAA-related concerns;
Ł Open-ended ﬁcommentsﬂ ˜elds to allow researchers to elaborate 
on their responses;
Ł Select demographic items including number of years in research;
Ł HMORN site membership; and
Ł Request to contact researcher for follow-up interview if web survey 
answers warrant it.
Nineteen respondents who reported a HIPAA-affected study in the web 
survey indicated a willingness to participate in a follow-up interview. These 
subjects were contacted via e-mail to initiate an appointment for a tele
-phone interview at a mutually convenient time. Three individuals opted out 
when they were contacted about scheduling the interview, and two could 
not be reached after 4 weeks of both e-mail and phone attempts. Twelve 
interviews were completed.
The interviews were semi-structured to ensure systematic collection 
of key study details, but also to allow each individual to describe his/her 
unique experience about conducting research under the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule. At least two members of the study team were present for each inter
-view to assist with note taking and capturing all relevant information. 
The principal investigator then reviewed the qualitative data for common 
themes and unique issues. Each response was rated as positive, negative, or 
neutral. The information obtained from these investigators included:
Ł A general description of the study (e.g., purpose, design, protocol, 
data sources, intervention)
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 299
Ł What types of changes were made to the study as a result of the 
HIPAA regulations
Ł Whether these changes had a negative impact on the study design 
or time line
Ł For multisite studies, whether differences arose across sites, and the 
nature of those differences
Ł Perceptions about their site™s interpretations of HIPAA
For the web survey, descriptive characteristics were reported as means, 
medians, or frequencies. Frequencies were generated for categorical vari
-ables, and chi square tests were used to analyze continuous variables. 
 
Survey responses were strati˜ed by site, years of experience, and number 
of studies affected by HIPAA provisions.
For the semi-structured interviews, qualitative information provided 
by the respondents was synthesized to determine the characteristics of the 
affected studies. The content of the interviews was also analyzed to identify 
recurrent themes.
IRB Administrator Survey
A mailed survey was used to collect data about IRB administrators™ 
experience with the HIPAA Privacy Rule. The IRB administrators were 
the 15 who work at the HMO Research Network sites. Responses were 
received from 11 of the 15 sites. The survey was developed by Sarah 
Greene, with input and review by the IOM Committee. The survey asked 
questions regarding:
Ł The role of the IRB as it relates to HIPAA Privacy Rule compliance
Ł Knowledge of and attitudes toward the research-related provisions 
of the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Ł Procedures in place (or planned) to ensure adherence to HIPAA 
Privacy Rule provisions
Ł Approaches (e.g., training, new staff) established at the site to 
address HIPAA compliance
Ł Speci˜c type of HIPAA Privacy RuleŒrelated training/education 
developed by the site™s IRB
Ł Sample scenarios of privacy breaches to see how each IRB would 
respond
Ł Impact of HIPAA Privacy Rule on IRB process ˚ow
Ł Desired training/guidance from federal agencies speci˜cally about 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule
Ł Open-ended ﬁcommentsﬂ ˜elds to allow respondents to elaborate 
on their responses
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Given the small sample size (n
max
 = 11), the analysis was limited primar
-ily to reporting frequencies, means, and medians. If warranted, selected 
frequencies were strati˜ed based on characteristics (e.g., volume of IRB 
applications and perceived impact of the Privacy Rule).
REFERENCES
Greene, S. M., S. Bennett, B. Kirlin, K. R. Oliver, R. Pardee, and E. Wagner. 2008. 
Impact of 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule in the HMO Research Network
. Seattle, WA: Group Health 
Cooperative Center for Health Studies.
Ness, R. 2007. In˚uence of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on health research. 
JAMA
 298(18): 
2164Œ2170.
Westin, A. 2007. 
How the public views privacy and health research. 
http://www.iom.edu/
Object
.File/Master/48/528/%20Westin%20IOM%20Srvy%20Rept
%2011-1107.pdf 
(accessed November 11, 2007).
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.301Appendix C
Committee Member and 
Staff Biographies
COMMITTEE MEMBER BIOGRAPHIES
Lawrence O. Gostin, J.D.
 (
Chair) is an internationally recognized scholar in 
law and public health. He is an elected member of the Institute of Medicine 
of the National Academies and an elected fellow of the Hastings Center. At 
the National Academies, he has served on the Board on Population Health 
and Public Health Practice, as well as many committees, including as Chair 
of the Committee on Genomics and the Public™s Health in the 21st Century 
and Chair of the Committee on Ethical Considerations for Revisions to 
HHS Regulations for Protection of Prisoners Involved in Research. Profes
-sor Gostin is the Health Law and Ethics Editor of the 
Journal of the Ameri
-can Medical Association
 and serves on the editorial boards of many other 
scholarly journals. His recent books have included: 
The AIDS Pandemic: 
Complacency, Injustice, and Unful˜lled Expectations
 (2004), 
The Human 
Rights of Persons with Intellectual Disabilities: Different But Equal
 (2003, 
with S. S. Herr, H. H. Koh, eds.), 
Public Health Law and Ethics: A Reader
 (2002), and 
Public Health Law: Power, Duty, Restraint
 (2000). He cur
-rently works as a Professor of Public Health at Johns Hopkins University, 
and as Professor of Law and Director of the Center on Law and the Public™s 
Health at the Georgetown University Law Center.
Paul S. Appelbaum, M.D.,
 is the Elizabeth K. Dollard Professor of 
 
Psychiatry, Medicine, and Law, and Director, Division of Psychiatry, Law, 
and Ethics, Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons 
of Columbia University. He is the author of many articles and books on 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
law and ethics in clinical practice, including four that were awarded the 
 
Manfred S.
 Guttmacher Award from the American Psychiatric Association 
and the American Academy of Psychiatry and the Law. Dr. Appelbaum is 
Past President of the American Psychiatric Association, the American Acad
-emy of Psychiatry and the Law, and the Massachusetts Psychiatric Society, 
and serves as Chair of the Council on Psychiatry and Law for the American 
Psychiatric Association. He was previously Chair of the Commission on 
Judicial Action for the American Psychiatric Association and a member of 
the MacArthur Foundation Research Network on Mental Health and the 
Law. He is currently a member of the MacArthur Foundation Network on 
Mandatory Outpatient Treatment. He has received the Isaac Ray Award 
of the American Psychiatric Association for ﬁoutstanding contributions to 
forensic psychiatry and the psychiatric aspects of jurisprudence,ﬂ was the 
Fritz Redlich Fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral 
Sciences, and has been elected to the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Appelbaum 
is a graduate of Columbia College, received his M.D. from Harvard Medi
-cal School, and completed his residency in psychiatry at the Massachusetts 
Mental Health Center in Boston.
Elizabeth Beattie, Ph.D.,
 is a Professor, School of Nursing, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, The Queensland University of Technology. She was formerly a 
Research Compliance Associate at the Of˜ce of Human Research Compli
-ance Review, University of Michigan, and an Adjunct Associate Professor 
in the Adult and Gerontology Nursing Program, University of Iowa. In her 
former role in regulatory affairs she was involved in compliance monitoring 
activities with human research studies in many disciplines, and in human 
subjects protection education and research. Prior to these positions, she 
was research faculty at the School of Nursing, University of Michigan. 
Her primary role was Project Director for several large multisite federally-
funded projects focused on wandering behavior associated with dementia 
in long term care residents. As Project Director, she coordinated all aspects 
of the projects, including Institutional Review Board and Special Project 
Assurance requirements, site access, subject recruitment and informed con
-sent procedures, research team training, data collection, and data coding. 
She served on the Institutional Review Board for Health Sciences for over 
3 years. She was formally tenured foundation faculty in Australia at two 
new schools of nursing: The University of Technology and James Cook Uni
-versity. Dr. Beattie received her Ph.D. (Nursing Science) in a unique arrange
-ment between the University of Michigan School of Nursing and James 
Cook University in Australia, and completed a fellowship at the Hartford 
Institute for Gerontological Nursing Research Summer Institute, New York 
University. She completed her Advanced Psychiatric Nursing Certi˜cate at 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 303the Bethlem Royal and Maudsley hospitals,
 London, United Kingdom. Dr. 
Beattie is a Fellow of the Gerontological Society of America.
Marc Boutin, J.D.,
 is the Executive Vice President at the National Health 
Council, an umbrella organization representing approximately 100 million 
people with chronic conditions. The Council promotes health care for all 
people, the importance of medical research, and the role of patient-based 
groups. Throughout Mr. Boutin™s career, he has been highly involved in 
health advocacy, policy, and legislation. He has designed and directed 
numerous strategies for issues ranging from access to health care to
 cancer 
prevention. Before joining the Council, Mr. Boutin served as the Vice Presi
-dent of Government Relations and Advocacy at the American Cancer Soci
-ety for New England and was a faculty member at Tufts University Medical 
School. In addition to senior government relations positions at Easter Seals 
and the Massachusetts Association of Health Boards, he was a civil rights 
litigator. Mr. Boutin received his Bsc. Econ. in International Politics/Law 
from the University College of Wales, Aberystwyth, United Kingdom, in 
1989, and his J.D. from Suffolk University Law School in 1994.
Thomas W. Croghan, M.D.,
 is a Senior Fellow at Mathematica Policy 
Research, Inc., where his research concentrates on studying health care 
access and quality, adequacy of coverage, and outcomes for different groups, 
in addition to analyzing the capabilities of the health system to provide care 
for vulnerable populations. Dr. Croghan received his M.D. from West Vir
-ginia University School of Medicine and undertook postdoctoral training 
at Johns Hopkins University and Stanford University. Prior to his position 
at Mathematica, he was a Senior Natural Scientist at the RAND Corpora
-tion. He has directed many studies of health care access, quality, cost, and 
cost-effectiveness of medical treatments, including projects for the National 
Institutes of Health, Center for Multicultural Mental Health Research, 
U.S. Department of the Army, National Defense Research Institute, and Eli 
Lilly and Company. While at Lilly, he founded the Department of Health 
Services and Policy Research and served as Principal Project Of˜cer for a 
National Bureau of Economic Research project that created price indexes 
for the treatment of depression and other conditions. He also initiated the 
Schizophrenia Care and Assessment Program, a prospective observational 
study of 2,400 persons with severe psychosis. In 1999, he received a Robert 
Wood Johnson Foundation Investigator Award in Health Policy Research 
for conceptualizing the social, economic, and cultural issues underlying 
health care outcomes. He has published widely and serves as a reviewer 
for many publications, including 
Health Services Research, Health Affairs, 
Archives of General Psychiatry
, and the 
American Journal of Managed 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Care
. Board certi˜ed in internal medicine and rheumatology, Dr. Croghan 
practices primary care medicine at the Washington Free Clinic.
Stanley W. Crosley, Esq.,
 is Chief Privacy Of˜cer at Eli Lilly and Company. 
Mr. Crosley initiated Lilly™s global privacy program, and he currently over
-sees the company™s privacy program on a global basis across all company 
functions. He is a co-founder and Chairman of the Board of Directors of 
the International Pharmaceutical Privacy Consortium (IPPC) and is on the 
Executive Committee of the Center for Information Policy Leadership. He 
also sits on the Conference Board™s Chief Privacy Of˜cers Council. Prior 
to his arrival at Lilly, Mr. Crosley worked at Armstrong Teasdale Schla˚y 
& Davis in St. Louis, and at Ice Miller Donadio & Ryan where he concen
-trated on technology, privacy, and eBusiness. Mr. Crosley earned his B.S. 
in Biology, with a minor in Chemistry, from Hillsdale College and his J.D. 
from Indiana University.
Sandra J. Horning, M.D.,
 is Professor of Medicine (Oncology and Bone 
Marrow Transplantation) at Stanford University School of Medicine in 
Stanford, California. She chairs the Lymphoma Committee of the Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG), serving as senior investigator for 
multiple Phase II and III clinical trials. Her patient-oriented research in 
Hodgkin™s disease and lymphoma is supported by National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) and other peer-reviewed funding. Dr. Horning is active in a 
number of professional soc
ieties including the American Society of Clinical 
Oncology, where she is the Immediate Past President. She is a member of 
the NCI Clinical
 Trials Advisory Committee to the Director of the National 
Cancer Institute and served as a member of the NIH Clinical Oncology 
Study Section. Dr.
 Horning chairs the Scienti˜c Review Committee at Stan
-ford Cancer Center and she co-leads the program in lymphoma for the 
Cancer Center. She lectures nationally and internationally and serves on 
the steering committees for several international consortia. An advocate 
of new drug development, Dr. Horning has served on the Oncology Drug 
Advisory Board for the Federal Drug Administration. She currently serves 
on the editorial boards of 
Annals of Internal Medicine, Leukemia and 
Lymphoma
, 
Clinical
 Lymphoma
, and 
C.U.R.E.
 Dr. Horning earned her 
medical degree at the University of Iowa, after which she completed inter
-nal medicine training at the University of Rochester. She also completed a 
medical oncology fellowship at Stanford University.
James S. Jackson, Ph.D.,
 is a Daniel Katz Distinguished University Professor 
of Psychology, Professor of Health Behavior and Health Education, School 
of Public Health, and Director of the Institute for Social Research; past 
Director of the Research Center for Group Dynamics, past Director of the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 305Program for Research on Black Americans, and past Director of the Center 
for Afroamerican and African Studies, all at the University of Michigan.
He is past-Chair of the Section on Social, Economic, and Political Sci
-ences of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). 
He is a former Chair of the Section on Social and Behavioral
 Sciences and 
the Task Force on Minority Issues of the Gerontological Society of America, 
Committee on International Relations; Association for the Advancement of 
Psychology, and American Psychological Association. He was a recipient 
of a Fogarty Senior Postdoctoral International Fellowship, 1993Œ1994, 
for study in France and Western Europe. He has conducted research and 
published numerous books, scienti˜c articles, and chapters on international, 
comparative studies on immigration, race and ethnic relations, physical and 
mental health, adult development and aging, attitudes and attitude change, 
and African American politics. He is former National President of the Black 
Students Psychological Association and the Association of Black Psycholo
-gists. He is a Fellow of the Gerontological Society of America, the American 
Psychological Association, the Association of Psychological Sciences, and 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He is an elected 
a member of the Institute of Medicine.
Dr. Jackson has been the principal investigator of more than two 
dozen NIH-funded and National Science Foundation (NSF) grants. He 
is currently directing the most-extensive social, political behavior, and 
health surveys on the American and Caribbean populations ever conducted; 
the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Institute on Aging, 
and the National Institute on Drug Abuse supported ﬁNational Survey of 
American Lifeﬂ and ﬁFamily Survey Across Generations and Nations,ﬂ and 
NSF-supported ﬁNational Study of Ethnic Pluralism and Politics.ﬂ
Mary Beth Joublanc, J.D.,
 is the Chief Privacy Of˜cer for the State of 
 
Arizona, Arizona Government Technology Agency. She was formerly the 
Chief HIPAA Compliance Of˜cer for the Arizona Department of Health 
Services, Phoenix, Arizona. She is also the Chair for the Department™s 
Human Subjects Research Board. Ms. Joublanc is an active member of the 
State Bar of Arizona. Her legal practice focuses on regulatory compliance, 
health care law, risk management, and professional liability claims manage
-ment. Ms. Joublanc has lectured on a variety of topics related to health law 
and risk management. She holds a B.S. in Health Information and, prior to 
law school, was a health information manager with experience in primary, 
secondary, and tertiary care.
Bernard Lo, M.D.,
 is Professor of Medicine and Director of the Program 
in Medical Ethics at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF). 
He is National Program Director for the Greenwall Faculty Scholars Pro
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
gram in Bioethics. He is Co-Chair of the Standards Working Group of 
the
 California Institute of Regenerative Medicine, which will recommend 
regulations for stem cell research funded by the state of California. He 
also serves on the Data and Safety Monitoring Committees for diabetes 
prevention trials and a HIV vaccine trial at the National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Disease. He is a member of the Ethics Working Group of 
the NIH-sponsorsed HIV Prevention Trials Network, which carries out 
clinical trials in developing countries. Dr. Lo is Co-Director of the Policy 
and Ethics Core of the Center for AIDS Prevention Studies at UCSF, which 
provides technical advice and consultation to researchers carrying out clini
-cal research, including research in resource-poor nations. He is a member 
of the IOM and serves on the IOM Council. He has been involved in a 
number of studies on ethical issues in human participants research carried 
out by the IOM and the National Academy of Science (NAS). He chaired 
an IOM panel on con˜dentiality in health services research. He developed 
a course on Responsible Conduct of Research that 120 postdoctoral fellows 
and junior faculty take each year. He also carries out research on ethical 
issues in human participants research, end-of-life decisions, and stem cell 
research. He is a practicing general internist and attends on the inpatient 
medical service at UCSF.
Andrew F. Nelson, M.P.H.,
 is Executive Director of the HealthPartners 
Research Foundation and Vice President of HealthPartners. Mr. Nelson 
has provided leadership for this nonpro˜t, medical/health care research 
organization since its inception in 1990. He also serves as a Corporate 
Of˜cer for HealthPartners, Inc. HealthPartners is an integrated health 
delivery system servicing over 725,000 people in Minnesota through a 
medical group of 650 providers, a large clinic system, and a 450-bed 
hospital.
 HealthPartners Research Foundation conducts more than 200 
laboratory, clinical, and health services research projects annually, through 
90 full-time staff, 25 full-time career researchers, and more than 45 clini
-cal
 researchers. More than 350 of HealthPartners 10,000 employees are 
engaged in research and represent a broad array of medical, scienti˜c, and 
administrative disciplines.
Prior to the HealthPartners Research Foundation position, Mr. Nelson 
was a Research Development Of˜cer for the University of Minnesota™s 
Health Sciences and Executive Director of the Day Community and Con
-nections Programs at the University of Minnesota™s programs that serve 
emotionally and behaviorally disturbed adolescents. Mr. Nelson is a found
-ing member and serves as Immediate Past Chair of the Board of Directors 
for the HMO Research Network, 15 research organizations with funding 
of more than $100 million. He serves on a wide range of professional and 
community committees and boards.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 307Marc Rotenberg, J.D.,
 is president of the Electronic Privacy Information 
Center and Adjunct Professor of Law, Georgetown Law. He was counsel to 
Senator Patrick J. Leahy on the Senate Judiciary Committee, specializing in 
technology and law. Professor Rotenberg has testi˜ed before Congress on 
many issues, including access to information, computer crime, computer 
security, and privacy. In 2003, he testi˜ed before the 9-11 Commission 
on Security and Liberty. He is the Editor (with Daniel J. Solove and Paul 
Schwartz) of 
Information Privacy Law
 (Aspen Publishing, 2006), is the Edi
-tor (with Phil Agre) of 
Technology and Privacy: The New Landscape
 (MIT 
Press, 1998), 
The Privacy Law Sourcebook: United States Law, Interna
-tional Law and Recent Developments
 (Epic, 2005), and is on the editorial 
boards of 
BNA Electronic Commerce and Law
 and 
Computer Law and 
Security Reporter
. Professor Rotenberg has served on advisory panels for 
the American Bar Association Section on Criminal Justice, the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science, the Austrian Institute for Law 
and Policy, the National Academy of Sciences, UNESCO, and the Organiza
-tion for Economic Cooperation and Development. He chairs the American 
Bar Association Committee on Privacy and Information Protection. He is 
also Former Chair of the Public Interest Registry, which manages .ORG 
domain. He was a Teaching Fellow in computer science at Harvard Univer
-sity from 1980 to 1982 and an instructor at Stanford University from 1986 
to 1987. He received his A.B. cum laude from Harvard University and his 
J.D. from Stanford University.
Wendy Visscher, Ph.D.,
 is Director of RTI International™s Of˜ce of Research 
Protection and Ethics, where she oversees the operation of the three Insti
-tutional Review Boards and chairs one of these committees. She maintains 
RTI™s Federalwide Assurance with HHS™s Of˜ce for Human Research Pro
-tections. She earned her Certi˜ed IRB Professional rating in 2002. In addi
-tion to her knowledge of human subjects protection, Dr. Visscher trains 
researchers on HIPAA and other data privacy requirements and regulations, 
and consults with RTI management on these and related issues. Dr. Visscher 
is also a trained epidemiologist with more than 20 years of health research 
experience. Her areas of expertise include: heart disease and diabetes in 
minority communities, drug use in pregnant women, children™s mental 
health, global burden of in˚uenza, HIV, reproductive epidemiology, radia
-tion and cancer, and patient outcomes studies. She received her Ph.D. in 
1987 from the University of Minnesota.
Fred Wright, M.D.,
 has served as Associate Chief of Staff for Research 
(director of the research program) since 1984. He is a Staff Physician at the 
VA Connecticut Healthcare System and has also been Acting Chief of Staff 
in 1995 and 1998. He is a Professor in the Departments of Internal Medi
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
cine and Cellular & Molecular Physiology at the Yale University School 
of Medicine. Dr. Wright received his A.B. and M.D. from the University 
of Michigan. He trained as a resident in medicine at the Johns Hopkins 
Hospital in Baltimore and as a postdoctoral trainee in kidney physiology 
at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Maryland. He was then 
appointed to the faculty at Yale University where his research continued 
to focus on the structure and function of the kidney, with an emphasis on 
mechanisms of ion transport by kidney tubules in health and disease. He 
joined the medical staff at the West Haven VA Medical Center in 1997 and 
continued to be involved in laboratory research and teaching of medical 
students and advanced trainees.
Clyde W. Yancy, M.D.,
 is a cardiologist and heart failure/heart transplant 
specialist at Baylor University Medical Center at Dallas, where he is the 
medical director of the Baylor Heart and Vascular Institute, and chief 
of cardiothoracic transplantation at Baylor University Medical Center at 
Dallas. Previously, Dr. Yancy was a professor of internal medicine and 
cardiology and holder of the Carl Westcott Chair in Medical Research at 
the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas where he 
served as director of its heart transplant program. He also is credited with 
establishing the medical center™s heart failure program and cardiovascular 
institute. He holds fellowships in the American College of Cardiology, the 
American Heart Association, and the American College of Physicians. He is 
an active member of the American Heart Association, the American College 
of Cardiology, the International Society of Heart and Lung Transplanta
-tion, and the American Society of Hypertension. Presently, he serves on the 
executive committee of the Heart Failure Society of America. He also sits 
on the editorial board of a number of professional journals. In 2003, he 
was recognized as physician of the year by the American Heart Association 
for leadership in programs related to its mission. He currently serves on the 
Cardiovascular Device Panel for the Food and Drug Administration and is 
a consultant to the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. His research 
interests include the broad areas of heart transplantation, heart failure, 
and heart disease in special populations. Dr. Yancy received his M.D. from 
Tulane University School of Medicine and completed post-graduate training 
at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center.
STAFF BIOGRAPHIES
Sharyl Nass, Ph.D.,
 is a Study Director and Senior Program Of˜cer at the 
Institute of Medicine, where she has worked with the Board on Health 
Sciences Policy, Board on Health Care Services, and the National
 Cancer 
Policy Board and Forum. Her previous work at the IOM has focused 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 309on
 topics that include developing cancer biomarkers, strategies for large-
scale bi
omedical science, developing technologies for the early detection of 
breast cancer, improving breast imaging quality standards, and contracep
-tive research and development. Her current position at the IOM combines 
her dual interests in biomedical research and health science policy. With a 
Ph.D. in Cell and Tumor Biology from
 Georgetown University and post
-doctoral training at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, she 
has authored numerous papers on the cell and molecular biology of breast 
cancer. She also holds a B.S. in Genetics and an M.S. in Endocrinology/
Reproductive Physiology, both from the University of WisconsinŒMadison. 
In addition, she studied developmental genetics and molecular biology at 
the Max Planck Institute in Germany under a fellowship from Fulbright and 
the German Heinrich Hertz-Stiftung Foundation. Dr. Nass was the 2007 
recipient of the Cecil Award for Excellence in Health Policy Research.
Laura Levit, J.D.,
 is an Associate Program Of˜cer for the Board on Health 
Care Services and the National Cancer Policy Forum. She started at the 
IOM as a Christine Mirzayan Science and Technology Graduate Fellow in 
winter 2007. In 2007, she received the IOM rookie award for her work 
with the National Cancer Policy Forum. She graduated from the University 
of Virginia School of Law in May 2006, and was admitted into the
 Virginia 
Bar Association in October 2006. She completed her undergraduate
 studies 
at the College of William and Mary, receiving a B.S. in Psychology. In law 
school, Ms. Levit worked for several different nonpro˜t organizations that 
focused on health and mental health care policy, including the World Fed
-eration for Mental Health, the Treatment Advocacy Center, the Bazelon 
Center, and the National Research Center for Women & Families.
Roger Herdman, M.D.,
 received his undergraduate and medical school 
degrees from Yale University. Following an internship at the University of 
Minnesota and a stint in the U.S. Navy, he returned to Minnesota where 
he completed a residency in pediatrics and a fellowship in immunology and 
nephrology and served on the faculty at the University of Minnesota. He 
served as Professor of Pediatrics at Albany Medical College until 1979.
In 1969, Dr. Herdman was appointed Director of the New York State 
Kidney Disease Institute in Albany, New York, and shortly thereafter was 
appointed Deputy Commissioner of the New York State Department of 
Health (1969Œ1977) and in 1977 was named New York State™s Director of 
Public Health. From 1979 until joining the U.S. Congress™s Of˜ce of Tech
-nology Assessment (OTA), he served as a Vice President of the Memorial 
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York City.
In December 1983, Dr. Herdman was named Assistant Director of OTA 
where he subsequently served as Director (1993Œ1996). He later joined the 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
IOM as a Senior Scholar and directed studies on graduate medical educa
-tion, organ transplantation, silicone breast implants, and the Veterans 
Administration national formulary. Dr. Herdman was appointed Director 
of the IOM/National Research Council National Cancer Policy Board 
from August 2000 through April 2005. Beginning in May 2005, he has 
directed the IOM National Cancer Policy Forum, which includes federal 
and private-sector cancer relevant agencies or organizations in addition 
to academic/industry members. In October 2007, he was also appointed 
Director of the IOM Board on Health Care Services. During his work at the 
IOM, Dr. Herdman has worked closely with the U.S. Congress on a wide 
variety of health care policy issues.
Andrew Pope, Ph.D.,
 is Director of the IOM Board on Health Sciences 
Policy. He has a Ph.D. in Physiology and Biochemistry from the University 
of Maryland and has been a member of the National Academies staff since 
1982 and of the IOM staff since 1989. His primary interests are science 
policy, biomedical ethics, and environmental and occupational in˚uences 
on human health. During his tenure at the National Academies, Dr. Pope 
has directed numerous studies on topics that range from injury control, 
disability prevention, and biologic markers to the protection of human 
subjects of research, NIH priority-setting processes, organ procurement and 
transplantation policy, and the role of science and technology in counter
-ing terrorism. Dr. Pope is the recipient of IOM™s Cecil Award and the NAS 
President™s Special Achievement Award.
Michael Park
 is a Senior Program Assistant for the Board on Health Care 
 
Services and the National Cancer Policy Forum. Before arriving at the 
IOM in September of 2007, Mr. Park worked for the National Academy of 
Education and the International Law Group in Washington, DC. He earned 
his B.A. in German and Italian Studies from the University of
 Maryland at 
College Park. He is ˚uent in Spanish, Italian, and German.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Abbrevations and Acronyms
AAHRPP
 Association for the Accreditation of Human Research 
Protection Programs
AAMC
 Association of American Medical Colleges
ACC
 American College of Cardiology
AHA
 American Heart Association
AHIMA
 Amer
ican Health Information Management Association
AHRQ
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
AOD 
 Accounting of disclosure
ASCO
 American Society for Clinical Oncology
BA
 Business associate 
CaBIG
 Cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid
CCW
 Chronic Conditions Warehouse
CDC
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CMS
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
DES
 Diethylstilbestrol
DUA
 Data use agreement
 ELSO
 Extracorporeal Life Support Organization
EPHI
 Ele
ctronic protected health information
EPHR
 Electronic personal health records
EU
 European Union
311
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
FDA
 Food and Drug Administration
FOIA
 Freedom of Information Act 
GAO
 Government Accountability Of˜ce
GINA
 Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
HAS
 Health Assessment Survey
HEW
 U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare
HHS
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
HIC
 Health information custodians
HIPAA
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
HIT
 Health information technology
HMAC
 Keyed-hash message authentication code
HMO
 Health maintenance organization
HMORN
 HMO Research Network
ICMJE
 International Committee of Medical Journal Editors
ICU
 Intensive care units
INTERMACS 
 Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted 
Circulatory Support
IOM
 Institute of Medicine
 IPC
 Information and Privacy Commissioner
IRB
 Institutional Review Board
JHU
 Johns Hopkins University
NAACCR
 North American Association of Central Cancer Registries
NCAB
 National Cancer Advisory Board
NCI
 National Cancer Institute
NCVHS
 National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics
NIH
 National Institutes of Health
NIST
 National Institute of Standards and Technology
NPDB
 National Practitioner Data Bank 
NTD
 Neural tube birth defects
OCR
 Of˜ce for Civil Rights
OECD
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development
OHRP
 Of˜ce for Human Research Protections
PCPS
 Partners for Child Passenger Safety
PDA
 Personal digital assistant
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
 313
PHI
 In HIPAA, protected health information; in PHIPA, 
personal health information
PHIPA
 Personal Health Information Protection Act
PRIM&R
 Public Responsibility in Med
icine and Research
REB
 Research ethics board
SACHRP
 Secretary™s Adv
isory Committee on Human Research 
Protections
 SELECT
 Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial
SMOG
 Simple Measure of Gobbledegook
UDE
 Unique data elements
UNOS
 United Network for Organ Sharing
VA
 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.315
Glossary
Accounting of Disclosures:
 This provision of the Privacy Rule gives indi
-viduals the right to receive a list of certain disclosures that a covered entity 
has made of their protected health information in the past 6 years, including 
disclosures made for research purposes.
Association for the Accreditation of Human Research Protection Programs, 
Inc. (AAHRPP): 
An independent, nonpro˜t entity that accredits organiza
-tions™ human research protection programs.
Authorization: 
An individual™s written permission to allow a covered entity 
to use or disclose speci˜ed protected health information (PHI) for a par
-ticular purpose. Authorization states how, why, and to whom the PHI will 
be used and/or disclosed for research, and seeks permission for that use or 
disclosure.
Autonomy:
 The capacity of a 
rational
 individual
 to make an informed, 
uncoerced decision.
Business Associate: 
A person or entity who, on behalf of a covered entity, 
performs or assists in performance of a function or activity involving the 
use or disclosure of protected health information, such as data analysis, 
claims processing or administration, utilization review, and quality assur
-ance reviews, or any other function or activity regulated by the HIPAA 
Administrative Simpli˜cation Rules, including the Privacy Rule. Business 
associates are also persons or entities performing legal, actuarial, account
-Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
ing, consulting, data aggregation, management, administrative, accredita
-tion, or ˜nancial services to or for a covered entity where performing those 
services involves disclosure of protected health information by the covered 
entity or another business associate of the covered entity to that person or 
entity.
Chronic Conditions Warehouse: 
Section 723 of the Medicare Prescrip
-tion Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 instructed the 
Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to make 
Medicare data more readily available to researchers studying chronic ill
-ness in the Medicare population, with the intent to help ﬁidentify areas 
for improving the quality of care provided to chronically ill Medicare 
bene˜ciaries, [and] reduce program spending.ﬂ The Chronic Conditions 
Warehouse implements this requirement of the Act and contains fee-for-
services claims, enrollment/eligibility, and assessment data. Researchers can 
ef˜ciently access data on 21 prede˜ned chronic health conditions, such as 
diabetes, breast cancer, Alzheimer™s, and depression.
Common Rule:
 The federal rule that governs most federally funded research 
conducted on human beings and aims to ensure that the rights of human 
subjects are protected during the course of a research project, histori
-cally focusing on protection from physical and mental harm by stressing 
autonomy and consent.
Con˜dentiality: 
Addresses the issue of how personal data that have been 
collected for one approved person may be held and used by the organiza
-tion that collected the data, what other secondary or further uses may be 
made of the data, and when the permission of the individual is required 
for such uses.
Covered Entity: 
A health plan, a health care clearinghouse, or a health care 
provider that transmits health information in electronic form in connection 
with a transaction for which the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services has adopted a standard.
Data Use Agreement: 
An agreement into which the covered entity enters 
with the intended recipient of a limited dataset that establishes the ways in 
which the information in the limited dataset may be used and how it will 
be protected.
Deidenti˜ed Information: 
The Privacy Rule provides for two methods to 
deidentify personally identi˜able health information. Under the statistical 
method, a statistician or person with appropriate training veri˜es that enough 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY
 317
identi˜ers have been removed that the risk of identi˜cation of the individual 
is very small. Under the safe harbor method, data are considered deidenti˜ed 
if the covered entity removes 18 speci˜ed personal identi˜ers from the data.
Effectiveness:
 The extent to which a speci˜c test or intervention, when used 
under 
ordinary 
circumstances, does what it is intended to do.
Ef˜cacy: 
The extent to which a speci˜c test or intervention produces a 
bene˜cial result under 
ideal
 conditions (e.g., a clinical trial).
Fair Information Practices: 
Principles affording individuals the meaning
-ful right to control the collection, use, and disclosure of information, and 
imposing af˜rmative responsibilities to safeguard information on those 
who collect it.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Protection of Human Subjects Reg
-ulations: 
Regulations intended to protect the rights of human subjects 
enrolled in research involving products that the FDA regulates (i.e., drugs, 
medical devices, biologicals, foods, and cosmetics).
Health Care Clearinghouse: 
A public or private entity, including a billing 
service, repricing company, community health management information 
system or community health information system, and value-added networks 
and switches, that either process or facilitate the processing of health infor
-mation received from another entity in a nonstandard format or containing 
nonstandard data content into standard data elements or a standard trans
-action, or receive a standard transaction from another entity and process 
or facilitate the processing of health information into a nonstandard format 
or nonstandard data content for the receiving entity.
Health Care Provider: 
A provider of services (as de˜ned in Section 1861(u) 
of HIPAA, 42 U.S.C. 1395x(u)), a provider of medical or health services (as 
de˜ned in Section 1861(s) of HIPAA, 42 U.S.C. 1395x(s)), and any other 
person or organization who furnishes, bills, or is paid for health care in the 
normal course of business.
Health Information: 
Any information, whether oral or recorded in any 
form or medium, that (1) is created or received by a health care provider, 
health plan, public health authority, employer, life insurer, school or uni
-versity, or health care clearinghouse; and (2) relates to the past, present, or 
future physical or mental health or condition of an individual; the provision 
of health care to an individual; or the past, present, or future payment for 
the provision of health care to an individual.
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318
 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA): 
An 
Act that requires, among other things, under the Administrative Simpli˜
-cation subtitle, the adoption of standards for protecting the privacy and 
security of personally identi˜able health information.
Hybrid Entity: 
A single legal entity that is a covered entity, performs busi
-ness activities that include both covered and non-covered functions, and 
designates its health care components as provided in the Privacy Rule. If 
a covered entity is a hybrid entity, the Privacy Rule generally applies only 
to its designated health care components. However, non-health care com
-ponents of a hybrid entity may be business associates of one or more of its 
health care components, depending on the nature of the relationship.
Informed Consent: 
A legal form required by the Common Rule that 
describes the potential risks and bene˜ts of research and seeks permission 
to involve the subject.
Institutional Review Boards (IRBs): 
ﬁAn administrative body established 
to protect the rights and welfare of human research subjects recruited 
to participate in research activities conducted under the auspices of the 
institution with it is af˜liated. The IRB has the authority to approve, 
require modi˜cation in, or disapprove all research activities that fall 
within its jurisdiction as speci˜ed by both the federal regulations and 
local institutional policyﬂ (Department of Health and Human Services 
IRB Guidebook).
Limited Dataset: 
Refers to protected health information that excludes 16 
categories of direct identi˜ers and may be used or disclosed, for purposes of 
research, public health, or health care operations, without obtaining either 
an individual™s authorization or a waiver or an alteration of authorization 
for its use and disclosure, with a data use agreement.
Nonmale˜cence:
 The ethical principle of doing no harm, based on the 
 
Hippocratic maxim, primum non nocere, ˜rst do no harm.
Privacy:
 In this report, the privacy of personal health information pertains 
to the collection, storage, and use of personal information and addresses 
the question of who has access to personal information and under what 
conditions.
Privacy Board: 
A board that is established to review and approve requests 
for waivers or alterations of authorization in connection with a use or dis
-closure of protected health information as an alternative to obtaining such 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GLOSSARY
 319
waivers or alterations from an Institutional Review Board. A Privacy Board 
consists of members with varying backgrounds and appropriate
 professional 
competencies as necessary to review the effect of the research protocol on 
an individual™s privacy rights and related interests. The board must include 
at least one member who is not af˜liated with the covered entity, is not 
af˜liated with any entity conducting or sponsoring the research, and is not 
related to any person who is af˜liated with any such entities. A Privacy 
Board cannot have any member participating in a review of any project in 
which the member has a con˚ict of interest.
Protected Health Information: 
Protected health information is personally 
identi˜able health information created or received by a covered entity.
Public Health:
 The Privacy Rule de˜nes a public health authority as any 
ﬁfederal, tribal, or local agency or person or entity acting under a grant of 
authority or contract with the agency, including state and local health depart
-ments, the Food and Drug Administration, the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.ﬂ
Public Health Practice: 
ﬁThe collection and analysis of identi˜able health 
data by a public health authority for the purpose of protecting the health 
of a particular community, where the bene˜ts and risks are primarily 
designed to accrue to the participating communityﬂ (Hodge, 2005; Hodge 
and Gostin, 2004).
Public Health Research:
 ﬁThe collection and analysis of identi˜able health 
data by a public health authority for the purpose of generating knowledge 
that will bene˜t those beyond the participating community who bear the 
risks of participationﬂ (Hodge, 2005; Hodge and Gostin, 2004).
Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research (PRIM&R): 
An organiza
-tion whose mission is to promote ethical research in both humans and 
animals.
Quality Improvement: 
ﬁSystematic, data-guided activities designed to bring 
about immediate, positive change in the delivery of health care in a particu
-lar settingﬂ (Baily et al., 2006).
Research: 
A systematic investigation, including research development, test
-ing, and evaluation, designed to develop or contribute to generalizable 
knowledge.
Respect for Persons:
 The ethical principle requiring that individuals be 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving Health Through ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
0 BEYOND THE HIPAA PRIVACY RULE
treated as autonomous agents, and that individuals with diminished 
 
autonomy are entitled to protection (HEW, 1979).
Security:
 ﬁThe procedural and technical measures required (a) to prevent 
unauthorized access, modi˜cation, use, and dissemination of data stored 
or processed in a computer system, (b) to prevent any deliberate denial of 
service, and (c) to protect the system in its entirety from physical harmﬂ 
(Turn and Ware, 1976).
Selection Bias: 
This phenomenon occurs when data are more likely to be 
collected from one subset of the population than from a representative 
sample of the entire population. This can cause systematic differences 
between the characteristics of the individuals included in a study and the 
individuals not included.
Waiver of Authorization:
 The documentation that the covered entity obtains 
from a researcher or an IRB or a Privacy Board that states that the IRB or 
Privacy Board has waived or altered the Privacy Rule™s requirement that an 
individual must authorize a covered entity to use or disclose the individual™s 
protected health information for research purposes.
REFERENCES
Baily, M. A., M. Bottrell, J. Lynn, and B. Jennings. 2006. The ethics of using QI methods to im
-prove health care quality and safety. 
A Hastings Center Special Report
 36(4):S1ŒS40.
HEW (Department of Health, Education and Welfare). 1979. 
The Belmont Report: Ethical 
principles and guidelines for the protection of human subjects of research.
 http://ohsr.
od.nih.gov/guidelines/belmont.html (accessed August 21, 2008).
Hodge, J. G., Jr. 2005. An enhanced approach to distinguishing public health practice and 
human subjects research. 
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics
 33(1):125Œ141.
Hodge, J. G., and L. O. Gostin. 2004. 
Public health practice vs. Research: A report for public 
health practitioners including cases and guidance for making distinctions.
 Atlanta, GA: 
Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists.
Turn, R., and W. H. Ware. 1976. Privacy and security issues in information systems. 
The 
RAND
 Paper Series. 
Santa Monica, CA: The 
RAND
 Corporation.
