DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12474Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting theConsumer First: Workshop Summary126 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-12642-7 | DOI 10.17226/12474Lyla M. Hernandez, Rapporteur; Roundtable on Health Literacy; Board onPopulation Health and Public Health Practice; Institute of MedicineHealth Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lyla M. Hernandez, 
Rapporteur
 Roundtable on Health Literacy 
 Board on Population Health and Public Health Practice
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. 
This project was supported by contracts between the National Academy of Sci
-ences and the Academy for Educational Development (Unnumbered Award); 
Af˜nity Health Plan (Unnumbered Award), Kaiser Permanente (Unnumbered 
Award); American Academy of Family Physicians (Unnumbered Award); Merck 
& Co., Inc. (Unnumbered Award); P˜zer Institute (Unnumbered Award); Depart
-ment of Health and Human Services (N01-OD-4-2139, TO#148); GlaxoSmithKline 
(G050002912). Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed 
in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the view 
of the organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-12642-7
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-12642-8
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
 For more information about the Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page 
at: 
www.iom.edu. 
Copyright 2009 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost 
all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The serpent 
adopted as a logotype by the Institute of Medicine is a relief carving from ancient 
Greece, now held by the Staatliche Museen in Berlin.
Suggested citation: IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2009. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and 
Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop Summary.
 Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁKnowing is not enough; we must apply.
 Willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ ŠG
oetheAdvising the Nation. Improving Health.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. 
Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vMEM
BERS
 OF
 THE
 P
LANNIN
G 
GRO
UP FOR
 T
HE
 W
OR
KSHOP
 ON
 H
EALTH
 L
ITERAC
Y, 
eHEALTH
, 
AND
 COMM
UNICATION
: PU
TTIN
G 
THE
 C
ONS
UMER
 F
IRST
CAROL
YN COCOTAS, 
Director, Af˜nity Health Plan 
ARTH
UR C
ULBERT, 
Senior Advisor to the Missouri Foundation for 
Health 
JANET M. MARCHI
BRODA, 
Chief Executive Of˜cer of the eHealth 
Initiative and the eHealth Foundation 
RUTH PAR
KER, 
Associate Professor of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine 
YOLANDA PARTIDA, 
Director, National Program Of˜ce, University of 
California, San Francisco, Fresno Center for Medical Education and 
Research 
JOSH
UA SEIDMAN, 
President, Center for Information Therapy
IOM planning committees are solely responsible for organizing the workshop, identifying 
topics, and choosing speakers. The responsibility for the published workshop summary rests 
with the workshop rapporteur and the institution.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viROUNDTA
BLE
 ON
 H
EALTH
 L
ITERAC
YGEOR
GE ISHAM 
(Chair
),
 Medical Director and Chief Health Of˜cer, 
HealthPartners 
SHARON E. 
BARRETT, 
Association of Clinicians for the Underserved
CAROL
YN COCOTAS, 
Director, Af˜nity Health Plan
MICHAEL L. DAVIS, 
Vice President, General Mills
BAR
BARA A. DE
BU
ONO, 
Senior Medical Director/Group Leader, 
P˜zer, Inc.
DE
BB
IE FRITZ, 
Director, GlaxoSmithKline
LINDA HARRIS, 
Acting Team Leader, Health Communication and 
eHealth Team, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
BETS
Y L. H
UMPHRE
YS, 
Deputy Director, National Institutes of Health
LINDA JOHNSTON-LLO
YD, 
Senior Advisor, Health Resources and 
Services Administration, Center for Quality
JEAN 
KRA
USE, 
Executive Vice President and CEO, American College 
of Physicians Foundation
DENNIS MILNE, 
Vice President, Patient Education, American Heart 
Association
RUTH PAR
KER, 
Emory University School of Medicine
YOLANDA PARTIDA, 
Director, National Program Of˜ce, University 
of California, San Francisco, Fresno Center for Medical Education & 
Research
KYU
 BAK LO
UIS RHEE, 
Director, Of˜ce of Innovation and Program 
Coordination, National Center on Minority and Health Disparities, 
National Institutes of Health
ZORI RODRI
GU
EZ, 
Health Disparities Manager, American Academy 
of Family Physicians
WILLIAM SMITH, 
Academy for Educational Development
CAROL TE
UTSCH, 
Director, Medical Services, Merck & Co.
WINSTON F. WON
G, 
Clinical Director, Community Bene˜t, Kaiser 
Permanente
SA
BRA WOOLLE
Y, 
National Cancer Institute
ANTRONETTE 
YANCE
Y, 
Associate Professor of Health Services 
and Director, Doctorate in Public Health Program, University of 
California, School of Public Health
IOM forums and roundtables do not issue, review, or approve individual documents. The 
responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteur 
and the institution.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Study Staff
LYLA M. HERNANDEZ, 
Staff Director, Roundtable on Health Literacy
KRISTINA SH
ULKIN, 
Senior Project Assistant (until July 2008)
ERIN R
USCH, 
Senior Project Assistant (from August 2008)
ROSE MARIE MARTINEZ, 
Director, Board on Population Health and 
Public Health Practice
HOPE R. HARE, 
Administrative Assistant
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
This report has been reviewed in draft form by persons chosen for 
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Don E. Detmer,
 American Medical Informatics Association
Jessie 
Gruman,
 Center for the Advancement of Health
Ida Sim,
 Center for Clinical and Translational Informatics, University
    
of California, San Francisco School of Medicine
Maria E. White,
 Of˜ce of Equal Opportunity and Civil Rights, Health
     
Resources and Services Administration, U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by
 Hugh Tilson
, Public Health Leadership Program, University of North Carolina School 
Reviewers
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x REVIE
WERS
of Public Health. Appointed by the Institute of Medicine, he was respon
-sible for making certain that an independent examination of this report 
was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all 
review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal 
content of this report rests entirely with the author and the institution.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Acknowledgments
Without the support of the sponsors of the Institute of Medicine 
Roundtable on Health Literacy, it would not have been possible to plan 
and conduct the workshop, Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communi
-cation, which this report summarizes. Sponsors from the Department 
of Health and Human Services are the Health Resources and Services 
Administration, the Of˜ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 
and the National Cancer Institute. Non-federal sponsorship was provided 
by the Academy for Education Development, Af˜nity Health Plan, the 
American Academy of Family Physicians Foundation, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Kaiser Permanente, Merck & Co., Inc., and P˜zer, Inc.
The Roundtable wishes to express its gratitude to the expert speakers 
whose presentations provided an overview of eHealth and communica
-tion challenges as well as describing consumer-oriented eHealth sys
-tems and guides for developing successful health information technology. 
These speakers were Cindy Brach, Dawn Gauthier, Rita Kukafka, Janet 
Marchibroda, Kim Nazi, Cameron D. Norman, Anthony Rodgers, Joshua 
Seidman, and Cynthia Solomon. Thanks also go to Charles Friedman and 
Linda Harris for their presentations on health literacy, health information 
technology, and Healthy People 2020. 
The Roundtable wishes to thank the planning committee members for 
their work in putting together an excellent workshop agenda. Members 
of the planning committee were Carolyn Cocotas, Arthur Culbert, Janet 
Marchibroda, Ruth Parker, Yolanda Partida, and Joshua Seidman. Thanks 
also go to George Isham for moderating the entire workshop. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
1 INTRODUCTION
 12 OVERVIEW OF ISSUES
 3 Overview of eHealth, 3
 Skills Essential for eHealth, 10
 Strategies for Raising Health Literacy in Arizona Medicaid 
    
Members: New Approaches for State Medicaid ﬁHealth 
Knowledge Builders,ﬂ 15
 Discussion, 21
3  
OUTCOMES AND CHALLENGES OF eHEALTH APPROACHES: 
PANEL 1
 29
 Internet Approaches for eHealth in Low-Literacy and Limited-
  
English-Pro˜ciency Populations, 29
 My Health
eVet, 36
 Discussion, 40
4  
OUTCOMES AND CHALLENGES OF eHEALTH APPROACHES: 
PANEL 2
 47
 Using Technology to Improve Migrant Health Care Delivery, 47
 A User-Centered Personal Health Record: The Design and 
   
Development of the Shared Care Plan, 54
 Observations from the Exam Room: Patient-Centered HIT 
  
Implementation in Diverse Practice Settings, 63
 Discussion, 67
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v CONTENT
S5 EMERGING TOOLS AND STRATEGIES
 73
 A Guide for Developing and Purchasing Successful Health 
  
Information Technology, 73
 Discussion, 77
 Health Literacy, Health Information Technology, and Healthy 
  
People 2020, 78
 Discussion, 80
6 CONCLUDING DISCUSSION
 85
REFERENCES
 89
APPENDIXES
A GLOSSARY OF TERMS
 95
B WORKSHOP AGENDA
 101
C WORKSHOP SPEAKER BIOSKETCHES
 105
TA
BLES
2-1
  
Seven-Stage Framework for Assessing and Tracking the 
Development of Health Information Exchange Initiatives at the 
State and Local Levels, 8
2-2
  
Snapshot of Web Utilization Trends/Data January 2008 to February 
2008, 19
3-1
 Health Information Seeking by Current Internet Use, 31
3-2
 Comparison of Principles of Web 2.0 and Web 1.0, 34
FI
GU
RES
2-1
 eHealth infrastructure of Medicaid system transformation, 17
3-1
 Trust in sources of health information, 32
4-1
 Patient dashboard, 49
4-2
 Task, 58
4-3
 Care team members, 60
4-4
 Add diagnosis, 60
5-1
 Simple design, 75
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Introduction
Many observers believe that the use of emerging interactive health 
information technologies, often referred to as eHealth,
1 can help to 
improve the quality, capacity, and ef˜ciency of the health care system. 
eHealth has the potential to improve access to the health care system for 
traditionally underserved populations and to increase the capacity to pro
-vide tailoring and customization for individual patients and consumers 
(Ahern et al., 2006). eHealth systems can also improve clinical decision 
making and adherence to clinical guidelines; provide reminder systems 
for patients and clinicians, thereby improving compliance with preven
-tive service protocols; provide more immediate access to laboratory and 
radiology results; and, when integrated with clinical decision support 
systems, help to prevent many errors and adverse events (IOM, 2003).
While eHealth has many potential bene˜ts, some observers have 
expressed concern that these systems could increase health care dispari
-ties by helping mainly those individuals and communities with greater 
resources. Recent reports show that health care disparities do exist 
between advantaged and underserved populations (IOM, 2002). Under
-served populations generally include ethnic minorities, people in lower 
1 
 It should be noted that throughout the report, speakers use different de˜nitions of the 
term eHealth in their presentations. This is not surprising since there is no agreed upon 
de˜nition for the term. In fact, Oh and colleagues (2005) found 51 different de˜nitions for 
the term eHealth. Since a workshop summary must accurately represent the concepts and 
ideas of each speaker, no attempt can be made to ensure consistency of de˜nitions across 
presentations.
1Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
socioeconomic groups, and people with lower educational and reading 
levels. These populations also tend to have limited access to computer 
technology (Eng et al., 1998). 
Furthermore, even if it were possible to ensure equal access to tech
-nology, some user groups ˜nd it extremely dif˜cult to take advantage of 
such technology. The average U.S. adult reads on just an eighth-grade 
level, for example, while most websites are designed for people whose 
reading level is much higher (Berland et al., 2001). In particular it is the 
elderly and those with limited literacy and number skills who are most 
likely to have low health literacy and thus be least able to take advantage 
of new health technologies. 
The Institute of Medicine Roundtable on Health Literacy serves to 
educate the public, press, and policy makers regarding issues of health 
literacy. Given the importance of health literacy issues in eHealth, the 
Roundtable decided to hold a workshop to explore and discuss strategies 
for improving the ways in which information and communication tech
-nologies address the needs of those with low health literacy and language 
barriers. A planning group designed a workshop to answer the following 
questions:

What is the current status of communications technology, particu
-larly electronic records systems?

What are the challenges of communication technology used for 
populations with low health literacy?

What are the strategies for increasing the bene˜t of these technolo
-gies for populations with low health literacy?
The workshop was moderated by George Isham. As the presentations 
in this workshop demonstrate, tremendous resources are being directed 
toward the development of health information technologies. While the 
vast majority of these resources are being devoted to systems that focus 
on physicians and health institutions, some notable efforts, such as those 
presented in this workshop, have been made to extend the use of these 
new technologies to patients. The ˜rst panel provided an overview of 
the issues, including a broad examination of eHealth, skills essential for 
eHealth, and a discussion of communication inequalities. The next two 
panels used speci˜c examples to explore the challenges and outcomes of 
different strategies for addressing health literacy issues in eHealth. The 
˜nal panel discussed the use of emerging tools in developing eHealth 
systems. The following workshop summary is organized according to the 
panel presentations. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Overview of Issues
OVERVIEW
 OF
 eHEALTH
Janet M. Marchibroda, M.B.A.
 Chief 
Executi
ve 
Officer, eHealth 
Initiati
ve and eHealth Foundation
Implementation of eHealth
1 and health information technologies is 
seen by many observers as an effective way to address current concerns 
about the quality and safety of the U.S. health care system. Among those 
concerns are the facts that U.S. adults receive only about half of recom
-mended health care services (McGlynn et al., 2003), that less than 50 
percent of adults receive the preventive and screening tests called for in 
guidelines for their age and sex (Commonwealth Fund, 2006), that pre
-ventable medical errors in hospitals result in around 100,000 deaths per 
year (IOM, 2000), and that there are 1.5 million preventable adverse drug 
events each year (IOM, 2007). 
The rising costs of health care are another major concern that eHealth 
may help address. By 2016, health care spending in the United States is 
expected to increase from the current 16 percent of the gross domestic 
1 
 There is an ongoing project devoted to determining de˜nitions of various concepts in 
eHealth and information technology, however, for purposes of this presentation the fol
-lowing de˜nition applies. 
eHealth
 ﬁinvolves simplifying and handling processes relating 
to information, communication and transactions within and between health care institu
-tions and professionals by utilizing information and telecommunications techn
ologies.ﬂ 
(Deutsche Telekom, 2008).
3Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
product to 20 percent or $4 trillion (American Academy of Orthope
-dic Surgeons, 2007). Health insurance premiums for workers and their 
employees have increased by 78 percent since 2000, while workers™ earn
-ings have risen by only 19 percent over the same time period (Kaiser 
Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust, 2006). 
Twenty-one percent of employers report it is ﬁvery likelyﬂ that they will 
increase the amount that employees pay for health insurance in the com
-ing year, while another 28 percent report it ﬁsomewhat likelyﬂ that they 
will do so (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2006).
In the year 2000, 12.7 percent of the U.S. population was age 65 or 
older. That number is expected to grow to 20 percent by the year 2030 
(U.S. Bureau of the Census, 2000), a factor that will contribute to the 
challenges facing the health care system as it strives to address chronic 
conditions of the population. In 2000 more than 125 million people in 
the United States had at least one chronic care condition, and it is pre
-dicted that the number will reach 157 million by 2020 (Wu and Green, 
2000). Seventy-eight percent of all health care spending in 1998 was 
focused on those with chronic conditions (Partnership for
 Solutions, 
2004).
 Himmelstein and colleagues (2005) estimate that medical issues 
are a major cause of bankruptcy in the United States. Furthermore, 
there are key challenges concerning access to care and the problems of 
the 47 million uninsured Americans, problems which many states are 
now trying to address through health care reform. 
The health care debate that will take place over the coming years 
will likely include all of these issues. And while health care policymakers 
are focusing on these issues, consumers are also weighing in. A survey 
by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that more than half of all those 
surveyed were dissatis˜ed with the quality of health care and that almost 
one-third of those indicated they were ﬁvery dissatis˜ed.ﬂ In addition, 81 
percent of those surveyed were dissatis˜ed with the cost of health care in 
the United States, with more than 50 percent of the respondents describ
-ing themselves as being very dissatis˜ed (Kaiser Family Foundation and 
Health Research and Educational Trust, 2006). 
When a recent survey by The Commonwealth Fund asked health 
care opinion leaders to rate the effectiveness of several key strategies for 
improving the quality and safety of health care, the highest-rated strategy 
was to accelerate the development and deployment of health information 
technology. In particular, 67 percent of respondents thought that acceler
-ating adoption of health information technologies would be an effective 
or highly effective strategy for improving health care, compared with 59 
percent for public reporting of provider performance on quality measures, 
51 percent for ˜nancial incentives for improved quality of care, 50 percent 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 5for stronger regulatory oversight of providers, and 39 percent for national 
voluntary quality campaigns (Shea et al., 2007). 
A variety of data support health information technology (IT) as an 
effective approach to improve quality, safety, and ef˜ciency. For example, 
the Center for Information Technology Leadership (CITL) in Boston issued 
a series of reports examining the value and role of health IT. One study 
indicated that 100 percent adoption of Computerized Provider Order 
Entry (CPOE) in the ambulatory care environment could save $44 billion 
annually in reduced medication, radiology, laboratory, and hospitalization 
expenditures (Johnston et al., 2003). That same study found that use of IT 
could prevent more than a million adverse drug events and 190,000 hos
-pitalizations per year. A more recent study from CITL indicates standard
-ized health care information exchange could, if fully implemented, result 
in annual savings of $86.8 billion. This would also mean direct ˜nancial 
bene˜ts for providers and other stakeholders (Walker et al., 2005). 
Additional data support the importance of IT as a strategy for address
-ing various challenges of the health care system. Research conducted at 
the Brigham and Women™s Hospital in Boston concluded that the use of 
CPOE cut error rates by 55 percent, from 10.7 to 4.9 per 1,000 patient days 
(Bates et al., 1998). A Kaiser Permanente study of intensive-care patients 
found that the use of a CPOE system resulted in a 75 percent decrease 
in incidents of allergic drug reactions and excessive drug dosages. There 
was also a decrease in the average time spent in the intensive care unit 
from 4.9 days to 2.7 days. These reductions led to a 25 percent cost savings 
(Raymond and Dold, 2002).
How, then, should the health care industry move forward with infor
-mation technology in order to address its various challenges? In 2007, 
working from a poll of more than 200 organizations across every sector 
of health care, the eHealth Initiative
2 developed a blueprint that provides 
a common vision for shared action. The purpose of the blueprint is to 
provide some initial ideas about how to move forward with the imple
-mentation of eHealth and information technology as a way of improving 
health care. Much of the plan is based on work by Ed Wagner who put 
2 
  ﬁThe eHealth Initiative and the Foundation for eHealth Initiative are independent, non
-pro˜t af˜liated organizations whose missions are the same: to drive improvement in the 
quality, safety, and ef˜ciency of healthcare through information and information technology. 
Both organizations are focused on engaging multiple and diverse stakeholdersŠincluding 
hospitals and other healthcare organizations, clinician groups, consumer and patient groups, 
employers and purchasers, health plans, healthcare information technology organizations, 
manufacturers, public health agencies, academic and research institutions, and public sector 
stakeholdersŠto de˜ne and then implement speci˜c actions that will address the quality, 
safety and ef˜ciency challenges of our healthcare system through the use of interoperable 
information technologyﬂ (eHealth Initiative and Foundation for eHealth Initiative, 2008a).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
forward the chronic care model
3 and talked about ways to drive health 
care improvement, laying out a number of
 strategies, such as engaging 
consumers, transforming care delivery, and improving population health. 
Wagner also examined how eHealth and health information technology 
can support those key health care improvement strategies. In addition to 
its ideas for moving forward with eHealth, the blueprint also discusses 
approaches to aligning incentives and addresses important issues in pri
-vacy and con˜dentiality. The shared vision of the eHealth Initiative blue
-print describes a high-performing health care system as one in which

all those engaged in the care of the patient are linked together in 
secure and interoperable environments; and 

the decentralized ˚ow of clinical health information directly enables 
the most comprehensive, patient-centered, safe, ef˜cient, effective, 
timely and equitable delivery of care where and when it is needed 
mostŠat the point of care (Marchibroda, 2008).
Components of eHealth include electronic health records (EHRs)
4 and personal health records
5 (PHRs). There are also a number of new 
 
consumer-facing applications, some of which are not referred to as PHRs 
but which serve a similar purpose as they provide patients with access 
to their own health information as they move among providers and 
health plans. Health information exchange is another major component 
of eHealth. This refers to the electronic exchange of data across organiza
-3 
 The Chronic Care Model was developed by Ed Wagner, M.D., M.P.H., director of the 
MacColl Institute for Healthcare Innovation, Group Health Cooperative of Puget Sound and 
colleagues of the Improving Chronic Illness program with support from the Robert Wood 
Johnson Foundation.
4 
 An EHR system includes ﬁ(1) longitudinal collection of electronic health information for 
and about persons, where health information is de˜ned as information pertaining to the 
health of an individual or health care provided to an individual; (2) immediate electronic 
access to person- and population-level information by authorized, and only authorized, us
-ers; (3) provision of knowledge and decision-support that enhance the quality, safety, and 
ef˜ciency of patient care; and (4) support of ef˜cient processes for health care delivery. Criti
-cal building blocks of an EHR system are the electronic health records (EHR) maintained 
by providers (e.g., hospitals, nursing homes, ambulatory settings) and by individuals (also 
called personal health records)ﬂ (IOM, 2003).
5 
 ﬁAn electronic Personal Health Record (ePHR) is a universally accessible, layperson 
comprehensible, lifelong tool for managing relevant health information, promoting health 
maintenance and assisting with chronic disease management via an interactive, common 
data set of electronic health information and e-health tools. The ePHR is owned, managed, 
and shared by the individual or his or her legal proxy(s) and must be secure to protect the 
privacy and con˜dentiality of the health information it contains. It is not a legal record 
unless so de˜ned and is subject to various legal limitationsﬂ (Healthcare Information and 
Management Systems Society, 2005).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 7tions and disparate information systems, including data from laboratories, 
pharmacies, plans, physicians, or hospitals. A major bene˜t of eHealth is 
the opportunity it offers doctors and other health care providers to con
-nect with the patient through these systems.
Neither patients nor the health care system can bene˜t, however, 
unless the new health information technology is actually adopted and 
used. Adoption rates for electronic health records in solo practitioner 
of˜ces are about 13 percent, while in large medical practices adop
-tion rates are somewhere between 19 percent to 57 percent. Overall the 
adoption rate for EHRs in physician of˜ces is between 17 percent and 
25 percent. For hospitals, the adoption rates for EHRs range from 16 per
-cent to 59 percent. CPOE system adoption rates for hospitals range from 
4 percent to 21 percent.
According to a Pew Internet and American Life research study, 
79 percent of Internet users, or 95 million American adults, have searched 
online for information on at least one major health topic (Fox, 2006). A 
more recent Pew survey indicated that adults living with a disability or 
chronic disease are less likely than others to go online, but once they are 
online, they are more likely to look for health information (Fox, 2007). 
Such consumer use of electronic systems for obtaining health information 
illustrates the potential value of consumer-facing Health IT applications.
According to an October 2005 research report supported by the 
 
Markle Foundation, 60 percent of Americans support the creation of 
a secure online ﬁpersonal health recordﬂ service that would allow con
-sumers to

check and re˜ll prescriptions;

get results over the Internet;

check for mistakes in the medical record; and

conduct secure and private e-mail communication with your
 doctor 
or doctors (Markle Foundation, 2005).
In a recent Commonwealth Fund survey of consumer views about 
key health care issues, 94 percent of respondents felt that having easy 
access to medical records was very or somewhat important and 93 per
-cent felt the doctors having access to their medical records was very or 
somewhat important (Shoen et al., 2006). In June 2006, when the eHealth 
Initiative Foundation conducted a number of focus groups and a phone 
survey of individuals in the Gulf Coast area on the topic of electronic 
health information exchange, it found that 70 percent of those individuals 
favored secure, electronic health information exchange that is ﬁprotected 
and exchanged under current medical privacy and con˜dentiality stan
-dard proceduresﬂ (Shea et al., 2007).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
In recent years there has been an increasing interest in consumer-
facing applications, with very large corporations such as Microsoft and 
Google developing a number of applications in this area. Most efforts 
are, however, provider-centric initiatives, increasingly led by hospitals 
and are designed to exchange data across organizations. There is also 
some activity with health plans. Of particular value in what is occurring 
across the ˜eld of health information technology is connecting consumer 
applications with those that exchange clinical data.
The eHealth Initiative Foundation conducts an annual survey of 
Information Exchange Initiatives. The fourth annual survey of health 
information exchange at the state, regional, and community levels, con
-ducted in 2007, found that of the 130 initiatives responding to the survey, 
20 were at the beginning stages of effort (stage 1 or 2Šsee Table 2-1 for 
TA
BLE 2-1
 Seven-Stage Framework for Assessing and Tracking the 
Development of Health Information Exchange Initiatives at the State 
and Local Levels
Stage 1
Recognition of the need for health information exchange among 
multiple stakeholders in your state, region or community. (Public 
declaration by a coalition or political leader)
Stage 2
Getting organized; defining shared vision, goals, and objectives; 
identifying funding sources, setting up legal and governance 
structures. (Multiple, inclusive meetings to address needs and 
frameworks)
Stage 3
Transferring vision, goals and objectives to tactics and business 
plan; defining your needs and requirements; securing funding. 
(Funded organizational efforts under sponsorship)
Stage 4
Well under way with implementationŠtechnical, financial, and 
legal. (Pilot project or implementation with multiyear budget 
identified and tagged for a specific need)
Stage 5
Fully operational health information organization; transmitting 
data that is being used by health care stakeholders.
Stage 6
Fully operational health information organization; transmitting 
data that is being used by health care stakeholders and have a 
sustainable business model.
Stage 7
Demonstration of expansion of organization to encompass a 
broader coalition of stakeholders than present in the initial 
operational model.
Reprinted with permission from the eHealth Initiative and Foundation for eHealth Initiative, 
2008c. 
Results of 
200
8 Sur
vey on Health 
Information 
Exchange: State of the Field. 
http://www.
ehealthinitiative.org/HIESurvey/2008StateOfTheField.mspx.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 9description of stages), 68 were in the process of implementation (stage 
3 or 4), 32 were operational (stage 5, 6, or 7), 5 were no longer moving 
forward, and 5 organizations did not respond to the stage of develop
-ment question. Thirty of the initiatives that responded to the 2006 survey 
reported advances in their stage of development (eHealth Initiative and 
Foundation for eHealth Initiative, 2008b). While some of these initiatives 
have not been successful, there are a number that have progressed well. 
At the same time, there are more efforts directed at consumer-facing 
applications, which is an entirely different model from the provider-
 
centric initiatives.
Congress has introduced bills over the last several years that were 
intended to address key barriers to health IT adoption. During 2007 more 
than 19 bills related to health IT were introduced both in the House and 
Senate, most notably the Wired for Health Care Quality Act of 2007 (S. 
1693), approved by the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, 
Labor, and Pensions in August 2007, and a companion bill introduced in 
the House in early October 2007, both of which include several provisions 
related to health IT (Marchibroda, 2008). 
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has also played 
a leadership role in moving the health IT agenda forward by emphasizing 
its four cornerstones of value-driven health care which are to

adopt interoperable health information technology (health IT 
standards);

measure and publish quality information (quality standards);

measure and publish price information (price standards); and 

promote quality and ef˜ciency of care (incentives) (HHS, 2006).
The HHS Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology has made a number of efforts aimed at health IT standards 
harmonization, standards certi˜cation, and trial implantation of health 
IT prototypes. More work remains to be accomplished, however, particu
-larly in the area of modifying payment strategies to reward those health 
IT initiatives that are accomplishing more rather than just doing more. 
A number of individual states have also gotten involved, with executive 
orders and legislative activities at the state level. 
Marchibroda concluded that, given the momentum of health IT, it is 
now a time of tremendous opportunity to develop eHealth systems that 
can address health literacy issues. At the same time, if such issues are 
not attended to, the creation of eHealth and health information applica
-tions may actually exacerbate existing problems, rather than providing a 
mechanism to help solve them.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
SK
ILLS
 E
SSENTIAL
 FOR
 eHEALTH
Cameron D. 
Norman, Ph.D.
 Assistant Professor, Department of Public Health Sciences, 
 Uni
versity of 
Toronto
Since the 1960s and early 1970s there has been a shift from provider-
centered care to consumer-centered care, with individuals being encour
-aged to search for answers themselves and to take greater responsibility 
for their own health. This has resulted in the growth of consumer-directed 
material, such as self-help books and Internet websites. 
Health information is known to be an essential component of health 
behavior change. People must have information about the threat, the 
opportunity, and the ability to make decisions about what actions to 
take. With the rise of the Internet and the World Wide Web, the public 
now has access to the greatest information tool ever available, with indi
-viduals able to obtain a great deal of medical information on health at a 
distance, without having to see a practitioner. So far, however, there are 
no established guidelines for how to use the Internet or how to produce 
content for it.
The Pew Internet and American Life Project (Fox, 2007) found that 
more than 80 percent of Internet users report seeking health information 
online; for Internet users with chronic conditions, the rate is 86 percent. 
And those percentages will most likely increase over the coming years. 
Unfortunately, few check the sources of information thoroughly and while 
there is widespread availability of health resources online, a search engine 
is usually the starting point. Thus, consumers need to have skills to effec
-tively seek out the desired information, evaluate it, and then apply the 
information they ˜nd toward solving their health problems. More than 
half (58 percent) of those who report searching for online health infor
-mation also report that the information they found affected their health 
decisions, and 39 percent say the information they found changed the 
way that they cope with a chronic condition or manage pain (Fox, 2006, 
2007). Given these data, it is clear that it would be valuable to provide 
individuals with skills essential for eHealth.
Robert Logan maintains that the Internet and networked tools for 
health represent a fundamentally new form of language that requires 
a new form of literacy (Logan, 2000). A quick search for information 
on the common cold can be used to illustrate the dif˜culties in eHealth 
literacy. 
A search of WebMD (www.webmd.com) for information on the com
-mon cold produces a page with a great deal of text and advertisements for 
a variety of products, not all of which are related to the health condition 
described on the page. At the bottom of the text-heavy page is a list of 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 11
potential treatments. To one with low literacy, such a page of information 
can be quite intimidating. 
Another site with health information was hosted by the Canadian 
Health Network (www.canadianhealthnetwork.ca), a federation of dif
-ferent health resources that does not produce all of the health materials 
itself.
6 If one searched the Canadian Health Network for information on 
the common cold, one was actually taken to another siteŠCapital Health, 
which is located in Edmonton, Canada. While information obtained in 
this redirected manner might be accurate and appropriate, an automatic 
switch of sites can be confusing to consumers who expect one site and 
get another. 
If one goes to www.health˜nder.gov, a site sponsored by the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, and types in ﬁcold,ﬂ one is 
presented with a page listing a variety of options to click for information. 
Clicking on an option then takes the user to a PDF (portable document 
format) ˜le that provides information about the cold. A PDF ˜le, however, 
requires the user to have Adobe Acrobat Reader which, if one does not 
have the software, must be downloaded. A person with minimal eHealth 
skills may be confused about what to do, and wonder why it is that a 
piece of software must be downloaded to the computer in order to read 
the page of information. Such actions can be frightening for those unfa
-miliar with health information or working with computers.
Finally, if one seeks information about the common cold from NHS 
Direct (www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk), the website of the National Health Service 
in the United Kingdom, one ˜nds the design of the site to be fairly pleas
-ing to the eye. The page on the common cold is uncluttered, although 
there is a fair amount of text and there are also some links for basic terms 
such as sneeze, lungs, and larynx that can be used to look up additional 
information. Nonetheless, despite its clear design, the site demands more 
than basic literacy to understand and therefore can be a challenge for 
those with low literacy skills and involves more than basic literacy.
As these examples illustrate, there are challenges to using the Inter
-net for obtaining health information. In response to such challenges, the 
concept of eHealth literacy has been developed. eHealth literacy is ﬁthe 
ability to seek, ˜nd, understand, and appraise health information from 
electronic sources and apply the knowledge gained to addressing or solv
-ing a health problemﬂ (Norman and Skinner, 2006b) Such a de˜nition is 
consistent with Logan™s contentions that use of the Internet is complex 
and its use plus the use of other networked tools constitutes a new lan
-6 
 The Canadian Health Network was operating at the time of this workshop, however it 
has since ceased operations. Therefore, the example provided during this presentation can 
no longer be accessed. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
guage form and requires a new set of skills to fully understand it (Logan, 
2000). The eHealth literacy de˜nition is framed in terms of action because 
if one is looking for information about a health problem, one is looking 
not just for information but for actions that one can take in order to solve 
a health problem. 
Two types of skills are needed for eHealth: general skills and speci˜c 
skills. General skills apply to a number of different contexts and settings 
and include traditional literacy (reading, writing, and numeracy), media 
literacy (media analysis skills), and information literacy (information seek
-ing and understanding). Speci˜c skills include such things as computer 
literacy (IT skills), health literacy (health knowledge comprehension), and 
science literacy (science process and outcome). 
Four out of 10 Americans and Canadians have low literacy, making it 
dif˜cult for them to function in everyday society (Rubenson et al., 2007; 
Statistics Canada, 2005). Thus in the case of eHealth interventions that are 
largely text-based, 4 out of every 10 people who might bene˜t from the 
intervention will have a great deal of dif˜culty reading the material. In 
the case of mathematical literacy (numeracy), one-quarter of U.S. 15-year-
olds scored at or below the lowest pro˜ciency level (Miller et al., 2007). To 
the extent that eHealth involves simple mathematical calculations such as 
addition or subtraction, or an understanding of numbers, those with low 
numeracy skills will likely ˜nd it dif˜cult to understand the information 
presented. Such individuals will also have dif˜culty reading maps or 
understanding simple charts.
Media literacy refers to the skills necessary to think critically and to 
act based on information from media-based messages. Media literacy 
places information in a social and political context and considers issues 
such as the marketplace, audience relations, and the role of the medium 
in the message. Those with low media literacy lack awareness of bias or 
perspective in media pronouncements, both in terms of what is presented 
and what is not presented. They also have dif˜culty understanding that 
the media has both explicit and implied messages and they have dif˜culty 
deriving meaning from media messages.
The third general skill involved in eHealth literacy, information lit
-eracy, involves a more general understanding of information. An infor
-mation literate person knows ﬁhow knowledge is organized, how to ˜nd 
information, and to use information in a way that others can learn from 
themﬂ (American Library Association Presidential Committee on Informa
-tion Literacy, 1989). Those with low information literacy are unable to see 
connections between information from multiple sources such as books, 
pamphlets, and websites. They are, therefore, unable to understand that 
one may have to triangulate pieces of information from various sources 
to build an entire picture of the subject about which they are seeking 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 13
information. Those with low information literacy are also unfamiliar with 
local libraries and other repositories of information, and they are unable 
to frame search questions in a manner that produces desired results.
As described above, the speci˜c skills involved in eHealth include 
computer literacy, science literacy, and health literacy. Computer literacy 
is a general awareness of and skill in using computer-based technology 
to solve problems (Logan, 2000). It relates both to computers and to the 
kind of technologies that surround the use of computers, such as the use 
of a keyboard, mouse, or printer. As Skinner and colleagues point out, 
computer literacy involves more than simply access to this type of tech
-nology; it is also about relative access and the comfort with which one 
accesses computers (Skinner et al., 2003a, 2003b). For example, Canada 
was the ˜rst country in the world to connect each of its public schools 
to the Internet. One might therefore say that all Canadian students have 
access to the Internet. But if access is only at certain times of the day, or 
in one particular room where the teacher is present and overseeing what 
students are doing, a young person wanting to ˜nd information on sexual 
health may ˜nd it dif˜cult to do so.
Science literacy, another skill necessary for eHealth, is an understand
-ing of the nature, aims, methods, application, limitations and politics of 
creating knowledge in a systematic manner (Laugksch, 2000). Research 
on scienti˜c literacy suggests that only 17 percent of Americans are con
-sidered able to understand basic science (Gross, 2006). This means that 
the remaining 83 percent of Americans lack an understanding of the 
cumulative, dynamic nature of scienti˜c knowledge. They are not aware 
that science can be understood and used by non-scientists, and they are 
unfamiliar with simple science terminology, the process of discovery, or 
how scienti˜c knowledge is translated into practice. Yet 87 percent of 
online users (128 million adults) use the Internet as a research tool, and 
70 percent have used the Internet to look up a scienti˜c term (Horrigan, 
2006). 
Finally, eHealth demands health literacy skills. The Pew Internet and 
American Life Project found that 64 percent of Americans had searched 
online for health information in 1 of 17 areas
7 identi˜ed by the Pew 
Internet and American Life Project (Fox, 2006). Seventy-three percent of 
7 
 The 17 areas are speci˜c disease or medical problem (64%); certain medical treatment 
or procedure (51%); diet, nutrition, vitamins, or nutritional supplements (49%); exercise or 
˜tness (44%); prescription or over-the-counter drugs (37%); a particular doctor or hospital 
(29%); health insurance (28%); alternative treatments or medicines (22%); depression, anxi
-ety, stress, or mental health issues (22%); environmental health hazards (22%); experimental 
treatments or medicines (18%); immunizations or vaccinations (16%); dental health infor
-mation (15%); Medicare or Medicaid (13%); sexual health information (11%); how to quit 
smoking (9%); and problems with drugs or alcohol (8%).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
individuals with a chronic condition have searched online for informa
-tion and those with chronic conditions were more likely than others to 
report that the results of an online search in˚uenced their health and care 
behavior related to their condition (Fox, 2007). Yet those with low health 
literacy
8 have dif˜culty following simple self-care directions or prescrip
-tion instructions. They fear taking medications without assistance and are 
unfamiliar with or lack understanding of basic health care terms. 
As can be seen from this discussion, a number of skills are necessary 
to successfully navigate the eHealth arena. Identifying these skills and 
understanding the extent to which individuals possess these skills should 
help in the design of better eHealth tools and systems. The eHealth liter
-acy scale (eHEALS) (Norman and Skinner, 2006a) was developed in order 
to provide a concise measure of a patient™s self-perceived skill and com
-fort in using information technology for health. It contains 10 questions, 
graded on a 5-point Likert scale with the questions designed to measure 
knowledge of existing eHealth resources, how to ˜nd resources, how 
to evaluate resources, how to use resources, and how to apply eHealth 
resources to health problems. eHEALS has been tested in both interven
-tion trials and population health surveys with multicultural samples. It 
has shown excellent internal consistency (scale alpha = .89-.97) and has 
good test-retest reliability. The scale is publicly available (http://www.
jmir.org/2006/4/e27), has been translated into multiple languages, and 
is currently in use in 10 countries.
eHealth literacy is growing in importance. Consumer-directed elec
-tronic tools are transforming the way that consumers receive
 informationŠ
for good and for bad. Blogs,
9 wikis,
10
 and a number of what are called Web 
2.0
11
 technologies allow people with little skill in programming to post 
information on line. This in turn means that the amount of information, 
including health information, found on the Internet is coming at a faster 
rate and from more diverse sources than ever. Unfortunately, there is no 
overall mechanism for monitoring and assessing the reliability of that 
8 
 It is estimated that 90 million Americans have low health literacy, that is, trouble under
-standing and acting on health information (IOM, 2004).
9 
 ﬁA blog is a website where entries are made in journal style and displayed in a reverse 
chronological order. Blogs often provide commentary or news on a particular subject, such 
as food, politics, or local news; some function as more personal online diariesﬂ (Sussex 
Learning Network, 2006).
10
  A wiki ﬁis a website that allows multiple users to create, modify
 and organize web page 
content
 in a collaborative mannerﬂ (Governors State University, 2008).
11
  Web 2.0 is ﬁa term often applied to a perceived ongoing transition of the World Wide 
Web from a collection of websites to a full-˚edged computing platform serving web applica
-tions to end users. It refers to a supposed second-generation of Internet-based servicesŠsuch 
as social networking sites, wikis, communication tools, and folksonomiesŠthat emphasize 
online collaboration and sharing among usersﬂ (2020 Systems).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 15
information, which makes it particularly important to provide the public 
with eHealth literacy skills.
eHealth literacy is not just a static, objective assessment of whether or 
not an individual is literate. It is something that will change as technology 
changes. It is a process of learning, not just an outcome, so eHealth lit
-eracy levels will constantly be in ˚ux as technology changes. As Marshall 
McLuhan once said, the medium really is the message, and it is true here. 
Literacy skills are related to the medium in which they are applied. These 
skills are teachable, but they require constant remediation and updating.
STRATE
GIES
 FOR
 R
AISIN
G H
EALTH
 L
ITERAC
Y 
IN
 A
RIZONA
 MEDICAID
 M
EM
BERS
: N
EW
 A
PPROACHES
 FOR
 S
TATE
 MEDICAID
 ﬁH
EALTH
 KNOWLED
GE BUILDERS
ﬂAnthony Rodgers
 Director, Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System
ﬁHealth literacy is one of the most widespread obstacles to achieving 
better health outcomes in the United Statesﬂ (AgrAbility Project, 2005) 
but eHealth technology can help address this issue. Medicaid enrolls 
what are probably the most vulnerable, least educated individuals in the 
country, and many of these individuals have mental health diseases and 
other chronic illnesses that hinder them from effectively participating in 
the health care delivery system. Additionally, Medicaid usually sees these 
individuals at a point of medical crisis. Arizona™s Medicaid program, the 
Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System (AHCCCS), has a fourfold 
vision

to encourage informed, active patients interacting with informed 
clinical teams; 

to have a medical home
12
 for each individual that is capable of 
understanding each patient;

to have a single view of each patient through electronic health 
records; and 

to have clinical decision support tools.
12
  A medical home ﬁis not just a building, house or hospital, but a team approach to 
providing health care. A Medical Home originates in a primary health care setting that is 
family-centered and compassionate. A partnership develops between the family and the 
primary health care practitioner. Together they access all medical and non-medical services 
needed by the child and family to achieve maximum potential. The Medical Home maintains 
a centralized, comprehensive record of all health related services to promote continuity of 
careﬂ (Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
To achieve this vision requires a transformation of the Arizona Med
-icaid health care system. Necessary components of this transformation 
will include the widespread adoption of interoperable health information 
technology (HIT), electronic health information exchange, and electronic 
health records that are transferable and transportable either through the 
patient or through electronic means. Furthermore, there must be greater 
use of Web-based clinical and patient decision-support tools that use a 
common health data set and evidence-based references. Such a system 
would enable Medicaid to use the data in its ˜les to provide clinical 
decision tools that allow physicians to see the individual patient episode 
of care or care plan and also make it possible for AHCCCS to aggregate 
this information for a broader perspective of the health of the Medicaid 
population. Finally, the system needs internet and communication tools 
that support the delivery of personalized health information and health 
literacy competency for Medicaid bene˜ciaries. 
Ratzan and Parker de˜ned health literacy as ﬁthe degree to which 
individuals have the capacity to obtain, process, and understand basic 
health information and services needed to make appropriate health deci
-sionsﬂ (Ratzan and Parker, 2000). Improving health literacy levels will 
help create informed and activated AHCCCS members. To design inter
-ventions aimed speci˜cally at improving health literacy, AHCCCS identi
-˜ed several skill sets inherent in the broad de˜nition of health literacy. 
One such set of skills is functional health literacy skills, the basic read
-ing and writing skills necessary to understand and follow simple health 
information. Another skill set is interactive health literacy skills which are 
more advanced than basic skills and include the ability to interact with a 
system that is providing personalized health information, not just general 
health information. This set also includes the cognitive and interpersonal 
skills needed and the con˜dence necessary for interacting or partnering 
with a clinical professional. 
Critical thinking skills are another component of health literacy. These 
skills involve the ability to analyze and make value-based choices when 
presented with alternative possibilitiesŠthe choice between medications 
with different side effects, for example, or the choice of surgery versus 
longer-term medical intervention. Finally, there are focused health literacy 
skills that are more specialized and that involve the knowledge and abil
-ity to engage in consumer-directed care by performing de˜ned patient 
self-care management support tasks and wellness activities. These skills 
will be increasingly important as people move more into home-based and 
community-based care. 
AHCCCS has a Medicaid Transformation Grant to develop new 
eHealth tools to improve health literacy. During Phase I of the grant, the 
objective will be to recon˜gure available technology. This will be accom
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 17
plished by building electronic health records, devising patient-decision 
support tools, providing Internet messaging capabilities for both clini
-cians and bene˜ciaries, developing Web multi-media health education 
efforts, and devising e-learning programs in multiple languages that will, 
over time, help document improvements in health literacy.
Phase II of the grant involves Web-based interactive games and per
-sonalized educational programming (seen as a particularly valuable way 
to reach adolescents and children), Internet-connected biometric monitor
-ing devices (intended to keep more people at home and in community-
based services), and Web 2.0 (Web-based health and human service sup
-port networking) that will be used to create self-support groups among 
different populations. 
Figure 2-1 below illustrates the infrastructure transformation toward 
which AHCCCS is working. The enabling technologies are the health 
information exchange infrastructure, electronic health record infrastruc
-ture, the Web-based e-learning programming infrastructure, and the 
knowledge building and transfer infrastructure. With properly con˜gured 
enabling technologies creating the processes through which the various 
Medicaid programs (e.g., acute care, long-term care, disease-management 
health education, and population-based education) operate, the end result 
is a transformed health system. Once the connection exists, new products 
and tools can be added and rapidly deployed.
The major issue is getting the infrastructure in place to transform the 
Figure 2-1, bitmappedFI
GU
RE 2-1
 eHealth infrastructure of Medicaid system transformation.
SOURCE: Rodgers, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
system. What AHCCCS is attempting is to integrate the system virtuallyŠ
to integrate it with information and to integrate more rapid deployment of 
knowledgeŠwhich should result in improved quality and reduced costs. 
In such a system one would have the same information reference points 
no matter where one was locatedŠin a community clinic, a physician™s 
of˜ce, or elsewhere.
Phase I will include a focus on interactive multimedia product devel
-opment that goes beyond static health content. Such products will include 
e-learning modules, electronic health assessments, Web-based health 
coaching, Web-logs, streaming video,
13
 Web-based health awareness cam
-paigns, eHealth-connected provider of˜ces for access to downloadable 
personalized health videos, and podcasts. 
Multimedia education will focus ˜rst on raising the health literacy of 
those with chronic diseases and, in particular, will be aimed at helping 
individuals understand their chronic illnesses. Over time the materials 
will address other important conditions and situations of relevance for the 
AHCCCS population, for example, how to keep one™s health care cover
-age in place and how to use one™s health plan. 
eHealth education will be personalized. The information that a person 
retains from an educational program is dependent upon a number of fac
-tors including to whom that individual relates well and who is providing 
the education. In many education efforts the same product is delivered in 
the same way by the same person. AHCCCS™s goal is to deliver education 
in a much more personal and culturally sensitive manner, tailoring the 
important content of that education to the various needs of the population 
and using messengers who are similar to and can relate to members of 
various populations. Additionally, these multimedia education programs 
will be developed in English, Spanish, and in some cases Native American 
languages.
AHCCCS strategies for building eHealth literacy products include 
knowledge-building programming capability and rapid production of e-
learning programs with multiple content sources. The rapid production 
goal for AHCCCS staff is to produce a new program every day. If it takes 
2 months to develop and deliver each audio or video program, that is too 
long. In a rapid production cycle, content is duplicated but it is delivered 
by a different person and is aimed at a different population. One can do a 
great deal with today™s camcorders and digital equipment. One does not 
need a $100,000 studio; one needs just a couple of creative people with a 
camera. To establish that the programs actually work, innovation centers, 
13
  A streaming video is a ﬁone-way video transmission over a data network. It is widely 
used on the Web as well as company networks to play video clips and video broadcastsﬂ 
(Techweb, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 19
established by AHCCCS at federally quali˜ed health centers with volun
-teer physicians, will be test sites for product prototypes. 
AHCCCS has recently introduced a website. One of the things of 
interest is who will access the website. Table 2-2 below provides an over
-view of utilization trends for 1 month this year.
The AHCCCS basic website is called My Arizona Health and Well
-ness (www.myazhealthandwellness.com). The mission of the website is 
ﬁto build health and wellness literacy in AHCCCS members so that they 
make decisions that improve their health care quality and reduce prevent
-able health care care costs through the utilization of interactive, personal
-ized health education and health literacy competencyﬂ (Rodgers, 2008). 
This website is the basic mechanism that will be used to deliver many of 
the eHealth tools AHCCCS will develop. The website also supports the 
governor™s executive order (Napolitano, 2008) to reduce the escalation of 
health care costs for Arizona by the following

reducing costs through patient-centered care that integrates 
wellness, prevention, self-care education and chronic disease 
management;
TA
BLE 2-2
 Snapshot of Web Utilization Trends/Data January 2008 
to February 2008
Website
Healthwise Knowledgebase Content Usage
Site Usage:
 - 1,152 visits
 - 
 
897 (72%) absolute
  unique visits
Top Traffic Sources:
 - 
 
79% referring site 
 (AHCCCS website)
 - 18% direct traffic
Top Content visits:
 - Health Resources
 - Get Covered, Stay Covered
 - Wellness in Arizona
E-mail signups: 40 
(mostly internal/staff)
Top 10 Search Terms:
 Top 10 Topic Views:
 Pneumonia
  Women™s Health
 Asthma
  Interactive Tools
 Dental
  Health Eating
 BOOK-n873 
  
Men™s Health
  
(surgery-carpal 
  
Pregnancy
  
tunnel syndrome) 
  
Children™s Health
 Cancer
  Diabetes
 Diabetes
  Depression
 COPD
  Pneumonia
 BOOK-d904 
  
Type 2 Diabetes
 (surgery-varicose 
  
veins) 
 Immunizations 
   Dairy
Healthwise Content Usage: 651 visits
Hits: 19,722
Visit duration by minutes: Majority (0-1 minute)
SOURCE: Rodgers, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION

implementing new incentives and policy changes for providers to 
adopt e-health technologies and evidence-based standards; and

improving accountability by empowering consumers with quality, 
cost and health information.
It is important that each bene˜ciary have an e-mail address and access 
to the internet so that each person can obtain needed information and also 
so that eHealth tools can be used effectively. One of AHCCCS™s require
-ments will be that each bene˜ciary have an e-mail address and, eventu
-ally, that each individual document how he or she will access the Internet. 
If an individual does not have a way to access the internet, then AHCCCS 
will take responsibility for devising a way to provide access. Such options 
could include using cell phones, text messaging, or an iPod or MP3 player 
on which information can be downloaded. 
One new tool that can be used for patient Internet access in a pro
-vider™s of˜ce is the ﬁTablet,ﬂ a handheld personal computer with an 
8.4 inch screen that runs Microsoft Windows XP. AHCCCS envisions a 
time when each patient who enters a physician™s of˜ce will be handed a 
device that provides access to the Internet. The patient will then be asked 
to update his or her health history (AHCCCS is developing a Web-based 
health history), and each patient will also access his or her personal health 
account which will contain a personalized audio/video ˜le of e-learning 
programs.
In this future vision, once a patient accesses his or her personal health 
account, the physician will be able to view the information and make sure 
that the patient understood the individual e-learning programs, since 
patient responses will be automatically uploaded to the electronic health 
record (EHR). If misunderstandings occur, the physician will then be able 
to correct the information and discuss the problems further.
This is the vision of ﬁmedical homeﬂ that each AHCCCS bene˜ciary 
will eventually have. To become a medical home, primary and specialty 
sites will be required to have EHRs, Internet connectivity, an AHCCCS 
Health Education Kiosk or Wi-Fi
14
-enabled touch-screen tablet, and a 
high-de˜nition television with speakers in the examination room so that 
patients can access the e-learning tools. These e-learning programs will not 
be something that the patient obtains from the Web, but rather will be pro
-grams developed speci˜cally for the chronic conditions or other problems 
14
  ﬁWi-Fi (short for ‚wireless ˜delity™) is a term for certain types of wireless local area 
network (WLAN) that use speci˜cations in the 802.11 family. The term Wi-Fi was created 
by an organization called the Wi-Fi Alliance, which oversees tests that certify product inter
-operability. A product that passes the alliance tests is given the label ‚Wi-Fi certi˜ed™ (a 
registered trademark)ﬂ (SearchMobileComputing.com, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 21
the patient has. Physicians will be familiar with the programs and so will 
be able to engage in a dialogue with each patient about his or her
 speci˜c 
conditions, using the e-learning programs as a basis for discussion. 
In one AHCCCS video on diabetes, the main character is a white adult 
male talking about diabetes while standing next to his vehicle in a parking 
lot. The video presentation was made by Knowledge
 Builders, the name 
that members of the AHCCCS staff gave themselves. The next charac
-ter featured in a video with the same content might be an adult female 
Hispanic who is Spanish-speaking or perhaps an adult male
 Spanish-
 
speaking individual or a Native AmericanŒspeaking individual. In the 
AHCCCS approach, Rodgers stated, the same content is used for every
-one, but the content is delivered by different characters depending on the 
audience. The purpose is to see if this engages the various bene˜ciary 
populations. Rapid production of these materials allows change in the 
material. AHCCCS evaluates its e-learning programs to determine exactly 
who is learning what and where most of the problems are. Material is then 
edited to address identi˜ed problems. 
Rodgers concluded by predicting that AHCCCS eHealth, properly 
con˜gured, will help address one of the major obstacles to achieving 
 
better outcomes, that is, eHealth literacy.
DISC
USSION
George 
Isham, M.D., M.S.
 HealthPartners
Moderator
One questioner asked Rodgers to provide more detail about the infra
-structure that AHCCCS is building. Rodgers replied that the ˜rst effort is 
being directed at EHRs so that providers will be able to exchange health 
information. This is not an EHR in the fullest sense, he said, but it will 
include the problem list, information regarding medications, lab results, 
x-ray views, and clinical notes. Further down the road the idea is to be able 
to embed ˜les and other information into the EHR. The e-learning pro
-gramming for patient-focused education will be available through the Web, 
as will be provider-focused education, the clinical support tools, and the 
patient decision-support tools. These will be con˜gured with the EHR. 
Another audience member asked whether AHCCCS is educating con
-sumers about the system as it is being developed. Are they learning what 
eHealth means, what an electronic medical system can do, and how to use 
the speci˜c hardware (e.g., the tablet discussed earlier)? Rodgers replied 
that the system is not currently in the market and available. What does 
exist is a prototype that is being tested. Once this is validated and addi
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
tional models are developed, AHCCCS plans to hold focus sessions with 
various groups to determine if different populations engage the system 
differently and if individuals can relate to the system.
The assumption is that the system will work, but that needs to be vali
-dated. Once validated, the idea is to use the innovation centers discussed 
earlier as the ˜rst beta sites. There are several options that one might use 
in these sites, including a workstation-type kiosk or provision of the tab
-lets. One could also create an education room, but since AHCCCS plans 
to ultimately offer these services in provider of˜ces where space tends 
to be limited, creating a separate education room may not be the best 
option to pursue. The hope is that access will eventually be available in 
the homes. The most logical access point, however, is the physician of˜ces 
where patients can use the system at the time of their appointment. This 
is probably also the time at which the patients will be most motivated to 
seek information, and it will be a good way to use waiting time.
Norman was asked to comment on what is involved in teaching indi
-viduals to be computer literate. Norman responded that there is a com
-plex and a simple way to teach computer literacy. The simple approach 
is usually constructed around a particular piece of technology, such as 
e-mail. In this case, one works with the individual to ˜nd the simplest 
route to e-mail and puts an icon on the desktop computer so that it is a 
simple matter to call up the e-mail. The idea is to have a familiar entry 
screen so that use is simple. 
eHealth is a place, although most do not think of it that way, Norman 
continued. It is a place to go in the system. A system needs benchmarks 
or landmarks that are easily associated with where the individual using 
the system needs to go. One should have a set of screens with a consistent 
style throughout the application, and people must be trained to under
-stand the screens in order to use the system.
The more complex problem arises when one is attempting to teach 
people to search for information, that is when the people will need to 
use multiple platforms. Just as is the case with learning to speak another 
language, it is not something one can pick up in a weekend course; it is 
a much more complex task. A constant dialogue is needed, with markers 
for learning the language of computers and information searching. The 
key is to ˜nd where individuals are in terms of their knowledge and 
comfort levels. That is what eHEALS is designed to do.
Rodgers added that individuals must also have a reason to want to 
use the technology. If they are not interested, if they do not perceive the 
value of using the system, they will not use it. By grabbing individuals™ 
attention with what one might think of as medical entertainment or with 
something that is fun and real to them, it becomes much easier to get them 
to want to use the technology.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 23
Another questioner asked Rodgers, what happens when one is dealing 
with multiple chronic conditions since people seem to be able to under
-stand only three concepts at any one time? Individuals need to be able to 
do many things, not just three, both in terms of navigating technology and 
in terms of self-management. Clinical professionals may identify speci˜c 
things that they think are most important for such individuals to know. 
Conversely, those from the technological or navigational side might iden
-tify another set of skills. How can one deliver the right information at the 
right time to the right person so that that person is doing the right thing?
Rodgers responded that AHCCCS is ready to learn from its bene˜
-ciaries what works best for them and what does not work. The system 
must be modular, and it must be engaging, interesting, and real-world rel
-evant to those using it. When one is working with Native Americans, for 
example, the programs and the person delivering them must understand 
the conditions (e.g., nutrition, daily life, etc.) in which that population 
operates and what strategies they might be willing to employ. 
The key to being able to make such an approach work is technology, 
as technology is very forgiving and ˚exible, and it allows one to make 
relatively inexpensive changes as conditions change. With technology 
there is a great deal of ˚exibility, much more so than with the static pam
-phlet approach.
One questioner stated that quite a bit of research has been conducted 
that is relevant to AHCCCS™s idea of delivering health information to 
people in a kiosk environmentŠfor example, on such things as where 
the kiosks are located and whether people enjoy using them. A number 
of studies have shown that, for reasons that may or may not apply to 
Arizona™s plan, using kiosks generally does not work well. 
Despite that, the questioner continued, what Rodgers describes 
appears to be a promising approach, and she said that she is particularly 
interested in the idea of focus groups and what individuals actually learn 
from the e-learning programs. The National Library of Medicine has illus
-trative tutorials on its Medline Plus in both Spanish and English. These 
are very popular with those with low health literacy and with those who 
work with such populations. It would be interesting to see whether these 
could be made even more effective if they were delivered, as AHCCCS 
intends to do, by individuals who look or appear to be like those for 
whom the tutorials are designed, although in the case of some of the inter
-active materials illustrations rather than live individuals are used. 
Rodgers responded that with the technology AHCCCS uses, change 
can be made relatively inexpensively. One does not need to reinvent 
things, just to present the material differently. The innovation centers, 
federally quali˜ed health centers that have multiple and different types 
of populations, will serve as the laboratory for testing to determine how 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
various populations respond to the various programs. It will be possible 
to determine whether individuals learn better from people like them
-selves. It will even be possible to measure variables over time because 
each time the system is accessed there is a time stamp and information 
on what modules are being accessed. 
One participant suggested that the public library is a good place for 
people to learn to use technology as well as to learn basic information 
about health. In the United States, public libraries are accessible to almost 
everyone. Furthermore, Arizona has a fantastic Arizona Health Informa
-tion Network.
Another participant suggested that non-English-speaking popula
-tions may not generally begin their searches on home computers. She 
asked Rodgers whether anyone has looked at the health information 
searching behavior of this population, including how they use the public 
library. Are there community intermediaries that can help?
Rodgers responded that AHCCCS has looked at this issue and that 
there are a number of community organizations that are willing to coop
-erate with them, such as libraries and schools that are willing to give 
computer access to parents. To date, however, AHCCCS has not had any 
product to provide access to. Eventually access will be provided not only 
in the physicians™ of˜ces, the clinics, and the hospitals, but also in a num
-ber of other places as well. 
The key is for individuals to know when and for what they should 
access the internet. AHCCCS wants to have its bene˜ciaries ˜ll out a 
health assessment as soon as they become eligible for services. Ultimately, 
the idea is to put the application online so that as they apply, they also ˜ll 
out a health assessment form which will immediately provide informa
-tion to the health plan that has never before been available. 
One participant said that she sees health literacy as patient-centric. 
Most eHealth initiatives, however, appear to be provider-centric and 
motivated by costs. The main reason for increasing the ef˜ciency of those 
systems appears to be recouping costs. At the Medicaid level, a very dif
-ferent system is driving eHealth. Here the issue is population health and 
how it can be improved, which is a more patient-centric approach. How 
can those motivated by costs be convinced to care about a patient-centric 
approach to eHealth?
Marchibroda responded that Rodgers™ description of what is happen
-ing in Arizona makes her wish this was the case across the country. The 
reality is, however, that most current initiatives do not connect with the 
consumer. When one examines community-based initiatives, for example, 
only 4 percent are connecting with consumers. There are many barriers 
to connecting with consumers, including lack of a business case and con
-cerns about liability, privacy, and con˜dentiality. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 25
Out in the ˜eld, talking with leaders at the state, local, and national 
level about eHealth and health technology, people ˜nd that there is little 
awareness of the problems associated with low health literacy. The ˜rst 
step, then, must be an educational effort to raise awareness. Once aware
-ness has been raised, efforts must focus on ˜guring out how to tackle the 
remaining issues. 
Looking at the drivers of health IT, one might be able to make a busi
-ness case for health literacy. In 2008, for example, analysts expect that $1.8 
billion will be spent on chronic care management, most of which will be 
paid for by health plans or employers. Connecting consumers who have 
chronic conditions to e-learning systems built to address low health lit
-eracy issuesŠsystems such as the one described by RodgersŠcould offer 
a compelling business case for health literacy.
Another participant asked Rodgers how AHCCCS made the business 
case for developing its eHealth system and how it addressed issues of lia
-bility, privacy, and con˜dentiality. Rodgers responded that AHCCCS ana
-lyzed the potential return on investment and found that it is about $144 
million a year. This is achieved on the provider side primarily through 
reduction of lab duplication, reduction in emergency room visits by pro
-viding patients with alternative sources of care, and reduction in x-rays 
by deploying images to where patients go for care. 
On the consumer side the key element is compliance. There is signi˜
-cant variation in how well patients comply with physicians™ instructions. 
It is dif˜cult to see beyond the basic compliance issue because more data 
are neededŠfor example, data on whether patients are taking their medi
-cations. It is expected that the system will allow providers to track various 
kinds of compliance (e.g., whether patients pick up their medications or 
keep their health care appointments). Once data are available, personal
-ized interventions can be developedŠit will not work to implement the 
same intervention for everyone because the reasons for noncompliance 
are not uniform. 
A participant asked if the speakers could elaborate on what Web 2.0 is. 
Norman responded that it re˚ects a shift in technology to more
 consumer-
driven content. When the World Wide Web was ˜rst introduced, for exam
-ple, in order to create a Web page, one had to know some programming 
language and HTML (HyperText Markup Language). With Web 2.0 tech
-nologies anyone, even those with no technical skill, can post on the Web 
with, for example a wiki (essentially an editable Web page) or a social net
-working Web page like Facebook. One does not need to understand any 
of the technology. Rodgers said that the great potential for health care is 
that patients with special health care needs can communicate with
 others 
who have the same needs, so that they can learn from each other. This is 
an entirely new way of providing coaching and obtaining support.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
One participant pointed out that there is a movement called Health 
2.0 which is focused on health. One Health 2.0 site, called Patients Like 
Me, allows patients to identify themselves, either anonymously or not, 
and then interact with others, describe their conditions, describe their 
experience with drugs, and so on. Patients Like Me also contains a variety 
of sites dedicated to particular health issues. For example, there is an ALS 
(amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) site within Patients Like Me. 
One questioner referred to the study of CITL mentioned by 
 
Marchibroda which suggested that if standardized health care infor
-mation were exchanged among health care IT systems, there would be 
a national savings of $86.8 billion. Is this a reasonable ˜gure and how 
would that happen? Marchibroda responded that those conducting the 
study examined data ˚ow across different organizations. The estimated 
savings come from a variety of things, such as reductions in duplicate 
lab tests and reductions in transactional costs related to messaging. 
In order to achieve the savings, one must provide multiple services 
to multiple parties in the system, which is not how things happen in 
the real health care system, in order to realize a return on the capital 
investment.
One participant stated that when she thinks of populations with low 
health literacy she thinks of recent immigrants, the elderly, and those with 
limited English pro˜ciency. Would the tools that are being developed for 
eHealth actually disenfranchise these groups even more? How can these 
populations learn to use Health 2.0 or other eHealth tools? Won™t these 
tools be of bene˜t only for other populations, those who do not have the 
health literacy problems faced by these disadvantaged populations?
Rodgers responded that, for AHCCCS efforts, the strategy is to keep 
eHealth tools really simple (e.g., point and click on pictures, not words) 
and to provide an easy set of audio/video instructions for those experi
-encing dif˜culty. To ensure that these tools are effective, one must start at 
the point of those being served and provide help, whether that is in the 
library or the physicians™ of˜ces. Even as more and more of the popula
-tion becomes comfortable with using eHealth tools, there will still be a 
group for which using the tools will be a challenge. For these individuals, 
new strategies will need to be developed. The idea is to try something, 
evaluate what has been tried, learn from that evaluation about what 
works and what doesn™t, and have a system that is ˚exible enough so that 
necessary changes can be made.
One participant observed that the role of individuals is going to be 
important in the realization of cost savings. Individuals will have to be 
literate enough to interact with the technology in order to harvest savings. 
How much of the projected $144 million for Arizona or the $86.6 billion 
estimate savings will depend upon computer literacy?
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVE
RVIE
W 
OF 
ISSU
ES 27
Norman responded that the eHealth system is dependent upon indi
-viduals with some type of literacy. The system must be structured in such 
a way that it meets the needs of those using it, that is, it must be user 
friendly for those with low health literacy or cultural needs. It cannot just 
repackage the same old information in a digital format. The design of the 
system must consider who is using it, how those using the system inter
-act with technology, what their needs are generally (such as literacy and 
cultural needs), as well as what their needs are at a given time.
Rodgers said that one of the tools that will be important in the future 
is an iPod or iPod-like device that enables the user to download informa
-tion. With such a tool individuals will not have to use a computer. Rather, 
they will need to understand how to record and then play back infor
-mation. While such a mechanism is less interactive, it will still provide 
important health information to users.
One participant said that the focus in developing eHealth systems 
should not be just on the package of technological or system tools. Rather, 
it will be critical to recognize the importance of the skills that individu
-als bring to the table and to understand what it is one is asking people 
to do. 
With the market driving development, competition is the name of 
the game: How can one do this a little cheaper, a little better? Medicaid 
in Arizona is doing it one wayŠand it seems to be a good way. Other 
health care organizations are developing different approaches. People 
using eHealth systems are confronted with 25 different ways of doing 
one thing. How can they possibly navigate through these options? What 
is needed is a system that people can navigate, one in which a set of skills 
can be taught and used throughout health care. While cost may be the 
driver, the real bottom-line quest is, Do these systems actually improve 
the health of the population? 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Outcomes and Challenges of 
 eHealth Approaches:
 Panel 1
INTERNET
 A
PPROACHES
 FOR
 eHEALTH
 IN
 L
OW
-L
ITERAC
Y AND
 L
IMITED
-E
NGLISH
-P
ROFICIENC
Y P
OP
ULATIONS
Rita Kukafka, Dr.P.H., M.A.
 Columbia Uni
versity, Mailman School of Public Health
The Harlem Health Promotion Center (HHPC) is one of the 33 Pre
-vention Research Centers
1 funded by the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention to conduct applied research into disease prevention. These 
research centers serve as a bridge between science and practice, and 
between academia and vulnerable communities, working with commu
-nities to identify areas of concern and to develop practical strategies to 
address these concerns.
Since 2004 the HHPC has been using the methods of participatory 
action research
2 to develop the Digital Partners in Health Project, a health 
portal designed to provide culturally-relevant health information and 
decision support to consumers with low literacy. Building the project 
required information about how people of color use technology and seek 
health information. Unfortunately, there is very little community-level 
1 
 Prevention Research Centers are ﬁa network of academic researchers, public health 
agencies, and community members that conducts applied research in disease prevention 
and controlﬂ (CDC, 2008).
2 
 ﬁParticipatory action research (PAR) is a method of research where creating a positive 
social change is the predominant driving forceﬂ (Seymour-Rolls and Hughes, 2000).
29
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
data about such use, although some national and regional data do exist. 
Furthermore, little is known about the extent to which people of color have 
access to, or interest in, using the Internet for health-related activities. 
For these reasons researchers at the HHPC spent a signi˜cant amount 
of time collecting data using a random-digit-dial survey of 646 Harlem 
residents 18 years of age and older. The survey collected data on the use of 
and access to different types of technology as well as data on demograph
-ics, general health, and health-information-seeking behaviors. About 77 
percent of responders said they had used a computer and 87 percent 
reported having friends or family who use the Internet. This is useful 
information for understanding diffusion of and normative support for 
technology use.
The survey also found that 68 percent of respondents had one or more 
computers at home and 57 percent used the Internet at home. For those 
who did not have a computer at home, 76 percent said they knew where 
a computer was publicly available. Sixty percent of respondents said that 
the most important problem in accessing the computer is overcrowding. 
Other problems in access were cost (2 percent), equipment problems 
(4 percent), location or transportation (8 percent), and hours of operation 
(13 percent). It is certainly true in Harlem that libraries have long lines 
waiting for access to the Internet. These data show that there is an interest 
in using technology. 
An examination of the demographics of those surveyed reveals that 
younger people are more likely to use the Internet, that English-speakers 
are more likely to use the Internet than those whose ˜rst language is other 
than English, and that African-Americans are more likely to be Internet 
users than Hispanics and Latinos. The data also show that Internet users 
are more likely to have higher educational attainment, are more likely to 
be employed, and have higher incomes than those who do not use the 
Internet. Internet users also had a higher perceived self-health rating.
As the data in Table 3-1 show, Internet users are more able to ˜nd 
health information and have less dif˜culty understanding it than non-
users. On the other hand, there is no signi˜cant difference between Inter
-net users and non-users when asked if they bring up something they have 
seen or read with the doctor. 
Survey participants were also asked where they went the last time 
they needed information on a health issue. Doctors were the main source 
of information for both Internet users (44 percent) and non-users (78 per
-cent), although non-users were much more likely to go to their doctors for 
information. The major difference between the groups was that 39 percent 
of Internet users said that they went to the internet for health information, 
which implies that the Internet users go to the internet for health informa
-tion almost as often as they go to their doctors.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
31
TA
BLE 3-1
 Health Information Seeking by Current Internet Use
Internet Users
Non-Users
P Value
ﬁI have difficulty understanding a lot 
of the health information I read.ﬂ
70 (21.2)
128 (42.0)
<0.0001
ﬁWhen I read or hear something 
concerning my health care, I bring it 
up with my doctor.ﬂ
274 (83.3)
272 (87.7)
0.1101
ﬁIt is hard to find good answers to my 
health questions and concerns.ﬂ
90 (27.5)
142 (47.3)
<0.0001
ﬁVeryﬂ or ﬁSomewhatﬂ confident 
in ability to get health advice OR 
confidence in ability to get health 
advice or information if needed
Scale: (1) Very confident, (2) 
Somewhat confident,
(3) Slightly confident, (4) Not 
confident at all.
290 (88.2)
Mean (SD)
1.53 (0.77)
247 (80.7)
Mean (SD)
1.75 (0.92)
0.0096
0.0014
SOURCE: Kukafka, 2008.
Participants were also asked how much they trust health-related 
information obtained from different sources. Figure 3-1 displays their 
responses. As can be seen, health care professionals are rated as an 
extraordinarily credible source of information. A high percentage 
(71 percent) of Internet users also trust health-related information found 
on the Internet. 
The data also show that 63 percent of those who go to the Internet 
search for health information about speci˜c diseases. This seems to be the 
major motivator for people to exert the effort needed to access information 
on the Internet. Sixty-one percent of people who go to the Internet look 
for information on diet, nutrition, and ˜tness. Other types of information 
sought on the Internet by the Harlem respondents included medicines 
(44 percent); insurance, doctors, or hospitals (38 percent); mental health 
(22 percent); sexual health (26 percent); substance abuse (21 percent); and 
smoking cessation (14 percent). 
In terms of barriers to Internet use, the study found that the responses 
for non-users about why they did not use the Internet were, in order of 
frequency: worry about pornography and fraud, followed by not wanting 
or needing the Internet; too expensive; no time; and too complicated and 
hard to understand. Non-users were also asked to indicate whether they 
agreed with a number of statements. The Internet:
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION

Would help them ˜nd out things easilyŠ82 percent agree, 10 per
-cent disagree

Helps people keep in touchŠ79 percent agree, 11 percent 
disagree

Is mostly entertainmentŠ55 percent agree, 34 percent disagree

I™m missing out by not using itŠ54 percent agree, 39 percent 
disagree

Is a dangerous thingŠ51 percent agree, 41 percent disagree

Is too expensiveŠ50 percent agree, 31 percent disagree

Is confusing, hard to useŠ38 percent agree, 29 percent disagree
The HHPC also used focus groups to gather information. The data 
that follow are from 6 of the 17 focus groups, 3 with Hispanic-speaking 
populations and three with English-speaking populations. Each group 
had 6 to 8 participants, and each person was asked to characterize himself 
as either Web user or non-user. Results from these focus groups indicate 
that both Web users and non-users consider the Internet to be a legitimate 
source of health information, even among those for whom the Internet 
was not the preferred source. Convenience of use was a major factor in the 
use of the Internet. Although participants reported enjoying the freedom 
that the Internet allowed, many said they had dif˜culty understanding 
94%
58%
57
%41
%71
%52%
90%
49
%40%
37%
29
%46
%0%
20
%4
0%
60%
80%
100%
Health careprofessionalFamily/FriendsNewspapers/MagazinesRadioInternet/WebTelevisionNon-UsersInternet UsersFigure 3-1FI
GU
RE 3-1 
Trust in sources of health information.
SOURCE: Kukafka, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
33
information found online and expressed a need for assistance in interpret
-ing the health information.
One of the major barriers to seeking mainstream health information 
that the focus groups identi˜ed was suspicion and mistrust of the medical 
community, as illustrated with the following quotes: ﬁI think one of the 
keys is that there is money involved. It is all about greed.ﬂ ﬁThose of us 
who are African-Americans are still grappling with the Tuskegee studies 
and the aftermath. So there are a lot of historical monsters with which 
we identify when it comes to medical community treatment and medical 
residents.ﬂ ﬁThen that leads me to conclude that there is just a lot of gen
-eral information that we are not getting. There seems to be a mainstream 
level of information which gives you stuff to lead you into drugs, different 
things like that . . . there is like a whole stream of other viable alternatives 
that could work but you don™t even hear about because it will blow all 
the mainstream drugs out.ﬂ ﬁThe pharmaceutical companies are in bed 
with the FDA.ﬂ
When members of the focus groups were asked what sources of infor
-mation they trust, their answers included (ranked from most
-mentioned 
to least-mentioned: their mothers; folk and alternative medicine (ﬁgrand
-mother™s curesﬂ); the health care provider; and, ˜nally, the Internet. 
 
Everyone was aware of the importance of lifestyle, diet, and stress as con
-tributors to health, but they expressed a general frustration with attempts 
to improve in these areas.
Using these data as background for understanding community atti
-tudes, the HHPC project set out to build a Web portal
3 that Harlem resi
-dents would use. The conclusion was that the Web portal platform would 
need to do more than deliver health information, even if it were at a lower 
health literacy level, the portal would have to encourage a level of trust 
and cultural relevance as its foundation. 
Developing the Web portal involves more than just developing con
-tent and images aimed at a particular literacy level. What HHPC realized 
is that the portal needs to facilitate an architecture of participation such 
as that found on Web 2.0, including such tools and services as blogs, RSS 
feeds,
4 and wikis. These different Internet instruments are examples of 
self-organizing structures where the principle of evolution will lead, in 
the course of time, to correct and complete content. 
Table 3-2 provides a comparison of the principles of Web 2.0 tech
-3 
 ﬁA Web portal is a term, often used interchangeably with gateway, for a World Wide Web 
site whose purpose is to be a major starting point for users when they connect to the Webﬂ 
(MariosAlexandrou.com, 2008).
4 
 RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feed.
 ﬁ
A syndication format that was developed by 
Netscape in 1999 and became very popular for aggregating updates to blogs and the news 
sites. RSS has also stood for ‚Rich Site Summary™ﬂ (
PC Magazine
, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
nologies with the more traditional Web 1.0.
5 In moving from the Web 1.0 
technology to Web 2.0 one moves from a centralized control situation to 
one of decentralized priorities. This is consistent with participatory action 
research methods, the methods used in the HHPC approach. 
There are a number of mechanisms available in Web 2.0 by which the 
community ˜lters material, such as community ratings. With Web 2.0 the 
receivers of information are coproducers of information as well, rather 
than just passive recipients, so that eventually, if enough people use the 
system, information is self-corrected. Content in Web 2.0 technologies 
is based on the experiential model or knowledge, and the culture of the 
technology moves from one of compliance to an enabling culture.
Web 2.0 structures facilitate social networking participation, collabo
-ration, and openness within and between user groups. Information in this 
newer type of platform is liberated from the control of experts, which in 
the Harlem community was a source of mistrust. Community members 
will be able to create, assemble, organize, locate, and share content to meet 
their own needs and the needs of their community. 
In a Web 2.0 technology, information is perceived as direct or unme
-diated. Such information is more credible than mediated information 
because the presence of mediation through a gatekeeper makes it pos
-5 
 Web 1.0 is ﬁa general reference to the World Wide Web during its ˜rst few years of opera
-tion. The term is mostly used to contrast the earlier days of the Web before blogs, wikis, so
-cial networking sites and Web-based applications became commonplaceﬂ (http://dictionary.
zdnet.com/de˜nition/Web+1.0.html). Accessed November 3, 2008.
TA
BLE 3-2
 Comparison of Principles of Web 2.0 and Web 1.0
Principle
Web 2.0
Traditional (Web 1.0)
Power
Decentralized (autonomy; 
information self sufficiency)
Centralized (experts); 
dependence
Priorities
Guided by community 
perspectives/norms, bottom up 
Guided by technology 
developers
Filtering
Downstream (e.g., user ranking)
Upstream
Nature of information 
consumption
Coproducers
Passive receiversŠ
consumption 
Learning
CollectiveŠcapacity building
Exclusive 
Content Credibility
Based on understandable 
language, experiential knowledge
Based on science
Culture
Enabling
Compliance
SOURCE: Kukafka, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
35
sible to question the motives and intentions of the communicator (Stamm 
and Dube, 1994). A study by Baldry and colleagues showed that when 
health professionals actively encourage patients to view their own health 
records, it helps restore patient trust in the medical system (Baldry et al., 
1986). Therefore, if the gatekeeper (e.g., the provider or hospital) moves 
out of the way and enables patients to view direct, unmediated informa
-tion, that will improve the patients™ level of trust in the provider. 
As mentioned previously, the Digital Partners in Health project uses 
participatory action research (PAR) methods. The key goals of PAR are 
to produce knowledge and action that are directly useful to a group of 
people and to empower people at a second and deeper level through the 
process of constructing and using their own knowledge. Web 2.0 tech
-nologies can serve as an informatics approach to facilitate the principles 
and characteristics of PAR in disadvantaged populations. If one examines 
why PAR works, one ˜nds that its principles are very similar to Web 
2.0Š-that is, enabling the community itself to become part of the process, 
to communicate and participate, instead of using a closed technology 
driven by experts. 
Developing the contents of the portal has involved a number of dif
-ferent types of individuals: technology developers, community people, 
informaticians, and public health people. There has been a great deal of 
negotiation among them about how much of the content on the portal will 
be unmediated (out of the control of experts) versus how much of it will be 
mediated. Some of the technology speci˜cations, developed on the basis of 
user input, include the following

Website content can be viewed by anyone but users must register 
to post or comment on the site™s content. 

Registered users can:
Šsubmit their own blog (e.g., ﬁHow I quit smoking after ten 
failed attemptsﬂ) or create special interest groups and social 
networks, each with its own discussion forums; 
Špost events of interest, links to useful health resources, or 
participate in several special programs, such as the Harlem 
YMCA-sponsored Fitness Challenge; and
Šrate posts made by other users or ˚ag posts as inappropriate 
(community policing and appraisal). 

An overall moderating team consisting of our experts as well as 
users will provide editorial control to ensure content quality.
The resulting website (gethealthyharlem.org) is not static. For exam
-ple, there are RSS feeds of Harlem-speci˜c health news where mem
-bers can post comments and debate the news online. The website is not 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
 
disease-driven; it is driven instead by determinants of health. Therefore 
it includes topics such as ˜tness, events, and spiritual concepts. Using 
empirical evidence about modifying health behavior and improving 
health outcomes, HHPC is attempting to use technology to engage people 
in health, building that technology on empirical data about what works 
and what does not. 
The platform and tools have a clear ˜t with the goals of HHPC and 
the populations with which it works. Careful thinking, testing and evalu
-ation research are still needed in order to establish best-practice models 
for leveraging these emerging technologies and to boost our ability to 
support health improvement in our community. In conclusion, Kukafka 
quoted John Dewey, ﬁIf the living, experiencing being is an intimate par
-ticipant in the activities of the world to which it belongs, then knowledge 
is a mode of participation, valuable in the degree in which it is effective. 
It cannot be the view of an unconcerned spectatorﬂ (Dewey, 1926).
MY H
EALTH
eVET
Kim 
Nazi, F.A.C.H.
E. Management Analyst, 
Veterans Health Administration
In response to the Institute of Medicine report, 
Crossing the Quality 
Chasm
, the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) of the Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA) began efforts to bring a consumer focus to organi
-zation-wide electronic health record development so that patients could 
directly obtain the bene˜ts of technology. The two major components of 
eHealth at the VA are the electronic health recordŠwhich includes the 
CPRS (computerized patient record system), BCMA,
6 and VistA imaging,
7 supported by VistA (Veterans Health Information Systems and Technol
-ogy Architecture)Šand the personal health record, My Health
eVet. These 
components offer a number of improvements over the previous system, 
including more comprehensive records, access to trusted patient educa
-tion, engagement and action, patient safety, medication reconciliation, 
patient concordance, wellness reminders, decision support, communica
-tion, and patient and provider partnerships.
The development of My Health
eVet has been guided by the belief that 
6 
 ﬁBar Code Medication Administration (BCMA) is a point-of-care software solution that 
addresses the serious issue of inpatient medication errors by electronically validating and 
documenting medications for inpatients. It ensures that the patient receives the correct 
medication in the correct dose, at the correct time, and visually alerts staff when the proper 
parameters are not metﬂ (Department of Veterans Affairs, 2008a).
7 
 The VistA Imaging system makes the complete multimedia patient record available to 
clinicians and patients (Department of Veterans Affairs, 2008b).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
37
knowledgeable patients are better able to make informed health care deci
-sions, stay healthy, and seek services when they are needed than patients 
who are not as knowledgeable about their care. In the pilot project now 
underway, patients are able to access data from the electronic health 
record, supplement those data with self-entered data, and control access 
to that information. The pilot project began in 1999 and has about 7,500 
participants spread across nine VA Medical Centers. Once the same kinds 
of features are available in the national My Health
eVet program, the pilot 
will be discontinued.
In November 2003, on Veterans Day, VA introduced the national My 
Health
eVet, beginning with some patient education modules. Since then a 
variety of features have been added, including online prescription re˜lls 
(which has been one of the most popular features), content centers (ori
-ented to speci˜c conditions or health and wellness), self-assessment tools, 
health journals and e-logs, veteran-speci˜c conditions, seasonal health 
reminders, a wellness calendar, and a complete medications view.
My Health
eVet (www.myhealth.va.gov) has three tiers of access. The 
˜rst tier is intended for visitors, who can view health education libraries 
and other publicly available content. The second tier is for veterans who 
self-register for an account and begin to build a personal health record. In 
particular, patients who register for My Health
eVet can begin to input and 
track personal information. The third tier of access demands in-person 
authentication
8 and connects the veteran registration data to the veteran 
as a VA patient. This authentication allows the veteran access to addi
-tional features, such as the ability to view medication names when order
-ing VA prescription re˜lls and access to the VA medication history as an 
extract from the VA electronic health record. Many of the screens within 
My Health
eVet have printer-friendly functions. There is even a printer-
friendly wallet card on which patients can choose to print speci˜c data.
There are several different tabs available in My Health
eVet. Using the 
pharmacy tab, VA patients can re˜ll VA prescriptions, keep track of their 
prescription history, and even track over-the-counter medications and 
prescription medications that they are getting from physicians outside the 
VA. The Research Health tab allows patients to look at multiple media, 
including interactive images and video on diseases and conditions of 
interest. There are also direct links to MedLine Plus
9 and Healthwise.
10
8 
 Data from the American Customer Satisfaction Index indicate that ﬁin-person authenti
-cationﬂ is dif˜cult to understand; therefore, VA will review the language to try to make the 
information and process understandable to patients in a much more user-friendly way.
9 
 MedLine Plus is a website network database of health information provided by the 
National Library of Medicine and the National Institutes of Health for use by consumers 
and health care providers. 
10
  ﬁHealthwise is a nonpro˜t organization with a mission to help people make better 
health decisions. Nearly 100 million times a year, people turn to Healthwise information to 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
In the Get Care tab, patients can keep track of their providers, their 
treatment locations and facilities, and health insurance coverage. The 
Track Health tab allows patients to keep track of their health history, 
vital signs and readings, test and laboratory results, family health his
-tory, military health history, allergies, and immunizations. Patients can 
also view graphs of self-entered data. Using the printer function they can 
print these graphs and bring them to a clinic visit. In the pilot program 
patients are allowed to authorize other persons to have electronic access 
to their ˜les for a speci˜c amount of time, and this is planned for the 
national program, as well.
There are nearly 24 million veterans and 259,000 VA staff who are eli
-gible to use the My Health
eVet system. Of the veterans, almost 8 million 
are enrolled for care in the VA. At this time, there are currently more than 
550,000 registered users of My Health
eVet, 71 percent of whom are actu
-ally VA patients. As mentioned previously, there is a three-tiered access 
to the systemŠvisitor, registered members, and authenticated members. 
There are currently 59,000 veterans who have been in person authenti
-cated and are now able to receive VA prescription medication names as 
the initial extract from the electronic health record, thereby improving 
medication reconciliation. More than 5.3 million prescription re˜lls have 
been processed since August 31, 2005, and more than 16 million visits 
have been made to the My Health
eVet website since it was launched in 
November of 2003.
The median age of users of the My Health
eVet is 59, and the age seg
-ment with the largest number of users is from 60 to 64 years old. During 
the past two quarters, however, the greatest population growth occurred 
in the younger agesŠsoldiers returning from Iraq and Afghanistan. That 
population is computer literate and has high expectations for being able 
to interact via computer with the VA. 
VA has implemented the American Customer Satisfaction Index 
(ACSI) among users of My Health
eVet. Information obtained for that 
index includes the veteran™s period of service, age, and frequency of visits. 
The majority of users are from the Vietnam War era. Thirty-˜ve percent 
of users are from 51 to 60 years of age, and 33 percent are from 61 to 70 
years. Fifty-one percent of users visit the website approximately once a 
month, while 25 percent actually visit once a week. 
Based on information from the ASCI, the satisfaction with My 
learn how to do more for themselves, ask for the care they need, and say ﬁnoﬂ to the care 
they don™t need. Healthwise partners with health plans, hospitals, disease management 
companies, and health Web sites to provide up-to-date, evidence-based information to the 
people they serve. To learn more about the Healthwise Information Therapy (Ix
®) Solution, 
visit www.healthwise.org or call 1.800.706.9646ﬂ (Healthwise, 2008). 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
39
 
Health
eVet is high. When asked if they were satis˜ed with the My 
 
Health
eVet program overall, visitors rated My Health
eVet highly, with an 
average satisfaction rating of 8.3 out of a possible 10. When asked how 
likely they were to recommend My Health
eVet to someone else, most visi
-tors indicated they would recommend the site with an average likelihood 
score of 8.6 out of 10. Veterans also indicated that they were highly likely 
to return to the site and use it, with an average score of 9.1 out of 10. 
In addition to providing services through My Health
eVet and assess
-ing consumer satisfaction, the VA is conducting performance evaluations 
of the reach, effectiveness, adoption, implementation, and maintenance 
(RE-AIM) of the system. The VA believes that it is important not only to 
track the effectiveness of an intervention, but also to evaluate the adop
-tion of these tools used by both the patients and the clinicians. The ulti
-mate goal of these evaluations is to learn how to provide access to every 
veteran in the country in such a way that the system can be maintained 
over time. 
There are many bene˜ts of the My Health
eVet. In terms of health 
literacy, access to information is a major issue. There is a vast amount of 
information available to users of the Internet but it is not all necessarily 
useful or helpful. Access to relevant, trusted, patient healthŒeducation 
tools and resources such as are available at My Health
eVet increases 
a patient™s level of engagement and fosters informed decision making. 
Ensuring that these sources are highly functional and easy to use, with 
information presented in a patient-friendly manner is one way that health 
literacy can be improved. Content development includes input both from 
experts who pay attention to the language that is used with the goal of 
making it as understandable as possible, and from the results of focus 
groups that test the content to make sure patients can understand.
Another bene˜t to patients is that access to care in multiple settings is 
facilitated by the VA™s electronic health record and My Health
eVet. Such 
access improves veterans™ timely access to services, enhancing utiliza
-tion management. A veteran could travel to a distant part of the country, 
for example, and still be able to have a clinician call up a record that 
stores information from all different sites where the patient has received 
care. Furthermore, My Health
eVet increases the patients™ ability to derive 
meaning from health information and make informed decisions by com
-bining usable, patient-friendly information in engaging formats with a 
variety of other tools such as wellness reminders. 
My Health
eVet also allows veterans to input information from care 
provided in community settings. About 40 percent of the VA population 
receives care outside the VA system so universal secure access to patient 
health information is critical to providing integrated care coordination 
among multiple providers. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Finally, personal health records such as those in My Health
eVet use 
technology to facilitate improved communication between patients and 
health care providers. Secure messaging will add new tools to supplement 
traditional care interactions. VA is currently in the alpha testing stage of 
secure messaging.
The contributions of eHealth to the goals of health literacy and 
improving patient outcomes can be very powerful, Nazi concluded. My 
Health
eVet is transforming health care by enhancing communication and 
providing veterans access to information that they can understand and 
use to make good health decisions.
DISC
USSION
George 
Isham, M.D., M.S.
 HealthPartners
 Moderator
An audience member asked Kukafka whether the extent to which 
respondents in the Harlem survey used the Internet for purchasing had 
any correlation with their level of comfort about obtaining health informa
-tion. Kukafka responded that while data on commerce was collected, she 
did not have those data available and was unable to provide an answer.
The same participant, noting that Kukafka™s presentation mentioned 
wariness and mistrust of medical institutions, asked: Do the data indicate 
that the information would be viewed more credibly if it was derived 
from the individual™s primary care provider or their medical home? If the 
primary care provider was the author of information on the Internet site, 
would it be viewed as credible? 
That speci˜c question was not asked, Kukafka replied, but the answer 
to the question is empirical. Currently, however, the data are not yet 
available to determine the answer. Results of the survey and the focus 
groups do indicate that the credibility of information from the health 
provider was rated as very high. On the website, well known community 
providers serve as creators of content. For example, information is being 
developed and provided by the Harlem Health Promotion Center and key 
community health care providers. However, equal time is given to any 
participant in the community who wishes to contribute. The community 
itself will then rate the information. If there are blogs provided by a group 
that forms in the community and there are also blogs created by experts, 
one could measure hits on the sites in order to evaluate which blogs are 
used more and thus get a good idea of which contributors are viewed as 
more credible. 
Another audience member said that she is delighted to ˜nd that 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
41
people might doubt all the information provided to them by such sources 
as a drug company or a physician who might have been detailed by a 
drug company. What is troubling, she said, is that no one is following the 
money trail on dietary supplements. For example, individuals read about 
how they can improve their health by taking Vitamin C, or Vitamin E is 
marketed in some popular magazine. While there is nothing wrong with 
marketing these supplements, somehow individuals fail to think about 
the greed factor with the supplements, which are a multi-billion dollar 
business. Perhaps one should use individuals™ natural skepticism as an 
educational entrée on things such as dietary supplements which deserve 
skepticism similar to that directed toward the medical establishment. 
There is also the issue of the placebo effect which should be part of the 
educational effort
Those are excellent points, Kukafka responded. The idea is that the 
website will provide a platform for discourse on such topics. As these 
things arise, there will be educational opportunities to correct erroneous 
information. But such information cannot be provided ﬁup frontﬂ by the 
experts because it will then be perceived as not credible. It must be part 
of the discourse. 
Kukafka was asked how large a pool of interactions was needed to 
have a self-correcting group that arrives at the truth through primary 
sources as opposed to seeking out experts. She responded that it is not 
known what the necessary number is. The available data show that what
-ever the size of the population using a wiki, only a small number of indi
-viduals in that population will actually make edits. One has to be able to 
divide the population into those who are making corrections and those 
who are only viewing. It is interesting that if one examines the numbers 
of hits for wiki sites versus those sites based on health expert design, the 
wiki sites tend to draw larger numbers. 
Another audience member said that wikis are being used to evaluate 
various professionals. For example, in San Francisco a website was estab
-lished recently to evaluate police of˜cers, but it was immediately taken 
down. Perhaps there are aspects of wikis that could be used to evaluate 
one™s health care providers in terms of their sensitivity or competency in 
health literacy. 
Yet another audience member said that she was concerned that, with 
the use of wikis, someone might actually act on health information before 
it is corrected.
Kukafka was asked how liability is being addressed. She responded 
that there is a disclaimer on the site and that editorial control group will 
be monitoring the content. Asked about how content development for 
non-English-speaking populations was proceeding, Kukafka responded 
that currently the portal is being developed in English because of the 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
complexity involved. There is a complementary project that will link the 
portal to a more traditional personal health record that has the traditional 
functions such as patient reminders and prescription re˜lls. There will 
also be point-of-care patient education. 
The portal, however, provides very different kinds of contentŠin 
particular, more actionable content. When a doctor tells a patient to con
-trol his or her blood pressure, for example, the ﬁhow to do itﬂ is the part 
that is often missing and, furthermore, is very community-speci˜c. The 
portal is a place to go to hear about what others have tried to do, what 
they have done or could not do, as well as a place to join groups or start 
groups aimed at accomplishing speci˜c things.
One participant commented that the statistics provided on the num
-ber of people who have access to and use the Internet are encouraging. 
She then asked Kukafka if, when conducting the telephone survey, the 
interviewers probed those individuals who do not have a computer or 
did not use the Internet in order to determine what the barriers to use 
were? And, if so, will the project begin to address some of those issues? 
Kukafka responded that the interviewers did probe and that some of the 
information on barriers was presented. Fear of pornography and fraud 
was actually of higher importance than being able to understand the 
information. Will the project be able to do something about all the bar
-riers? The answer is no. What the project can do is encourage discourse 
among the participants during which the barriers might emerge and can 
then be discussed.
In terms of such barriers as having to wait in long lines at the library 
to use the computer or having only limited hours when the library is 
open, the hope is that the community will begin to build capacity in order 
to reduce some of those barriers. One of the most interesting comments 
about the portal was ﬁThis is not a website, it™s an action, it is activism.ﬂ 
The portal can assist a ground-up effort and provide the platform for 
discourse and activism out of which change will occur.
On the subject of the Harlem community, a participant said that there 
are a variety of factors that are not directly addressed by eHealth, such as 
the social determinants of health, including lower education and lower 
employment. It seems that people are thinking that eHealth will provide 
a panacea to bridge the gap in health disparities. But how likely is it that 
that will really happen? Isn™t it necessary to address the broader social 
determinants of health and not depend on eHealth bridging the gap?
Kukafka responded that empirical evidence will be necessary to deter
-mine the degree to which the Harlem approach is successful. It is likely 
that there will be early adopters, as in the diffusion of any technology, but 
there will be people who have signi˜cantly more barriers to adoption, and 
it is doubtful that 100 percent of the population will be reached.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
43
One participant said that while the approaches taken by the VA and 
Harlem are different, they are related, and it is important to determine 
which outcomes are desired by the different systems. It appears that VA 
is looking at the more traditional outcomes such as utilization of services. 
What outcomes is the Harlem project looking for?
Kukafka responded that the HHPC project is conducting a cohort 
study with the entire user base to look at such things as changes in atti
-tudes, beliefs, the way the site is used, the extent to which different func
-tions of the system are used, and if the experts are being downloaded or 
used more than the community generated material. Whether or not the 
outcomes can be examined depends on funding.
In response, the same questioner said that it appears that HHPC has 
recognized culture, language, and trust as large barriers and is attempt
-ing to design a system to inform users and so address those barriers. That 
is incredibly important, but it also raises such questions as whether it 
would be better to have a large number of people who engage in discus
-sions about ˚u shots or to have a higher rate of ˚u vaccination. How can 
one handle such issues? Kukafka responded that it is hoped that if there 
is a great deal of discourse around ˚u vaccination, then ˚u vaccinations 
would increase. If that does not happen, however, then it will be impor
-tant to examine the discourse in detail, in order to determine what it was 
about and why it did not lead to increased vaccinations. Ultimately, the 
HHPC project is looking for both process and outcome measures. Under
-standing the process better should identify issues and barriers where new 
interventions need to be developed, which would then, one hopes, lead 
to improved outcomes.
One participant said that he was intrigued by the juxtaposition of two 
approachesŠone related to the Harlem project and the other related to the 
VA. A great deal of research has demonstrated that the VA is incredibly 
effective in eliminating or reducing health disparities and their approach 
is very innovative, despite the fact that their population is elderly and has, 
perhaps, low literacy. What is the VA doing that makes it so effective, that 
results in it getting 15,000 hits a day?
Nazi responded that the VA has taken a very comprehensive strategyŠ
not just enacting technology, but also implementing technology in a way 
that reaches people where they are. Knowing that veterans may not have 
access to a computer, the VA made sure that computers were placed in 
every medical center for use by veterans. Data show that while veterans 
access their personal health record they are also accessing the health 
education libraries. The most downloaded document on the site is a PDF 
called 5 Steps For Safer Health Care. 
Offering value also means offering such programs as online prescrip
-tion re˜lls, which was of more importance to veterans than any other 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
option. The ACSI data show that the most desired options for online ser
-vice now are appointment view followed by appointment scheduling. In 
response, with the secure messaging initiative, VA is building templates 
to make it very easy for patients to request appointments online. Other 
services of importance are the ability to engage in secure messaging and 
the ability to communicate electronically with patients™ clinicians.
Because veterans know about the pilot project, it is important for VA 
to move quickly to make these features available in the national program. 
While the technology is fairly easy, it takes time to build the business 
process and the organizational framework at all the sites. For that reason, 
VA has taken an incremental approach aimed at ensuring that each step 
is done correctly before moving to the next service.
One participant asked if those who enrolled in the VA Track Health 
had better health outcomes on average than the members of the VA 
population who did not enroll. Nazi responded that this is an important 
research question. Because VA has a research branch, those involved in 
informatics at VA are pressing for a collaborative effort with VA research
-ers to study such questions as: Do personal health records make a dif
-ference? Do users have better health outcomes? Are they more highly 
satis˜ed?
Some research questions are quite complex, such as looking at clini
-cal outcomes over time, but there is a great deal of interest in pursuing 
questions about eHealth. VA is poised to create a research summit to help 
develop policy frameworks for how research is to be carried out. The 
personal health record is a new frontier and requires a multidisciplinary 
stakeholder approach to make sure the infrastructure is in place to sup
-port the research.
One audience member noted that Nazi said the VA would like, ulti
-mately, to give patients access to progress notes and clinical information. 
Is that information going to be transformed in a way that makes it easily 
understandable? When one thinks about medical progress notes and how 
cryptic they might be, will there be an intermediate step to translate the 
information into something more useful to patients?
Nazi responded that, in the pilot, there has been a narrow focus on 
answering whether this could be done in a secure way, and if it is done, 
will patients ˜nd it to be of value. From the pilot responses, the answer is 
yes, although one particular piece that translated clinical reminders into 
patient-friendly wellness reminders appears to be most easily understood 
by patients. In terms of the broader question, one of the advantages of 
building the system incrementally is that one can spend time focused 
on the different pieces. At present, VA is conducting a ˜eld test of offer
-ing laboratory test results in order to obtain feedback on the system. In 
some cases it is not possible to change the readability of the material. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
1 
45
One approach in such situations might be to supplement the data with 
materials that enrich and support patients™ understanding, for example by 
providing places to obtain additional information and resources to help 
patients make decisions.
Another approach that VA has worked on in response to an executive 
order is to offer quality information about delivery of services. Rather 
than just put forth a report card about quality metrics for a particular 
facility, clinic, or physician, VA opted to integrate the sharing of quality 
information into My Health
eVet. 
The longer-term goal is to move from generalized reports about the 
quality of a facility to provider-speci˜c reports, which are then translated 
into something of value to the patient, such as, Is my blood pressure 
under control? Is my blood sugar controlled?
An audience member suggested that as one gains more informa
-tion about one™s own personal health record, there may be things in the 
record that one did not hear when visiting the clinician. Will the VA have 
a mechanism to allow patients to type questions back to their clinicians 
for clari˜cation, or is there another way to obtain clari˜cation? Nazi 
responded that one of the things that emerged from the pilot was that it 
is very important to patients that the content of their medical record be 
correct. When that information is released, there must be an easy way for 
patients to identify things that may need to be corrected. Soon, with one 
click, a patient will be able to send a secure message to a triage group 
which then sends it on to the best person to handle the message. The 
idea that patients should be able to relay information or questions is very 
interesting and something worth thinking about.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Outcomes and Challenges of 
 eHealth Approaches:
Panel 2
USIN
G T
ECHNOLO
GY 
TO
 I
MPROVE
  MIGRANT
 H
EALTH
 C
ARE
 D
ELIVER
YCynthia Solomon
 Chief 
Executi
ve 
Officer, Access Strategies, 
Inc.
MiVIA is a patient electronic personal health record (PHR) origi
-nally designed to engage a very vulnerable populationŠmigrant and 
seasonal farm workersŠin their own health care through the use of a 
personal health record. It was later expanded to include other vulnerable 
populations such as the homeless, those with special needs, women, and 
children. The MiVIA project is a collaborative effort of St. Joseph Health 
System in Sonoma County, California; the Community Health Resource 
Development Center; and Vineyard Workers Services. 
In 2002 and 2003 developers of the new system held meetings with 
farm workers and settled agricultural workers to explain the concept of 
the PHR and to ask them what information they would want to carry with 
them and have accessible to them. The developers quickly learned, for 
instance, that the participants did not want to be called users or patients 
or consumers; they wished to be called members. The members named 
the system MiVIA, which means ﬁmy wayﬂ in Spanish. 
MiVIA has evolved over the years. In 2003 it was a consumer portal 
for information storage on migrant and farm worker members. By 2005 
it included a clinician portal that offered clinicians access to the personal 
health record (with member permission), but the data entered were read-
47
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
only. By 2005 MiVIA had expanded to include members of the homeless 
community. In 2007 four hospitals were using it as an electronic medical 
record and it had expanded its member rolls to include special needs 
children. 
The resulting PHR, which was designed with input from the mem
-bers, is Web-based, and compliant with HIPAA (the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act). It is now being licensed to hospitals 
and clinics for use with mobile populations. Additionally, it serves as an 
affordable electronic health record for small clinics.
When the MiVIA pilot project started in 2003, it had a goal of enroll
-ing 50 migrant workers. That ˜gure quickly became 250, then 300, then 
400. Because MiVIA serves a very mobile population of migrant workers 
who may access many different clinics and health care systems from San 
Diego all the way up the coast to Alaska, it serves as a bridge among these 
health systems. It promotes continuity of care and engages and empowers 
members as active partners in their own health care.
MiVIA stores medical and dental information and provides a photo 
identi˜cation and emergency information card which includes the mem
-ber™s name, health conditions, the last provider seen, any allergies, and 
other special information, such as presence of implanted medical devices. 
MiVIA also includes an e-mail account offering a ﬁpermanentﬂ address 
and provides information and resources with links to other health infor
-mation resources, primarily to MedLine Plus, but also to some other 
health websites. Both family and individual memberships are available.
It is interesting to note that 7 out of 10 of the providers engaged in 
MiVIA had not heard about MedLine Plus before getting involved with 
MiVIA. Once they learn about it, however, they love it. And it is not only 
providers who appreciate having the additional information available 
from MedLine Plus, but members appreciate it as well. One story illus
-trates the value of this resource. About a year and a half ago, an older 
gentleman came to the resource center with his daughter. The gentle
-men was supposed to take seven medications but the daughter told an 
outreach worker that, while her father needed the medications, he did 
not take them. The outreach worker and the daughter sat with the father, 
logged on to MedLine Plus, looked up every medication, and printed the 
information in Spanish. That was what was needed to engage the gentle
-man in his health care so that he took his medication. The small amount 
of effort required to log into MedLine Plus and retrieve information from 
it made all the difference in that patient™s care.
MiVIA has a clinician portal for professional entry and veri˜cation. A 
clinician can go to www.mivia.org, sign up as a clinician, and run a test 
account to check out the system. The log-in is also available in Spanish, 
although it is somewhat more limited. There are approximately 5,000 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 49
FI
GU
RE 4-1
 Patient dashboard.
SOURCE: Solomon, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
MiVIA members in Sonoma County and about 1,100 of them use the 
Spanish version.
One useful feature of the system is the patient dashboard (see Figure 
4-1). On the dashboard the member™s information is on the left-hand side. 
Among other things it tracks medications and providers, and it provides 
all the information needed to ˜ll out the forms on a physician visit.
The member identi˜cation card is probably one of the most popular 
features of MiVIA. The card can be printed anytime. If a change is made 
to the PHR (e.g., adding a medication), the card is reprinted and the new 
information appears. If a member who does not speak English visits a 
clinic or hospital where no translator is available, this card can be used to 
provide pertinent information and access to the patient™s PHR.
MiVIA has many features. It is a single database with both member 
access and clinician access. A member can grant a clinician access to his 
or her MiVIA record. There is also ﬁon-the-˚yﬂ clinician sign up, meaning 
that if a clinician wants a MiVIA member to see a specialist, the member 
can give the specialist immediate permission to access his or her record. 
There is also a Spanish version which is experiencing some challenges 
that will be described later. There is a service wheel which identi˜es 
resources by special population or region. Resources include information 
about employment, transportation, housing, community services, health 
services, and legal assistance. So, for example, if a member is in San Diego 
but is going to Sonoma to work for a while, he or she can click on housing 
and locate the different services available to him for migrant housing.
The most recent version of MiVIA includes a feature that allows a 
 
continuity-of-care record (CCR) to be downloaded into a computer or 
another electronic medical record system. MiVIA is currently working 
with two electronic medical record companies to test this feature. MiVIA 
also has a complete audit-and-edit trail with date and time stamping. 
The system is located in a collocation facility that has managed servers. 
Encryption, SSL,
1 and secure log-in and passwords are used.
Member suggestions have led to a number of enhancements to the 
system. The success of MiVIA is due primarily to the outreach and lay 
outreach workers, or 
promotores
. They are the champions of MiVIA. They 
conduct the enrollment and provide the training in the use of MiVIA. 
They also provide cultural and social support and check in with the mem
-bers about their use of MiVIA.
The 
promotores
 are provided with a training and enrollment manual 
that is very simple to use. There are about three training sessions each 
year that the 
promotores 
can attend. Each session lasts about two and a half 
hours and starts with the basicsŠwhat the computer is used for and how 
1 
 SSL stands for secure sockets layer which is a technology used to protect websites.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
51
to access different programs. There is a quick overview of the Internet, 
with a brief look at different sites, and the session also covers the purpose 
of MiVIA, its use, and how to enter and access data. Since the training can 
be intense, 
promotores
 often return for a repeat session. 
When MiVIA ˜rst began, most of those who enrolled did not have 
an e-mail account, so MiVIA provided an e-mail account for anyone who 
needed one. Within a few years that changed so that most of those enroll
-ing today come in to the system with their own e-mail accounts, indicat
-ing awareness of the Internet. 
Similar to the patient dashboard described earlier, there is also a cli
-nician dashboard that MiVIA makes available to health care providers. 
Using this dashboard, a MiVIA clinician can, with a member™s permis
-sion, use the member™s log-in, password, or limited-access code to enroll 
the member on the clinician™s list of patients. This enables the clinician to 
pull up patient data.
The clinician portal features an alphabetical list of individual clini
-cians or clinics, and patient lists by organization. Access to patient records 
is with the owner™s permission only. With that permission, clinicians can 
access patient records online at any time and from any place. Data entry 
is protected, as it is read-only to members and other clinicians. 
The latest version of MiVIA uses the SOAP
2 format for data entry. 
This version allows providers to record whether the nature of a patient 
visit is preventive, emergency, or chronic care. The version also has a tele
-medicine component which becomes the record between the patient, the 
specialist, and the provider. Those granted access can retrieve a summary 
medical report that can be downloaded or else can go to speci˜c parts of 
the record detailing such things as immunizations, medical of˜ce visits, 
and allergies. The information can also be shared across platforms. 
There are many member bene˜ts of MiVIA. It reduces the divide 
between those who have access to digital and information technology and 
those who do not. It facilitates access to health and community services, 
clinics, and libraries. The 
promotores
, when teaching about MiVIA, teach 
farm workers and their families to use the local library, taking them to the 
library, showing them around, and showing them how to access the Inter
-net. Because the members have MiVIA cards, they are able to get library 
cards, which they were not eligible for before. Members become more 
engaged in their community. MiVIA also promotes health care literacy 
and peace of mind. Members know their information is safely stored and 
can follow them wherever they go for services. 
MiVIA has applications for children with special needs who have 
2 
 SOAP stands for subjective, objective, assessment plan. The SOAP format is used to 
document observations and care provided.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
multiple conditions as well as for the homeless. In the case of the children, 
MiVIA eases the burden of parents who are busy with multiple medical 
appointments, providing an easy way to carry health information with 
them at all times. In the case of the homeless, clients have a concise docu
-ment on which to store health information. Relevant personal data from 
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development can be copied 
and pasted into MiVIA. The MiVIA photo ID allows clients to pick up 
their prescription voucher at local pharmacies.
In Fall 2007, the St. Joseph Health System conducted a telephone 
member satisfaction follow-up survey. Of 613 members, 40 percent of the 
people enrolled said that they log on to MiVIA on a regular basis. Eight 
percent (50) members had no prior computer experience and received 
basic computer training from MiVIA. Eighty-seven percent of members 
enrolled did not have a computer in their home.
MiVIA also has a disease-management tool. The ˜rst disease targeted 
was diabetes, and work has now begun on asthma. With the
 diabetes-
 
management tool, members can track their blood sugar and weight, 
graphing this information and sharing it with their health care providers. 
MiVIA is also working with several regional health information organiza
-tions (RHIOs) and EMR linkages.
MiVIA is currently working in Sonoma County, California, with 
mobile medical and dental clinics, community clinics, a family practice 
residency ﬁbridgeﬂ clinic for diabetics, a homeless center, and a resource 
center. MiVIA also works with two hospitals and three rural clinics in the 
California Central Valley. In Hood River, Oregon, MiVIA is working with 
a hospital, a mobile medical clinic, and a rural clinic. In the Finger Lakes 
region of New York MiVIA is working with ˜ve clinics, three voucher 
sites,
3 and an integrated network and is involved in telemedicine. Hospi
-tals that join MiVIA use it as a method for health information exchange 
between local physicians™ of˜ces, their patients, and the hospital. 
Several lessons have been learned since MiVIA began in 2003. First, 
each community is different. Second, the value of the photo ID cannot be 
overstated. Third, 
promotores
 are invaluable resources trusted by members. 
Fourth, members gain computer skills through the use of MiVIA. Finally, 
it is extremely valuable to partner with local libraries and
 community-
based organizations to provide computers and classes in English as a 
second language.
One of the challenges MiVIA faces in serving limited-English-
3 
 A voucher is an agreement between a provider and the voucher program (usually a 
migrant health grantee), to reimburse a provider, who is usually in a distant location, for 
health services provided to the migrant worker. Voucher sites are local providers who are 
contracted with on a per-visit basis.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
53
 
pro˜ciency (LEP) members is that printed and online content is not easily 
available in Spanish, with the exception of MedLine Plus, and appropriate 
translation services are dif˜cult to locate. MiVIA™s ˜rst translation effort 
was carried out by a university and cost a substantial amount of money, 
which was paid for by a grant. Two years later MiVIA learned that it was 
not an appropriate translation. It was a word-for-word translation and, 
as such, did not make sense. MiVIA has received a great deal of criticism 
about that translation and is in the process of trying to identify the cor
-rect technical and ˜nancial resources to remedy the error. Still, despite its 
problems, the Spanish translation is being used for now since there is, as 
yet, nothing better.
A ˜nal challenge relates to quality. Those who work in the ˜eld of 
electronic health records and information exchange are so involved with 
issues of technology, privacy, security, getting the project out, and prepar
-ing for interoperability that that they have not yet put in place a mecha
-nism to measure the quality and content of the translation. This is a key 
challenge.
Solomon made several recommendations for future efforts to con
-struct patient-centered health information technology. First, when issuing 
requests for proposals, it should be a prerequisite for funding that the 
proposal should include provisions for serving LEP individuals. Second, 
resources should be made available to assist organizations in accessing, 
measuring, and deploying health content that is relevant and respectful 
of cultural differences. Finally, because many individuals in vulnerable 
populations do not read or do not read well, the development of down
-loadable audio and video content should be encouraged. 
Although many talk about the huge investment of resources needed 
to develop health information technology, the total amount of funding for 
MiVIA through the 6 years of its development is less than $600,000. This 
is not a huge investment, considering the bene˜ts that accrue.
Solomon concluded with a vision for the future of MiVIA and other 
personal health records. In that vision, these tools make it possible for 
both physician and patient information to be sent directly to the PHR 
from any electronic health record; there are condition-speci˜c modules for 
self management; access to critical information is available 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week; and the tools have the ability to bridge language barriers 
between patients and providers.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
A 
USER
-C
ENTERED
 P
ERSONAL
 H
EALTH
 R
ECORD
:  THE
 D
ESI
GN A
ND
 D
EVELOPMENT
 OF
  THE
 S
HARED
 C
ARE
 P
LAN
Dawn Gauthier, M.
I.S.
 Web Usability Designer, PeaceHealth
In 2001 the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation awarded a Pursuing 
Perfection grant to Whatcom County, Washington (the only community 
to receive such a grant) to implement a chronic disease model, including 
the development of a user-centered personal health record (PHR). The 
project was also supported by a patient safety grant from the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality. With the publication of 
Crossing the 
Quality Chasm
 (IOM, 2001), those working on the project kept in mind the 
report™s six aims for improvement
4 and the ten rules
5 for the health care 
system as design work proceeded.
Whatcom County had been very much interested in designing a 
patient-centered health care system. Development of a user-centered 
electronic health record, the Shared Care Plan, ˜t well with the activities 
of the County. The project began with a focus on chronic conditions and 
the design of a chronic-disease-management tool. The involvement of 
patients pushed the design in the direction of a personal health record. 
The design goals of the Shared Care Plan, which was an endeavor of 
the entire community including all the providers, were to
Ł  
facilitate patients™ interactions with the health care system, sup
-porting the virtual Care Team concept, and planned care, and to 
ensure the ﬁnothing about me without meﬂ perspective of the 
patient;
Ł  
offer patients a tool that fosters a sense of responsibility for their 
own health and encourages them to learn about and practice prin
-ciples of self-management (such as maintaining a medication list), 
thereby encouraging educated and engaged patients;
Ł  
provide a tool that enables patients to feel safer because they are 
informed and in control; and 
4  The six aims for improvement for the health care system are that the system must be safe, 
effective, patient-centered, timely, ef˜cient, and equitable (IOM, 2001).
5 
 The 10 rules for the health care system are that care should be based on continuous 
healing relationships, there should be customization based on patient needs and values, the 
patient should be the source of control, there should be shared knowledge and the free ˚ow 
of information, there should be evidence-based decision making, safety should be a system 
property, there is a need for transparency, the health system should anticipate patient needs, 
there should be a continuous decrease in waste, and there should be cooperation among 
clinicians (IOM, 2001).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
55
Ł  
give patients access to their clinical information from multiple 
community health care systems so that they may organize it into a 
single meaningful lifelong personal health record and then make 
appropriate parts of that record available to those who need it at 
the patient-owner™s discretion.
The second goal may be of particular interest to those attending this 
workshop because of its health literacy aspects. The idea behind the goal 
is that if patients could be encouraged to use the Shared Care Plan, even 
if they did not understand everything they encountered, not only would 
their health literacy increase but, if their Shared Care Plan was up to date, 
they would be in a good position to deal with any issues that might arise 
in their health care.
There are currently more than 1,400 Shared Care plans in Whatcom 
County. There are also a couple of pilot sites in Oregon. The regions in 
which the plans are being implemented are the PeaceHealth regions.
Patient involvement was key to development. The user-centered 
design approach is more than just a methodology; it is a philosophy and 
a process in which the tasks, needs, wants and limitations of the end user 
of a system (in this case, the patients) are given extensive attention at each 
stage of the design process. 
Jakob Nielsen (2005) developed the following key end-user principles 
or ﬁrightsﬂ for user-centered design. First, people should be considered 
superior to technology. While that may seem obvious, there are those 
involved in technology development and programming who may some
-times need to be reminded of this. Second is the right to empowerment. 
Third, users have the right to simplicity, that is, to have things that are 
well-designed, easy to use, and designed to complete the task one needs 
to complete, not someone else™s idea of what one needs to complete. 
Finally, people have the right to have their time respected. One can waste 
a great deal of time using poorly designed technology. Such technology 
is very frustrating and can be intimidating.
Through an approach called user research, system designers working 
on the Shared Care Plan project set out to determine what tasks patients 
were actually attempting to accomplish. They observed, they listened to 
patients tell their stories, and they asked questions about why patients 
did things in a certain way. Several approaches were used to gather infor
-mation including one-on-one contextual interviews, usability testing of 
design ideas and prototypes, patient focus groups, and surveys. 
A very popular approach is the use of focus groups. It is important in 
such groups to make sure you have a range of representation including
Ł patients who most successfully navigate the health care system;
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Ł patients who are healthy and rarely use the system;
Ł  
patients who fully understand what you are trying to do (may be 
health care professionals themselves); and
Ł patients who have no idea what you are trying to do.
The dif˜culty with the focus group approach is that one can end up 
with ﬁgroup-think.ﬂ That is, people begin agreeing with each other even 
if what they hear is not actually how they do things. Furthermore, people 
may say that they do things in a particular way but when they are actually 
observed, they are doing it differently. 
In user-centered design one ˜gures out what patients are trying to 
do, designs something that one thinks will allow patients to accomplish 
their tasks, tests the design with the patients, and then evaluates whether 
the design worked or not. The resulting feedback is then used to re˜ne 
the system design as necessary. One does not need a fully functioning 
prototype to evaluate a design; one can use ideas and drawings on paper 
for the tests.
The best approach is probably one-on-one contextual design. In this 
approach one goes into the ˜eld to talk with patients. During such inter
-views one might accompany patients to physician of˜ce visits and watch 
their interactions with physicians. One might even, accompanied by the 
patient, look through the patient™s medicine cabinet.
An important part of user-centered design is producing a task analysis, 
because such an analysis crystallizes the design work. In a task analysis one 
lists all the tasks that are observed and then prioritizes the tasks based on 
how important each task is to the patients. This helps de˜ne the scope and 
focus of the product.
In terms of scope, for example, even though survey after survey has 
shown that the thing patients most want to be able to do is re˜ll their 
medications online, and even though project designers knew it was a 
high priority for patients, the decision was made to not include that in 
the personal health record. That decision was made because the task was 
too large to accomplish for every single health organization in the com
-munity, and the Shared Health Plan is a community-wide resource. It was 
an intentional decision, therefore, to leave that tool out of the scope of the 
PHR product.
Task analysis also serves to keep design and development work 
focused on the task at hand. It is easy to get off track because there are so 
many interesting and wonderful features that can be tried in this arena. 
A task analysis, however, focuses designers on what patients are trying 
to accomplish. This focus clears a great deal of static from the design 
process.
Most importantly, when one has user research and a task analysis 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
57
in hand, decisions are made by referencing user data rather than relying 
on opinions and assumptions. This is very important, especially if one 
is working with health care professionals. Such professionals frequently 
believe that they know what is best for patients and that, if patients would 
just do things the way the professionals say, everything will work out ˜ne. 
So user research is a way to keep the focus on the patients. When this was 
done, it was found that patients™ tools are very different from the tools one 
might build for clinicians and health care professionals.
Finally, the design work focused on how to support the tasks that 
were identi˜ed, rather than making up the tasks that one thinks patients 
should be doing.
The project also had a Patient Action and Advisory Committee. 
Gauthier strongly recommended that anyone designing technology for 
patients convene such a group. It makes it easier to ˜nd patients to work 
with, and the committee members invigorate staff, keeping them focused 
on the reasons the product is being developed.
Much of the design work and problem solving for the system was 
tested with patients using a wireframe
6 before a single line of code was 
written. Patients were given a graphic representation of a Web page and 
told they could use their ˜nger as a mouse to click on the various options. 
They were then asked questions such as, ﬁWhat would you click on to add 
a new medication?ﬂ Using a wireframe with patients allows the designer 
to determine where changes should be made. It also allows for rapid itera
-tions that bring one closer and closer to a really great design that most 
patients will be able to pick up and use quite easily. 
The following examples illustrate how a task was designed in the 
user interface. The ˜rst task was for a patient to be able to ˜nd the generic 
name of a medication. There is a great deal of confusion among patients 
over the myriad names for a single drug. The design decision was made to 
always pair the brand name with the generic name so that patients always 
see the two together (see Figure 4-2). When patients add medications to 
their lists, the lists will always show both the brands and, when available, 
the generic pairing. The page also shows the patient which strengths of 
the medication are available, a piece of information that patients were 
very interested in knowing.
6 
 A wireframe ﬁis a visualization tool for presenting proposed functions, structure and 
content of a Web page or Web site. A wireframe separates the graphic elements of a Web 
site from the functional elements in such a way that Web teams can easily explain how us
-ers will interact with the Web site. A typical wireframe includes (1) key page elements and 
their location, such as header, footer, navigation, content objects, branding elements, (2) 
grouping of elements, such as side bars, navigation bars, content areas, (3) labeling, page 
title, navigation links, headings to content objects, and (4) place holders, content text and 
imagesﬂ (Jupitermedia Corporation, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Figure 4-2, bitmappedFI
GU
RE 4-2
 Task.
SOURCE: Gauthier, 2008.
Another task was to allow the patient to ˜nd the name of a medica
-tion he or she took in the past because it was effective and he or she would 
like to take it again. Amazingly, many patient records and medication 
lists are structured so that only active medications are shown. Yet there 
are a number of valid and legitimate reasons that patients might need 
to access their discontinued medication lists, so the project designed a 
discontinued-medication section in the Shared Care Plan. The system is 
designed so that it does not require the patient to do any work to maintain 
the list. The patient simply takes a medication off the active-medication 
list and, unless the patient states that the removal was entered in error, 
the medication will automatically be put onto the patient™s discontinued 
medication list. 
Another task that patients are often faced with is to quickly communi
-cate their health information to a new doctor. As in the case of MiVIA dis
-cussed earlier, the wallet-sized card provided with the Shared Care Plan 
is valued by both patients and their health care professionals. The card 
provides a concise summary of some of the most pertinent information in 
the personal health record and can be easily printed. If one were to print 
the entire Shared Care Plan, by contrast, it could be 15 to 20 pages long.
Since one of the goals of the Shared Care Plan is to enable patients to 
communicate with their health care professionals, and because health care 
professionals were logging into the system, it became necessary to sup
-port clinician tasks in addition to patient tasks. For example, a clinician 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
59
seeing a patient for the ˜rst time who ˜nds no allergies listed on the plan 
may want to know if the patient really has no allergies or if the patient 
has just not yet ˜lled out that section of the Shared Care Plan. It often 
takes patients several sittings to ˜ll out the entire plan which means that 
there will often be varying levels of completion. The design has to allow 
patients to check a box that explicitly states that the patient has no known 
allergies so that the answer is not ambiguous to the clinicians.
There were numerous challenges encountered in designing the sys
-tem. One set of challenges related to privacy and security. How, for exam
-ple, can one design the system to safely provide patients access to their 
private health care information over the Internet, yet still allow needed 
information to be shared in an emergency situation? Other issues in this 
area included how clinicians would log in and how usage would be 
audited.
The Shared Care Plan was designed so patients can explicitly give 
view-only or fully-edit access to their care team members (see Figure 4-3). 
In Whatcom County about 99 percent of the physicians participate in the 
local health care network which means that patients can easily look up 
their various local health care providers and add them to their care teams. 
Patients can invite family members and friends to be part of their care 
team as well by using the invitation mechanism. Patients are the ones who 
determine who is on their care team.
Providing appropriate emergency access was another issue in the area 
of privacy and security. In the situation illustrated in Figure 4-3, access 
is given to a group called Community Clinicians. This is a way to group 
all the community clinicians together whom the patient has not explicitly 
listed on the care team. By granting community clinicians access to the 
records, the patient is saying that anyone who needs to access the Shared 
Care Plan in an emergency may have access. Alternatively, patients can 
also block access to anyone who is not explicitly listed on the care team.
Figure 4-4 illustrates the privacy ˚ag feature. In this example, a patient 
is adding a new diagnosis (sleep apnea) to the diagnosis list. At the bot
-tom of every record that the patient adds to the Shared Care Plan, there is 
the privacy ˚ag indicated by a padlock icon. When the patient checks the 
box by the padlock, the team list is displayed at the bottom of the page 
and the patient decides who will be able to access that diagnosis. This was 
a feature that patients requested. Patients did not want a blanket yes/no 
setting for access to a record for the entire care team; they wanted instead 
to decide which individuals on the care team would have access.
The system also produces a summary of who has accessed the 
record, the health care facility and department of those who accessed 
the record, and the date on which the access occurred. Patients can view 
that summary access screen at any time. If the patient sees something 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Figure 4-3, bitmappedFI
GU
RE 4-3
 Care team members.
SOURCE: Gauthier, 2008.
Figure 4-4, bitmappedFI
GU
RE 4-4 
Add diagnosis.
SOURCE: Gauthier, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
61
troubling, he or she can call the Shared Care Plan of˜ce and ask the staff 
there to look into the situation. Shared Care Plan staff can also audit 
the entire database, which is not available through user interface. If a 
patient alerts staff to a problem because a name appears on the audit 
trail that the patient does not recognize, staff can go into the database 
and re-create what happened. No editing activity is ever deleted.
Although there are some nice front-end privacy controls in the Shared 
Care Plan, there is not, as yet, a policy that discloses who has access to 
the back end of a PHR; is it 5 people or 100 people? With a de˜nite policy 
in place that discloses this type of information, patients would be better 
able to make determinations about how secure the back end of a PHR 
system is.
In addition to challenges surrounding privacy and security, there 
have also been challenges involving health literacy. There is a great deal 
of accumulated wisdom available from patients who have navigated the 
health care system. The features and functionalities of the Shared Care 
Plan were designed based on the tasks that engaged patients are perform
-ing. But how does one explain these features and functions to someone 
who is interacting with the health care system for the ˜rst time? The con
-cepts in, for example, managing a medication list are extremely complex. 
Designers spent a great deal of time on the medication list because there 
were a large number of things that patients needed to understand and to 
do, but there is a real problem in preparing new participants to compre
-hend these concepts.
The Shared Care Plan was developed speci˜cally for a chronic
-disease 
population. Once it was turned into a more general personal health record 
the target audience expanded and the need for meeting patients at their 
own knowledge level increased. One thing that has been done to mitigate 
the problem is giving patients the choice to deactivate sections in the 
Shared Care Plan that they ˜nd they are not using. For example, there is 
a goal-setting/next steps section that chronic-disease patients ˜nd very 
useful but that someone who is healthy and just wants to have a record 
may not need to use.
The platform approach may be one way of managing this problem. 
With HealthVault, Microsoft is constructing a basic platform that allows 
people to build tools that can then be plugged into the platform. This 
avoids the problem of each group having to do all the work of designing 
and building the functions of the platform over and over again. In the 
future, it is likely that there will be a greater variety of tools which serve 
many different audiences and which can be built more quickly and then 
plugged into HealthVault.
Many individuals have never heard of a personal health record. To 
educate potential users, drop-in labs were organized that allowed people 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
to sit with an expert who provided hands-on attention while the users 
worked through the system. To build awareness, presentations were given 
at such locations as community centers, senior centers, and churches. 
Once a few people became excited about the Shared Care Plan they acted 
as ambassadors, talking with friends and family, and spreading the idea. 
This was a very successful way of spreading ideas and getting people to 
sign up.
The ˜nal challenge is management of patient expectations. This is 
incredibly dif˜cult. It takes a great deal of explaining to get people to 
sign up for the personal health record. Once they sign up, they are very 
pleased to ˜nd they can add any of their clinicians in the community to 
their care team and set the access level for each person. But once they 
have done this, they tend to expect that the clinicians will be constantly 
logging on to the PHR to record and access information. Not all clinicians, 
however, entirely engage in using the system. 
Patients also expected to be able to log in to the system and imme
-diately have all of their health care records electronically available for 
them to download into their personal health record. But as Marchibroda 
mentioned, only a small percentage of physicians use electronic health 
records. Thus, it was necessary to work with patients to explain the limita
-tions and to temper their expectations.
Another common patient expectation was that a critical mass of clini
-cians would be engaged. It is a great deal of work to ˜ll out the Shared 
Care Plan and it is even more work to maintain it. Patients were lucky if 
one of their clinicians was a participant in the Pursuing Perfection Proj
-ect. A large number of patients did not have any of˜cially participating 
clinicians which meant they did not see their clinicians participating. 
Unfortunately there were a number of stories of patients taking their 
printed Share Care Plan to a clinician visit, even the wallet-size version, 
only to have the clinician completely disregard it, even throw it into the 
trash can in one extreme case. Imagine the effect that had on the patient™s 
perception of the value of ˜lling out the large amount of information in 
the Shared Care Plan.
Patients will understand the value of PHRs only when they start 
actually seeing them signi˜cantly improving their experiences within the 
health care system. (e.g., not repeating their medication lists verbally, not 
having to ˜ll out repetitive forms, etc.). In other words, patients won™t 
value PHRs until their own clinicians value and use them.
Recently, emergency medical services (EMS) in Whatcom County 
have decided to participate with the system. Ambulances have installed 
wireless Internet, and now EMS has the ability, when receiving a 911 call, 
to cross-walk the telephone number with a patient™s Shared Care Plan, 
if there is one. If the patient has given the community clinicians ability 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
63
to access the PHR, the ambulance drivers can actually look up informa
-tion as they are driving to the patient™s house. This is very appealing to 
patients.
Improvements to the system are always being made. A new version 
of the Shared Care Plan was recently launched, for example. While it 
appears similar to users, there is a great deal of new technology in place, 
including new support for localization (such as language). This version is 
being piloted in New Zealand and Sweden, among other places. There is 
also a beta version that will enable integration with emerging platforms 
such as Microsoft™s HealthVault. 
The original version of the Shared Care Plan is available for free to 
anyone who wishes to use it. The full source code and complete docu
-mentation of the tool are available at http://www.peacehealth.org/scp. 
Anyone can download it. Hundreds of people all over the world have 
downloaded the code base and the documentation guide.
One question PeaceHealth staff is currently pondering is how its 
patient portal should interact with the Shared Care Plan and other PHRs. 
One idea is similar to the concept upon which Quicken (the ˜nancial man
-agement software) is basedŠthat is, to try to standardize the systems so 
that a patient can interface his or her PHR with multiple organizational 
portals where patients may choose to receive services. 
Gauthier concluded by saying that there is no shortage of great ideas 
from patients that then lead to new designs and built systems. The Shared 
Care Plan will keep evolving to incorporate those ideas. 
OB
SERVATIONS
 FROM
 THE
 EX
AM
 R
OOM
: P
ATIENT
-C
ENTERED
 HIT I
MPLEMENTATION
 IN
 D
IVERSE
 P
RACTICE
 S
ETTIN
GSJoshua Seidman, Ph.D., M.H.S.
 President, Center for 
Information 
Therapy
Information therapy sits at the intersection of patient-centered care 
and health information technology (HIT). The Center for Information 
Therapy is an independent nonpro˜t organization whose mission is to 
advance the practice and the science of information therapy in order to 
improve people™s health. The vision of the center is a future in which 
every health decision is informed.
7The center uses the logo ﬁIxﬂ because Ix is a corollary to Rx, the stan
-dard symbol for a medical treatment or prescription. People talk about all 
the information that is available on the Web and, in general, it is positive 
that consumers have access to that information. But too much information 
7 
 The Center for Information Therapy website is www.ixcenter.org.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
can create an information overdose. If people access inaccurate or incor
-rect information, that too can have negative side effects. Therefore, the 
issue can be seen as a matter of titrating the dosage of information. How 
does one ˜gure out the appropriate dose, frequency, and duration of the 
information to provide? How can the right information be delivered to the 
right people at the right time so that they can better manage their health 
and make better health decisions?
Kerr White, an epidemiologist, developed the idea of the ecology of 
health care and medicine (1961). His idea was to examine a population of 
1,000 people to determine how people experience health and health issues 
and how they use the health care system. This research was updated by 
Larry Green (a family physician) and colleagues (2001).
Green and his colleagues found that in a population of 1,000 people, 
on average about 800 would report symptoms of one sort or another. Of 
those reporting symptoms, 217 would visit a physician™s of˜ce (includ
-ing 113 who would visit a primary care physician), 65 would visit a 
complementary or alternative medicine provider, 21 would visit a hospital 
outpatient clinic, 14 would choose to receive home health care, 13 would 
visit an emergency department, and 8 would be hospitalized (with fewer 
than 1, on average, hospitalized in an academic medical center). There is 
a big difference between the number of people reporting symptoms and 
the number who actually seek care. 
How does use of the Internet for seeking health information ˜t into 
this picture? Of those 1,000 people, it is known that considerably more 
than the number who seek care, but probably less than the 800 who report 
symptoms, will access the Internet for health information. There are dif
-ferent degrees of access to the InternetŠsome people have access at home, 
others at work, and still others have access through a family member. The 
Pew Internet and American Life Project found that 60 percent of people 
with household incomes below $40,000 per year had access to the Internet 
(Esterbrook et al., 2007). 
More people now go online for health information every day than 
visit a doctor, which is what Susannah Fox of the Pew Internet and Ameri
-can Life Project referred to as the ﬁDr. Googleﬂ phenomenon. That raises 
the obvious question, What happens when physicians tell their patients 
not to go online? When surveyed on this question, consumers said that 
they either change where they are going for medical care or else just no 
longer tell their physicians about it (Fox and Fallows, 2003). 
If one asks consumers where they would prefer to obtain information, 
they report that their ˜rst choice is from their personal physician. But 
when they do see their physician, the visit is often carried out in a very 
condensed timeframe with insuf˜cient time to discuss everything they 
would like to talk about. Furthermore, about 50 to 80 percent of things a 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
65
patient hears in the physician™s of˜ce is completely forgotten by the time 
he or she gets home (Eiser, 1982) When the patient returns home, he or she 
will generally have numerous questions still unanswered. In response, the 
patient goes to the Internet. The patient may also go to other places as 
well in the search for information.
It is not dif˜cult to ˜nd information on the Internet. The dif˜culty is 
˜nding information relative to a speci˜c need. Even if people ˜nd what 
they need, they may not understand what they ˜nd. If they ˜nd and 
understand the information, the next challenge is to remember it. If they 
˜nd, understand, and remember the information, they must then ˜gure 
out how to contextualize it, that is, they must determine what the infor
-mation means for their particular care and needs.
This is the task of information therapy; to ˜gure out how to bring two 
worlds together in order to make sure that the information people need 
is there for them at the right time. Information therapy recognizes that 
there is a difference between data and information. If one looks at a PHR, 
for example, it may contain data that are hard to read and interpret. But 
going from data to information therapy requires making sense of those 
data and putting them into some context that leads to information, then 
to knowledge, and ultimately, to behavior. 
Appropriate use of HIT can help individuals make informed health 
decisions. The Center for Information Therapy took part in a project that 
observed how clinicians and patients use HIT to advance patient educa
-tion and to make better use of HIT tools.
8 Time was spent in a wide vari
-ety of settingsŠsmall practices with one or two physicians, for example, 
multi-specialty groups, and in integrated delivery systems. About half of 
the time was spent in federally quali˜ed community health centers.
Health literacy issues cut across various populations. One important 
observation of the project was that some of the biggest health literacy 
challenges occur with people who have signi˜cantly impaired cognitive 
function, such as people with mental illness.
If one is to understand what actually happens with patients, one 
must spend time on site. For that reason, project staff spent a great deal 
of time observing the interactions of clinicians and patients. But before 
they observed these clinician/patient interactions, the project staff spoke 
with administrators of the facilities. One ˜nding was that the way in 
which administrators viewed things was often contradicted by what 
8 
 Safety net providers observed included the Institute for Family Health (New York); 
East Boston Neighborhood Health Center; Cambridge Health Alliance (Massachusetts); La 
Clinica de La Raza (California); District of Columbia Primary Care Association; Lifelong 
Medical Care (California); Queens Health Network (New York); UNITE HERE! (New York); 
Urban Health Plan (New York); Baltimore Medical System; Redwood Community Health 
Coalition; and MiVia/La Luz Community Center (California).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
actually was happening. In one community health center, for example, 
the chief information of˜cer told the project staff, ﬁOh, we don™t really 
need a PHR because our patients don™t really want to access information 
electronically.ﬂ But when the staff observed the primary care physician 
serving his patients over a 2-hour period, the physician received e-mails 
and text messages from patients on his cell phone. It turned out that 
the clinician™s patients already were using electronic technology, but 
the message was not getting to the administrators of the center. Rather 
than making assumptions about what technologies patients do or do not 
use, one should use data and observations to determine what is actually 
occurring.
The project found that there was a great deal of variability in terms 
of the technology that patients were using. For example, in one inner-
city community health center with a population that was about 95 per
-cent Latino, the clinicians said, ﬁAll our patients use e-mail.ﬂ In other 
communities patients were using smartcards. These smartcards contain 
patient information which can by read by smartcard readers at health 
care facilities in order to quickly obtain information about the patient. 
The smartcard readers cost about $15, so this approach is fairly inexpen
-sive to implement. The problem is that facilities frequently do not plan in 
advance to buy smartcard readers when they buy their computers.
Similarly, many facilities are implementing electronic health records 
without thinking about the portal access. Furthermore, planning for PHRs 
is often done without thinking about the link between an individual™s 
health information (e.g., a person™s lab data, medical record, and medica
-tion information) and the context within which that information will be 
used. This is a serious concern, and it is important to think carefully about 
the best way to contextualize content. There is a great opportunity to do 
things correctly the ˜rst time, to make sure electronic records are patient-
centered, as PeaceHealth and MiVIA have done.
There are many instances when PHRs are implemented but not much 
used. Providers don™t promote their use or they may even object to their 
useŠas in the case that Gauthier spoke of earlier where the physician 
threw the Shared Care Plan card in the trash. Patients need to be engaged, 
but clinicians must also be active participants in the process because 
patients do pay attention to what their clinicians say and give it a great 
deal of weight.
Observation shows that people are hungry for information but do 
not have very high expectations. As mentioned in earlier presentations, 
people need a reason to use technology. Once they have an experience of 
value to them, they are much more likely to use the technology. For exam
-ple, technologies could create after-visit summaries in English, Spanish, 
or other languages. Given that patients forget 50 percent to 80 percent of 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
67
what they hear in a physicians of˜ce (Eiser, 1982), such summaries could 
have a big effect on how the patients view technology.
A major challenge is the reimbursement system and the way that 
incentives are structured. Currently, particularly for community health 
centers, the in-person visit is the major source of income. But if technology 
use decreases the number of visits, it also decreases income. This issue 
must be addressed.
Crossing the Quality Chasm
 stated that health care in the past has been 
based on episodic encounters with the delivery system (IOM, 2001). It 
is important to create a system with a more continuous cycle of care 
and continuous healing relationships. Furthermore, as the report states, 
the system should encourage ﬁall types of health care interactions that 
improve information transfer.ﬂ On average, a patient™s visit to a clinician 
lasts 16 minutes, during which the conversation between clinician and 
patient may cover six topics (Blumenthal et al., 1999). Information therapy 
and patient-centered HIT can help patients maximize the value of these 
visits by, for example, allowing them to obtain information in advance of 
the visit. By using HIT to obtain information in advance, the patient has 
a better sense of what might be expected, which sets the stage for more 
ef˜cient use of time during the encounter. An after-visit summary would 
then reinforce what went on during the visit.
Seidman concluded by saying that use of PHRs increases ongoing 
communication for risk reduction, health promotion, care management, 
and, ultimately, decision support, particularly concerning high-end proce
-dures. The Center for Information Therapy™s annual meeting will explore 
HIT and patient-centered care as well as information therapy and health 
disparities, plus information therapy and health literacy.
DISC
USSION
George 
Isham, M.D., M.S.
 HealthPartners
 Moderator
An audience member said that what has been presented certainly 
has implications for building the medical home. The challenge will be to 
involve patients. Gauthier responded that in the PeaceHealth project par
-ticipating clinics were often the ˜rst ones to introduce the concept of the 
Shared Care Plan and its personal health record to patients. They would 
display tent cards on their desks and stickers on their windows that said, 
ﬁWe support the Shared Care Plan.ﬂ That advocacy for the personal health 
record helped convince patients. 
Solomon said that MiVIA is actually the medical home for the people 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
it serves because those members have so many providers. A member may 
go to a public health clinic, an emergency room, and two or three clinics 
in a just a few months. If the patient™s health information is dispersed 
throughout all those sites, it can contribute to poor outcomes for the 
member. MiVIA, as a single storage site, can facilitate better coordination 
and outcomes. This does not mean that the various facilities do not have 
their own charts, but all the information relevant to the member is stored 
in the MiVIA personal health record.
The same participant asked what the repercussions are regarding 
reimbursement and revenue streams for using these electronic tools, espe
-cially for the providers who are providing clinical care.
Solomon replied that, for MiVIA, the members are mostly uninsured 
and use clinics that are reimbursed under special programs. It is critical, 
however, to start looking at how to promote reimbursement to providers 
so that they participate as partners with their patients in getting this infor
-mation online. PHRs, especially with vulnerable populations, contribute 
to costs savings because results of tests are located in the record, which 
negates the need for running the same test or for scanning multiple times 
as the patient visits multiple providers.
One participant said that hearing about the Shared Care Plan is awe 
inspiring. How applicable is it to other parts of the country? The Shared 
Care Plan is in a rural area with a de˜ned set of providers, and the patient 
research was conducted in that community. What can be learned from that 
work to think about how to apply this in other places?
Gauthier responded that the circumstances in Whatcom County did 
enable the project to move farther than, perhaps, other locales would. 
What was done in Whatcom County is available for download, but what 
is of foremost importance is that those constructing PHRs should conduct 
user research. One may or may not end up with the same kind of PHR 
that Whatcom County did. Certainly the example of MiVIA shows that 
things vary from city to city.
Another very important lesson is to give patients the respect they 
deserve for what they are trying to accomplish in the health care system. 
Many people have the attitude that getting clinicians together in a room 
to brainstorm about what patients need is suf˜cient, but that is simply not 
true. Just because a clinician works with patients on a day-to-day basis 
does not mean that the clinician understands what patients are experienc
-ing at the pharmacy or when they go home. 
Another useful thing would be to standardize the de˜nition of a per
-sonal health record and the components that make up that record.
 Solomon 
said that the Markle Foundation, as part of its Connecting for Health 
work (http://www.connectingforhealth.org/workinggroups/personal
 healthwg.html), will be releasing some recommendations, principles, and 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
69
policies regarding personal health information and the term ﬁnetwork 
PHRs.ﬂ The technology is fast developing to the point where, given stan
-dards, one should be able to take a PHR from one system to another and 
share information.
In terms of usability in separate locations, MiVIA has been imple
-mented not only on the West Coast but also in New York. Two networks 
that have migrant streams that go from New York to Florida are enrolling 
the members in New York and then having the clinics in Florida connect 
with those in New York.
But the most important things, Solomon continued, are ˜rst to edu
-cate, then to engage in outreach, and ˜nally to proceed with implemen
-tation. One needs to educate the public and the provider communities 
about how PHR and technology can help. Next, outreach with communi
-ties and providers must be undertaken. Finally, one must implement the 
program.
One audience member said that, given the discussion, it seems correct 
to say that there is no standard PHR design or dominant design in the 
country. Is there a standard interface with electronic medical records?
Solomon responded that a standard interface is emerging. Just as 
CCHIT (Certi˜cation Commission for Healthcare Information Technol
-ogy) offers certi˜cation for electronic medical records, HL7
9 will soon be 
releasing recommendations for interfaces around certain parts of the PHR. 
Standardization could happen, although it has not yet been accomplished. 
Information can be downloaded from the HL7 website at www.hl7.org. 
Gauthier added that there are de˜nitely opportunities for standard
-izing personal health records, but there will always be a need for seg
-mentation. For example, a patient could take an activation quiz to ˜nd 
out where he or she is on the health literacy scale and then be prescribed 
a certain type of PHR based on how health-literate that patient is. As the 
patient progresses in health literacy, he or she could easily move informa
-tion to a different PHR. That is where standards would be key.
Solomon was asked whether she thought that at some point any 
commercial application of EHR in the country would be able to feed 
MiVIA data. Absolutely, Solomon responded. MiVIA is already working 
with two electronic medical record companies and with other PHRs to 
accomplish this.
One questioner asked whether, within the MiVIA PHR design, there 
are any standards for the way information is displayed, for the level or 
9 
 ﬁHealth Level Seven is one of several American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-
accredited Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs) operating in the healthcare arena.
Health Level Seven™s domain is clinical and administrative dataﬂ (Health Level Seven Inc., 
2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
density of text, or for readability levels of charts or information. This 
would seem to be important given the differing abilities of people to 
read and comprehend. Or is this an issue that people are just beginning 
to realize is important?
Solomon responded that this is an important issue. MiVIA has focused 
on technology, privacy, and security of applications. This third generation 
needs to start looking at health-literacy aspects.
One participant, noting that several of the speakers touched on train
-ing and helping people understand how to use the technology, asked, 
Are there any best practices or standards for how to do that effectively or 
well, or is it so early that one is just at the point of doing something and 
sharing information?
Gauthier responded that it has been her experience that people do 
not expect or want to have to go through a 2-hour training session to 
use a website. People expect to be able to sit down and use any website 
that is out there. With the newer technologiesŠfor example, the so-called 
Ajax Rich Internet ApplicationsŠthere is an opportunity to build robust 
contextual help. Patients may be listing their care team on the form with 
no problem, but then they get to the advanced directions and are at a loss 
for what to do. It is at this point that they are ready for a training module 
embedded in the application that could walk them through the process. 
Embedding more contextual training in the applications themselves is 
probably the best approach to take.
Seidman agreed, although he pointed out that there is a portion of the 
population that is not yet versed in computers and does not use them. The 
idea of using 
promotores 
or community health workers as educators is a 
good one which seems to work well. There are other resources that can 
be deployed as well, such as librarians and other ancillary health profes
-sionals. In many cases, however, it is the community health workers who 
have been found to be most effective and the best use of resources. In one 
case, for example, a janitor™s union engaged unemployed janitors to help 
train union members in the use of computers. Union members™ reception 
of the training was very positive.
Solomon remarked that, on average, it takes a physician anywhere 
from 4 to 12 hours to learn to use an electronic medical record. Outreach 
and training for the community using the 
promotores
 engages the members 
and is a good model. Such training is really health advocacy. During the 
session members learn about all kinds of things, including how to talk 
with the physician, how health care is important to the member, and the 
importance of the member being a partner in the health care experience.
One audience member said that it is important that those designing 
PHRs want to listenŠto hear from the patients about their needs. Starting 
with people™s needs and working with them is crucial. But how does one 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PA
NE
L 
2 
71
make that grow? Are there ways to use these approaches in adult educa
-tion or in K-12 education to involve the next generation in skill building 
around use of these technological tools and to learn about the kinds of 
chronic conditions one might have, the immunizations one needs, and 
the medicines one takes? Another alternative might be to work with large 
employers and labor to engage populations in understanding information 
about their health and how to act on such information. 
Solomon responded that one of the successful things MiVIA did was 
to create a curriculum called the Student Health Ambassadorship Pro
-gram. MiVIA representatives visited the local high school and, through the 
high school principal, recruited three ESL (English as a Second Language) 
students. For 3 months, these students met once a week for about 2 hours 
to learn about information technology, health advocacy and
 bilingual 
assistance. They worked with the outreach workers as well. One of these 
students was a shy young lady about 16 years old who would not look at 
anyone directly. That young lady is now a sophomore in college, focus
-ing on health care. She has created her own curriculum and is working 
with PTAs (parent-teacher associations), the councils, and with teachers 
at various schools. Patient navigators or student health ambassadors are 
an important tool.
Seidman said that working with 
promotores
 and community health 
workers to train people in the use of the Internet also creates other social 
and employment opportunities. He described his experience as a vol
-unteer and president of the board of directors of a transitional house 
for homeless women in recovery from substance abuse in the mid- and 
late 1990s. At that time computers and the Internet were just beginning 
to emerge as being of major importance to individuals, and his group 
realized that women wanted to develop their skills with the computer. 
The board bought a computer for the house, and it became an important 
bene˜t for the women living there as they created their independent lives. 
Creating these kinds of opportunities is something that should be kept 
in mind.
Isham concluded the discussion by stating that the presentations and 
conversations had been excellent in terms of helping the audience realize 
that there is an interesting interface between health literacy and technol
-ogy that needs to be explored. It is not clear, however, that most of those 
engaged in developing these technological tools are currently aware of or 
exploring that interface.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Emerging Tools and Strategies
A 
GUIDE
 FOR
 D
EVELOPIN
G 
AND
 PU
RCHASIN
G SU
CCESSF
UL HEALTH
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY
Cindy Brach, M.P.P.
 Senior Health Policy Researcher, 
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) is a leader 
in the ˜eld of health information technology (HIT). It has an extensive 
HIT portfolio and operates the National Resource Center (NRC)
1 for HIT. 
Previous speakers have noted that there is not a great deal of awareness 
about health literacy issues in the IT world and that we need to raise that 
level of awareness. As an evidence-based agency, AHRQ wants to put 
forward what is known in the ˜eld about better ways of developing HIT 
that will lead to more effective ways to communicate effectively with all 
audiences.
The NRC was asked to develop a health literacy guide for HIT 
developers and purchasers. The project was managed jointly by Prashila 
1 
 NORC (the National Opinion Research Center), ﬁin cooperation with several partners, 
has led the development of a national resource center (NRC) for AHRQ™s Health Information 
Technology (health IT) initiative. The AHRQ NRC supports over 100 AHRQ HIT grantees, 
˜ve State and Regional Demonstration (SRD) projects working toward health information 
exchange, as well as 33 states and
 one territory working on a Health Information Security 
and Privacy Collaborationﬂ (National Opinion Research Center, 2008).
73
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Dullabh and June Eichner. The goal of the guide is to assist developers, 
the people who are creating new software programs, to become more 
aware of and more knowledgeable about health literacy issues. For pur
-chasers, the guide includes a checklist of things they should look for when 
evaluating whether to buy a particular HIT product.
The project ˜rst reviewed the literature, both the IT and HIT literature, 
to ˜nd out what was known about ways to develop health information 
technology so that it would be accessible to limited-literacy audiences. 
Project staff also looked at various products and websites such as MiVIA. 
Finally, project staff held discussions with individuals who develop and 
purchase HIT as well as with researchers involved in the evaluation of 
HIT for limited literacy populations.
Not surprisingly, the literature on developing accessible health infor
-mation technology for limited-literacy audiences is scanty; very little 
has been published about the best way to proceed. As discussed in this 
workshop, there may not be a single ﬁbestﬂ way; instead systems should 
be adapted to a particular community or population.
AHRQ views health information technology as including personal 
health records, electronic health records, and health information exchange. 
The guide covers a number of different types of technology that can be 
used to convey health information to various audiences, including Inter
-net websites, touch screen kiosks, personal wireless devices (e.g., cell 
phones, BlackBerrys, and personal digital assistants or PDAs), and home 
monitoring devices.
The guide promotes the use of universal basic design principles. First, 
use a simple structure with clean looks that highlight important elements. 
Second, build well, taking advantage of the technology inherent in the 
application in order to give consumers choices. Finally, for Internet sites, 
it is important to use HTML rather than other formats because HTML is 
more accessible to consumers.
An example of a simple design is shown in Figure 5-1. This design, 
which is still in testing, is a version of an update to prevention information 
in health˜nder.gov, which has been attempting to ˜nd which approaches 
are more responsive to and work best for consumers. As can be seen, the 
design contains only ˜ve headings of two or three words each: (1) Eat 
Healthy, (2) Get Active, (3) Get Screened, (4) Quit Smoking, and (5) Watch 
Your Weight. Each of the subsequent Web pages takes a similarly clean 
approach, presenting quite a bit of information but in a clear, simple, and 
understandable way.
Much of the guide
2 adheres to current guidelines for print materials. 
2 
 The guide is called 
Accessible Health 
Information 
Technology (
IT
) for Populations with Limited 
Literacy: A Guide for De
velopers and Purchasers of Health 
IT
. It is available on AHRQ™s National 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERG
IN
G 
TOO
LS A
ND S
TRA
TE
GIE
S 75
For example, the content should assume that the browser has little or 
no background knowledge, information should be relevant to users, it 
should deliver a limited number of messages, and it should use numbers 
and percentages that are appropriate. Furthermore, one should use graph
-ics only if they clarify text. There should be white space, lines should be 
short, and text should be broken up and chunked. Text should be in a 
large and familiar dark font on a light background, and there should be 
a consistent use of font sizes and styles with both upper and lower case 
letters, and justi˜cation to the left-hand margin only.
It is also important to develop content that is culturally competent. 
Guidelines for cultural competence require content that is culturally 
appropriate and sensitive to users, and that members of groups be por
-trayed accurately in pictures and other graphic illustrations. The guide
-lines also require that translation from English be accurate and that idi
-oms and expressions be appropriate.
Iterative testing is critical. The recommended process is to draft a 
prototype, conduct a team review and a review by health-literacy experts, 
Resource Center for Health Information Technology at http://healthit.ahrq.gov/portal/
server.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_3882_803031_0_0_18/LiteracyGuide.pdf.
Figure 5-1, bitmappedFI
GU
RE 5-1
 Simple design.
SOURCE: Brach, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
and then revise the prototype based on the results of that review. After 
that, the revised design should be tested with a target audience that is 
culturally diverse and that includes limited-literacy members. During the 
test the audience should be observed using the technology, they should 
be asked about their experiences, and their comprehension should be 
assessed. Based on this test, the technology should be revised again and, 
if the technology will be in multiple languages, it should be tested in all 
those languages as well.
Some considerations are speci˜c to HIT. For example, design needs to 
be usable with both old and new hardware and software. Some users may 
have black and white monitors, some may have slow Internet connections 
that would take a very long time to load fancy images, and some may not 
have the plug-ins needed to access complicated graphics. The home page 
of the website must be simple, and information should be prioritized with 
a minimal amount of text per screen. Furthermore, it is important that 
navigation is simple and consistent, with minimal need for scrolling. Lim
-ited-literacy individuals often have great dif˜culty with the concept that 
they have to scroll down to obtain more information. AHRQ frequently 
uses the three-click rule, that is, one must get users to the information in 
three clicks or face the possibility of losing them.
Searching must be simpli˜ed, as it is one of the more dif˜cult opera
-tions for individuals with limited literacy. They frequently misspell words, 
and they may ˜nd it dif˜cult to understand the search engines. The site 
should have clearly de˜ned hyperlinks and a printer-friendly option. 
Audio transcription is an option to consider, especially for people who 
have dif˜culty reading or seeing, as well as for those who have a hard 
time ˜nding information, particularly such things as instructions for using 
home health equipment. It is also a good idea to give users information 
about how to call for assistance. 
Certain lessons have been learned about the use of computer kiosks. 
For example, it is important to have a practice session to familiarize users 
with the eLearning method. There should be one idea or question per 
screen and information should be limited to what is needed to manage 
the health problem. There should also be an option that allows the user 
to repeat a message and there should be some kind of teach-back built in 
so that learning can be reinforced. Again, audio transcription should be 
considered.
The guide also discusses personal wireless devices. When developing 
programs for these devices for use by adults with limited literacy, reliance 
on text should be minimized, and text messaging should be simpli˜ed.
There are a number of ways to make home monitoring devices such 
as glucometers and blood pressure cuffs easier to use including limiting 
the number of steps needed to use the device, using large keys with clear 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERG
IN
G 
TOO
LS A
ND S
TRA
TE
GIE
S 77
icons, including a self-calculating feature, and adding voice instructions 
and results. Clear presentation of results is important. For example, a 
person with limited literacy will ˜nd it easier to understand a message 
that says ﬁYour blood sugar is too highﬂ than one that provides a number 
that must be interpreted. Instructions should be clear and easy to follow, 
using simple print and video tutorials with illustrations for each step of 
use. One should avoid very small fonts and technical medical language, 
for instance. Critical components or warnings should be emphasized. 
Brach concluded by saying that, in thinking about the future it is 
important to start incorporating literacy and health literacy considerations 
into the development of personal health records and ePrescribing. 
DISC
USSION
George 
Isham, M.D., M.S.
 HealthPartners
 Moderator
One audience member said that many of her patients who use the 
Internet have dif˜culty so they look for a telephone number to call to 
obtain assistance. Yet, she said, it is usually not possible to ˜nd a tele
-phone number. The audience member urged AHRQ to be careful about 
posting guidelines on telephone use if there is not someone available to 
receive calls. Brach agreed that it was important to have someone avail
-able to answer calls.
Another participant asked if Brach could elaborate on what she meant 
when she talked about making information culturally relevant. Brach 
responded that some of the things one might look for are whether the 
graphics are relevant to the population. Unfortunately, there is not a sci
-ence base that one can point to and say, if one follows this checklist, one 
will be culturally competent. It is a very complex issue.
Another audience member pointed out that there does not seem to be 
a consensus about what the three to ˜ve actionable items are that could 
lead to quality improvement in various areas. What is it that everyone 
needs to know how to do in order to improve diabetes outcomes, for 
example, or asthma outcomes? It is a great deal easier to build platforms 
for communicating if one agrees on the actionable points. Any leadership 
or guidance that AHRQ can provide on how to do a better job of coming 
up with some common consensus about what one needs to know about 
health literacy would be very helpful.
Brach responded that AHRQ and those in the Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS) working on health˜nder.gov have been in the 
process of building consensus on the top prevention and health promo
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
tion messages. They started with an exhaustive search of all HHS docu
-ments and have winnowed the material down to ˜ve messages. So there 
is recognition that this is an important avenue to pursue. 
One audience member asked if AHRQ is tracking who is asking for 
and using the health literacy guide and if there are plans to determine 
whether or not the guide makes a difference. Brach responded that AHRQ 
tracks the number of hits and downloads of the document, but it cannot 
collect information about who is using the guide and what their experi
-ence is. It might be possible to conduct a study to examine those issues.
HEALTH
 L
ITERAC
Y, H
EALTH
 I
NFORMATION
 T
ECHNOLO
GY,
 AND
 H
EALTH
Y P
EOPLE
 2020
Linda Harris, Ph.D.
 Lead, Health Communication and eHealth 
Team
 Office of Disease Pre
vention and Health Promotion
Charles P. Friedman, Ph.D.
 Deputy 
National Coordinator for
 Health 
Information 
Technology 
 Department of Health and Human Ser
vices 
Healthy People is a comprehensive set of national 10-year objectives 
that provide a framework for public health priorities and actions, Harris 
explained. As many know, Healthy People 2010 has a communication 
focus and, within that focus, one of the objectives is to improve and 
address limited health literacy. Other topics in the 2010 communication 
focus area are meaningful access to the Internet, health website quality, 
research-based health communication with an evaluation component, and 
supporting patient-provider communication.
Planning for the Healthy People 2020 is now under way, with the 
mission, the vision, and the objectives yet to be de˜ned. Work began in 
2005 with meetings of experts to provide suggestions for how it should 
be organized. In 2007 this group presented its ideas. The year 2008 has 
been and will continue to be focused on building a framework for Healthy 
People 2020. During 2009, measurable objectives will be developed and, 
in 2010, Healthy People 2020 will be launched.
The group of experts involved in the planning of Healthy People 2020 
presented a different approach from the alphabetical categorization of 
objectives in Healthy People 2010, proposing two major focus areas. The 
current idea is that the primary focus would be on risk factors and deter
-minants of health, that is, on the primary factors related to health and 
disparities. The secondary focus would be on diseases and disorders. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERG
IN
G 
TOO
LS A
ND S
TRA
TE
GIE
S 79
The intent is that Healthy People 2020 create a systems view of health, 
to organize it around different contexts and different important factors. 
There are three high priorities in public health. First is prevention, second 
is preparedness, and third is HIT. 
In late 2007, the Of˜ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 
the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technol
-ogy, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formed a 
federal interagency subgroup on health communication and information 
technology. The purpose of the group is to create a vision and project a 
future in which health communication and information technologies sig
-ni˜cantly advance the goals of Healthy People 2020. Public forums, a blog 
and a wiki will provide an opportunity for input from the public about 
how health literacy is important and the role that health literacy should 
play in the development of the framework for Healthy People 2020. 
Friedman said that it is fascinating, exciting, and an enormous chal
-lenge to combine health literacy, health information technology, and health 
communications as a major foundational element of the Healthy People 
2020 activity. The Of˜ce of the National Coordinator (ONC) for Health 
Information Technology, in collaboration with a large number of people, 
has been working to conceptualize a vision of what information technol
-ogy might look like in the future and to develop a national 5-year HIT stra
-tegic plan (2008 to 2012). Efforts in this area began in 2007 and the plan is 
in the ˜nal stages of federal clearance.
3 The plan has two broad goals. The 
˜rst goal centers on person-focused health care. In addition to discussing 
the hardware and software aspects of IT, much of what is discussed in the 
plan will address the personŒfocused aspects of health care. Furthermore, 
the plan envisions IT as a means to achieve a healthier population.
A second goal concerns the improvement of population health. The 
plan de˜nes population health as having four components: public health, 
preparedness, biomedical research, and health care quality improvement. 
The plan is national in scope and is federally focused, setting forth a 
set of strategies that can be undertaken across a broad range of federal 
agencies.
Each of the two goals in the plan has four objectives with measurable 
outcomes. For the eight objectives there are a total of 43 strategies listed, 
each with a milestone. Some of the milestones are near-term (i.e., 2009 or 
2010), while others are longer-term (i.e., 2011 or 2012). Perhaps the most 
important feature of the plan is that it will include a compendium of fed
-eral activities already under way that are related to the various objectives 
of the plan and that are taking place in the agencies and departments 
involved in putting the plan together. 
3 
 The 
ON
C-Coordinated Federal H
IT
 Strategic Plan: 
200
8-2012
 was released June 3, 2008.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Harris said that the Federal Interagency Advisory Group will be the 
decision maker for Healthy People 2020. Current members of the group 
include only agencies from HHS, but the membership will soon expand 
to other agencies. As mentioned earlier, there is a Health Communica
-tion and Health Information Technology subgroup. The group™s task is 
to determine how health communication, health literacy, and HIT can 
provide an infrastructure for the achievement of Healthy People 2020. 
The strategic thinking presented in the ONC strategic plan will be woven 
throughout the work of this subgroup. Questions to be addressed include, 
What should be measured in health literacy and how should that be 
measured?
Harris concluded by saying that an effort to envision the future of 
an integrated system of health literacy, health communication, and HIT 
has begun. The subgroup will be advising the Secretary of HHS. Input is 
needed from those who are expert in the area of health literacy as well as 
from the public in general.
DISC
USSION
George 
Isham, M.D., M.S.
 HealthPartners
 Moderator
One audience member from a private health system said that his 
system has had a series of 5-year goals and each time it prepared for the 
next set, the system attempted to evaluate what had been learned from 
the previous set of goals. What information from Healthy People 2010, 
he asked, is being used as input to Healthy People 2020 in terms of the 
communication objectives and, more speci˜cally, health literacy? Harris 
responded that it is not clear that Healthy People 2020 should measure 
the same things that Healthy People 2010 measured. At present the health 
literacy of the population is being measured. But if one thinks in terms of 
infrastructure, one could measure other things, such as how many physi
-cians are trained in health literacy. One might set an objective to have all 
providers obtain continuing medical education credit for health commu
-nication or health literacy training. This is the kind of objective that could 
be incorporated into Healthy People if one thinks of it as representing an 
integrated infrastructure with skills, tools, and best practices.
Friedman asked for input from members of the audience about 
whether they believed that Healthy People 2020 should include objec
-tives directly related to HIT, health literacy, or health communication or 
whether those three components should be viewed in a more integrated 
fashion as a means to an end. One audience member replied that objec
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERG
IN
G 
TOO
LS A
ND S
TRA
TE
GIE
S 81
tives should relate directly to health literacy. The bottom line is that what 
is measured is what gets done. Low health literacy has been a barrier to 
many improvements in health. To create the correct incentives, one must 
measure the correct things, so only if there is an explicit focus on health 
literacy will people address its issues.
One audience member said that it appeared to him that a set of goals 
for the nation must be anchored in improving the health of the popula
-tion. Many things are enabling factors to improving the health of the 
citizens of the United States. Ultimately, however, the goals must lead 
to improving the health of the population. How one thinks about that 
is informed by one™s experience over time. The government has been 
engaged in this effort for 40 years now, and this will be the third decade of 
the iteration of these goals. What speci˜cally is being learned from what 
has happened in the past?
An audience member noted that there is an Institute of Medicine 
report on health literacy that made a number of recommendations (IOM, 
2004). It would probably be helpful to review those recommendations and 
determine the kind of progress achieved for the recommendations related 
to the communications and health objectives of Healthy People 2020. 
Another participant asked if the primary goal or vision of Healthy 
People 2020 is as global as improving the health of the nation or is more 
speci˜cally focused on reducing disparities. Health information technol
-ogy is very broad. Health communication, being about health information 
and its transfer, is a bit more speci˜c. And health literacy is about what 
people understand and what they can do with the information they have 
been given. Will Healthy People 2020 attempt to weave these three things 
together to improve health or to reduce disparities?
Harris responded that Healthy People 2020 is about both improving 
the health of the population and reducing disparities. Health communi
-cation and HIT will have to be able to address both. Friedman said that 
they are attempting to mix three different culturesŠHIT, health commu
-nication, and health literacyŠthat have similar problems and issues but 
that have addressed them in different ways. The challenge is to integrate 
the fundamentally different approaches that these three groups take to 
address problems. If successful, there will be a synergy that creates a 
whole far greater than the sum of its parts.
The Health Communication and Health Information Technology sub
-group is inviting people who represent these three domains to work 
together. The hope is that through a combination of interaction and analy
-sis a synergistic product will emerge. Perhaps in 2008 it is possible for 
these domains to function separately, but by 2020 it is likely that the 
groups will have had to merge.
When addressing the issue of who is missing from the discussion of 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
health literacy, one audience member suggested that the behavior side of 
the equation is less prominent than it could be. A major goal is to motivate 
behavior change that will lead to improved health. However the people 
who are experts in behavior modi˜cation and behavior change don™t seem 
to have played a major role.
Harris responded that, at is core, Healthy People is a stakeholder-
driven effort. The groups organizing it are made up of federal government 
people. But there is an important forum for the public and for profession
-als to put forth their ideas about what Healthy People 2020 should look 
like. Friedman stated that it is often said in health informatics that the 
˜eld is 80 percent about psychology and sociology and 20 percent about 
technology. It may be that individuals are attracted to the ˜eld because it 
is more about people and changing the way they work in a positive way 
than it is about software and hardware.
One audience member said that one of the speci˜c objectives in 
the health communication goal of Healthy People 2010 was to increase 
individuals™ health literacy. The National Assessment of Adult Literacy 
(NAAL) instrument was developed as a way of measuring this objective. 
Because there was measurement at only one point, however, it is not 
possible to determine whether individual health literacy has improved. 
Furthermore, the measure is about reading comprehension in a health 
context, which is not the same as health literacy. Dave Baker
4 says that 
health literacy is the interaction or the combination of what the individual 
brings to the situation and the demands placed on the individual, both the 
print and verbal demands. Much of the discussion and effort surrounding 
health literacy has focused on trying to reduce the demands.
Some of the other measures in Healthy People 2010 concern people™s 
use of the Internet for health information. There is a graphic of the NAAL 
results that displays the amount of information that people get from the 
Internet by health literacy level. People with below basic levels of health 
literacy had very low rates of using the Internet and people in the pro˜
-cient category had very high rates. This might be a good measure to use. 
IT could be measured again in 5 years to determine if there is an increase 
in people with limited literacy using the Internet for health information.
Another audience member asked whether we are accommodating 
or skill building. Accommodating is a legitimate strategy, but it needs to 
be recognized as such. One must also recognize that the determinants of 
health are very broad.
One participant asked how much of the IT conversation addresses 
4 
 David W. Baker wrote The meaning and the measure of health literacy.
 2006. 
Journal of 
General 
Internal Medicine: 
Of˜cial Journal of the Society for Research and 
Education in Primary 
Care 
Internal Medicine 
21(8):878-883.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERG
IN
G 
TOO
LS A
ND S
TRA
TE
GIE
S 83
population-level tools today versus a potential tomorrow. In Minnesota, 
for example, probably about 80 percent of the providers have HIT tools, 
but that is very different from the country overall. 
It is also interesting, the participant continued, that HIT is not yet 
associated with performance. That is, having HIT is not yet a factor in 
terms of improving performance because many systems are old-school 
technologies. Perhaps there should be short-term and long-term objectives 
that address the progress in improving health, with old-school technolo
-gies being used while the infrastructure for IT is being built in order to 
enable something more in the future. It frequently is the case that things 
take longer to occur than one envisions, so it may be that the bene˜ts of 
IT will take much longer to achieve. If one places a great deal of emphasis 
on IT in Healthy People 2020, one may not actually make a lot of progress 
in improving the nation™s health in the interim.
Another participant stated that IT can, if developed with more than 
just a focus on the individual, facilitate examination of population-level 
health. How do the risk factors as determinants of health relate to the 
infrastructure IT issues? Friedman agreed that it is important to focus on 
population HIT tools.
Harris replied that that is part of the framework development that 
the groups are working on. How might they relate to one another? Also, 
for the ˜rst time, there is public advisory group that is providing input to 
the Secretary. Jonathan Fielding is chair of that 13-member group which 
will also be discussing these issues and questions. There is a dialogue 
between the federal interagency group and the public advisory group. A 
public comment page has been added to the Healthy People website and 
everyone is urged to ask questions and make comments.
One audience member said that 10 years from now it will likely be 
possible to measure genetic risk factors for various populations in order 
to judge which interventions will work best for which populations. Will 
Healthy People 2020 address genetics? Friedman responded that this is 
one of the areas that, as an audience member observed earlier, will prob
-ably take longer to achieve than is currently anticipated.
Another audience member said that many people still do not under
-stand health literacy or its importance for health. Healthy People is an 
important effort that could help bring much needed attention to the issues 
of health literacy and its affect on health. One may say that health literacy 
is a tool that ˚ows across objectives, but if there are not explicit objectives 
related to health literacy, important stakeholders will be missing from 
the discussion and action. Health literacy is a determinant of health, 
one which will be of even more importance by 2020. The participant 
concluded by saying that including speci˜c health literacy objectives in 
Healthy People would place a national focus on this important area.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Concluding Discussion
George 
Isham, M.D., M.S.
 HealthPartners
 Moderator
The audience was asked to re˚ect on the entire workshop and to ask 
questions of any of the speakers who presented during the day. 
One participant remarked that the lack of standardization of personal 
health records (PHRs) and electronic health records (EHRs) is fascinat
-ing. It is encouraging that there are efforts to develop standards for the 
interface of these two and there appears to be a great deal of opportunity 
for developing display approaches and tools that address some health 
literacy concerns. Yet there is much that is unknown about how a range 
of people with differing skill levels and different education levels can 
understand and effectively use these tools. A digital divide remains, with 
the people on the wrong side of the divide tending to be the people with 
poorer health status and poorer health outcomes. Gauthier™s position that 
patient-centered care equals user-centered design is a great summary of 
what needs to be done, the participant concluded.
One participant commented that Susannah Fox suggests that, rather 
than thinking of Internet use in terms of a digital divide where every
-one can be classi˜ed as being in one camp or anotherŠlike an on/off 
switchŠit makes more sense to think of the situation in terms of a ther
-mometer where everyone is on a continuum of use and everyone™s use 
is increasing.
Another audience member said that she believes there is a need for 
standardization in the exchange of information among PHRs and between 
PHRs and the EHRs. However there is a danger in rushing too quickly 
to standardize before there is enough information about what is impor
-85
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
tant. Another issue in standardization is that people™s expectations and 
desires about how things look change over time. If there is not room for 
modi˜cation, people may not pay attention to a site or to the available 
information there.
Another participant noted that many of the presenters talked about 
the importance of obtaining user feedback and observing users, which is 
very important in the development of these health information technol
-ogy (IT) systems. 
Kukafka commented that while there may be a need for standards 
in terms of exchange between systems, there has been little discussion 
about tailoring or personalizing content, which is what the data and 
research indicate people ˜nd most salient. It appears that people today 
want something targeted speci˜cally for them at the time they need it. If 
one can assess a person™s literacy level, one can provide that person with 
exactly what he or she needs. One is spared the issues associated with 
population-based approaches to communication, issues such as whether 
one should present all information at a 6th-grade level. What happens 
when the information is at a 6th-grade level but the person accessing it 
is at the 12th-grade level? Does that put them off? In terms of improving 
health, providing individuals with tailored messages may well be a suc
-cessful approach.
Tailoring and personalizing content are critical, Seidman agreed, not 
only because of issues such as health literacy, but also because content 
needs to be provided at the action level. For example, in attempting to get 
someone to quit smoking, providing information to that person if he or 
she is in the pre-contemplation stage will not be as effective.
Another issue, one participant said, is whether measurements should 
focus on process or outcome. That is, should one measure what needs 
to be learned concerning an individual™s interaction with information 
technology, or should one measure whether the interaction between an 
individual and the technology resulted in that person doing what he or 
she shouldŠfor example, taking the medication appropriately? What 
does it take to get the proper reaction or behavior? 
It was pointed out that many people using the Internet or other IT 
tools are not looking for information in order to take action. Instead they 
are trying to understand something they have just been told.
One participant said that in the broader eHealth world it does not 
appear that the people designing health information technology (HIT) 
systems have an understanding of the issues of health literacy or their 
importance. Yet there have been several presentations about development 
of systems that did focus on the health literacy needs of their users. Is 
there any guidance that the presenters can give about how to bring these 
issues to the broader eHealth world?
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CON
CLUD
IN
G D
ISCUSS
ION 
87
Marchibroda responded that, currently, health literacy is separate 
from the development of HIT systems. The focus is on putting electronic 
health records into physicians™ of˜ces and helping emergency rooms to 
obtain data. The focus is very provider-centric in other words, and there 
are many barriers to that adoption. Consumer-facing applications are 
happening in some areasŠWhatcom County, for exampleŠand per
-sonal record organizations are working directly with employers or health 
plans. To bring health literacy more broadly into the development of HIT 
requires addressing some of the barriers to implementation, particularly 
making the business case. 
There are also other things that could be done, Marchibroda contin
-ued. The ˜rst is raising awareness of how important health literacy is in 
the development of these systems. The second is raising expectations of 
what is expected from providers in terms of health literacy. In terms of 
measurement, one might start with some process measures but what ulti
-mately drives change is what is rewarded in health care. It is important to 
show that obtaining higher-quality health outcomes requires more effec
-tive consumerŒclinician engagement and understanding. 
The questioner responded that focusing on improving physician 
understanding of health literacy may result in the kind of situation that 
now exists with IT systems for prescription medications. That is, the 
systems are designed for ease of communication between the pharmacist 
and the physician, but that does not necessarily have anything to do with 
increasing patient understanding about taking medication.
Seidman said that there has been a great deal of conversation about 
health behavior change and how to get individuals to make different 
choices or to learn certain skills. But it is important to remember that 
people are embedded within communities and individual practitioners 
are embedded in organizations. Perhaps some of the largest gains could 
be made by looking at that bigger picture.
Systems are critical, he continued. Many approaches assume that 
everyone has the same advantages. However, those who are poor, unwell, 
or uneducated have many things working against them. For example, 
the action taken in the Arizona Medicaid program to give people e-mail 
addresses was a system action. Going to where people are rather then 
expecting individuals to take responsibility is a shift in organizational 
thinking. Such a shift would include creating health-promoting types of 
systems that help develop literacy cultures. The wiki has been discussed 
before. The power of the wiki is that there are a number of people working 
together, beyond the individual. One is actually tapping into the system 
in which those people are embedded.
One participant said that in order to make sure decent electronic 
health records are widespread one should work with the patients, the 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
consumers, and the families. Health providers will demand integrated 
systems when patients arrive at their of˜ces saying things like, ﬁHere 
is my electronic health record. Why can™t you download your standard 
information to me? Where are my MRIs? You should be able to e-mail 
those to me or put them on my thumb drive.ﬂ The Commission on Sys
-temic Interoperability took the position that more people need to demand 
interoperability. If that were done, health providers would be motivated 
to demand integrated systems. 
Isham concluded the session by saying that many important ques
-tions remain about the integration of health literacy with developing HIT 
systems. For example, do the current methods used for assessing health 
literacy apply to the humanŒIT interface? There were many anecdotes 
throughout the day about how people interact with their machines and 
their PDAs and about how games are important. Are the NAALs and the 
other tools for assessing health literacy valid for assessing how effectively 
people understand and use information to improve health when that 
information is mediated through technology? 
Another question for future exploration relates to the source of the 
$86.6 billion in savings spoken of earlier that it is estimated will be real
-ized from the implementation of health care IT systems. While some 
might ˜nd it dif˜cult to understand how such savings will accrue, it is 
likely that the interface between people and IT machines is a critical com
-ponent in harvesting that savings. Perhaps if we understood that interface 
better, many would think that health literacy contributes more to savings 
than is currently realized and, therefore, would conclude that it is a much 
more important objective for Healthy People 2020 and other efforts.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.References
2020 Systems. 
2020 systems ﬁ
Online marketing. Made easy,ﬂ
 http://www.2020systems.com/
internet-ad-glossary-r-z.html (accessed August 14, 2008).
AgrAbility Project. 2005. Health literacy: A critical but hidden health issue. 
AgrAbility Quar
-terly
 6(1):2Œ4.
Ahern, D., J. Kreslake, and J. Phalen. 2006. What is eHealth (6): Perspectives on the evolution 
of eHealth research.
 Journal of Medical 
Internet Research
 8(1):e4.
American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons. 2007. 
Discrepancy in healthcare utilization: 
Is more better in orthopedic surgery?
 http://www.aaos.org/news/bulletin/jun07
/reimbursement2.asp (accessed December 4, 2007).
American Library Association Presidential Committee on Information Literacy. 1989. 
Final 
report
. Washington, DC: American Library Association.
Baldry, M., C. Cheal, B. Fisher, M. Gillett, and V. Huet. 1986. Giving patients their own 
records in general practice: Experience of patients and staff. 
British Medical Journal 
(Clinical Research 
Edition)
 292(6520):596Œ598.
Bates, D., L. Leape, D. Cullen, N. Laird, L. Petersen, J. Teich, E. Burdick, M. Hickey, S. 
Klee˜eld, B. Shea, M. V. Vliet, and D. Seger. 1998. Effect of computerized physician 
order entry and a team intervention on prevention of serious medication errors. 
JAMA
 280:1311Œ1316.
Berland, G., M. Elliott, and L. Morales. 2001. Health information on the internet: Accessibil
-ity, quality, and readability in English and Spanish. 
JAMA
 285:2616Œ2621.
Blumenthal, D., N. Causino, Y. Chang, L. Culpepper, W. Marder, D. Saglam, R. Stafford, and 
B. Star˜eld. 1999. The duration of ambulatory visits to physicians. 
Journal of Family 
Practice
 48(4):264Œ271.
Brach, C. 2008. 
A guide for de
veloping and purchasing successful health information technology. 
Powerpoint presentation at the Institute of Medicine workshop on health literacy, 
eHealth, and communication: Putting the consumer ˜rst. Washington, DC, March 17.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2008. 
Pre
vention research centers
. http://
www.cdc.gov/prc/ (accessed August 14, 2008).
89
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment. 2008. 
Glossary of genetics terms
. http://www.cdphe.state.co.us/ps/genetics/glossary.html#M (accessed August 14, 
2008).
Commonwealth Fund. 2006. 
Why not the best?: Results from a national scorecard on US health 
system performance
. http://www.commonwealthfund.org/publications/publications_
show.htm?doc_ id=401577 (accessed June 18, 2008).
Department of Veterans Affairs. 2008a. 
Bar code medication administration (BCMA)
. http://
www.innovations.va.gov/innovations/page.cfm?pg=13 (accessed August 14, 2008).
Department of Veterans Affairs. 2008b. 
Vista imaging
. http://www1.va.gov/imaging/ (ac
-cessed August 14, 2008).
Deutsche Telekom. 2008. 
Group report, January 
1 to March 
31
, 
200
6. http://www.interimreport.
telekom.de/site0106/en/co/glossar/index.php (accessed August 14, 2008).
Dewey, J. 1926. 
Democracy and education: An introduction to the philosophy of education
. New 
York: Macmillan.
eHealth Initiative and Foundation for eHealth Initiative. 2008a. 
eHealth initiati
veŠabout
. http://www.ehealthinitiative.org/about/ (accessed August 14, 2008).
eHealth Initiative and Foundation for eHealth Initiative. 2008b. 
Fourth annual sur
vey of infor
-mation exchange at the state, regional, and community le
vels
. http://www.ehealthinitiative.
org/2007HIESurvey/stateOfTheField.mspx#1 (accessed June 20, 2008).
eHealth Initiative and Foundation for eHealth Initiative. 2008c. 
Results of 
200
8 Sur
vey 
on Health 
Information 
Exchange: State of the Field. 
http://www.ehealthinitiative.org/
HIESurvey/2008State OfTheField.mspx. (accessed January 22, 2009).
Eiser, J. R. 1982. 
Social psychology and beha
vioral medicine
. London: Wiley.
Eng, T., A. Max˜eld, K. Patrick, M. Deering, S. Ratzan, and D. Gustafson. 1998. Access to 
health information and support: A public highway or a private road? 
JAMA
 280:1371Œ
1375.
Esterbrook, L., E. Witt, and L. Rainie. 2007. 
Information searches that sol
ve problems
. http://
www.pewinternet.org/pdfs/Pew_UI_LibrariesReport.pdf (accessed July 17, 2008).
Fox, S. 2006. 
Online health search 
200
6. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American Life 
Project.
Fox, S. 2007.
 E-patients with a disability or chronic disease
. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and 
American Life Project.
Fox, S., and D. Fallows. 2003. 
Internet health resources
. Washington, DC: Pew Internet and 
American Life Project.
Gauthier, D. 2008. 
A user centered personal health record: 
The design and de
velopment of the shared 
care plan. 
Powerpoint presentation at the Institute of Medicine workshop on health 
literacy, eHealth, and communication: Putting the consumer ˜rst. Washington, DC, 
March 17.
Governors State University. 2008. 
eLearning
. http://www.govst.edu/elearning/default.
aspx?id=12984 (accessed August 14, 2008).
Green, L., G. Fryer, B. Yawn, D. Lanier, and S. Dovey. 2001. Ecology of medical care revisited. 
New 
England Journal of Medicine
 344:2021Œ2025.
Gross, L. 2006. Scienti˜c illiteracy and the partisan takeover of biology. 
PLoS Biology
 4(5):
e167.
Health Level Seven Inc. 2008. 
Health le
vel 
7. http://www.hl7.org/ (accessed August 14, 
2008).
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society. 2005. 
Personal health record
. http://www.himss.org/asp/topics_phr.asp (accessed August 14, 2008).
Healthwise. 2008. 
Healthwise among the ˜rst to recei
ve 
NCQA health information product certi˜
-cation
. http://hwinfo.healthwise.org/docs/DOCUMENT/9166.pdf (accessed August 
14, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFEREN
CES 91
HHS (Department of Health and Human Services). 2006. 
Four cornerstones of 
value dri
ven 
health care
. http://www.hhs.gov/valuedriven/fourcornerstones/index.htm (accessed 
June 20, 2008).
Himmelstein, D., E. Warren, D. Thorne, and S. Woolhandler. 2005. Illness and injury as 
contributors to bankruptcy. 
Health Affairs
 24:w63Œw73.
Horrigan, J. 2006. 
The internet as a resource for news and information about science
. Washington, 
DC: Pew Internet and American Life Project.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2000. 
To err is human: Building a safer health system
. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2001. 
Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 
21
st century
. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2002. 
Unequal treatment: Confronting racial and ethnic disparities in health care
. Washing
-ton, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2003. 
Key capabilities of an electronic health record system
. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
IOM. 2004.
 Health literacy: A prescription to end confusion
. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
IOM. 2007. 
Pre
venting medication errors
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Johnston, D., E. Pan, B. Middleton, J. Walker, and D. Bates. 2003. 
The 
value of computerized 
pro
vider order entry in ambulatory settings
. Boston, MA: Center for Information Technol
-ogy Leadership.
Jupitermedia Corporation. 2008. 
ISP glossary
. http://isp.webopedia.com/TERM/W
/wireframe.html (accessed August 14, 2008).
Kaiser Family Foundation and Health Research and Educational Trust. 2006. 
Employer health 
bene˜ts 
200
6 annual sur
vey
. http://www.kff.org/insurance/7527/ (accessed June 18, 
2008).
Kukafka, R. 2008. 
Internet approaches for eHealth in low literacy and limited 
English pro˜ciency 
populations. 
Powerpoint presentation at the Institute of Medicine workshop on health 
literacy, eHealth, and communication: Putting the consumer ˜rst. Washington, DC, 
March 17.
Laugksch, R. 2000. Scienti˜c literacy: A conceptual overview. 
Science 
Education
 84:71Œ94.
Logan, R. 2000. 
The sixth language: Learning a li
ving in the internet age
. Toronto, ON: Stoddart 
Publications 
Marchibroda, J. M. 2008. 
Ov
er
view of eHealth. 
Powerpoint presentation at the Institute of 
Medicine workshop on health literacy, eHealth, and communication: Putting the con
-sumer ˜rst. Washington, DC, March 17.
MariosAlexandrou.com. 2008. 
De˜nition of web portal
. http://www.mariosalexandrou.com/
de˜nition/web-portal.asp (accessed August 14, 2008).
Markle Foundation. 2005. 
Attitudes of Americans regarding personal health records and nation
-wide electronic health information exchange: Key ˜ndings from two sur
veys of Americans
. Alexandria, VA: Public Opinion Strategies.
McGlynn, E. A., S. M. Asch, J. Adams, J. Keesey, J. Hicks, A. DeCristofaro, and E. A. Kerr. 
2003. The quality of health care delivered to adults in the United States. 
New 
England 
Journal of Medicine
 348(26):2635Œ2645.
Miller, D., L. Malley, and E. Owens. 2007. 
Comparati
ve indicators of education in the United 
States and other G-
8 countries: 
200
6. (
NCES 
200
7Œ00
6), US department of education
. Wash
-ington, DC: National Center for Educational Statistics 
Napolitano, J. 2008. Executive order 2008Œ07: Reducing the escalation of health care costs for 
Arizonans. 
Go
vernor™s 
Executi
ve 
Orders/Proclamations
 14(5).
National Opinion Research Center. 2008. 
AHRQ national resource center for health information 
technology. 
http://www.norc.org/projects/ahrq+national+resource+center+for+health
+information+technology.htm (accessed August 18, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Nielsen, J. 2005. 
Usability: 
Empiricism or ideology?
 http://www.useit.com/alertbox/20050627.
html (accessed July 9, 2008).
Norman, C. D., and H. A. Skinner. 2006a. eHEALS: The eHealth literacy scale. 
Journal of 
Medical 
Internet Research
 8(4):e27.
Norman, C. D., and H. A. Skinner. 2006b. eHealth literacy: Essential skills for consumer 
health in a networked world. 
Journal of Medical 
Internet Research
 8(2):e9.
Oh, H., C. Rizo, M. Enkin, and A. Jadad. 2005. What is eHealth (3): A systematic review of 
published de˜nitions. 
Journal of Medical 
Internet Research
 7(1):e1.
Partnership for Solutions. 2004. 
Chronic conditions: Making the case for ongoing care
. www.
partnershipforsolutions.org/DMS/˜les/chronicbook2004.pdf. (accessed June 18, 
2008).
PC Magazine.
 2008. 
Encyclopedia
. http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia_term/0,2542,t= 
RSS&i=50680,00.asp (accessed August 14, 2008).
Ratzan, S., and R. Parker. 2000. Introduction. In
 National Library of Medicine current bibliog
-raphies in medicine: Health literacy
. NLM Pub. No. CBM 2000-1 ed., edited by C. Selden, 
M. Zorn, S. Ratzan, and R. Parker. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services.
Raymond, B., and C. Dold. 2002. 
Clinical information systems: Achie
ving the 
vision
. Oakland, 
CA: Kaiser Permanente Institute for Health Policy.
Rodgers, A. 2008.
 Strategies for raising health literacy in Arizona Medicaid members: 
New ap
-proaches for state Medicaid and ﬁhealth knowledge builders.ﬂ 
Powerpoint presentation at 
the Institute of Medicine workshop on health literacy, eHealth, and communication: 
Putting the consumer ˜rst. Washington, DC, March 17.
Rubenson, K., R. Desjardins, and E. Yoon. 2007. 
Adult learning in canada: A comparati
ve persepecti
ve: Results from the adult literacy and life skills sur
vey
. Ottowa, ON: Statistics 
Canada.
SearchMobileComputing.com. 2008. 
Searchmobilecomputing.Com de˜nitions
. http:/
/searchmobilecomputing.techtarget.com/sDe˜nition/0,,sid40_gci838865,00.html (ac
-cessed August 14, 2008).
Seymour-Rolls, K., and I. Hughes. 2000. 
Participatory action research: Getting the job done
. http://www2.fhs.usyd.edu.au/arow/arer/004.htm (accessed August 14, 2008).
Shea, K., A. Shih, and K. Davis. 2007. 
Health care opinion leaders™ 
views on the quality and safety 
of health care in the United States
. New York: The Commonwealth Fund 
Shoen, C., S. How, I. Weinbaum, J. Craig Jr., and K. Davis. 2006. 
Public 
views on shaping the 
future of the US health system
. New York: The Commonwealth Fund.
Skinner, H. A., S. Biscope, and B. Poland. 2003a. Quality of internet access: Barrier behind 
internet use statistics. 
Social Science & Medicine
 57(5):875Œ880.
Skinner, H. A., S. Biscope, B. Poland, and E. Goldberg. 2003b. How adolescents use technol
-ogy for health information: Implications for practitioners. 
Journal of Medical 
Internet 
Research
 5(4):e32.
Solomon, C. 2008. 
Using technology to impro
ve migrant health care deli
very. 
Powerpoint pre
-sentation at the Institute of Medicine workshop on health literacy, eHealth, and com
-munication: Putting the consumer ˜rst. Washington, DC, March 17.
Stamm, K., and R. Dube. 1994. The relationship of attitudinal components to trust in media. 
Communication Research
 21(1):105Œ123.
Statistics Canada. 2005. 
Building on our competencies: Canadian results of the international adult 
literacy and skills sur
vey, 
200
3. Ottawa, ON: Human Resources and Skills Development 
Canada and Statistics Canada.
Sussex Learning Network. 2006. 
Glossary
. http://www.sussexlearningnetwork.org.uk
/glossary/B (accessed August 14, 2008).
Techweb. 2008. 
Techencyclopaedia: Streaming 
video. http://www.techweb.com/encyclopedia/
de˜neterm. jhtml?term=STREAMINGVIDEO (accessed August 14, 2008).
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFEREN
CES 93
U.S. Bureau of the Census. 2000. 
Projections of the total resident population by 
5-year age groups 
and sex with special age categories: Middle series, 
1999
 to 
21
00. (np
Œt3). http://www.census.
gov/population/www/projections/natsum-T3.html (accessed June 18, 2008).
Walker, J., E. Pan, D. Johnston, J. Adler-Milstein, D. Bates, and B. Middleton. 2005. The value 
of health care information exchange and interoperability. 
Health Affairs (Millwood)
 19 
Jan:10Œ18.
White, K., T. Williams, and B. Greenberg. 1961. The ecology of medical care. 
New 
England 
Journal of Medicine
 265:885Œ892.
Wu, S., and A. Green. 2000. 
Projection of chronic illness pre
valence and cost in˚ation
. Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Glossary of Terms
Bar Code Medication Administration (
BCMA). 
ﬁA point-of-care software 
solution that addresses the serious issue of inpatient medication errors 
by electronically validating and documenting medications for inpatients. 
It ensures that the patient receives the correct medication in the correct 
dose, at the correct time, and visually alerts staff when the proper param
-eters are not metﬂ (http://www.innovations.va.gov/innovations/page.
cfm?pg=13). Accessed July 5, 2008.
Blog.
 ﬁA blog is a website where entries are made in journal style and 
displayed in a reverse chronological order. Blogs often provide com
-mentary or news on a particular subject, such as food, politics, or local 
news; some function as more personal online diariesﬂ (http://www
.sussexlearningnetwork.org.uk/glossary/B). Accessed August 9, 2008.
eHealth.
 ﬁInvolves simplifying and handling processes relating to infor
-mation, communication and transactions within and between health care 
institutions and professionals by utilizing information and telecommuni
-cations techn
ologiesﬂ (www.interimreport.telekom.de/site0106/en/co/
glossar/index.php).
Electronic Health Record (EHR).
 An EHR system includes ﬁ(1) longitudi
-nal collection of electronic health information for and about persons, where 
health information is de˜ned as information pertaining to the health of an 
individual or health care provided to an individual; (2) immediate elec
-tronic access to person- and population-level information by authorized, 
and only authorized, users; (3) provision of knowledge and decision-
95
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
 
support that enhance the quality, safety, and ef˜ciency of patient care; and 
(4) support of ef˜cient processes for health care delivery. Critical building 
blocks of an EHR system are the electronic health records (EHR) main
-tained by providers (e.g., hospitals, nursing homes, ambulatory settings) 
and by individuals (also called personal health records)ﬂ (IOM, 2003).
Health literacy. 
ﬁThe degree to which individuals have the capacity to 
obtain, process, and understand basic health information and services 
needed to make appropriate health decisionsﬂ (Ratzan, S. C., and R. M. 
Parker. 2000. Introduction. In 
National Library of Medicine Current Bibliogra
-phies in Medicine: Health Literacy
. NLM Pub. No. CBM 2000-1. C. R. Selden, 
M. Zorn, S. C. Ratzan, and R. M. Parker, Editors. Bethesda, MD: National 
Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services).
Healthwise.
 ﬁA nonpro˜t organization with a mission to help people 
make better health decisions. Nearly 100 million times a year, people turn 
to Healthwise information to learn how to do more for themselves, ask for 
the care they need, and say ‚no™ to the care they don™t need. Healthwise 
partners with health plans, hospitals, disease management companies, 
and health Web sites to provide up-to-date, evidence-based information 
to the people they serve. To learn more about the Healthwise Information 
Therapy (Ix
®) Solution, visit www.healthwise.org or call 1.800.706.9646ﬂ  
(http://hwinfo.healthwise.org/docs/DOCUMENT/9166.pdf). Accessed 
May 6, 2008.
HL7. ﬁHealth Level Seven is one of several American National Standards 
Institute (ANSI)-accredited Standards Developing Organizations (SDOs) 
operating in the healthcare arena. Health Level Seven™s domain is clinical 
and administrative dataﬂ (http://www.hl7.org/). Accessed July 11, 2008.
Medical home. 
ﬁA medical home is not just a building, house, or hospital, 
but a team approach to providing health care. A Medical Home originates 
in a primary health care setting that is family-centered and compassion
-ate. A partnership develops between the family and the primary health 
care practitioner. Together they access all medical and non-medical ser
-vices needed by the child and family to achieve maximum potential. The 
Medical Home maintains a centralized, comprehensive record of all health 
related services to promote continuity of careﬂ (http://www.cdphe.state.
co.us/ps/genetics/glossary.html#M). Accessed June 26, 2008.
MedLine Plus.
 A website network database of health information pro
-vided by the National Library of Medicine and the National Institutes of 
Health for use by consumers and health care providers. 
Participatory Action Research (PAR). 
ﬁA method of research where cre
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX A
 97
ating a positive social change is the predominant driving forceﬂ (http://
www2.fhs.usyd.edu.au/arow/arer/004.htm). Accessed July 1, 2008.
PDA. 
A personal digital assistant is ﬁa handheld device that combines 
computing, telephone/fax, Internet, and networking features. A typi
-cal PDA can function as a cellular phone, fax sender, Web browser, and 
personal organizerﬂ (http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/P/PDA.html). 
Accessed August 11, 2008.
Personal Health Record (PHR). 
ﬁAn electronic Personal Health Record 
(ePHR) is a universally accessible, layperson comprehensible, lifelong 
tool for managing relevant health information, promoting health mainte
-nance, and assisting with chronic disease management via an interactive, 
common data set of electronic health information and e-health tools. The 
ePHR is owned, managed, and shared by the individual or his or her legal 
proxy(s) and must be secure to protect the privacy and con˜dentiality of 
the health information it contains. It is not a legal record unless so de˜ned 
and is subject to various legal limitationsﬂ (Healthcare Information and 
Management Systems Society. http://www.himss.org/asp/topics_phr.
asp). Accessed August 11, 2008.
PODcast.
 ﬁAn audio broadcast that has been converted to an MP3 
˜le or other audio ˜le format for playback in a digital music player. 
Although many podcasts are played in a regular computer, the origi
-nal idea was to listen on a portable device; hence, the ‚pod™ name from 
‚iPod.™ Although podcasts are mostly verbal, they may contain music, 
images, and videoﬂ
 (http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia_term/
0,2542,t=podcast&i=49433,00.asp). Accessed August 12, 2008.
Prevention Research Centers.
 ﬁA network of academic researchers, public 
health agencies, and community members that conducts applied research 
in disease prevention and controlﬂ (http://www.cdc.gov/prc/). Accessed 
July 1, 2008.
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) Feed. 
ﬁA syndication format that was 
developed by Netscape in 1999 and became very popular for aggregat
-ing updates to blogs and the news sites. RSS has also stood for ﬁRich 
Site Summaryﬂ (http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia_term/0,2542,t= 
RSS&i=50680,00.asp). Accessed August 11, 2008.
SOAP.
 The initials, SOAP, stand for subjective, objective, assessment 
plan. The SOAP format is used to document observations and care 
provided.
SSL.
 Secure sockets layer which is a technology used to protect 
websites.
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
Streaming Video.
 ﬁA one-way video transmission over a data network. 
It is widely used on the Web as well as company networks to play video 
clips and video broadcastsﬂ (http://www.techweb.com/encyclopedia/
de˜neterm.jhtml?term=STREAMINGVIDEO). Accessed August 11, 2008.
Voucher sites.
 A voucher
 is an agreement between a provider and the 
voucher program (usually a migrant health grantee), to reimburse a pro
-vider, who is usually in a distant location, for health services provided to 
the migrant worker. Voucher sites are local providers who are contracted 
with on a per visit basis. 
Web 1.0. 
Web 1.0 is ﬁa general reference to the World Wide Web during 
its ˜rst few years of operation. The term is mostly used to contrast the 
earlier days of the Web before blogs, wikis, social networking sites and 
Web-based applications became commonplaceﬂ (http://dictionary.zdnet.
com/de˜nition/Web+1.0.html). Accessed November 3, 2008.
Web 2.0.
 ﬁA term often applied to a perceived ongoing transition of the 
World Wide Web from a collection of websites to a full-˚edged computing 
platform serving web applications to end users. It refers to a supposed 
second-generation of Internet-based servicesŠsuch as social networking 
sites, wikis, communication tools, and folksonomiesŠthat emphasize 
online collaboration and sharing among usersﬂ (http://www.2020systems.
com/internet-ad-glossary-r-z.html). Accessed June 29, 2008.
Web portal.
 ﬁA web portal is a term, often used interchangeably with 
gateway, for a World Wide Web site whose purpose is to be a major 
starting point for users when they connect to the Webﬂ (http://www
.mariosalexandrou.com/de˜nition/web-portal.asp). Accessed August 11, 
2008.
Wi-Fi.
 ﬁWi-Fi (short for ‚wireless ˜delity™) is a term for certain types 
of wireless local area network (WLAN) that use speci˜cations in the 
802.11 family. The term Wi-Fi was created by an organization called the 
Wi-Fi Alliance, which oversees tests that certify product interoperability. A 
product that passes the alliance tests is given the label ‚Wi-Fi certi˜ed™ (a 
registered trademark)ﬂ (http://searchmobilecomputing.techtarget.com/
sDe˜nition/0,,sid40_gci838865,00.html). Accessed August 11, 2008.
Wiki.
 ﬁA wiki is a website that allows multiple users to create, modify, 
and organize web page content
 in a collaborative mannerﬂ (http://www.
govst.edu/elearning/default.aspx?id=12984). Accessed August 9, 2008.
Wireframe. 
ﬁA wireframe is a visualization tool for presenting proposed 
functions, structure and content of a Web page or Web site. A wireframe 
separates the graphic elements of a Web site from the functional elements 
in such a way that Web teams can easily explain how users will interact 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX A
 99
with the Web site. A typical wireframe includes (1) key page elements 
and their location, such as header, footer, navigation, content objects, 
branding elements, (2) grouping of elements, such as side bars, navigation 
bars, content areas, (3) labeling, page title, navigation links, headings to 
content objects, and (4) place holders, content text and images.ﬂ (http://
isp
.webopedia.com/TERM/W/wireframe.html). Accessed July 9, 2008. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Workshop Agenda
Roundtable on Health Literacy
Institute of Medicine
Board on Population Health and Public Health Practice
Monday, March 17, 2008
Workshop on Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication:
Putting the Consumer First
National Academies Building
2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20001
GOAL: 
To obtain information on the current status, barriers, and steps 
to be taken to facilitate eHealth strategies that incorporate needs of 
populations with low health literacy and language barriers.
OBJECTIVES:
 To organize presentations to address the following 
questions:
1.
  
What is the current status of communication technology, particularly 
electronic health records systems?
2.
  
What are the challenges of communication technology use for 
populations with low health literacy?
3.
  
What are strategies for increasing the bene˜t of these technologies 
for populations with low health literacy?
MONDA
Y, MARCH 17, 2008
9:00-12:00
 WOR
KSHOP SESSIONSŠLecture Room
9:00-9:15
 Welcome and Overview
  George Isham
  Roundtable Chair
101Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
9:15-10:15
 Panel: Overview of the Issues
 9:15-9:35
 Overview of eHealth. Presentation will address:
 1.
 What is eHealth
 2.
 What is the value of eHealth
 3.
 De˜nitions and status of 
  a.
 Internet use for health
  b.
 Personal Health Records 
  c.
 Electronic clinical use (e.g., monitoring)
   
Janet M. Marchibroda
   
eHealth 
Initiati
ve and eHealth Foundation
 9:35-9:55
 Skills Essential for eHealth
 1.
 What is eHealth literacy?
 2.
  
What fundamental skills are needed to bene˜t from 
eHealth?
   
Cameron D. Norman
    
Uni
versity of 
Toronto
 9:55-10:15
  
Communication Inequalities and eHealthŠchallenges 
for populations with low health literacy and limited 
English pro˜ciency
   
Anthony Rodgers
   
Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System
10:15-10:30
 B
REA
K10:30-11:00
 Discussion
11:00-12:00
 Panel: Outcomes and ChallengesŠSome Examples
Each panelist will discuss the project in which they are engaged, describing 
both outcomes achieved and the challenges encountered in addressing low 
health literacy or language barriers to the use of eHealth approaches.
 11:00-11:20
  
Internet Approaches for eHealth in Low Literacy/LEP 
populations
  Rita Kukafka
  Columbia Uni
versity
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX B
 103 11:20-11:40
 My 
Health
eVet
  Kim Nazi
  Veterans Health Administration
 11:40-12:00
 Discussion
12:00-1:00
 LUNCH
1:00-2:50
  
Panel: Outcomes and ChallengesŠSome Examples 
(continued)
Each panelist will discuss the project in which they are engaged, describing 
both outcomes achieved and the challenges encountered.
 1:00-1:20
 MiVia
  Cynthia Solomon
   Medical Management Resources
 1:20-2:00
 PeaceHealth 
  Dawn Gauthier
  PeaceHealth
  2:00-2:20
  
Observations from the Exam Room: Patient-Centered 
HIT Implementation in Diverse Practice Settings.
  Joshua Seidman
  Center for 
Information 
Therapy
2:20-2:50
 Discussion
2:50-3:15
 BREA
K3:15-3:35
 A Guide for Developing and Purchasing Successful HIT
  Cindy Brach
  Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
3:35-4:00
 Discussion
4:00-4:30
 Strategies for Integration
  Linda Harris
  Charles P. Friedman
  Department of Health and Human Services
4:30-5:00
 Discussion
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Workshop Speaker Biosketches 
Cindy 
Brach, M.P.P.,
 is a senior health policy researcher at the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). She is AHRQ™s lead on cultural 
competence and sits on a number of cultural competence advisory groups. 
In addition to her own cultural competence research, she has overseen the 
development of guides to assist health plans in implementing culturally 
and linguistically appropriate services and a research agenda for cultural 
competence in health care. Currently, Ms. Brach is spearheading AHRQ™s 
health literacy activities, coordinating AHRQ™s work in developing mea
-sures and improving the evidence base, and integrating health literacy 
activities throughout AHRQ™s portfolios.
Charles P. Friedman, Ph.D.,
 is deputy national coordinator for Health 
Information Technology in the Of˜ce of the Secretary for Health and 
Human Services. In this capacity, he serves as the chief operating of˜cer of 
the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator (ONC), working to build collabora
-tions in the public and private sectors, and maintain cohesion across the 
programs that ONC undertakes. In addition, Dr. Friedman is ONC™s lead 
for planning and communication activities, as well as the Of˜ce™s initia
-tives relating to clinical decision support. He also lends his informatics 
expertise as needed to support activities of the Of˜ce.
Prior to joining the ONC, Dr. Friedman was institute associate direc
-tor for Research Informatics and Information Technology at the National 
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes of Health. From 
1996 to 2003, Dr. Friedman was professor and associate vice chancellor 
105Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
for biomedical informatics at the University of Pittsburgh. He established 
a well-funded program of informatics research and directed the enter
-prise-wide effort to develop and deploy integrated advanced information 
resources across the health sciences center. Dr. Friedman™s research has 
focused on how to build information and knowledge resources that make 
clinicians, biomedical researchers, and health professional students better 
at what they doŠand how to study the effects of these resources. He has 
also studied and written about how institutions can organize to make 
optimal use of their information and knowledge resources. 
Dr. Friedman has authored or co-authored over 150 articles in sci
-enti˜c journals. He is the author of a well-known textbook on evalua
-tion methods for biomedical informatics. He is a past president of the 
American College of Medical Informatics and was the 2005 chair of the 
Annual Symposium of the American Medical Informatics Association. He 
currently serves as associate editor of the 
Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association
.Dawn 
Gauthier, M.I.S.,
 is a Web usability designer at PeaceHealth, a 
nonpro˜t six-hospital system based in Bellevue, Washington. From 2002 
to 2006 she led the design and development of the Web-based 
Shared Care 
Plan
 personal health record (PHR), widely recognized for trai
lblazing 
many innovative and patient-centered PHR concepts. She also partici
-pated in an AHRQ-funded study on how patient-owned PHRs could 
be used to help maintain accurate medication lists across a community. 
More recently she has led the introduction of user-centered design and 
user experience to PeaceHealth™s Web application development lifecycle. 
Ms. Gauthier holds a Master of Information Science degree, specializing 
in human-computer interaction, user-oriented information architecture, 
and interactive design, from Indiana University in Bloomington, Indiana. 
She currently resides in Bellingham, Washington, with her husband and 
passionately advocates for user-centered design in all health care pro
-cesses, with an emphasis on patient needs and their privacy.
Linda Harris, Ph.D.,
 leads the Health Communication and ehealth Team 
in the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Of˜ce of Disease 
Prevention and Health Promotion (ODPHP). In this role she supervises 
the management of the National Health Information Center, a congressio
-nally mandated source of health information for the public (health˜nder.
gov). Prior to her arrival at ODPHP, Dr. Harris was a senior health com
-munication scientist at the National Cancer Institute, Division of Cancer 
Control and Population Sciences where she managed health communica
-tion technology research projects, including health systems research in 
collaboration with the VA. She has over 20 years of experience manag
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX C
 107ing information technology/communication research and development 
projects in public health and in the private health care sector. She has 
extensive experience architecting, designing, developing, and evaluat
-ing information systems for consumers and health professionals. She is 
the editor of 
Health and the 
New Media: 
Technologies 
Transforming Personal 
and Public Health. 
Her Ph.D. is in communication from the University of 
Massachusetts.
Rita 
Kukafka, Dr.P.H., M.A.,
 is jointly appointed with the Department of 
Biomedical Informatics and the Mailman School of Pubic Health (Socio
-medical Sciences). She holds a doctorate degree from the School of Public 
Health at Columbia University and two master™s degrees, one in health 
education, and the second in biomedical informatics from Columbia Uni
-versity, where she also completed a National Library of Medicine awarded 
postdoctoral fellowship in medical informatics. 
Dr. Kukafka maintains an active, funded program of research and 
publication in public health informatics while being engaged in major 
leadership roles in the ˜eld. Her research is at the crossroads of bio
-medical informatics and public health including computer interventions 
for chronic disease self-management, health promotion and informed 
decision-making, patient focused electronic health records and personal 
health records, tailoring health communication, and interactive computer 
graphics for communicating health risk probabilities to patients. Another 
area of her research focuses on how theory from the behavioral sciences 
can be applied to advance our understanding and to improve our capacity 
to implement information technology systems into health care organiza
-tions. She is a member of the American Medical Informatics Association 
Board of Directors and she is a past chair of that organization™s Working 
Group on Consumer Health Informatics. She is on the editorial board of 
the 
Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics
, and serves on the editorial boards 
for several other biomedical informatics publications. Dr. Kukafka has 
authored several key articles and books, and book chapters in the ˜elds 
of public health informatics and consumer health informatics. 
Dr. Kukafka is an experienced mentor; notably in the area of public 
health informatics where she spearheaded the formation of the public 
health informatics program at the Department of Biomedical Informatics, 
Columbia University, one of four programs in the country, to build this 
specialization with training support from the Robert Wood Foundation 
and National Library of Medicine. 
Janet M. Marchibroda, M.
B.A.,
 is the chief executive of˜cer of the 
eHealth Initiative and its Foundation, both Washington, DC-based inde
-pendent, national nonpro˜t organizations whose missions are to improve 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
the
 quality, safety and ef˜ciency of health care through information and 
information technology. 
The eHealth Initiative is a multi-stakeholder member organizationŠ
representing clinicians, employers, health plans, health care IT suppliers, 
hospitals and other health care providers, consumer groups, pharma
-ceutical and medical device manufacturers, public health organizations, 
standards bodies, and academic institutionsŠthat develops consensus 
among multiple and diverse stakeholders on strategies that will drive 
better health care for patients through the use of information technology. 
Through the eHealth Initiative Foundation, the organization provides 
˜nancial and technical support to state, regional, and community-based 
multi-stakeholder collaboratives across the nation who are mobilizing 
health information electronically to support patient care.
Ms. Marchibroda previously served as the executive director of Con
-necting for HealthŠa publicŒprivate sector initiative funded and led by 
the Markle Foundation and supported by the Robert Wood Johnson Foun
-dationŠwhich is designed to catalyze actions on a national basis to drive 
electronic connectivity and create an interconnected, electronic health 
information infrastructure. In addition, she was recognized in 2005 as one 
of the Top 25 Women in Healthcare by Modern Healthcare magazine and 
in 2006 for the Federal Computer Week Top 100 Award.
Prior to the eHealth Initiative, Ms. Marchibroda cofounded and 
served as chief operating of˜cer for two health care information organi
-zations, one which focuses on providing patient safety and compliance 
information to physicians and the otherŠa Bertelsmann AG subsidiaryŠ
which focuses on providing electronic publishing services to the payer 
community to support member information needs. She also served as 
the interim chief operating of˜cer for the National Coalition for Cancer 
Survivorship. 
Ms. Marchibroda also served as the chief operating of˜cer of the 
National Committee for Quality Assurance, an organization devoted to 
evaluating and improving the quality of health care for AmericansŠ
where she was responsible for accreditation of health care organizations, 
education programs, the national HEDIS database, electronic information 
products, strategic planning, human resources, ˜nance, and administra
-tion. She holds a B.S. in commerce from the University of Virginia and an 
M.B.A. with a concentration in organization development from George 
Washington University.
Kim Nazi, F.A.C.H.E.,
 is a management analyst for the Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA), working in the Veterans/Consumer Health Infor
-matics Of˜ce of the Veterans Health Administration (VHA). She is a 
Board-Certi˜ed Healthcare Executive and a fellow in the American Col
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX C
 109lege of Healthcare Executives. She holds a master™s degree in strategic 
communication from Seton Hall University, New Jersey and is currently 
a doctoral student in the joint sociology/communication program at the 
University of Albany. Ms. Nazi™s research interests include technology 
and personal health records, health communication, and behavioral inter
-ventions. Prior to taking on her current role in July 2006, she served as 
the director of eHealth for the VA Healthcare Network Upstate New York, 
focusing on the use of technology to improve and expand the delivery of 
health care services. Ms. Nazi is a graduate of the VA™s Executive Career 
Field Candidate program and a member of the American Health Informa
-tion Community Consumer Empowerment Workgroup. 
Cameron D. Norman, Ph.D.,
 is an assistant professor in the Department of 
Public Health Sciences at the University of Toronto, director of evaluation 
with the Peter A. Silverman Global eHealth Program, and the principal 
investigator of Youth Voices Research, the youth engagement unit of the 
Centre for Health Promotion. The focus of his research is on understand
-ing how people work together to solve health problems and how informa
-tion technologies can aid learning and collaboration across time, physical 
space, and culture to improve health and well-being. His current research 
is seeking to understand how youth and young adults are engaged in 
health promotion through virtual communities; exploring what skills 
are necessary to fully participate in health decisions using information 
technology (eHealth); and how social networks connect ideas together to 
translate knowledge into improved health practices with professionals 
and consumers alike. Dr. Norman has published and presented widely on 
the concept of 
eHealth literacy
, which he developed (with Harvey Skinner 
at York University) as a means of framing the essential skills necessary to 
fully engage with electronic health tools. His eHealth Literacy Scale is cur
-rently in use in nine countries and has been translated into ˜ve languages 
and applied to both consumer and health professional populations.
Dr. Norman holds a Ph.D. in public health from the University of 
Toronto and completed a post-doctoral fellowship in systems thinking and 
complexity science jointly at the University of British Columbia and the 
Centre for Global eHealth Innovation in Toronto. He lives in Toronto.
Anthony ﬁTonyﬂ Rodgers
 has over 25 years of health care executive 
management experience in both hospital systems and health plans. He 
currently holds the position of director of the Arizona Medicaid Program, 
known as the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System.
As Director, Mr. Rodgers reports to the Governor and is responsible 
for providing health coverage for one million Arizonans. The agency 
administers multiple sources of funding and provides oversight and com
-Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
0 HEAL
TH L
ITE
RACY, 
eHEAL
TH, A
ND C
OMMU
NI
CA
TION
pliance to health care providers that focus on quality of care and ˜scal 
accountability. 
Mr. Rodgers currently holds visiting professor appointments at 
 
Arizona State University, at the W.P Carey School of Business, and at 
University of CaliforniaŒLos Angeles, School of Public Health. 
Joshua Seidman, Ph.D., M.H.S.,
 has been on a quest to improve health 
care quality for 17 yearsŠ˜rst by in˚uencing health plans and provider 
behavior, then shifting to a grassroots approach by activating consum
-ers. In October 2001, Dr. Seidman saw the fusion of his two strategies to 
improve health care quality in information therapy. Information therapy 
(Ix) is the timely prescription and availability of evidence-based health 
information to meet individuals™ speci˜c needs and support sound deci
-sion making.
Dr. Seidman leads the independent, not-for-pro˜t IxCenter and pro
-vides key leadership and direction, applying his extensive experience in 
strategic planning, product development, research, and education. 
Before launching the IxCenter, Dr. Seidman served as senior editor 
and director of quality initiatives for the Advisory Board Company™s 
Consumer Health Initiative. In that capacity, he played a leading role in 
strategic planning and product development and provided leadership in 
the development of quality-of-care information for consumers. 
Dr. Seidman has worked for the National Committee for Quality 
Assurance as the director of measure development, overseeing analytical 
projects related to health-plan-performance measure testing and develop
-ment for HEDIS
. He has also worked at the Advisory Board Company 
as a consultant and at the American College of Cardiology as assistant 
director of Private Sector Relations, conducting extensive research and 
analysis in managed care, quality-of-care issues, and other aspects of the 
health care industry. In addition, Dr. Seidman has published several book 
chapters and articles in peer-reviewed journals on eHealth and quality-
of-care-related issues. 
Dr. Seidman holds a Ph.D. in health services research and a master 
of health science degree in health policy and management, both from the 
Johns Hopkins School of Public Health. His doctoral research involved 
the development of a tool to evaluate the quality of health information on 
the Internet and an assessment of what website characteristics in˚uenced 
health information quality. He earned a bachelor of arts in political science 
from Brown University.
Due to his unique dissertation research and expertise, he has served 
as a consultant to independent oversight groups and government agen
-cies in the assessment of electronic consumer health information, and has 
served as a peer reviewer for various scienti˜c journals including 
The 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APP
EN
DIX C
 111
 
Journal of Medical 
Internet Research
. He also authored the California Health
-Care Foundation Issue Brief, ﬁLost in Translation: Consumer Health Infor
-mation in an Interoperable World,ﬂ which examines what could be done 
to better integrate consumer health information standards into PHRs and 
the national health information network framework.
For 5 years, Dr. Seidman volunteered as president of the board of 
directors for Micah House, a transitional house in Washington, DC, for 
homeless women recovering from substance abuse. Seidman uses distance 
running as his own therapy of sorts, and has completed 27 marathons.
Cynthia Solomon
 is CEO of Access Strategies Inc, a health care consulting 
˜rm located in Sonoma, California. Her company specializes in research, 
development and implementation of special projects which focus on sys
-tems of care for at-risk populations including the indigent, chronically 
ill and uninsured. She has over 25 years experience as a health systems 
consultant in the private and public health sectors. Ms. Solomon is a co-
founder of MiVia, an electronic personal health record for migrant and 
seasonal workers developed for a nonpro˜t coalition of health and ser
-vice providers serving agricultural workers. In October 2005, MiVia was 
highlighted in the Presidential Commission Report on Systemic Interop
-erability, submitted to Congress (www.endingthedocumentgame.gov). 
MiVia is currently being implemented in California, Oregon, and two 
rural migrant health networks in New York. 
Ms. Solomon™s company launched the FollowMeŽ PHR in 2000. 
The FollowMe platform has been recognized as a pioneer in the ˜eld of 
PHRs and has been featured in several national publications including 
The
 E
conomist
, 
Washington Post
, 
Wall Street Journal
, 
L.A. 
Times
, Medical 
Ethics
, and 
For the Record
. She is a member of the Markle Foundation 
Connecting for Health
 Workgroup and participated in developing the rec
-ommendations and standards for interoperability between electronic 
health records (EHRs) and PHRs which was submitted to the Of˜ce of the 
National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (HHS) in July 
2004. Ms. Solomon has presented testimony on PHR technology to the 
NCVHS NHII workgroup in April 2005. She has also presented testimony 
to the Consumer Empowerment WorkgroupŒAmerican Health Informa
-tion Community on the role of Government in PHR technology. 
As the mother of a child diagnosed with hydrocephalus she is an 
experienced and committed health advocate and cofounder of the Hydro
-cephalus Association, a national support and advocacy organization for 
families and individuals living with hydrocephalus. Her son Alex has had 
multiple procedures and hospitalizations and it was her frustration with 
trying to manage and coordinate his complex medical information that 
led her to developing a Web-based PHR in 1999. 
Health Literacy, eHealth, and Communication: Putting the Consumer First: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.