DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12514Protecting Student Records and Facilitating EducationResearch: A Workshop Summary106 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38361-5 | DOI 10.17226/12514Margaret Hilton, Rapporteur; Committee on National Statistics; Center forEducation; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; NationalResearch CouncilProtecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Margaret Hilton, 
Rapporteur
Committee on National Statistics
Center for Education
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Award No. 20071157 between the National Acad
-emy of Sciences and the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, Award No. 9010 
between the National Academy of Sciences and the William T. Grant Foundation, 
and Award No. 200800057 between the National Academy of Sciences and the 
Spencer Foundation. The work of the Committee on National Statistics is sup
-ported by a consortium of federal agencies through a grant from the National 
Science Foundation (Number SBR-0453930). Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, 
or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and 
do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided 
support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-12799-8
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-12799-8
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2009 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Research Council (2009). 
Protecting Student Records 
and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop Summary. 
Margaret Hilton, Rap
-porteur. Committee on National Statistics and Center for Education, Division of 
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr.
 Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPLANNIN
G C
OMMITTEE
 ON
 P
ROTECTIN
G S
TUDENT
 RECORDS
 AND
 F
ACILITATIN
G E
DUCATION
 R
ESEARCH
FELICE
 J. 
LEVINE
 (Chair),
 American Educational Research Association, 
Washington, DC
ROBE
RT F. 
BORUCH
, The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
HELEN
 F. 
LADD
, Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy, Duke University
MARTIN
 ORLAND
, WestEd, Washington, DC
JAY
 P
FEI
FF
ER, Florida Department of Education, Tallahassee
BARBA
RA S
CHNEIDE
R, College of Education, Michigan State University 
THO
MAS J. P
LEWE
S, 
Study Director
MARGA
RET
 HILTON
, 
Senior Program Of˜cer, 
Center for Education
MICHAEL
 J. S
IRI, 
Senior Project Assistant
PAULA
 S
KED
SVOLD
, Director of Education Research Policy, 
American 
Educational Research Association (until August 2008)
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMMITTEE
 O
N N
ATIONAL
 S
TATISTICS
 2007-2008
WILLIA
M F. 
EDDY
 (
Chair
), Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon 
University
KATHA
RINE
 ABRAHA
M, Department of Economics and Joint Program in 
Survey Methodology, University of Maryland
WILLIA
M 
DUMOUCHEL
, Lincoln Technologies, Inc., Waltham, 
Massachusetts
JOHN
 HALTIWANGE
R, Department of Economics, University of Maryland
V. J
OSEPH HOTZ
, Department of Economics, Duke University
KAREN
 KAFADA
R, Department of Statistics, Indiana University
DOUGLA
S M
ASS
EY
, Department of Sociology, Princeton University
SALLY
 M
ORTON
, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
VIJAY
 NAI
R, Department of Statistics and Department of Industrial and 
Operations Engineering, University of Michigan
JOSEPH NEWHOU
SE, Division of Health Policy Research and Education, 
Harvard University
SAMUEL
 H. P
RESTON
, Population Studies Center, University of 
Pennsylvania
KENNETH
 P
REWITT
, School of International and Public Affairs, Columbia 
University
LOUI
SE R
YAN
, Department of Biostatistics, Harvard University
ROGE
R TOU
RANGEAU
, Joint Program in Survey Methodology, University of 
Maryland, and Survey Research Center, University of Michigan
ALAN
 ZASLAV
SKY
, Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard University 
Medical School
CON
STANCE
 F. 
CIT
RO, 
Director
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Acknowledgments
This report is a summary of a workshop on protecting student records 
and facilitating education research convened by the National Research 
Council (NRC) and the American Educational Research Association. The 
workshop would not have become a reality without the generous support 
of the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the Spencer Foundation, and 
the William T. Grant Foundation.
We thank our colleagues who served on the planning committee, each 
of whom brought deep and varied expertise to the process of planning the 
workshop. Their diverse expertise on protecting student records and facil
-itating education research added greatly to the success of the endeavor. 
Although the planning committee played an important role in designing 
the workshop, they did not participate in writing this report.
We are especially grateful to the experts who quickly responded to our 
request for background papers on research and privacy issues, including 
Gerald Gates, U.S. Bureau of the Census (retired); Jane Hannaway, Urban 
Institute; Helen Ladd, Duke University, Susanna Loeb, Stanford Uni
-versity; Clara Muschkin, Duke University; and Steven Winnick, Nelson 
Mullins Riley & Scarborough. Their papers provided a substantive con
-text for the rich discussions that took place at the workshop.
We also thank the many experts, including members of the work
-shop planning committee, who participated as presenters and panelists: 
Thomas R. Bailey, Columbia University; Ellen Campbell, U.S. Depart
-ment of Education; Lizanne DeStefano, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign; Myron Gutmann, University of Michigan; Helen Ladd, Duke 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
University; Roberta Ness, University of Pittsburgh; Kenneth Prewitt, 
Columbia University; Ross Santy, U.S. Department of Education; Barbara 
Schneider, Michigan State University; Marilyn Seastrom, U.S. Department 
of Education; Jeff Sellers, Florida Department of Education; and Jonathan 
White, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
This workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by indi
-viduals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in 
accordance with procedures approved by the Report Review Committee 
of the National Research Council. The purpose of this independent review 
is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution 
in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the 
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and respon
-siveness to the charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the process. We thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report: Eric Hanushek, Hoover Institu
-tion, Stanford University; Stephen Plank, Department of Sociology and 
Baltimore Education Research Consortium, Johns Hopkins University; 
Barbara Schneider, College of Education, Michigan State University; and 
Steven Winnick, Nelson Mullins Riley & Scarborough,  Washington, DC.
Although the reviewers listed above provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-tent of the report, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before 
its release. The review of this report was overseen by Eleanor Singer, 
Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan. Appointed by the 
National Research Council, she was responsible for making certain that 
an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance 
with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely 
with the author and the institution.
We are grateful for the leadership and support of Michael Feuer, 
executive director, and Miron Straf, deputy director of the NRC™s Divi
-sion of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education (DBASSE), and 
Constance Citro, director of the Committee on National Statistics. We also 
thank Paula Skedsvold, former director of education research policy at 
the American Educational Research Association, Margaret Hilton, senior 
program of˜cer in the NRC Center for Education, Christine McShane, 
senior editor, and Michael Siri, senior project assistant in the Committee 
on National Statistics.
  
Felice J. Levine, 
Chair
   
Thomas J. Plewes, 
Study Director
  
Planning Committee on Protecting Student
  
Records and Facilitating Education Research
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Contents
1 Introduction
 12  
Balancing Privacy, Con˜dentiality, and Access at the U.S. 
Department of Education
 93  
The Value of Education Research Using Student and School 
Records
 23
4  
Reconciling the Access, Privacy, and Con˜dentiality of 
 Education Data
 37
5  
Reconciling Access and Con˜dentiality in Federal 
 Statistical and Health Data
 51
6 Re˚ections and Next Steps
 75
References
 83
Appendixes
A Workshop Agenda and Participants
 87
B Biographical Sketches of Planning Committee Members
 93
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Introduction
In August 1974, President Gerald R. Ford signed the Family Educa
-tional Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) into law. One of two privacy laws 
Congress approved that year in response to the breach of public trust cre
-ated by the Watergate scandal, FERPA was designed to protect the privacy 
of individual student test scores, grades, and other education records 
(U.S. Code, Title 20, Chapter 31, Section 1232g).
1Much has changed since that time. Education policies now emphasize 
education standards and testing to measure progress toward those stan
-dards, as well as rigorous education research. At the same time, private 
˜rms and public agencies, including schools, have replaced most paper 
records with electronic data systems. Re˚ecting the movement toward 
electronic data, many social science researchers have changed their meth
-ods; today, they may conduct fewer original surveys to gather research 
data and turn more often to administrative data maintained in govern
-ment databases. 
These trends have converged to greatly increase the supply of data 
on student performance in public schools. With funding from the U.S. 
Department of Education, the states are compiling student records from 
local schools and districts into statewide databases, with unique student 
identi˜ers that can be used to track students™ performance as they move 
through grade levels and schools. Although these databases represent a 
1 
Text of the act is available at 
http://www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/html/uscode20/ 
usc_sec_20_00001232---g000-.htm
l.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
rich source of longitudinal data, researchers™ access to the individually 
identi˜able data they contain, as well as to student record data main
-tained at the local level by individual schools and school districts, is 
limited by the privacy protections of FERPA. Researchers™ limited access 
to individual student data slows research not only in education but also 
in related ˜elds, such as child welfare and health.
To explore possibilities for data access and con˜dentiality in compli
-ance with FERPA and with the Common Rule for the Protection of Human 
Subjects, the National Academies and the American Educational Research 
Association convened the Workshop on Protecting Student Records and 
Facilitating Education Research in April 2008 (see Appendix A for the 
workshop agenda). The workshop was supported by the Ewing Marion 
Kauffman Foundation, the Spencer Foundation, and the William T. Grant 
Foundation.
To carry out the workshop, the National Academies™ Committee on 
National Statistics and Center for Education appointed an expert plan
-ning committee chaired by Felice J. Levine, researcher and executive 
director of the American Educational Research Association. The planning 
committee was charged to
Plan for a workshop at the National Academies on providing research 
access to administrative records (including test scores) pertaining to 
elementary, secondary, and higher education students and their schools 
while protecting the privacy and con˜dentiality of the information. The 
planning committee will be charged with commissioning papers for pre
-sentation, and convening and serving as moderators for the workshop.
WORKSHOP 
GOALS AND FRAMEWORK
Felice Levine opened the workshop by welcoming all participants and 
providing an overview of the key issues to be discussed. Over the past 
˜ve years, researchers have become increasingly interested in accessing 
the state education databases that compile student records, particularly 
because the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 requires that ﬁscienti˜cally 
based [education] researchﬂ drive state and local use of federal education 
funds. These concerns informed the central question of the workshopŠ
how to reconcile FERPA protections with current educational needs and 
goals. Levine explained that the workshop would address this central 
question in a broader context, examining approaches to reconciling pri
-vacy protections with research access not only in education, but also in 
other ˜elds, such as health care.
Levine observed that the workshop was timely, because the Depart
-ment of Education was seeking comments on proposed changes to its 
FERPA regulations. The proposed new rules address not only when 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 3schools and colleges can release student information for the purpose of 
protecting health and safety (following the April 2007 massacre at Vir
-ginia Polytechnic Institute and State University), but also when student 
information may be released for research purposes (U.S. Department 
of Education, 2008a). Levine invited thoughtful discussions that would 
inform useful comments on the proposed new rules. She mentioned that 
comments on the rules by the American Educational Research Associa
-tion
2 would re˚ect an online survey of its members about FERPA, which 
drew a large response from over 250 education researchers. In closing, 
she predicted that the workshop would be valuable, observing that the 
National Academies™ Committee on National Statistics has a long history 
of successfully addressing issues of research access and privacy protection 
(e.g., National Research Council, 1993).
ACCESS AND PRIVACY IN CONTEXT
Miron Straf (National Research Council) described the larger context 
of data privacy and research access issues surrounding the workshop. His 
remarks re˚ected a series of reports issued by the Committee on National 
Statistics over the past three decades. Straf began by de˜ning the follow
-ing key terms (Bradburn and Straf, 2003):
Information: 
knowledge, facts, or representations of them.
Personal information:
 information that is or can be linked directly 
or indirectly to some person. Identi˜able information is personal 
information.
Data: 
information that is collected, compiled, captured, created, or 
received for one or more purposes.
Con˜dential data:
 data with personal information.
Statistical data:
 data without any personal information.
Disclosure:
 the release of personal information.
Discovery:
 to become aware of personal information from statistical 
data and other knowledge.
Privacy:
 an individual™s control over who has access to information 
about him or her. The concept of privacy is relevant to what per
-sonal information becomes data.
2 
Joint comments on the proposed rule, submitted by the American Educational Research 
Association, the American Statistical Association, and the Consortium of Social Science 
Associations, were published following the workshop (American Educational Research 
Association, 2008).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
Con˜dentiality:
 protection against the release of personal information. 
An important distinction is that privacy pertains to individuals; 
con˜dentiality to their information.
Straf then distinguished between (1) con˜dential data, with personal 
information, and (2) statistical data, without any personal information. He 
said that privacy pertains to the boundary between personal information 
and data and to the release of con˜dential data to others. For example, 
an individual may be willing to provide personal information to a health 
provider but opposed to having that same personal information provided 
to his or her employer.
On the basis of this analysis, Straf argued that, although people have 
the right to control their personal information, they do not have the right 
to control statistical data derived from that information. For example, 
the fact that a parent has a child enrolled in the eighth grade of a par
-ticular school district is personal information, but the number of eighth 
graders reported by the school district is an example of statistical data. 
An individual parent has no right to exclude his or her child from that 
count. Expanding on this analysis, Straf argued that it is not a violation 
of con˜dentiality to produce statistical data from one™s personal informa
-tion and, more broadly, it is not a violation of privacy or con˜dentiality to 
use statistical data for a purpose different from the one for collecting the 
information from which the statistical data were derived.
However, two key problems remain, according to Straf. The ˜rst is 
disclosure of personal information in con˜dential data, and the second 
is discovery of personal information from statistical data when those 
data are combined with other knowledge. He outlined two approaches 
to protect con˜dential data against both problems:
1.
  
Altering the data in one of several ways, such as removing per
-sonal identi˜ers, collapsing individual data categories, adding 
random errors (statistical noise) to the data, or creating replicated 
(synthetic) data.
2.
  
Restricting accessŠone approach is to license researchers who are 
then subject to penalties for disclosure or discovery. Straf noted 
that the National Center for Education Statistics has been a leader 
in using this approach (see Chapter 4). Another approach is to pro
-vide access at highly protected sites (data enclaves, research data 
centers), where analyses and other outputs are screened before 
they are released to any researcher.
Straf explained that new variants of restricted access have emerged. In 
one, at the request of a researcher, agency staff members analyze con˜den
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 5tial data and then screen the results before releasing them to the researcher 
online. In another, Cornell University economist John Abowd has created 
a virtual research data center, which provides access to synthetic data over 
the Internet (Cornell University, 2008). The National Opinion Research 
Center at the University of Chicago has created a virtual data enclave that 
licenses researchers for restricted access online.
Although these protective approaches are important, Straf said, they 
also impose new costs and risks. Protected research sites, such as the 
Census Bureau™s research data centers, are not easily available to many 
researchers, and, even when they are, they may not provide access to 
all relevant data. In addition, researchers are unclear about the extent to 
which replicated data corresponds to real data.
Straf then gave a brief overview of federal privacy laws and regula
-tions. The Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency 
Act of 2002 (CIPSEA) is designed to protect con˜dentiality of data col
-lected for statistical purposes by government agencies. In addition, 17 
federal agencies have adopted the Federal Policy for the Protection of 
Human Subjects, widely referred to as the Common Rule (U.S. Code of 
Federal Regulations, Chapter 45, Section 46). The Common Rule requires 
universities, federal agencies, and other research organizations to estab
-lish institutional review boards (IRBs). These boards review proposals 
to conduct research involving human participants, and they may reject 
proposals or require alterations in order to ensure adequate protection of 
individual privacy and data con˜dentiality. Straf said that, although these 
boards sometimes impose unnecessary con˜dentiality requirements that 
delay valuable research activities, they are important, providing an extra 
level of protection against disclosure and discovery of personal informa
-tion. Most boards provide expedited reviews for research proposals not 
seen as involving signi˜cant risk.
Straf said that IRBs often require researchers to ensure that written, 
informed consent will be obtained from individuals who provide personal 
information for use in research studies. Informed consent documents are 
designed to clarify who will have access to the personal information and 
how it will be used. Straf argued that informed consent should apply only 
to personal information and should not be required when a researcher 
wants to use statistical data derived from that information (because, in 
his view, privacy and con˜dentiality do not apply to statistical data). 
Nevertheless, informed consent is valuable to build trust with the public, 
he said. Straf suggested that informed consent documents clearly describe 
all potential uses of the data sought, including research uses (National 
Research Council, 1993), and refer to the larger goals of the research, such 
as to improve the quality of education.
Arguing that statistical agencies™ goal of zero tolerance for disclosure 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
of con˜dential data is unrealistic, Straf suggested that agencies might 
instead adopt a standard of reasonable care, which would balance a small 
risk of disclosure against the great bene˜t of social science research. An 
additional protection would result if the agency placed the onus on the 
researcher using the data to avoid discovery or disclosure of personally 
identi˜able information, as the National Center for Education Statistics 
does in its licensing arrangements (see Chapter 4).
Straf said that current tensions result from education policy makers™ 
ﬁvoraciousﬂ demand for data on student performance and the Depart
-ment of Education™s efforts to promote rigorous research. Advances in 
cognitive, behavioral, and neurosciences are opening up new research 
avenues with potential to reduce disparities in educational achievement, 
he said, but researchers need access to education records to pursue these 
avenues. Describing many state education agencies as ﬁwaryﬂ of provid
-ing education records for research because of uncertainty about how 
FERPA applies, he observed that many different methods are available to 
provide research access while protecting personal information, which is 
the goal of FERPA.
DISC
USSION OF KEY ISS
UES
In response to Straf™s presentation, Levine said that the key issue is 
the migration of individual data to statistical data. As discussed in 
Putting People on the Map: Protecting Con˜dentiality with Linked Social-Spatial Data 
(National Research Council, 2007), when researchers link statistical data 
sets to other data sets (such as geospatial data), they sometimes create 
personally identi˜able data without having the consent of the individual 
whose data are now identi˜able. When conducting a small-scale survey, 
a researcher routinely obtains each survey participant™s informed consent 
for the uses of the data (including a warning about possible disclosure 
or discovery), but when there is no consent process, as is the case with 
administrative data, it is unclear how to allow research access while pro
-tecting privacy.
Straf™s proposal for a reasonable standard of care led to a discussion 
of breaches of con˜dential data. Robert Boruch (University of Pennsyl
-vania) said that the United States Privacy Protection Study Commission 
created under the Privacy Act of 1974 had searched for disclosures or 
risks of disclosure and found them only in marketing surveys and other 
private-sector information-gathering activities. Gerald Gates (Census 
BureauŒretired) said that, although the Census Bureau does not docu
-ment disclosures, it has a staff dedicated to studying data ˜les in order to 
determine whether links to external data would reveal individual identi
-ties, and this staff has identi˜ed some dangers. Myron Gutmann (Inter-
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 7University Consortium for Political and Social Research) said that a recent 
search for lawsuits related to data disclosure had uncovered very few 
(National Research Council, 2007). As the director of a data-archiving 
organization, Gutmann said, he had asked other data-archiving orga
-nizations for examples of disclosures but found none. When Gutmann 
directed his staff to study the consortium™s data ˜les, the staff found few 
dangers. Gutmann explained that, because survey data has ﬁnoise,ﬂ the 
odds of disclosure are small and that some papers on this topic would 
soon be published.
Barbara Schneider (Michigan State University) agreed that it is hard 
to personally identify data in large national data sets, but said state-level 
data are ﬁeasier to crack,ﬂ raising critical con˜dentiality issues. This led 
to discussion of whether state databases of deidenti˜ed education records 
might actually include personally identi˜able information, as well as the 
risks of disclosure from these databases.
REPORT OVERVIEW
This report continues in Chapter 2 with discussion of the Department 
of Education™s current interpretation of FERPA and proposed new regula
-tions to carry out the law, along with a description of the department™s 
initiative to assemble and report state educational performance data. 
Chapter 3 discusses the value of education research using student and 
school records using examples of three studies that promise to inform 
needed improvements in public schooling. Chapter 4 presents models 
that allow researchers to access education records in ways that protect 
con˜dentiality and discusses the limitation of these models. Building on 
that discussion, Chapter 5 describes similar models of research access and 
con˜dentiality protection in other sectors, discussing as well the limita
-tions of these models. The ˜nal chapter includes re˚ections about key 
issues and next steps by members of the workshop planning committee 
and other workshop participants.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92Balancing Privacy, Con˜dentiality, 
and Access at the U.S. 
Department of Education
This chapter illuminates tensions between the privacy and con˜den
-tiality goals of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) 
and the goal, included in the No Child Left Behind Act, of using educa
-tion data for research and accountability. The ˜rst section describes the 
Department of Education™s current approach to implementing FERPA as it 
affects data access for research, as well as its proposed new FERPA rules. 
The second section discusses a Department of Education initiative to 
assemble and publicly report state educational achievement data and the 
challenges of doing so while protecting privacy and con˜dentiality. The 
˜nal section sketches a successful approach to providing research access 
while protecting privacy and con˜dentiality, used in the department™s 
own National Center for Education Statistics.
CURRENT INTERPRETATION AND 
PROPOSED NEW RE
GU
LATIONS
Ellen Campbell (U.S. Department of Education) provided an over
-view of the law and regulations (U.S. Code, Title 20, Chapter 31, Section 
1232g). FERPA directs schools and higher education institutions to protect 
the rights of parents and students (age 18 or entering college) to inspect 
and review education records, to seek to amend education records, and to 
consent to disclosure of personally identi˜able information from educa
-tion records. The law applies to education agencies that receive funding 
from the department, including public elementary and secondary schools, 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
some private elementary and secondary schools, and public or private 
institutions of higher education. FERPA provisions apply to a wide vari
-ety of education records, including medical records maintained by school 
health professionals. Provisions of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 (P.L. 104-191), as well as FERPA 
regulations, clarify that school medical records protected by FERPA are 
not governed by HIPAA.
 FERPA de˜nes ﬁpersonally identi˜able informationﬂ to include not 
only the student™s name and the name of the student™s parent or other 
family member and address of the student or student™s family, but also a 
personal identi˜er, such as a social security number or student number 
or a list of personal characteristics or other information that would make 
the student™s identity easily traceable. Although one of the primary rights 
of parents and students protected by FERPA is to consent to disclosure of 
personally identi˜able information, such consent is not required under 
certain exceptions. Two of these exceptions are sometimes applied in deci
-sions granting access to education records for research purposes:

Disclosure to federal, state, and local educational authorities con
-ducting an audit, evaluation, or enforcement of education programs 
(U.S. Code, Title 20, Chapter 31, Section 1232g, Subsection b).

Disclosure to ﬁorganizations conducting studies for, or on behalf of, 
educational agencies or institutions for the purpose of developing, 
validating, or administering predictive tests, administering student 
aid programs, and improving instructionﬂ (Ibid).
The law requires a school or higher education institution to maintain a 
record of each request for access to and each disclosure of an education 
record. In addition, when disclosing information from education records, 
the school should inform the receiving party that the information may not 
be further disclosed (with some exceptions).
Campbell said that the Department of Education expects that its pro
-posed new FERPA regulations (U.S. Department of Education, 2008a) 
will improve access to education data for research and accountability 
purposes. The new rules would make it easier for state and local educa
-tion agencies to redisclose information to each other, such as when a state 
department of education discloses student K-12 education records to a 
state higher education commission in order to track individual student 
achievement over time. The proposed rules would also update and clarify 
the de˜nition of personally identi˜able information and provide stan
-dards for removing all personally identi˜able information from education 
data, as necessary or appropriate to release the information as deidenti
-˜ed data. A state education agency™s release of properly deidenti˜ed data 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BALANCING PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND ACCESS
 11
(meeting these standards) to an outside researcher would not constitute a 
disclosure requiring prior informed consent. In addition, the regulations 
would permit a state education database or education agency to attach 
a code to properly deidenti˜ed information that allows an education 
researcher to match information received from the same source. Finally, 
the proposed rule provides new information and recommendations for 
safeguarding records contained in electronic data systems.
Steven Winnick (Nelson Mullins Riley & Scarborough) argued that, 
despite some improvements in the proposed rules, FERPA continues to 
present signi˜cant barriers to the use of state data systems to improve 
public education. He noted that both federal and state policies call for 
using these data systems to advance standards-based education reform 
and that the department™s Institute of Education Sciences had awarded 
$50 million to the states in ˜scal year 2008 to develop and maintain these 
data systems.
Winnick explained that he works closely with the Data Quality Cam
-paign, a national, collaborative effort to encourage states to compile lon
-gitudinal databases of education information (National Center for Edu
-cational Achievement, 2008). Its goal is not to water down the protections 
of FERPA, but to facilitate use of education records for research and 
accountability purposes. The major challenge to advancing this goal, in 
his view, is that FERPA has been interpreted to lodge virtually all control 
of student data in individual schools and institutions of higher education. 
The department™s regulations state that FERPA covers local education 
agencies, including public schools and higher education institutions, but 
not state education agencies.
1Echoing Campbell, Winnick said that FERPA prohibits these agencies 
and institutions from disclosing personally identi˜able education records 
without written parental consent, unless the disclosure is covered by a 
list of exceptions. He observed that ﬁeducation recordsﬂ have been very 
broadly de˜ned to include records, ˜les, and other materials directly 
related to a student and maintained by an education agency. For example, 
a case that challenged students™ peer review and editing of other students™ 
papers went all the way to the Supreme Court, which ruled that these 
papers were not education records under FERPA. 
FERPA directs the Department of Education to seek voluntary compli
-ance before imposing the sanction of cutting off federal fundsŠa sanction 
1 
Currently, FERPA applies to ﬁan educational agency or institution to which funds have 
been made available under any program administered by the Secretary if (1) The educational 
institution provides educational services or instruction, or both, to students; Or (2) The 
educational agency is authorized to direct and control public elementary or secondary, or 
postsecondary educational institutionsﬂ (U.S. Code, Chapter 34, Section 99.1).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
to be applied only if the school or school district establishes a policy or 
practice of making unauthorized disclosures of education records. A 2002 
Supreme Court decision clari˜ed that parents and others may not sue a 
school or local education agency for alleged violations of FERPA. Winnick 
said that, although the Department of Education has never imposed this 
sanction,
2 the law has had a ﬁsigni˜cant chilling effectﬂ on the develop
-ment of robust state education data systems. He said it is clearly permis
-sible to disclose deidenti˜ed data, not traceable to individual students, 
from state longitudinal data systems. In addition, FERPA does not pro
-hibit creating a state data warehouse, obtaining personally identi˜able 
information from student education records, or using these data to evalu
-ate schools, districts, postsecondary institutions, and programs, including 
making accountability determinations. State education agency employees 
and contractors engaged by the state may review and analyze personally 
identi˜able information for these purposes.
Winnick agreed with Campbell that parental consent is not required 
if a school or local education agency discloses personally identi˜able 
education information to organizations that will conduct research stud
-ies for or on their behalf to improve instruction. However, he said, it is 
unclear what ﬁfor, or on behalf of,ﬂ means and whether a state education 
data system may authorize such studies. The proposed new regulations 
do not appear to authorize state education agencies to redisclose data 
for studies, and, if such authorization were provided, would continue to 
make such redisclosure subject to the current requirement that a school 
or local education agency record each disclosure or redisclosure. Winnick 
asked whether this would mean that the state data system must obtain 
permission from the school or local education agency, either at the time 
of redisclosure or at the time when the state ˜rst obtains the data (disclo
-sure from the local education agency to the state). He suggested that the 
proposed regulations be revised to permit recordation of the disclosure by 
state education of˜cials at the time they make a redisclosure.
Campbell responded that the reason for recording a disclosure is so 
that a parent or student would know who is seeing their records, and 
that this was an important issue when FERPA was ˜rst implemented. 
She said that, even if the state were authorized to record the disclosure, a 
copy of that record would have to be in the school, where the student or 
parent could see it. Winnick agreed but said that parental requests to see 
these records of disclosures were infrequent. He suggested that, if there 
is a parental request, that request be forwarded by the school to the state, 
2 
Campbell agreed that the sanction has never been imposed, explaining that the local 
education agencies have responded to threats of funding cutoffs by coming into compliance 
with FERPA.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BALANCING PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND ACCESS
 13
so that, when the state authorizes a redisclosure, the state will send that 
information back to the school. He also said it might not be very dif˜cult, 
because most the information could be exchanged electronically. Campbell 
said that it was unclear how frequently parents were requesting records 
of disclosures, because the department heard of such requests only when 
the school or school district denied access and parents complained to the 
department. Winnick did not disagree but said the department™s own 
cost-bene˜t analysis of the proposed regulations includes low estimates 
of the number of parental requests for records of disclosures.
Winnick said the proposed regulations would provide a needed 
change in the Department of Education™s interpretation of the FERPA 
authorization for release of data for studies ﬁfor, or on behalf of,ﬂ edu
-cation agencies and institutions. Although the current interpretation 
excludes studies initiated by a research organization, the proposed new 
rule would authorize release of data if there is an agreement between 
the education agency or institution and the organization performing the 
study. However, he indicated that the proposed regulation does not pro
-vide for state education authorities to enter these research agreements, 
thus undermining a key purpose for the state education data systems. 
Winnick pointed out that the Department of Education™s own National 
Center for Education Statistics, which is subject to the same FERPA provi
-sions as state data systems, has a long-standing practice of entering licens
-ing agreements with third-party research organizations to use student 
data for research studies.
Winnick welcomed provisions in the proposed regulations that would 
increase the ability of different state agencies to share education records, 
which he said would aid creation of data systems that link student data 
across levels of education, from prekindergarten through postsecondary 
education. These linked data systems, he said, would be useful for con
-tinuous improvement and alignment, to track individual students, and 
for evaluation and accountability. The proposed regulations wouldŠif 
they increased the states™ authority to record disclosures and enter into 
studiesŠprovide adequate ˚exibility in this area, according to Winnick.
In closing, Winnick argued that his proposals would not raise fun
-damental privacy concerns, because three things would not change: (1) 
who may receive a disclosure of personally identi˜able information, (2) 
the purposes for which the information may be received, or (3) the fact 
that the state is maintaining this information. The only real issue, he said, 
is whether the stateŠas well as a local agency or individual schoolŠmay 
control the decision and the process to authorize research studies and to 
disclose data for such studies (and record the disclosure). He concluded 
that FERPA needs to be reinterpreted, or possibly amended, to harmonize 
state and federal education policies, rather than to thwart core purposes 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
of state education data systems. Without further changes, he argued, 
FERPA would frustrate use of state-level, personally identi˜able student 
data for research conducted by organizations other than the state educa
-tion agency.
In the discussion that followed Campbell™s presentation, Marilyn 
Seastrom (National Center for Education Statistics) explained that one 
impetus for the proposed new regulations was to address the states™ uncer
-tainty about the meaning of ﬁfor, or on behalf of.ﬂ This language, she said, 
put the state in the position of endorsing that a proposed research study 
would be useful to the school or local education agency, causing them to be 
very cautious about disclosing education records for studies. The proposed 
regulations, she said, clarify that these words simply mean that the study is 
something the state recognizes as having potential value.
Winnick expressed concern that, although the proposed regulations 
do allow the state to redisclose student data for a number of purposes, 
they do not authorize the state to do so for a study. Rather, in implement
-ing the statutory requirement that the study must be ﬁfor, or on behalf 
of an educational agency or institution,ﬂ the proposed regulations only 
permit a school, local school district, or educational institution to enter 
an agreement for a study and release data pursuant to the agreement. He 
said that it would be legal and quite simple for the Department of Educa
-tion to clarify that the de˜nition of an ﬁeducational agency or institutionﬂ 
includes a state education agency or that the state education agency may 
enter a study agreement on behalf of schools or school districts in the 
state.
Responding to a question, Campbell indicated that her of˜ce does not 
formally certify collaborations between education agencies and research 
groups as compliant with FERPA, but it does review collaboration propos
-als and provide informal opinions on compliance. Myron Gutmann sug
-gested that, because state longitudinal data systems contain the history 
of individual students™ school participation from kindergarten through 
higher education, these records could never be completely deidenti˜ed. 
He observed that, if a girl attended a particular school in second grade and 
another school in a different county in ˜fth grade, the individual would 
be obvious as a unique case in the data. Gutmann asked whether any 
transfer of data from such longitudinal databases to a researcher would 
constitute a disclosure of personally identi˜able information. Seastrom 
agreed that, because it would be easy to identify one person™s unique 
case, such a transfer would always pose a problem unless the education 
agency did not allow any directory information at all in the deidenti
-˜ed ˜les. Gutmann responded that he would talk later in the workshop 
about similar situations, in which researchers are allowed access to data 
only with strong protections, such as the use of synthetic data or strong 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BALANCING PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND ACCESS
 15
contracts between researchers and data holders, such as those used by the 
National Center for Education Statistics and by his center.
INITIATIVE ON REPORTIN
G STATE 
ED
UCATIONAL PERFORMANCE DATA
Ross Santy (U.S. Department of Education) described several pub
-lic and private initiatives to use and publicly report education data to 
improve students™ academic achievement. Because these initiatives focus 
on reporting of aggregated data, representing an entire school, school 
district, or state, the potential for disclosure of individual student infor
-mation is small. Nevertheless, as discussed below, the states must make 
alterations before reporting some subsets of these data ˜les, in order to 
ensure compliance with the con˜dentiality requirements of FERPA.
The Department of Education™s ED
Facts
 initiative aims to access and 
use student performance data created by the testing requirements of the 
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 in order to create a usable national data 
set (U.S. Department of Education, 2008b). The No Child Left Behind Act 
requires the states not only to collect and analyze student performance 
data, but also to publicly report these data in the form of state, district, 
and school-level ﬁreport cards.ﬂ The report cards must provide student 
achievement results, both overall and within different groups, such as 
those with limited English pro˜ciency, those with diagnosed learning 
disabilities, and members of different racial or ethnic groups. The report 
cards must also include information on the percentage of students not 
tested, two-year trend data by subject and grade, each school™s status 
in attaining adequate yearly progress, the professional quali˜cations of 
teachers, and other data.
Santy explained that, as the states have increased their public report
-ing of aggregated educational achievement and school accountability data 
over the past few years, they have received more requests from outside 
education organizations and researchers for access to their data in a form 
that is more usable than the report cards. Many states have responded, 
posting an annual report card data ˜le on their websites, along with 
the annual report card. At the same time, the states have received more 
requests for data from the ED
Facts
 initiative. A key component of this ini
-tiative was the creation of the Education Data Exchange Network (EDEN) 
in 2004, as a pipeline to bring state data into the department.
To reduce the burden on the states of complying with these multiple 
requests for data, the Data Quality Campaign, a national organization 
dedicated to assisting states in developing and using longitudinal data 
systems, has collaborated with the ED
Facts
 of˜ce and independent edu
-cation organizations to develop the ﬁCoordinated Data Askﬂ (CDA). In 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
response, state education agencies are beginning to make CDA ˜les avail
-able for download on their websites. These ˜les represent a common set 
of indicators that are often requested by policy analysts and researchers. 
Re˚ecting the growing interest in access to these data, the Council of Chief 
State School Of˜cers and Standard & Poor™s (2008) are developing the 
State Education Data Center, to be an online repository for consistently 
formatted ˜les of aggregated school-, district-, and state-level education 
data. The website, created in late 2007, has had a rapidly growing number 
of hits.
3Returning to his description of the ED
Facts
 initiative, Santy said that 
the ED
Facts 
reporting tools were introduced in spring 2006. For the ˜rst 
three years of the initiative, states voluntarily provided data to ED
Facts
 and, in 2007, the department ˜nalized a regulation requiring electronic 
submission of data and granting states a two-year transition window. The 
formal data request to the states was designed to encompass the range of 
types of data the states were already required to collect, including basic 
demographics, student performance data, measures of adequate yearly 
progress, and other data. The states have provided an increasing percent
-age of the data types and amounts requested by the department over the 
past three years.
Santy explained that analysts in the ED
Facts 
of˜ce are currently com
-piling the data from state education agencies, studying its quality, and 
determining what is appropriate to be shared with the public. Although 
they de˜nitely plan to make the national data set public, and they would 
like to share it with the State Education Data Center in order to reduce 
the burden of reporting requirements on the states, they have not done so 
yet. Santy explained that the ED
Facts
 of˜ce has not made the data public 
because it has not received a consistent answer from the Department 
of Education about what constitutes ﬁappropriateﬂ privacy protections. 
He explained that different of˜ces in the Department of Education have 
quite different policies and procedures, including licensing agreements 
used by the National Center for Education Statistics and different data-
masking procedures used by the Of˜ce for Civil Rights when it makes 
data sets public and by the Of˜ce of Special Education Programs in its 
annual reports to Congress on implementation of the Individuals with 
Disabilities Education Act.
Santy outlined several questions about con˜dentiality facing the 
states as they cooperate with the Department of Education, the Data Qual
-ity Campaign, and the State Education Data Center to share and report 
their performance data. The No Child Left Behind Act includes provi
-sions designed to protect the con˜dentiality of student records, directing 
3 
See http://www.schooldatadirect.org/.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BALANCING PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND ACCESS
 17
each state to establish a ﬁreporting N size.ﬂ Under the law, if a cell were 
to fall below this N size, the state must ensure that the information in 
that cell would not be publicly reported in a state education report card, 
in a data ˜le, or in any other way. The data must be redacted, masked, 
or otherwise controlled. One frequent question from the states is how to 
respond if one subgroup falls below the reporting N size for a given grade 
or performance level. Should the state suppress the one subgroup and the 
total or, alternatively, report only the total data and suppress all of the 
subgroup data? A more fundamental question is, as growth models are 
more frequently used to meet No Child Left Behind Act testing require
-ments, what data should be reported and how will privacy be protected 
over time?
Santy said that, although the Department of Education currently has 
no of˜cial answer to such questions, of˜cials are now discussing the dif
-ferent approaches used in the department. These discussions address 
the different uses of the data sets, why they are being made public, and 
whether different purposes may require different procedures for main
-taining con˜dentiality. Santy described the current situation as ﬁunfor
-tunate,ﬂ with many different interpretations of how to protect individual 
privacy of student records, but no common approach.
DATA LICENSIN
G SYSTEM OF THE 
NATIONAL
 CENTER
 FOR
 ED
UCATION
 STATISTICS
The National Center for Education Statistics at the Department of 
Education balances con˜dentiality with research access through a data 
licensing system, described by Marilyn Seastrom. Seastrom opened by 
noting that the center uses somewhat different disclosure protections 
for its own sample survey data than for administrative data owned and 
maintained by the states. She said that applying the same protections 
used for sample data to state administrative data sets would reveal the 
center™s approach to protecting the sample data, which includes adding 
noise and substituting data. Such changes would be readily apparent to 
state analysts who are familiar with their data and would be inappropri
-ate, because the state data do not belong to the center.
Seastrom explained that the National Center for Education Statistics 
collects and compiles statistics on education in the United States at all 
levels, from preschool through adult education. In the process, the center 
often obtains con˜dential data about speci˜c institutions and individu
-als. As required by the Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002 (P.L. 107-
279), the center has established con˜dentiality standards that de˜ne indi
-vidually identi˜able information to include ﬁany record, response form, 
completed survey, or aggregation thereof from which information about 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
particular individuals . . . may be revealed.ﬂ Such information includes 
not only direct identi˜ers, such as a name or social security number, 
but also indirect identi˜ers (e.g., place of birth, race/ethnicity, a speci˜c 
geographic location) that in combination are linkable to a speci˜c indi
-vidual. She said that a microdata set with thousands of variables for tens 
of thousands of people could potentially include many unique strings of 
individual cases across all those items, and this is what the center tries to 
guard against disclosing.
Seastrom said that the center™s mandate to protect privacy and con
-˜dentiality is governed not only by FERPA but also by speci˜c con˜
-dentiality provisions in the Education Sciences Reform Act and by the 
Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act of 2002 
(CIPSEA). Section 183 of the Education Sciences Reform Act, known as 
the Institute of Education Sciences (IES) con˜dentiality law, states that no 
person may

use any individually identi˜able information collected under an 
Education Sciences Reform Act nondisclosure pledge for any non
-statistical purpose, except in the case of terrorism;

make any publication whereby the data for a particular person can 
be identi˜ed; or

permit anyone other than the individuals authorized by the direc
-tor to examine the individual reports.
In addition, both this law and CIPSEA regulations exempt the center™s 
individually identi˜able data from the legal process, including requests 
from the public under the Freedom of Information Act.
Seastrom highlighted two important ways in which the IES con˜
-dentiality law differs from more general FERPA requirements. First, it 
states:
employees including temporary employees or other persons who have 
sworn to observe the limitations imposed by this law, who knowingly 
communicate any individually identi˜able information will be subject 
to ˜nes up to $250,000 or up to ˜ve years in prison or both (Class E 
felony).
Second, the law allows the commissioner of the National Center for Edu
-cation Statistics to use temporary staff, including federal, state, or local 
agency employees and private employees, ﬁbut only if such temporary 
staff are sworn to observe the IES con˜dentiality law.ﬂ This speci˜c clause, 
Seastrom said, is the basis of the center™s licensing process, providing 
the legal authority to require people outside the center to ﬁtake our oath 
and have access to the data.ﬂ Winnick expressed disagreement that these 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BALANCING PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND ACCESS
 19
provisions gave the center broader legal authority than the states have to 
disclose student data to third parties for research studies.
The center™s con˜dentiality procedures guard two types of released 
data: (1) restricted-use data (the type provided to researchers under 
license) and (2) public-use data. For restricted-use data sets, the center 
removes all direct identi˜ers and either makes con˜dentiality edits (data 
perturbation) or restricts cell sizes. Data perturbation techniques directly 
alter individual respondents™ data for some variables, such as blanking 
out randomly selected records; combining multiple records into a single 
record; adding random noise; and swapping or switching data. Release 
of public-use data sets begins when center analysts conduct disclosure 
limitation analysis of the restricted-use data, in order to determine which 
records require masking prior to public release. This analysis leads to fur
-ther data perturbation to create public-use data sets. These changes pro
-tect center employees against the disclosure penalties described above, as 
employees can honestly tell a judge that they did not know whether data 
they released included individually identi˜able information. A disclosure 
review board made up of technical experts approves data perturbations 
for restricted-use data ˜les and clears release of masked public-use ˜les. 
To reduce the need for release of both types of data, the center provides a 
data analysis system. This analysis software system provides online tabu
-lations in a framework that allows external users to analyze individually 
identi˜able data without direct access to individual data records.
In the data licensing system, center data security staff issue licenses 
for access to restricted-use data, while contracted security investigators 
conduct inspections to ensure that the con˜dentiality provisions of the 
license are met. The license itself is between the Institute of Educational 
Sciences, the user, and the user™s institution or organization. The licens
-ing system began as a trial in 1991 and was formalized in 2002 following 
passage of CIPSEA, which allows federal statistical agencies to enter into 
licensing and contracting agreements. In 2007, the center implemented an 
electronic system to apply for licensing, and the center expected to issue 
900 licenses for access to restricted-use data over the course of 2008.
Individual researchers must apply for a license through an organiza
-tion based in the United States, submitting a formal request with detailed 
information about the research project, its objective, an explanation of 
why the public-use ˜les or the center™s data analysis system cannot meet 
the researcher™s need, and other information. Once the application is 
approved, the researcher must submit the signed license documents, along 
with a formal security plan and notarized af˜davits of nondisclosure, for 
all those listed on the license as authorized users. The license documents 
include detailed information about the data, the authorized users, security 
requirements, and penalties for misuse or disclosure, and they must be 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
signed by both the researcher and a senior of˜cial authorized to legally 
bind the institution. The security plan speci˜es the exact location where 
the data are held and used, the physical security of the building and room, 
and required computer security provisions. For example, the restricted-
use data must be loaded and run on a standalone computer, any network 
devices must be disconnected when the restricted-use data are installed 
and used on the computer, and the data must be purged and overwritten 
prior to reattaching to any network.
Seastrom explained that contracted security personnel monitor com
-pliance with all aspects of the security plan and security requirements, 
which limit data use to a secure room or of˜ce, require a password (which 
must be changed every three months) to log into the computer, limit the 
data to read-only access, and require the licensee to remove the data 
either at the end of the project or when reattaching the computer to the 
network. The license gives center data security of˜cials the right to con
-duct unannounced, unscheduled inspections of the licensee™s site. At the 
same time, however, the licensee is responsible for ensuring that daily 
operations comply with the license and security plan, maintaining a ˜le 
of license-related documents, and ensuring that all authorized users read 
and understand this ˜le. In addition, the licensee must submit any presen
-tation or publication to the center for disclosure review prior to release, 
notify the center of any changes to the project or its staff, and close the 
license after destroying the restricted-use data.
Seastrom closed her presentation with several licensing lessons 
learned for other agencies and organizations wishing to protect data:

maintain complete and detailed records of all license transactions;

use security inspections to monitor minor violations;

maintain regular contact with licensees, using e-mail and auto
-mated features of the electronic license system (e.g., by sending 
annual reminders for personnel and security updates); and

automate license closeout reminders.
She observed that, although the center™s licensing system was developed 
to conform to the IES con˜dentiality law, it can work equally well in 
other situations. For example, the National Science Foundation operates 
a licensing system that mirrors the center™s system, and both the National 
Institute on Aging and the National Institute for Child Health and Devel
-opment have used university data labs to
 distribute con˜dential data to 
quali˜ed researchers through agreements that are similar to the center™s 
license and include onsite security inspections.
In response to these lessons learned, Felice Levine asked whether 
schools, school districts, and states could use a license to provide research
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BALANCING PRIVACY, CONFIDENTIALITY, AND ACCESS
 21
ers with access to education records, and Seastrom agreed that licenses 
could be used to establish a formal agreement for data access. In response 
to another question, Seastrom said that the center™s licensing system is 
not subject to review by the Department of Education institutional review 
board. The department™s general counsel determined that, given the cen
-ter™s strong legal requirements protecting con˜dentiality and stringent 
penalties for violation of these requirements, it was unnecessary for the 
institutional review board to be involved in decisions about how the cen
-ter should protect the data. However, a researcher who accesses restricted-
use data through the licensing system may be required to obtain approval 
from the institutional review board at her or his home institution.
Miron Straf asked whether, under the law, a licensed researcher who 
discovered individually identi˜able information in restricted-use data 
provided by the center was responsible for protecting that information. 
Seastrom agreed that, in this case, the burden of protection would lie 
with the researcher. Straf then asked whether the center might play a role 
in bringing state data, either virtually or physically, into its system of 
protections with access through licensing, and Seastrom replied that she 
believed the center would be open to discussing this.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23
3The Value of Education Research 
Using Student and School Records
VAL
UE 
OF
 LON
GIT
UDINAL ST
UDENT 
RECORD DATA FOR RESEARCH
Jane Hannaway (Urban Institute) directs the Center for the Analysis 
of Longitudinal Data in Educational Research (CALDER), funded by 
the U.S. Department of Education™s Institute of Education Sciences.
1 She 
described four features of state education databases that make them par
-ticularly valuable for analysis and research.
First, because they include unique student identi˜ers, the databases 
allow researchers to link individual education records over time in order 
to develop measures of individual learning gains. Researchers can use 
these measures to eliminate many confounding variables. In the past, 
investigators sometimes compared student achievement in a classroom 
at two different points in time, but the classroom might be made up of 
different students at the later point in time. Perhaps more importantly, 
these data allow researchers to address the greatest threat to the validity 
of many educational studiesŠthe fact that students are not randomly 
assigned to classrooms and schools. Investigators can use the individual 
measures of academic achievement and other student characteristics in 
these databases to statistically adjust for the lack of random assignment.
Second, Hannaway said, some state databases include unique teacher 
identi˜ers that allow researchers to link teacher records with student 
records and track patterns over time. This feature of the databases has 
1 
See http://www.caldercenter.org/.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
allowed CALDER research teams to demonstrate the effect of the teacher 
on student learning and show how widely individual teachers vary in 
their effectiveness. This feature has also enabled research on the factors 
that may account for the variation in teacher effectiveness, such as cre
-dentials, training, classroom behavior, and experience. Hannaway argued 
that these studies are important because they help to clarify which factors 
do indeed promote student achievement, which in turn has implications 
for cost ef˜ciency. For example, many school districts provide higher 
salaries to teachers with master™s degrees, but recent CALDER studies 
indicate that, among elementary school teachers, the presence or absence 
of a master™s degree does not affect student learning gains.
Third, the databases consist of census data, including all students 
and teachers in the state public education system. This feature of the 
databases allows an investigator to conduct multiple comparisons. For 
example, in her recent study of Teach for America teachers in North 
Carolina, Hannaway was able to compare Teach for America teachers 
with other new teachers, with all teachers, and with fully licensed and 
credentialed teachers. She described the potential of the databases for 
multiple comparisons as ﬁvery importantﬂ for policy purposes and as a 
valuable complement to random assignment studies.
Fourth, the databases incorporate historical records, a feature that is 
critical to understanding the effects of a change in education policy. For 
example, when studying Florida™s A Plus accountability policy, Hannaway 
expected that the policy would have its largest effects on the lowest per
-forming schools. Contrary to expectations, she initially found that the 
low-performing schools were less likely to change their behavior than the 
high-performing schoolsŠsuggesting that the accountability policy was 
not working as intended. However, after analyzing additional data from 
an earlier period, when another policy targeted many of the same low-
performing schools, they concluded that the previous policy had already 
generated behavioral change in the low-performing schools. Without the 
historical data, Hannaway said, ﬁyou could come to a very faulty infer
-ence . . . in policy research.ﬂ
In response to a question, Hannaway said that the quality of district 
and state data varies. For example, one North Carolina school district 
employing a large number of Teach for America teachers provided her 
research team with data, after a long delay. When Hannaway compared 
these data with a separate list provided by Teach for America, she found 
an overlap of only 25 percent. In contrast, some states, including North 
Carolina and New York, have invested in their data systems, are working 
with multiple researchers, and have accurate, reliable data, she said.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE VALUE OF EDUCATION RESEARCH
 25
USIN
G LON
GIT
UDINAL ST
UDENT RECORD 
DATA IN HI
GHER ED
UCATION RESEARCH
Tom Bailey (Columbia University) explained that, as director of both 
the Community College Research Center, which often analyzes longitu
-dinal student record data from state databases, and the National Cen
-ter for Postsecondary Research, which conducts more time-consuming 
and expensive random assignment studies, he sees the value of both 
approaches. He asserted that it was impossible to carry out ﬁmeaningful 
analysis of student experiences in higher educationﬂ without longitudi
-nal data from student records, and that the lack of such analyses limits 
understanding of higher education. He and other researchers would like 
to be able track students across higher education institutions in order to 
address such critical questions as whether community colleges are suc
-cessful in preparing students to transfer to four-year colleges and how 
well elementary and secondary schools prepare students for higher edu
-cation. They would also like to track students within higher education 
institutions.
Bailey observed that the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA) is only one of several barriers that stand in the way of using edu
-cation records for these types of analysis. One barrier is the fact that, until 
recently, most people had faith in the quality of U.S. higher education. 
Because colleges were assumed to be effective, public debates focused on 
access, rather than on the quality of higher education. Second, because 
public funding is based on enrollments, community college administra
-tors often de˜ne success in terms of current enrollments, rather than 
thinking about how to improve student success over the course of their 
college years. Third, increasing student mobility poses a challenge to 
measuring the performance of individual higher education institutions. 
Bailey likened policy makers™ current focus on accountability in higher 
education without attention to individual student progress to General 
Motors examining its performance without gathering data on car sales 
over time.
National longitudinal databases maintained by the National Center 
for Education Statistics have yielded valuable knowledge and understand
-ing of student progress in higher education, Bailey said. The Center™s 
National Education Longitudinal Study of 1988 (NELS 88) collects and 
maintains data on students over time, including their college transcripts, 
providing the source for many published studies. However, the data come 
from limited national samples of all students, including a smaller group 
of about 1,000 to 1,500 students who have ever attended community col
-lege. Given the small size of the national community college sample, it is 
impossible to analyze student progress in a single state, in demographic 
subgroups, or in a single educational institution. In contrast, the state 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
longitudinal databases, which include records on every student, are much 
larger, allowing the Community College Research Center to conduct stud
-ies of single colleges, subgroups, and other important topics.
Bailey expressed surprise at how rarely community colleges analyze 
their own internal student records. Many of the 83 colleges participating 
in the Achieving the Dream project lack information on such questions as 
how many and which type of students succeed in developmental educa
-tion and go on to take regular college courses. Although FERPA poses no 
barrier to a college in analyzing the progress of its own students, weak 
information technology (IT) systems pose signi˜cant barriers. Community 
college IT systems are designed to track enrollments once each year and 
to send these data to the state for reimbursement, rather than to track 
individual students over time. Although some states and colleges are 
trying to improve their IT systems, many do not place a high priority on 
analysis of student progress. According to Bailey, members of community 
college boards do not understand what kinds of research could be con
-ducted using student records and how that research might improve their 
educational programs.
Studies using longitudinal data to track student progress over time 
have already yielded important insights, because they allow researchers 
to track student responses to educational interventions over long time 
periods, Bailey observed. For example, a study in Ohio (Purnell and 
Blank, 2004) found that guidance counseling had strong positive effects on 
student success in the ˜rst two semesters of community college, but these 
effects had vanished two years later. Studies of developmental education 
in Florida (Calcagno and Long, 2008) and Ohio (Bettinger and Long, 2008) 
found that taking these remedial courses had little effect over three years, 
but greater effects over six years. In another analysis, the Washington 
State Community College Board found that less af˚uent students tended 
to enroll in occupational programs, while their more af˚uent counterparts 
more often enrolled in prebaccalaureate transfer programs. The board 
took these ˜ndings to the state legislature and won approval for com
-munity colleges to offer applied bachelor™s degrees and for expansion of 
transfer programs.
In another example, Bailey presented an analysis of student progres
-sion in mathematics developmental and gatekeeper courses at a single 
institution. Among students assigned to developmental mathematics 
courses, 34 percent never enrolled and another 13 percent completed a 
course but never enrolled in the following gatekeeper course. This kind 
of information can be surprising to community college leaders, who often 
focus on improving instruction in individual courses without considering 
how to ensure that students actually attend classes they are assigned to.
In the few states whose longitudinal databases link elementary and 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE VALUE OF EDUCATION RESEARCH
 27
secondary school records with higher education records, it is possible to 
assess the effectiveness of K-12 education in preparing young people for 
higher education. A 2006 survey (Ewell and Boeke, 2006) found that only 
11 state databases included these links, slowing research on this impor
-tant topic. For example, dual enrollment programs, in which high school 
students may take college courses, are growing rapidly, but little research 
is available on their effectiveness. The Community College Research Cen
-ter has done a preliminary study of dual enrollment in Florida, because 
it has one of the few databases with linked records for K-12 and higher 
education.
Bailey argued that it is also important to link student data among col
-leges, in order to assess community colleges™ effectiveness in preparing 
students for transfer to four-year colleges. More broadly, the increased 
mobility of all college students makes linked data across colleges crucial 
for any analysis of higher education outcomes. Without such linked data 
sets, education of˜cials must rely on weak measures, such as the Gradu
-ation Rate Survey. This measure, which includes only full-time students, 
is a weak indicator of community college outcomes, since 66 percent of 
community college students enroll part-time. In addition, the survey 
excludes transfers and students who register in the spring, and it tracks 
students for only three years.
To measure community college outcomes more accurately, Bailey and 
colleagues analyzed longitudinal data on individual college students from 
the National Center for Education Statistics™ Beginning Postsecondary 
Students study. They found that, although only 22.9 percent of students 
graduated from the institution at which they initially enrolled within 
three years, nearly 46 percent graduated from either their original institu
-tion or another institution after six years. State education databases allow 
development of much more ˚exible accountability measures, in Bailey™s 
view. For example, his center has analyzed three- and six-year graduation 
rates for different groups of students, including transfer students and 
part-time students, at Florida™s 28 community colleges. While improved 
accountability measures are important, Bailey said, the real value of the 
state databases is in allowing more comprehensive and sophisticated 
analysis of student progress.
In conclusion, Bailey reiterated that research on higher education 
faces many barriers besides FERPA. Individual colleges and state higher 
education systems could potentially conduct a great deal of valuable 
research, but this will require a change of priorities, improvement in their 
IT systems, and increases in their analytic capabilities. While acknowledg
-ing that his center wants to build partnerships with the states, bringing its 
skills and research priorities, he said it was critically important to increase 
the states™ own skills and priorities.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
Responding to a question, Bailey said that Florida and Washington 
are among the very few states that have linked employment data with 
education data in their longitudinal databases. For example, research
-ers analyzing linked data in Washington found that, among community 
college students who took adult basic education courses, those who con
-tinued in other courses and completed least 30 credit hours earned more 
money later than those who completed fewer credit hours (Prince and 
Jenkins, 2005). On the basis of this research, the state created a new pro
-gram integrating adult basic education and occupational skills training.
BENEFITS OF RESEARCH ACCESS TO 
LON
GIT
UDINAL ST
UDENT RECORD DATA
Susanna Loeb (Stanford University) opened by discussing how FERPA 
affects university-based researchers™ access to data from individual stu
-dent records. She said that FERPA allows an education agency to share 
personally identi˜able information from student records without writ
-ten consent if the disclosure is to ﬁorganizations conducting studies for, 
or on behalf of, educational agencies or institutions for the purpose of 
. . . improving instruction.ﬂ The study must be conducted ﬁin a manner 
that does not permit personal identi˜cation of parents and students by 
individuals other than representatives of the organizationﬂ (U.S. Code, 
Title 34, Part 99, Section 31.6). While this provision has allowed valuable 
research in education policy and practice, Loeb said, it has been inter
-preted in very different ways. Some schools and education agencies have 
shared data, while others have not. In her view, the dif˜culty of interpret
-ing the law has required both researchers and school personnel to expend 
substantial effort on compliance.
Addressing the question of why an education agency might want to 
give researchers access to its data, Loeb said that education policy mak
-ers often seek research evidence to inform their decisions. However, most 
school districts and state departments of education have quite limited 
capacity to conduct research. Researchers at universities and think tanks 
can provide the time and some of the expertise needed to make the best 
use of the information that education agencies have. In addition, outside 
researchers often have the ˚exibility to look at medium-run and long-run 
questions that do not help as directly with day-to-day decisions but can 
inform better decisions in the future.
The ˜rst bene˜t of allowing access is that researchers have time to 
compile and analyze data, Loeb said. Because linking and cleaning data 
from multiple sources is time-consuming, very few states and school 
districts have done so. For example, she belongs to a team of researchers 
studying the teacher workforces of New York City and New York state, 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE VALUE OF EDUCATION RESEARCH
 29
who have obtained, compiled, checked, and cleaned data from over 10 
different sources. From New York public schools, the team obtained data 
on student demographics and test scores and teachers™ years on the job. 
From New York state, they obtained data on individual teachers, includ
-ing whether they were certi˜ed, their scores on the certi˜cation exam, and 
which teacher education program they had completed. In addition, the 
team identi˜ed the institutions from which individual teachers earned 
their undergraduate degrees and combined this information with the 
Barron™s ranking of college selectivity to construct variables measuring 
the selectivity of the college from which each teacher graduated. While 
the research team had time to devote to this process, it is unlikely that 
any single education agency in New York would be able to compile all of 
these data sets. FERPA protections apply both to the individual student 
data and also to the individual teachers when they were students.
Dedicating this time to accessing and compiling data sets, Loeb said, 
has allowed her team to conduct several important studies, including an 
analysis of the impact of the No Child Left Behind Act provision requiring 
school districts to employ only ﬁhighly quali˜ed teachers.ﬂ In response 
to the law, the New York City Department of Education eliminated emer
-gency certi˜ed teachers between 2002 and 2004, replacing them with 
teachers prepared by alternative certi˜cation programs, including Teach 
for America and New York City™s Teaching Fellows Program (see Figure 
3-1). As a result of this change, the average math SAT scores of teachers 
in the poorest schools increased dramatically. Today, the poorest schools 
employ higher scoring new teachers than the richer schools.
The second bene˜t of allowing access is that researchers provide 
expertise. Although school district and state personnel can often answer 
day-to-day questions by providing accurate, timely descriptive statis
-tics, outside researchers are able to analyze longitudinal data in much 
more sophisticated ways. They conduct value-added analyses to assess 
how much various factors contribute to student learning over time and 
difference-in-difference analyses to compare patterns in two different 
time periods. Outside researchers also use a variety of techniques for 
simulating experiments. In addition, they are using longitudinal data and 
ﬁputting experiments on top of them,ﬂ Loeb said. After randomly assign
-ing students or schools (or both) to treatment and control groups, Loeb 
said, the researchers are not required to gather survey data from the two 
groups, relying instead on the data that are collected on an ongoing basis 
in a state or school district database.
Loeb offered two examples of important ˜ndings resulting from out
-side researchers™ expertise. First, her team used value-added modeling of 
longitudinal data to estimate the effect of the ﬁhighly quali˜ed teacherﬂ 
requirement on student achievement (Boyd et al., 2008). They found that 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
01,0002,0003,0004,0005,0006,000200020012002200320042005Number of New TeachersCollege recommended and otherTeaching Fellows and TFATemporary licenseFI
GU
RE 3-1
 Number of new teachers in New York City by pathway, 2000-2005.
NOTE: TFA = Teach for America.
SOURCE
: Boyd et al. (2008: Figure 6).
the largest increases in teacher effectiveness were in low-income schools, 
where the weakest teachers were eliminated, whereas the policy had little 
impact on teacher effectiveness in the richer schools. These improvements 
in teacher quali˜cations in the poorest of schools reduced the gap between 
rich and poor schools in student achievement by 25 percent (see Figure 
3-2).
Second, she described studies by Jacob and Lefgren (2004, 2007) of a 
policy introduced in Chicago public schools requiring students scoring 
below a speci˜c cut score on a reading and mathematics test to be retained 
in grade. The researchers used regression discontinuity analysis to com
-pare quite similar students whose scores were below and above the cutoff 
scoreŠan improved approach over previous studies, which often simply 
compared the academic achievement of students who were retained with 
the achievement of other students who were not. In contrast to previ
-ous studies, which generally have found that retention has a negative 
effect on student achievement, Jacob and Lefgren (2007) found increases 
in measured academic achievement one year later among students who 
were retained in third grade. However, in comparison to students not held 
back, these gains vanished by the time the students reached sixth grade.
The third bene˜t of sharing student record data with outside research
-ers is that researchers™ broad perspective allows them to address questions 
relevant to long-run policy. For example, Boyd et al. (2005) combined data 
from college applications to the State University of New York with infor
-mation from the College Board to describe how close to home teachers 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE VALUE OF EDUCATION RESEARCH
 31
tend to teach. They found that most public school teachers in New York 
take their ˜rst public school teaching job very close to their hometowns 
or to where they attended college. Teacher candidates coming from sub
-urban or rural hometowns strongly prefer to remain in those areas, rather 
than teach in urban districts. Their ˜ndings have particular implications 
for the long-term policies of urban districts, which are net importers 
of teachers. The study suggests that urban districts must offer salaries, 
working conditions, or student populations that are more attractive than 
those of the surrounding suburban districts to attract suf˜ciently quali
-˜ed candidates.
The broad perspective that outside researchers bring to education 
questions is apparent in studies that yield important policy information 
for more than one education agency. For example, an analysis conducted 
as part of the study of New York City teachers (Boyd et al., 2005) identi˜ed 
differences in the effectiveness of various teacher education programs, as 
measured by student achievement. The study also identi˜ed features of 
teacher preparation programs associated with greater gains in student 
051015Proportion of TeachersŒ.15Œ.1Œ.050.05.1.15.2Average Impact on Students in Standard DeviationsRich 2001Poor 2001Rich 2005Poor 2005FI
GU
RE 3-2
 Effect of all observed teacher quali˜cations on students in grades 
4 and 5 mathematics achievement, most af˚uent and poorest deciles of schools, 
2001 and 2005.
SOURCE
: Boyd et al. (2008: Figure 8).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
achievementŠsuch as providing preparation for teaching practice and 
developing knowledge of content areas. These ˜ndings have implica
-tions for other organizationsŠspeci˜cally, colleges providing teacher 
educationŠas well as for the New York City Department of Education.
Despite these important bene˜ts to education agencies that share 
data, Loeb said, researchers often ˜nd it dif˜cult and costly to gain access 
to education data sets. She asserted that the many local school districts, 
states, and higher education institutions that are interpreting FERPA lack 
clarity about how to comply. As a result, people in each organization 
have to think about compliance before providing access. For example, 
Loeb said, the research team studying the New York state and city teacher 
workforces had to obtain approvals for the research from over 20 differ
-ent state and local education agencies and higher education institutions. 
Obtaining approval from the institutional review boards at 18 different 
colleges and universities engaged in teacher preparation was nearly a 
full-time job for one member of the research team, and compiling the data 
took all of another researcher™s time. The process led to a different data-
sharing agreement with each organization. The team has a contract to act 
as an agent of New York State and has signed memoranda of understand
-ing with many school districts across the country, each of which is slightly 
different from the others. A few districts do not want a formal memoran
-dum of understanding but require the research team to ˜ll out a form.
This process has ﬁhuge time costs,ﬂ Loeb said, partly because schools 
and agencies are nervous about complying with FERPA. For example, 
although her workshop paper (Loeb, 2008) includes sample language 
from a memorandum of understanding with one school district, most of 
the school districts were unwilling to publicly share their memoranda, 
because of uncertainty about compliance. Another result of the process is 
that researchers must work with incomplete and unrepresentative data, 
because agencies that do not want to share their data use FERPA as an 
excuse not to provide them. Even agencies that are willing to share data 
sometimes do and sometimes do not, depending on how much time they 
have and whether they know and trust the researchers.
Ultimately, Loeb said, the extent of data sharing depends on research
-ers™ ability to develop trust with individual education of˜cials and ana
-lysts, which has bene˜ts. For example, her research on the New York 
teacher workforce was strengthened by extensive discussions with city 
and state of˜cials. She explained that she is able to access other data from 
other school districts because she is part of a group at Stanford that gives 
executive training to superintendents from around the country about 
the bene˜ts of sharing data with researchers. The bottom line, Loeb con
-cluded, is that there would be bene˜ts to making FERPA ﬁa little bit more 
understandableﬂ to school districts and state departments of education. 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE VALUE OF EDUCATION RESEARCH
 33
She said that the National Center for Education Statistics™ data licens
-ing system was a good model for protecting con˜dentiality while also 
providing access. Although the protections are much stricter than those 
included in her team™s contracts and memoranda of understanding with 
other organizations, it is ﬁmuch, much easier and less time-consuming for 
usﬂ to comply, because there is a manual to follow.
VAL
UE OF RESEARCH PARTNERSHIPS
Barbara Schneider complimented the speakers, observing that 
CALDER was doing ﬁthe most important work on the state longitudinal 
databases that we haveﬂ and that no one was conducting the kinds of 
analyses of community college education that Bailey™s group was under
-taking. However, she expressed deep concern about the value and impor
-tance of education research. Observing that none of the states has the time 
or analytic capacity to carry out the types of studies described by the 
panelists, she said that the real barrier to increased access to state data has 
been that the researcher has gone in, taken the state™s data, and then the 
state of˜cials never hear from the researcher againŠleading to negative 
feelings about researchers. Schneider called on researchers to establish a 
new form of relationship with state education of˜cials, including the ideas 
not only of researchers, but also of the state, and emphasizing the shared 
interests of both parties.
Praising Loeb™s ﬁspectacularﬂ research, Schneider said its results 
are important, particularly the ˜nding that, at the high school level, the 
alternative certi˜ed teachers are more effective than traditionally pre
-pared teachers, as measured by student achievement. The real question, 
she said, is what will happen when Loeb and colleagues publish these 
˜ndings, which re˚ect negatively on the traditional teacher education 
institutions that provided data to Loeb™s research team. She asked how 
researchers can go back to agencies and institutions with which they have 
signed memoranda of understanding to discuss ˜ndings that may be 
negative and, if so, whether the agencies or institutions might pressure 
the researchers not to publish such ˜ndings. She asked about the long-
term implications, particularly in light of her call for a new relationship 
between researchers and education agencies.
Loeb responded that she has observed a change in the way her team 
interacts with New York City school of˜cials. Five years ago, she said, no 
one wanted to know about any weaknesses in the teacher workforce, but 
today all school of˜cials want information on their teachers™ ﬁ˜xed effectﬂ 
on student achievement, are happy to share that information with the city, 
and want to know how they can do better. She said that, as university-
based researchers, her team retains control over the research information 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
and will publish it. At the same time, however, education of˜cials are 
likely to recognize errors in the team™s data or in its interpretation of the 
data. Recognizing the value of this expertise, Loeb™s team shares draft 
papers with agency of˜cials, allowing them 30 days to comment, a pro
-cess she described as ﬁgood for them and for us.ﬂ
Bailey said Schneider had raised a potentially serious issue, as it can 
create problems if researchers ˜nd that an existing policy is ineffective. 
His team, too, shares draft papers with state of˜cials and discusses the 
drafts before publication. He said he believes that, in some cases, con
-tinued access to data has been limited because of studies reaching nega
-tive conclusions and described this as an ongoing problem. However, he 
emphasized that good access to state education data often is the result of 
long-term investments by a few states. For example, Florida has held a 
three-day conference annually for the past 20 years, including all those 
responsible for sending data into the comprehensive state database, to 
discuss technical issues. Similarly, the state of Washington has a very good 
database on community colleges that has been developed with strong 
political support over 15 years. These states not only have better quality 
data but also have easier relationships with researchers when discussing 
such issues as negative ˜ndings about education policies. Bailey sug
-gested supporting sustained state efforts like these.
Hannaway noted that, when accepting a grant or contract from an 
education agency, CALDER always retains the right to publish research 
results but is ˚exible about when to publish. The center tries not to blind
-side education agencies that have provided longitudinal data. In addition, 
the researchers try not to prejudge educational programs that are still 
at an ﬁincubator stage.ﬂ The researchers take time to develop trust with 
education agencies and to ensure that the researchers fully understand the 
policy or program they are investigating. Helen Ladd (Duke University) 
said that, although researchers involved in establishing the North Caro
-lina Education Research Data Center developed trusting relationships 
with the state and school districts, the center now makes the data sets 
available to outside researchers, both inside and outside North Carolina. 
This could have drawbacks if an outside researcher conducted a weak 
study that would put the North Carolina Department of Education on 
the defensive. Felice Levine observed that these concerns about publish
-ing negative results, while very important, represented a dimension of 
conducting responsible, ethical research that is not speci˜c to FERPA.
Focusing more speci˜cally on FERPA, Levine observed that access 
to personally identi˜able student record data is often provided without 
requiring written consent under the law™s exception for studies conducted 
ﬁfor, or on behalf of,ﬂ an education agency. She asked whether contracts 
between researchers and agencies re˚ecting this provision of the law 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE VALUE OF EDUCATION RESEARCH
 35
always protect researchers™ autonomy to publish their ˜ndings. Loeb 
responded that her team™s memoranda of understanding do guarantee 
the right to publish, as required by the team members™ universities. Bailey 
expressed the view that researchers™ right to publish can be guaranteed 
in the language of the contracts they negotiate, but the real question was 
whether researchers would be allowed further data access after publish
-ing negative ˜ndings about a state or district. His center™s researchers 
have sometimes encountered problems when an individual staff member 
with whom they have developed a relationship leaves the agency, which 
has sometimes led to limits on access or lengthy delays before approval 
of the next data request.
A member of the audience suggested that the take-home message 
of the panel, including the examples of successful research, was that 
FERPA and the Common Rule were ﬁreally not much of a problemﬂ for 
researchers. Hannaway disagreed, saying that it was important not to 
underestimate the costs of obtaining access to these data sets and the 
ﬁtenuousnessﬂ of the relationships researchers had established with states 
and school districts.
Martin Orland (WestEd) asked whether there were cases in which 
researchers had tried to gain access to data but FERPA posed a barrier. 
Hannaway said this had happened in Texas: John Kain, at the University 
of Texas at Dallas, established relationships and negotiated data-sharing 
agreements with the state and local school districts, which included con
-˜dentiality protections in compliance with FERPA, in the Texas Schools 
Project. With support from the Spencer Foundation, Kain™s team compiled 
these and other data from multiple sources into a comprehensive longitu
-dinal database with individually linked records on K-12 and higher educa
-tion and employment outcomes (Kain, 2000). Analyses using the database 
yielded important ˜ndings about student achievement gaps (Kain and 
Singleton, 1996) and teachers in Texas (e.g., Hanushek, Kain, and Rivkin, 
2004). However, Hannaway said, a change in the state™s interpretation 
of FERPA led it to block access to more recent data (Hanushek, 2007). 
Although the researchers made several efforts to obtain renewed access, 
including an appeal to the state legislature, they were unsuccessful.
2 Describing the state™s decision as ﬁarbitrary,ﬂ Hannaway called for central 
guidance on how to interpret FERPA.
Marilyn Seastrom said that the value of developing trusting relation
-2 
The University of Texas at Dallas has recently established a state-designated Education 
Research Center in collaboration with the Texas School Project. According to its website, the 
new center will assemble, clean, and document deidenti˜ed K-12 and higher education data 
for analysis by the center and will also facilitate secure use by outside researchers in compli
-ance with FERPA (http://www.utdallas.edu/erc/about/ [accessed July 2008]).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
ships with the states is not unique to outside researchers. National Center 
for Education Statistics analysts who create the central core data always 
send the data for each state back to the state where it originated. This is 
done partly to verify and edit the data, but also so that the state depart
-ment of education knows in advance what information will be made 
public. The center has an ﬁelaborate processﬂ of keeping state education 
of˜cials involved and informed.
Shelly Martinez (Of˜ce of Management and Budget) agreed with 
Seastrom that these issues of data access are not unique to university 
researchers. She explained that she participates in the Federal Committee 
on Statistical Methodology, whose members discuss the use and con˜
-dentiality of administrative records across all federal agencies.
3 Martinez 
observed that there are con˜dentiality laws similar to FERPA in every 
˜eld, including health care, in which HIPAA protects individual health 
records. She said that federal statistical agencies need clear guidance on 
how to interpret these laws across a variety of situations, because federal 
agencies are often ﬁin just as tenuous a situation as many of youﬂ when 
they seek access to state or federal administrative data. Based on her 
monthly discussions with federal analysts studying nutrition, income, 
and other topicsŠall of whom face similar challengesŠshe suggested 
developing broad, systematic solutions, as well as addressing the more 
speci˜c data access challenges posed by FERPA.
In conclusion, Ladd observed that it is important to remember that 
access to data is sometimes limited by technical weaknesses in state IT 
systems, not only by FERPA.
3 
See http://www.fcsm.gov/committees/cdac/.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37
4Reconciling the Access, Privacy, and 
Con˜dentiality of Education Data
This chapter discusses models that reconcile research access to edu
-cation records with the con˜dentiality requirements of the Family Edu
-cational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA). The ˜rst two sections of the 
chapter describe well-established models, in North Carolina and Florida, 
that allow researchers to access and analyze state longitudinal data. The 
next section presents an emerging long-term research partnership that 
permits University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign researchers to access 
and analyze longitudinal data from schools and school districts. The ˜nal 
model is a new collaboration in Michigan.
NORTH CAROLINA ED
UCATION RESEARCH DATA CENTER
Helen Ladd provided an overview of the North Carolina Educa
-tion Research Data Center, which she described as ﬁone of the most 
productive collaborations between a state department of education and 
researchers.ﬂ
The data center was originally created in 2001 through a memoran
-dum of agreement between the North Carolina Department of Public 
Instruction and a consortium of researchers at the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, and Duke University. The data center is housed 
at Duke University™s Sanford Institute of Public Policy.
1Today™s center had its origins in 2000, when researchers at the two 
1 
See http://www.pubpol.duke.edu/centers/child/ep/nceddatacenter/index.html.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
universities were developing a joint proposal for research into the black-
white achievement gap. Realizing they would need large amounts of data, 
they began discussions with the Department of Public Instruction. The 
group succeeded in obtaining funding from the Spencer Foundation for 
two initial studies, for the creation of the data center, and for a colloquium 
series designed to bring researchers using the data together with policy 
makers. Although the colloquium series helped to forge ties between state 
education of˜cials and the university partners, Ladd said, the research
-ers always emphasized to the state leaders that any research conducted 
through the center would be independent from the state. Following the 
signing of the memorandum of understanding in 2001, the Spencer Foun
-dation provided additional support for the data center in 2003, and the 
memorandum of understanding was updated in 2006. Ladd described the 
center as a four-way partnership, including the state department of public 
instruction, the two universities, and the Spencer Foundation (Muschkin 
and Ladd, 2008).
Ladd explained that the
 center was initially established to assemble 
data from the Department of Public Instruction for two purposesŠto 
enable the speci˜c studies of the minority achievement gap funded by 
the Spencer Foundation and to make the data available to the wider 
research community. Both purposes have been more than achieved. To 
date, 93 studies have received data through the center, including 21 proj
-ects headed by researchers outside North Carolina.
Ladd argued that the data center™s greatest accomplishment has been 
to overcome barriers to research using the state™s education data. In addi
-tion to barriers related to compliance with FERPA, the Department of 
Public Instruction stored administrative data in a format that researchers 
could not use, and lacked resources to link data on teacher characteristics 
with data on student achievement, or to create longitudinally matched 
data over time.
The data center has overcome each of these barriers, by encrypting 
the data to maintain con˜dentiality, checking the data for consistency and 
accuracy, writing user-friendly code books, merging data across sets (e.g., 
students with teachers and longitudinally over time), and meeting with 
researchers to explain what data are and are not available. The data cen
-ter is populated almost entirely with data from the Department of Public 
Instruction and does not include data from other state agencies. These 
data are at the district, school, teacher, and student levels. Although some 
student and teacher records are matched over time, and some teacher and 
student data are linked, most matching is done by researchers.
Returning to the issue of con˜dentiality, Ladd said that the memoran
-dum of understanding is very clear on this subject, referring to FERPA and 
also to the state board of education policy manual. In this memorandum, 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING EDUCATION DATA
 39
the state interprets broadly the FERPA provision that exempts disclo
-sure of education records from requirements for informed consent if the 
records are to be used for studies ﬁto improve instructionﬂ (see Chapter 
2). The memorandum governs the process through which the state data 
are made available. Initially, the data with all identifying information are 
maintained on a secure server at the Department of Public Instruction. No 
more than three members of the data center staffŠwho have been trained 
in the con˜dentiality requirements of FERPA and have signed con˜den
-tiality agreementsŠsee the data in this form. They encrypt the original 
data, removing all direct and many indirect identi˜ers and adding new 
randomly assigned identi˜ers. When new data become available from the 
Department of Public Instruction, the unique encrypted data center iden
-ti˜er is used to link the new record to existing data, and new data center 
identi˜ers are assigned to unmatched records. As a result of this process, 
Ladd said, ﬁI would never see any data with identi˜ers on it. There are 
˜rewalls all around that.ﬂ
The data center makes these deidenti˜ed data available only to 
researchers employed at a higher education institution or other research 
organization that has an institutional review boardŠexcluding journal
-ists, advocacy groups, and other organizations that lack these procedures. 
The data are also available to graduate students who provide letters of 
support from their faculty advisers, in which the advisers assume respon
-sibility for maintaining con˜dentiality. To access the data, an investigator 
sends a research proposal for review by the director and the associate 
director of the data center. If the proposal is approved, the researcher is 
required to sign an agreement that includes guarantees of con˜dentiality 
and also speci˜es that the research ˜ndings will be shared with both the 
data center and the Department of Public Instruction.
Ladd explained that the data center process has yielded many ben
-e˜ts for North Carolina™s Department of Public Instruction, in the form of 
useful studies. For example, Bifulco and Ladd (2007) found that students 
make considerably smaller achievement gains in charter schools than they 
would have in public schools, and that charter schools have increased 
racial segregation and minority achievement gaps. Another study, by 
researchers at Duke University™s Nicholas School of the Environment 
and Earth Sciences, showed that blood lead levels in early childhood are 
related to educational achievement in early elementary school (Miranda 
et al., 2007). State education of˜cials are also very interested in a study 
that found that the incidence of problem behavior was signi˜cantly higher 
among sixth graders attending middle schools than among sixth graders 
attending elementary schools (Cook et al., 2007).
Ladd predicted that further bene˜ts to the state of North Carolina 
would emerge from a new collaboration between Duke University fac
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
ulty and researchers at ˜ve other universities. These researchers have 
access to comparable administrative data from other states, including 
Texas and Florida. Financed by the U.S. Department of Education through 
the Center for the Analysis of Longitudinal Data in Education Research 
(CALDER; see Chapter 3), the collaboration facilitates the replication of 
analyses across states and shared learning among education researchers.
In addition to this useful research, the data center also generates 
more direct bene˜ts to the Department of Public Instruction, including 
providing full access to the cleaned and linked data sets generated by 
the data center. For example, department of˜cials frequently use data 
center ˜les on student disciplinary infractions, since they are more easily 
linkable to student demographic and academic information than the data 
˜les maintained by the department. In addition, when the department 
contracts with other state agencies to carry out research, the data center 
supplies ˜les to these agencies at little or no cost. Over time, the depart
-ment™s internal research capacity and productivity have both risen. The 
presence of the data center also allows the department to refer requests 
for data from outside researchers to the center, eliminating the costs of 
responding.
Ladd emphasized that the research community™s data needs differ 
from those of the Department of Public Instruction. Researchers value 
longitudinal data over a long time period, in order to estimate models of 
educational activities and outcomes. In contrast, the Department of Public 
Instruction sometimes needs the most recent data and data with identi
-˜ers. Because of these differences, it is important that the department 
continue to develop its own data management capacity, Ladd said. Not
-ing that the department had received a grant from the U.S. Department 
of Education to develop a longitudinal data set, she said it was important 
that the department move forward on this project internally, even though 
the data center has been working to create a longitudinal data set. She 
said that the data center has already held useful conversations with the 
state about this project, predicting that the evolving relationship between 
the state and the data center will be productive. Ladd observed that it 
would take the department two or three years to develop its longitudinal 
data set and that, unlike the data center™s data set, it would not include 
historical data.
Finally, Ladd noted that the data center and the Department of Public 
Instruction share the goal of expanding the developing K-12 longitudinal 
systems to include data on postsecondary education. Through its part
-nership with the department, which has begun discussions with the state 
higher education system, the data center hopes to establish the necessary 
mechanisms for sharing data, ensuring con˜dentiality, and providing 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING EDUCATION DATA
 41
researcher access to information that would promote policy-enhancing 
research at all levels of education.
In response to a question about the memorandum of understanding, 
Ladd said that it was helpful during the negotiations to explain to the 
North Carolina of˜cials that Texas had a similar arrangement to share 
data with researchers at that time (see Chapter 3). Robert Boruch called for 
increased sharing of memoranda of understanding to reduce the burden 
of negotiating each agreement separately and to encourage more states to 
develop and share data sets.
FLORIDA™S ED
UCATION DATABASE
Jeff Sellers (Florida Department of Education) provided an overview 
of Florida™s comprehensive data system. He explained that the state 
developed the Florida Education and Training Placement Information 
Program in the 1990s, in order to assess the effectiveness of state educa
-tional programs. The system used social security numbers to link indi
-vidual student records at all levels of education and training to other state 
data sets on employment and wages, public assistance, incarceration in 
the state prisons, military enlistments, and other life activities. Analysts 
used the linked data to answer questions about what happens to students 
after they graduate from or leave educational programs; for example, 
one study examined the relationship between high school test scores and 
receipt of public assistance.
Lessons learned in developing this program were applied to develop 
a central state data repository in 2000, using more current technology. 
This central data warehouse is administered by the Florida Department 
of Education but relies on administrative data from a variety of state and 
federal agencies. It includes individual assessment results from prekin
-dergarten through community college, including scores on teacher certi˜
-cation assessments, as well as other individual student and staff data from 
all levels of education, prekindergarten through state university. Since 
2004, state analysts have drawn on the warehouse to create several prod
-ucts. Emphasizing that state of˜cials and systems analysts learned as they 
developed the system, Sellers noted that one of the ˜rst products, a series 
of research extracts, was created in partnership with outside researchers 
who reviewed the data sets and provided feedback on their accuracy and 
usefulness. Local researchers from Florida State University also helped 
the state analysts to study and understand the longitudinal data they 
had assembled. The next product was a series of data marts, which are 
made up of data ˜les aggregated by subject, such as enrollments or assess
-ments. They are designed to provide increased access to the data, while 
protecting con˜dentiality in compliance with FERPA, Sellers explained. 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
Aggregating these subsets of the huge volume of records speeds system 
performance and allows faster responses to speci˜c queries.
Sellers described the state™s approach to making the data anonymous. 
As the data are extracted from the various sources (assessment data, preK-
12 student data, etc.), they take two different paths (see Figure 4-1). Data 
on enrollments, assessments, attendance, and the like follow one path 
into the warehouse, and student and teacher data follow another path, 
in which identi˜ers (social security number, name, birthdate, and other 
student and teacher identi˜ers) are stripped off. The data enter a ﬁblack 
boxﬂ in which each individual or institution is assigned a unique student 
or teacher identi˜cation code, known as a ﬁdata warehouse internal iden
-ti˜er.ﬂ This anonymous identi˜er is then relinked with the data that fol
-lowed the other path, creating a new, anonymous record, which, in turn, 
is loaded into the data warehouse for storage. Sellers emphasized that 
this process of matching a new anonymous identi˜er to each student or 
teacher is completed only once, mentioning that the group uses a similar 
technique to make school information anonymous. Data warehouse man
-agers ensure that each unique individual or institution retains the origi
-nally assigned identi˜er throughout the loading and extraction of data.
Transform & loadprocessesMatching ProcessData warehouseinternal identifierMainframe SystemsOther SystemsData for load in the warehousePersonal IdentifiableDataData warehouseMatching Individuals in Florida™s Education 
Data Warehouse:  AnonymizingDataFIGU
RE
 4-1
 Florida™s approach to making data anonymous.
SOURCE
: Sellers (2008).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING EDUCATION DATA
 43
The integrated longitudinal data in the warehouse are useful for many 
different purposes. Administrators in the Florida Department of Educa
-tion use the data to inform decisions about funding, class size planning, 
and other matters and to meet the federal accountability and reporting 
requirements. The data marts produced over the past two years, which 
report and present the data, have been used to provide feedback reports 
to high schools and community colleges. In response to state legislators™ 
questions, analysts are creating a data mart focusing on the effectiveness 
of the variety of state-funded teacher preparation and certi˜cation pro
-grams (including alternative certi˜cation programs). Using an approach 
similar to the one Susanna Loeb used in New York, the state analysts link 
teacher identi˜ers with student identi˜ers and also look at the teacher™s 
educational record when she or he was a university student, to assess 
the effectiveness of alternative preparation programs based on student 
performance.
The data are also useful for research, Sellers said. The state of Florida 
has established research partnerships with the Center for the Analysis of 
Longitudinal Data in Educational Research (CALDER; see Chapter 3) and 
has collaborated with the Community College Research Center described 
by Thomas Bailey to study community college ˜nancial aid and high 
schoolŒcommunity college dual enrollment programs (see Chapter 3).
Sellers concluded his presentation by highlighting key lessons about 
what has worked in Florida:

To the extent possible, build on existing systems and expertise. 
Sellers observed that many states have administrative data, but 
the key question is how to leverage these data to study and inform 
policy. For the 27 states that have received federal grants to build 
longitudinal data systems, he said, the challenge will be linking 
the data so that students can be followed over time in school and 
beyond, as they enter postsecondary education or the workplace, 
receive public assistance, or have other life experiences.

Pursue opportunities to provide service and share information. 
Sellers noted that he usually delivers presentations to ﬁpeople 
who have the data, not people who want to use it.ﬂ In his talks, he 
encourages the data managers to respond to outside researchers™ 
requests by considering how the state may leverage the request. 
Because his agency lacks the resources needed to evaluate current 
or proposed future education policies, outside research can be very 
valuable. At times, state of˜cials will ask the researcher to slightly 
modify the research plan or add a component related to a speci˜c 
question in order to gain more from the research. Sellers suggested 
that this could be a selling point for researchers as they approach 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
states looking for data. The researchers could propose to help the 
state evaluate some of its programs and policies in exchange for 
access to the state™s data.

Exceed all requirements dealing with con˜dentiality and restricted 
release. This is important not only because of the legal require
-ments in FERPA, but also to address how the public, parents, and 
the media perceive the collection and use of individual data and to 
counter possible future references to the state government as Big 
Brother.

From a development perspective, it is really never over. The answer 
to any single question about education policy often raises ˜ve new 
questions that need to be addressed.
In discussion, Sellers said that his agency does not have enough staff 
to respond to all requests for access to the database. He observed that the 
queue of researchers seeking access was growing longer. In the future, he 
said, the state would like to create a center similar to the North Carolina 
Education Research Data CenterŠa ﬁvirtual sandbox.ﬂ Ideally, the state 
could give the key to the sandbox to a quali˜ed, approved researcher, 
moving to a self-service model that would eliminate the need to respond 
to each individual request.
DEVELOPIN
G LON
G-TERM RESEARCH 
PARTNERSHIPS IN ILLINOIS
Lizanne DeStefano (University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign) 
explained that she been involved in balancing researchers™ need for access 
to education data with protections for individual privacy and con˜dential
-ity for over two decades, including many years as chair of the university™s 
institutional review board and in her current position as associate dean for 
educational research. Observing that ﬁwe live in interesting times,ﬂ DeSte
-fano argued that longitudinal studies of individual student performance 
over time are critical for responding to the accountability requirements 
of the No Child Left Behind Act. Because of this, she said, local and state 
education agencies are now more motivated to ˜nd solutions that enable 
research while also protecting student con˜dentiality.
DeStefano outlined different phases in the relationship between Uni
-versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign education researchers and local 
school districts. In the early 1990s, local schools and districts became 
increasingly unwilling to respond to many different ad hoc requests for 
data from university researchers. They viewed researchers as people who 
came into the schools, took data, and left without providing anything of 
value to the school or district. In addition, these small schools and dis
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING EDUCATION DATA
 45
tricts often lacked the time and staff to respond to individual requests that 
they create anonymous data sets.
To overcome this problem, the university created the Of˜ce of School-
University Research Relations, a single point of contact for researchers and 
schools. School of˜cials can call this of˜ce to receive assurance that any 
research proposed for or under way in their schools has been approved 
by the university™s institutional review board and that the researchers 
involved have undergone criminal background checks and received train
-ing in research ethics and procedures. School of˜cials can also ask ques
-tions about the research and its ˜ndings and implications for school 
policy. The new of˜ce was successful for many years, facilitating about 
150 research projects in schools each semester.
However, in 2004-2005, as school of˜cials grew concerned that spend
-ing time with outside researchers was distracting them from improving 
instruction in order to meet the requirements of the No Child Left Behind 
Act, they again grew reluctant to sponsor research. At the same time, 
responding to the federal requirements had increased their awareness of 
value of data analysis, evaluation, and research. These changes led the 
university and the school districts to a new phase in their relationships, 
establishing long-term research partnerships based on common interests 
and a shared commitment to school improvement. The new partnerships 
involve many different school districts in the Urbana-Champaign area 
and are supported by a new Center for Education in Small Urban Com
-munities.
2 DeStefano noted that the university has not yet developed a 
long-term research partnership with the state of Illinois and only recently 
signed the ˜rst memorandum of understanding governing access to state 
data.
Although there are many research partnerships, each includes several 
common elements. First, it is based on a negotiated long-term research 
agenda, developed through frank discussions among university adminis
-trators and faculty and school district representatives. DeStefano observed 
that, although she had initially feared that faculty interests would differ 
from the districts™ interests, she found quite a bit of overlap. These dis
-cussions and negotiations led to a list of four areas in which research is 
critically needed, and the university provides funding and fellowships 
to encourage faculty to conduct studies in these four areas. In addition, 
the university commits to sharing the research ˜ndings in a form that the 
school or school district can easily use and apply.
Second, each partnership deploys similar strategies for informing par
-ents and students about research activities. The partnerships use ﬁrobust 
and effectiveﬂ procedures for disseminating information and obtaining 
2 
See http://www.ed.uiuc.edu/smallurban/.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
parental consent, when consent is required, DeStefano said. For example, 
parents can view survey instruments, protocols, and research summaries, 
and they can also call a toll-free number if they have a concern or question 
about research under way in their schools.
Third, each partnership is supported by cross-training of school dis
-trict personnel, families, and researchers on research ethics and com
-pliance with FERPA. This training develops shared understanding and 
undergirds the fourth element of the partnershipsŠformal data-sharing 
agreements specifying that the school districts will maintain and allow 
regular access to deidenti˜ed longitudinal data sets in speci˜c areas. 
These formal agreements include common interpretations of FERPA and 
options for compliance. For example, when informed consent is required 
for disclosure of education records, the relationships the university rou
-tinely develops with families make it relatively easy to obtain signed 
consent forms. More often, the school district is allowed to disclose dei
-denti˜ed data without informed consent under the FERPA exception 
for ﬁorganizations conducting studies for, or on behalf of, educational 
agencies or institutions for the purpose of . . . improving instructionﬂ (see 
Chapter 2).
In addition, a memorandum of understanding with each school 
or district partner allows the university researcher and the district to 
obtain approval for the research from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign institutional review board, which has been expanded to 
include representatives of the school districts. No approvals from other 
institutional review boards are required, saving both the researchers and 
the school districts time and money.
The ˜nal element of each partnership includes measures to strengthen 
the research capacity of the school district. The university provides 
resources to strengthen district information of˜ces, including technology, 
expertise in encryption and security, shared servers, and student interns 
with background in information technology.
In conclusion, DeStefano said that, although some faculty members 
had been concerned that the efforts to develop new research partnerships 
would constrain their research agendas, this has not happened. At ˜rst, the 
negotiated research projects were very focused on students™ performance 
in reading and mathematics, because this is what the schools wanted. 
However, after three years of experience, including routine meetings 
with faculty members, school of˜cials now recognize the value of broader 
research, including investigations of social, emotional, and behavioral 
questions. For example, one current study is investigating student health 
and obesity. Responding to a question, DeStefano explained that school 
representatives agreed to a broader research agenda partly because they 
had received a good payoff from the original projects focusing on analysis 
of reading and mathematics performance, including ﬁtables and graphs 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING EDUCATION DATA
 47
and charts and reports that they could have never generated.ﬂ She empha
-sized that university researchers routinely share reports and studies with 
school of˜cials.
In response to another question, she said that, with a few exceptions, 
the university does not provide ˜nancial or other incentives for parents 
to sign informed consent forms. Instead, the university aims to educate 
and inform parents about research going on in their children™s schools, 
through a newsletter, a series of public forums, an annual conference 
cohosted by the university and the school districts, and the toll-free num
-ber mentioned earlier. As a result of these efforts, when a student brings 
home an informed consent agreement, the parents are more likely to be 
aware of the research and are more likely to read and sign the agreement. 
Over the past ˜ve years, the response rate when researchers send out 
consent agreements has increased.
A NEW COLLABORATION FOR DATA SHARIN
G IN MICHI
GAN
Barbara Schneider began by identifying several differences between 
her new model of collaboration in Michigan and the North Carolina Edu
-cation Research Data Center. She explained that the Michigan collabora
-tion was developed much more recently, through a subcontract with the 
Regional Education Laboratory-Midwest, which in turn is funded by the 
U.S. Department of Education™s Institute of Education Sciences. The sub
-contract has two goals (Schneider, 2008):
1.
  
To demonstrate the feasibility of assisting state education agencies 
in leveraging existing state administrative record data to provide 
an empirical basis for developing education policies and practices 
and
2.
  
To provide technical assistance to the state of Michigan, addressing 
questions initiated by the stateŠand to document and publicize 
the technical assistance process as well as any unique analytic 
problems in working with the state administrative records.
One continuing challenge, Schneider said, is that in Michigan, the Cen
-ter for Educational Performance and Information (a unit of the state bud
-get of˜ce) collects and maintains education data, rather than the Depart
-ment of Education. Schneider said that different of˜ces in the center allow 
her research team (including faculty, postdoctoral fellows, and Michigan 
State University graduate students) to access and analyze administrative 
data ˜les in response to questions they jointly identify. These questions 
and their potential answers are constructed to inform state education 
decision making and have potential budgetary consequences.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
The research team has published three reports, including a back
-ground survey and two technical reports to the state. The survey yielded 
responses from education of˜cials in seven Midwestern states about the 
types of data and data analysis they would ˜nd most useful (McDonald 
et al., 2007). The researchers learned that state education policy leaders 
are very interested in developing longitudinal data systems with linked 
student, teacher, and school data. However, most states lack the person
-nel and the capacity to develop such systems at present, due to their very 
limited resources.
Before discussing the team™s ˜rst technical report, Schneider described 
the context supporting the analysis. Because the demonstration project 
was speci˜cally designed to make the collaborative process transparent, a 
member of the research team took notes at every meeting; all team activi
-ties were documented in a historical ˜le; and all data analyses, codes, and 
procedures were recorded. As required in the subcontract, the team iden
-ti˜ed unique analytic problems of dealing with universal data, rather than 
a survey sample. For example, to analyze differences in data on 98,000 
teachers, the team used gamma statistics, rather than the t-test commonly 
used to analyze differences in means between two sample groups.
Schneider outlined three ground rules underlying the researchers™ 
relationship with the two Michigan agencies. First, the questions were to 
be generated by the agencies. Second, the analyses would be designed 
and conducted as an iterative process, which led to modi˜cations at each 
meeting. Third, the research team would document the technical assis
-tance process, to enable an evaluation of the potential replication of this 
model.
Turning to the issue of con˜dentiality, Schneider explained that the 
research team is able to access the Michigan data under the FERPA pro
-vision allowing disclosure without prior consent ﬁto organizations con
-ducting studies for or on behalf of educational agenciesﬂ and because the 
research team members are designated as agents of the state (see Chapter 
2). In addition, the team members have obtained approval from the insti
-tutional review boards at their respective universities and at the state 
level. In response to a question, Schneider said that con˜dentiality pro
-tections are very important, and that she and other professors teach their 
graduate students this. For example, she requires her graduate students 
to practice following the procedures required by the National Center for 
Education Statistics™ licensing process (see Chapter 2). Schneider empha
-sized the need to inform the research community about con˜dentiality 
protections.
The team™s ˜rst analysis of Michigan data originated in a meeting that 
included the researchers and staff of the two state agencies, organized by 
Margaret Ropp, director of the Center for Educational Performance and 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING EDUCATION DATA
 49
Information. The purpose of the meeting was to discuss priority issues 
that could be addressed through analysis of the existing state data. In 
preparation for the meeting, Schneider™s team created a series of table 
shells illustrating the types of analyses that could be conducted using 
the state™s data. When they saw these tables, she said, the state analysts 
ﬁgot really excited,ﬂ because, although they have doctorates and are very 
familiar with the data, they lacked time to think about questions that the 
data could answer. She observed that ﬁeverybody™s eyes lit upﬂ and the 
meeting continued until 6:15 on a Friday afternoon.
At the meeting, participants discussed Michigan™s recently approved 
ﬁmerit curriculum,ﬂ requiring high school students to complete four years 
of English and mathematics, three years of science and social studies, and 
two years of foreign language in order to graduate. The state superin
-tendent of schools wanted to know whether schools across the state had 
enough quali˜ed teachers to teach the required subjects. To address this 
question, the state gave the team access to a large ˜le of teacher data. With 
the help of a postdoctoral student, Schneider was able to ﬁunstackﬂ the 
˜le into individual teacher records. When team members veri˜ed their 
individual records related to thousands of teachers against a Standard & 
Poor™s database of Michigan teachers, they found only a small discrep
-ancy. The team then linked these records with other national and state 
data and analyzed the linked data sets.
Schneider observed that, as the research team and agency personnel 
began to work together, they built trust. She said that all of the key ideas 
identi˜ed in her book on relational trust (Bryk and Schneider, 2002)Š
respect, competence, integrity, and working for the common goodŠwere 
realized over the course of the project. For example, she promised to 
deliver a report within a month of the ˜rst meeting with state of˜cials, in 
order to counter the view that research ﬁtakes forever.ﬂ To meet this com
-mitment, the ˜ve team members worked daily to produce a draft, which 
they reviewed and discussed with agency of˜cials. After revisions, the 
team delivered a ˜nal report.
Schneider said that her graduate student, who was familiar with high 
school scheduling, developed a demand formula to answer the superin
-tendent™s question about whether schools across the state had enough 
quali˜ed teachers to deliver the merit curriculum. She said that several 
statisticians had described this formula as ﬁthe most simple, elegant way 
to ˜gure out how many teachers you need to teach the merit curriculum in 
your school.ﬂ The formula is designed to adjust for changes in enrollment 
size, increases and decreases in class size, and changes in the number of 
courses teachers are required to cover. Applying the formula to the large 
teacher data set, the team found that only 14 schools had an undersupply 
of quali˜ed teachers in all four required subjects, but, when considering 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
each subject and grade level, the undersupply of quali˜ed teachers could 
potentially affect 72,000 students.
The team™s ˜ndings on teacher supply and demand were summarized 
in a second technical report to the state (Keesler et al., 2008). The state 
of˜cials welcomed the report, using it to target professional development 
courses and funding toward schools with an inadequate supply of quali
-˜ed teachers. They have also raised new questions that the research team 
is currently addressing. At the same time, Schneider and Margaret Ropp, 
director of the state Center for Education Performance and Education, 
are sharing the report™s ˜ndings and methods, including the formula, 
throughout the Midwest region (Ropp et al., 2008).
In conclusion, Schneider said that the bene˜ts of the project include a 
trusting, open relationship with state personnel, encouraging collabora
-tion across universities, openness and sharing of information, and work
-ing ﬁwith a fabulous group of professionals.ﬂ The greatest challenge, how
-ever, is that the state, on the basis of its interpretation of FERPA, has not 
provided access to linked longitudinal student and teacher data, as the 
research team originally requested in 2006. Schneider described FERPA as 
ﬁthe shield that stops us and the barrier from getting to the places where 
we want to be.ﬂ
Finally, Schneider said that the project is at a much earlier stage than 
the databases allowing research access in Florida and North Carolina. 
The team is currently in the process of creating a research collaborative 
that will allow researchers across the state to access the teacher ˜le and 
other ˜les, and this has raised questions about who should warehouse 
the data. Currently, she said, the state of Michigan maintains the data, 
although both Michigan State University and the University of Michigan 
have proposed to warehouse the developing data sets. The team is also 
working on another technical report and collaborating with the state to 
study several new issues.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51
5Reconciling Access and Con˜dentiality 
in Federal Statistical and Health Data
This chapter focuses on reconciling research access to administrative 
data with privacy, con˜dentiality, and consent requirements in health 
care and other sectors outside education, as well as considering the impli
-cations for education research. The ˜rst section describes the Census 
Bureau™s approach to statistical use of administrative data and outlines 
options for allowing researchers to access data sets while protecting con
-˜dentiality. The second section includes an overview of data access and 
con˜dentiality issues and further discussion of options for reconciling 
these issues. The third section discusses the impact of the Health Infor
-mation Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) on health research 
using medical records, and the fourth section outlines concepts for a data 
stewardship entity that could potentially facilitate health research. Finally, 
the chapter summarizes an extended discussion of the implications of 
experiences in these other sectors for education research.
INTE
GRATIN
G 
ADMINISTRATIVE
 DATA
 INTO
 CENS
US BUREA
U 
PRO
GRAMS
Gerald Gates explained that his years at the Census Bureau as a 
privacy of˜cer and earlier as an administrative records program of˜cer 
had made him aware that privacy is ﬁthe key issueﬂ in obtaining access 
to administrative records and sharing them with researchers. On the 
basis of his understanding of laws, regulations, and current practices, he 
outlined three fundamental principles for statistical use of administrative 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
records. First, individuals must be informed of the uses of their personal 
information and given the ability to control such uses. Second, he argued, 
administrative data can be shared for statistical purposes without consent, 
provided the data are protected from nonstatistical uses, echoing a point 
Straf had made earlier (see Chapter 1). Third, federal agencies must pro
-vide effective data stewardship, ensuring both appropriate protections 
and optimal use (Gates, 2008).
Moving to more practical issues, Gates observed that it is ﬁhard to get 
these data,ﬂ requiring negotiations among lawyers, program managers, 
policy advisers, and institutional review boards in order to reach agree
-ments on data sharing. He noted that any violation of con˜dentiality 
protections negatively affects all parties, including an administrative or 
a statistical agency that shares data with a researcher. However, the par
-ties are not equally liable for protecting con˜dentiality. Depending on the 
arrangement for sharing of data, the researcher may not be liable, but the 
federal agency is always liableŠwhich may make an agency reluctant to 
provide access. In addition, news reports about breaches of security in 
federal data systems (e.g., Lee and Goldfarb, 2006) raise concerns among 
the public and in Congress and put pressure on agencies to protect, rather 
than share, their data.
Legal and Policy Support
Both law and policy support the use of administrative data for statisti
-cal purposes, Gates said. The law not only authorizes the Census Bureau 
to acquire administrative records, but also goes further to state that the 
bureau must use such records ﬁto the maximum extent possible . . . 
instead of conducting direct inquiriesﬂ (U.S. Code, Title 13, Sections 6, 9, 
and 23). The law protects administrative information that is used for sta
-tistical purposes from being reused for administrative purposes. The Con
-˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act (CIPSEA) of 
2002, another important law, requires uniform con˜dentiality protections 
among federal agencies that collect information for statistical purposes. 
Prior to this law, Gates said, agencies protected this information under a 
variety of laws and regulationsŠsome more ironclad than others.
Many policy studies also support the use of administrative records for 
statistical purposes. In a key report, the congressionally mandated Privacy 
Protection Study Commission (1977) de˜ned the concept of ﬁfunctional 
separationﬂ between use of individual information for statistical pur
-poses and for administrative purposes. More recent reports (e.g., National 
Research Council, 1993) support the use of administrative records for 
statistical purposes in ways that protect individual privacy and data 
con˜dentiality.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 53
Uses of Administrative Records in Statistical Programs
Gates said that administrative recordsŠsuch as the tax records the 
Census Bureau obtains from the Internal Revenue ServiceŠcan be useful 
to statistical programs in several different ways:

to assess population coverage in surveys;

to assess the nature and impact of survey nonresponse;

 
to aid survey methodologists in understanding the nature and 
extent of sampling error;

to improve survey data editing and imputation;

to improve questionnaire design;

to make improvements in survey sampling frames;

to improve simulation models for policy evaluation and review;

as a source for economic survey sample frames;

as measures of migration for producing population estimates 
between censuses;

as a source of information about income, poverty, and health insur
-ance at the substate level; and

to investigate social, economic, demographic, and occupational 
differentials in mortality.
Recent Census Bureau Data Linkage Activities
Gates described several recent data linkage activities at the Census 
Bureau. Analysts began developing the Statistical Administrative Records 
System (StARS) before the 2000 census, collecting information from ˜ve 
agencies that replicates the answers to questions on the short form of 
the census. Originally developed as a low-cost alternative to improving 
within-household census coverage, the new records system has improved 
the bureau™s demographic information, which will enable improvements 
in the demographic data collected in the next census. The new system 
also provides more up-to-date information, such as very current change-
of-address data from the U.S. Postal Service, making it a very valuable 
resource.
The Census Bureau launched the Longitudinal Employer Household 
Dynamics Program in 1999 to integrate census, survey, and administrative 
records data on workers and employers, including state unemployment 
insurance wage records. This data system provides a detailed, comprehen
-sive picture of workers, employers, and their interaction in the national 
economy. While offering unprecedented detail on the local dynamics 
of labor markets, the data program maintains con˜dentiality through 
advanced con˜dentiality protection methods (Abowd et al., 2005).
Another recent Census Bureau program to link data sets is the Med
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
icaid Undercount Project. This data system includes information from the 
Current Population Survey, the National Health Interview Survey, and 
the Medicaid program. Its goal is to examine ﬁperplexingﬂ discrepan
-cies between estimates of Medicaid enrollment from population surveys 
and enrollment counts from the Medicaid program™s own administrative 
data.
Protecting Privacy and Con˜dentiality of Administrative Data
Gates said that the key challenge in obtaining administrative data 
for statistical activities and research access is to protect privacy and con
-˜dentiality. He distinguished between privacy, which he de˜ned as an 
individual™s right to control the use and disclosure of information about 
himself or herself (Fanning, 2007), and con˜dentiality, echoing a point 
made earlier by Miron Straf (see Chapter 1). Collecting and using social 
security numbers, which play a key role in integrating administrative 
data sets, raise privacy concerns. To address such concerns, the Census 
Bureau and other federal agencies convert the social security numbers to 
protected identifying keys that cannot be decoded except by a handful 
of persons who know the code. After data sets are linked, social security 
numbers and names are removed and replaced with these keys.
Public awareness heightens the challenge of protecting privacy and 
con˜dentiality, Gates said. For example, in 1999, the privacy commis
-sioner of Canada effectively shut down a major data linking project on the 
grounds that it had not been suf˜ciently publicized. In announcing this 
decision, the commissioner observed that, although the agency in charge 
of the project (Human Resource Development Canada) had not tried to 
hide its effort to collect and merge individual information, Canadian 
citizens remained unaware of how much information was being gath
-ered about them and the extent to which it was being shared with others 
(Gates, 2008). Gates said it is important to acknowledge and address 
people™s concerns about merging and reusing various sources of admin
-istrative data.
Maintaining the con˜dentiality of individually identi˜able records 
poses a greater challenge today than it did in the past for two reasons, 
Gates maintained. First, policy makers and researchers in education, 
health, and other ˜elds are demanding detailed, individually linked data 
sets. Second, when such data sets are made public, people have access 
through the Internet to many more sources of data that could be used to 
identify individuals in the data set.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 55
Options for Providing Access to Administrative Data
Gates presented several options for providing safe, useful access to 
administrative data. He explained that it was important to consider the 
range of options, because no single option will meet the needs of every 
data producer and every data user.
Options for Public 
Use Without Restrictions
Traditionally, the Census Bureau and other federal statistical agencies 
have made survey data and some types of administrative data available in 
the form of ﬁpublic-use microdata systems,ﬂ and these data sets continue 
to meet the needs of most researchers today, Gates said. To protect these 
data against an intruder who might try to identify one or more individu
-als, the public-use microdata systems include only a sample of records. 
For example, for the decennial census, the largest available national 
public-use microdata ˜le includes only 6 percent of the population. In 
addition, bureau analysts remove all direct and indirect identi˜ers, restrict 
the amount of geographic information shown, remove outliers, and take 
other steps to reduce the risk of disclosure. The advantages of these data 
systems include availability to the public with no limits on use and easy 
analysis using most software. At the same time, public-use microdata 
sets have several limitations, due to the restrictions on geographic infor
-mation, the removal of outliersŠwhich are often the most interesting 
dataŠand other con˜dentiality protections.
Gates explained that, for many administrative data sets, further pro
-tections are needed to protect the con˜dentiality of individual informa
-tion. One option is to develop synthetic data. Synthetic data sets have sev
-eral advantages. They are designed speci˜cally to protect administrative 
data, they can be made accessible to the public or to researchers without 
restrictions, and they are easy to analyze using most software. However, 
these data also have limitations. Because synthetic data sets are custom
-ized to meet the needs of speci˜c groups of users, they will not satisfy 
all researchers. In addition, research to date has not yet demonstrated the 
quality and usefulness of synthetic data for a wide range of different types 
of applications and analyses.
Options for Restricted 
Use
Restricting use of administrative data sets provides another layer of 
protection, Gates explained. The Census Bureau pioneered one option to 
restrict useŠthe Research Data Center. After establishing the ˜rst center 
in Boston in the 1990s, the bureau expanded the network and today oper
-ates nine such centers. At these centers, users may directly access adminis
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
trative data sets that include everything but direct identi˜ers (name, social 
security number). The data include outliers, and the user may link the 
data to external data sets. However, these centers also have limitations. 
The researcher or other user must go ˜rst go through a complex approval 
process and then relocate to the regional research data center, limiting 
possibilities for collaboration with other researchers.
Another option for restricting access to administrative system data is 
through a licensing system, such as the system operated by the National 
Center for Education Statistics (see Chapter 2). This option has the advan
-tage of allowing the licensed researcher to directly access data sets at her 
or his own institution, using the researcher™s own software, and facilitat
-ing collaboration with colleagues at the institution. The limitations of this 
option include the possibility of losing one™s license if an onsite inspection 
by the licensing agency ˜nds violations of the con˜dentiality protections 
or other elements of the licensing agreement. In addition, the license 
agreement typically does not allow the researcher to link the licensed data 
to external data sets.
Remote Access Options
Gates said that the option of providing researchers with remote access 
to statistical data is growing rapidly. In this option, the researcher submits 
programs to an intermediary, which applies the programs to restricted-
use data and provides the results and tabulations to the researcher. For 
example, the National Opinion Research Center has created a ﬁdata 
enclave,ﬂ with data sets from the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology and other sources and conducts analyses of these data at 
the request of approved researchers.
1 The National Center for Health 
Statistics provides access to approved researchers by e-mail through the 
Analytic Data Research by E-mail (ANDRE) system and has also created 
a virtual research data center.
2 Remote access options have the advantage 
of providing easy access to administrative data sets by e-mail or the Inter
-net. However, the types of analysis possible are limited by the specialized 
software housed on the servers of the data enclave. In addition, outliers 
in the data sets have been removed to protect against disclosure of indi
-vidually identi˜able information, and some data enclaves require users 
to pay a subscription.
A ˜nal option for providing access to administrative data is to obtain 
informed written consent from the individuals whose administrative 
records are sought. Consent has the advantage of putting the individual 
1 
See http://www.norc.org/DataEnclave/.
2 
See http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/r&d/rdc.htm.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 57
in control and potentially allows the most ˚exible access to, and use 
of, individual record data. The limitations include potential bias in the 
data set, because some individuals will not give consent for use of their 
records, and it may not be possible to locate other individuals. When 
using this option, Gates said, it is critically important to test different 
formats for informing individuals of the proposed uses for their record 
data and requesting their consent.
Gates concluded with several key points from his paper (Gates, 2008). 
First, administrative records serve many important research uses; these 
uses are supported by law and facilitated by the advanced technology and 
methods for linking records available today. Second, although all parties 
who have access to administrative records have a great incentive to pro
-tect con˜dentiality, they are not all equally liable for any possible breach 
of con˜dentiality. Third, access is affected by increased public scrutiny of 
privacy protections, which leads to development of new data stewardship 
principles and policies. Gates explained that agencies sometimes apply 
new policies and procedures in response to privacy violations ﬁin order 
to survive.ﬂ
Finally, he observed that the variety of new options for access re˚ects 
the degree of control the agency holding the records is willing to relin
-quish to permit speci˜ed uses. Gates emphasized that agencies will pro
-vide access if they are comfortable that their requirements are going to 
be met, leading to a ﬁstaged approach,ﬂ rather than trying to provide 
access to all data for all users. Instead, the agency considers the needs of 
particular groups of data users, provides only the amounts and types of 
data needed, and imposes restrictions on use of these data.
Responding to a question, Gates said that language is very impor
-tant when talking about the complex issues involved in maintaining 
con˜dentiality of individual information. He said that the key point to 
convey, when talking to the public about using their personal records 
for statistical purposes, is that a federal agency will not use personal 
records to make administrative decisions, such as to determine one™s 
level of social security bene˜ts, and that the information will be merged 
with information from other individuals. He said that the Census Bureau 
had done some research to ˜nd that, when people were asked to give 
consent for use of their information ﬁfor statistical purposes,ﬂ they did 
not understand the term. People were more comfortable when asked to 
give consent ﬁfor statistics,ﬂ because they think of statistics as numbers, 
Gates said. In response to another question, Gates agreed with Robert 
Boruch that studies of the informed consent process are important, stat
-ing that ﬁthe statistical community needs to acknowledge that consent is 
an important issue.ﬂ
Felice Levine highlighted a key question related to informed consent. 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
She said that, if researchers ask for informed consent when an individual 
takes a test or gives blood, they must consider what the consent is for. 
This question becomes important, she said, when a researcher asks an 
institutional review board for a waiver of consent. The board will look at 
the proposed research and consider whether the original consentŠfor its 
intended purposesŠwould be compromised by the research uses of the 
individual information. Levine suggested that it might ﬁtrivializeﬂ the 
importance of informed consent if an individual were asked to simply 
check a box on a consent form, agreeing that the information could be 
used for all other legitimate research purposes.
MODELS
 FOR ENS
URIN
G DATA ACCESS 
AND PRIVACY PROTECTIONS
Myron Gutmann began by observing that the general issues sur
-rounding data con˜dentiality are well reported in 
Putting People on the 
Map: Protecting Con˜dentiality with Linked Social-Spatial Data 
(National 
Research Council, 2007: Chapter 2). Data con˜dentiality concerns re˚ect 
principles for the protection of human subjects outlined in the Belmont 
report (National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of 
Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979),
 and they are supported in 
regulations by the Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects 
(the Common Rule). There is an ethical consensus, Gutmann said, on the 
need both to protect human subjects and to share data.
In this general context, Gutmann said that protection of educa
-tion data is special because Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA) legislation and regulations are added on to the core protections 
of the Common Rule. The Common Rule was designed to protect human 
subjects in a research environment, assumes that prior informed consent 
is fundamental, and uses a ﬁreasonableﬂ standard for protection. In con
-trast, FERPA was designed to protect students and their families in an 
educational environment, does not assume prior informed consent, and 
has ﬁa much more absolute standard for protection.ﬂ Despite these differ
-ences in the law and regulations, he said, in reality, researchers do obtain 
informed consent for the use of school records, but they get this consent 
from school administrators, rather than from parents or students.
The Problem: With a Focus on Spatial Data
Gutmann illustrated the process of disclosure review (i.e., review 
of data sets to assess and prevent disclosure of individually identi˜able 
information) using the analogy of trying to ˜nd Waldo in the children™s 
book, 
Where™s Waldo?
 (Handford, 1997). Gutmann said that, given ˜ve 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 59
attributes about Waldo, he can easily ˜nd him in a small crowd. In real
-ity, administrative and survey data sets are large; by analogy, locating 
Waldo based on ˜ve attributes is much more dif˜cult when he is in a 
large crowd. However, spatial information or electronic monitors make it 
easier to ˜nd Waldo even in a large crowd, because all explicit geographic 
locations are identi˜able (VanWey et al., 2005). For example, if one knows 
that Waldo always stands next to the ring toss at the carnival, or if Waldo 
always carries around a radio transponder that signals his location, he 
stands out in the crowd.
Gutmann explained that, when reviewing possible dissemination of 
data on a particular topic, it is important to recognize that these data may 
not be the only published source of information about that topic. For 
example, he might publish a map of Washtenaw County, Michigan, and 
list three attributes of an individual living in that county. This may pose 
little risk of revealing that individual™s identity, because there are many 
individuals with those three attributes across the entire county. However, 
because there may be only one individual with these attributes who 
lives in one particular city block, publishing this geographic information 
would be likely to reveal the individual™s identity. In the case of educa
-tion records, if a few attributes of an individual student were published, 
along with that student™s school, then the individual student would be 
easily identi˜able.
Protecting Con˜dentiality: 
Goals and Options
Gutmann outlined two goals for protecting con˜dentiality when shar
-ing or disseminating microdata: (1) to eliminate direct identi˜ers and (2) 
to eliminate unique individuals in small cells. Options for achieving these 
goals in tabular data with area identi˜ers but no precise spatial locations 
include the following:

aggregating values (e.g., into ˜ve-year age groups instead of single 
years);

top-coding (recoding values so that extreme values are combined 
with less extreme values);

swapping data across spatial units; and

paying careful attention to easily identi˜ed categories of data, 
especially geography, schools, and clustered samples.
Gutmann said that 
Putting People on the Map
 (National Research 
Council, 2007) differentiates between technical and institutional options 
for protecting con˜dentiality. Technical options include replacing real 
data with synthetic data for potentially identifying attributes and creating 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
secure data analysis systems. Institutional options, which focus on indi
-viduals and organizations rather than on technology, include contracts 
and data enclaves. Institutional options vary, based on the perceived 
level of risk of disclosure; more complex options are more expensive and 
make research more dif˜cult. For example, Gutmann said, the University 
of Michigan houses one of the nine research data centers operated by the 
Census Bureau. The center is expensive and dif˜cult to use for investiga
-tors who live more than 30 miles away.
Gutmann presented a ˜gure illustrating the gradient of levels of risk 
and levels of protection required for different types of data sets (see Figure 
5-1). Simple data sets, with little risk of disclosure and little risk of harm 
if there were a disclosure, can be made publicly accessible on the Internet. 
If the data set is more complex and the risk of harm from disclosure is 
greater, then the data producer might require a formal data use agreement 
before providing access. Some data sets include information about illegal 
or undesirable behavior, which people voluntarily provide. Because dis
-closure of individual identities in such data sets would pose a great risk of 
harm, the data producer might require a strong data use agreement. This 
agreement would be likely to include restrictions on technology and tech
-FI
GU
RE 5-1
 The gradient of risk and restriction. 
SOURCE
: Gutmann (2008).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 61
nology access, similar to those included in National Center for Education 
Statistics licensing agreements (see Chapter 2). Finally, if there is a very 
high risk of disclosure and a high risk of harm, the data producer might 
ﬁjust lock things into an enclosed data centerﬂ and require the researcher 
to come and use the data onsite, Gutmann said.
Inter-
University Consortium for Political and Social Research
Gutmann presented an overview of the activities of the Inter-University 
Consortium for Political and Social Research, the data archive he directs 
(see http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/). Experts at the archive conduct dis
-closure risk analysis of all data sets that enter the archive. In most cases, 
they remove all direct and indirect identi˜ers in the data sets and make 
them available through the Internet to users who have signed contracts 
with the consortium. Because most of these data sets are based on politi
-cal opinion polls and information on voter behavior, Gutmann described 
their information as ﬁreally not very harmful.ﬂ Other data, which are not 
useful for research without some indirect identi˜ers, are subject to further 
restrictions, ranging from easy to more stringent contracts. However, 
the consortium lacks authority to impose large ˜nes on individuals who 
violate these contracts, in contrast to the National Center for Education 
Statistics (see Chapter 2). Finally, the most sensitive data sets, posing the 
greatest risk of harm to an individual whose identity might be disclosed, 
are housed in an onsite data enclave for use by researchers who appear 
in person.
The consortium houses and maintains data sets and conducts research 
with support from many organizations, including the National Institute 
of Child Health and Human Development and other agencies in the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, the National Institute 
of Justice, and the consortium™s member institutions. For example, the 
consortium is currently taking over dissemination of the National Lon
-gitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health) from the University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. This study includes several different 
types of data, including survey (self-report) data and biomarker data. 
Biomarker dataŠindicators of disease or health, such as blood pressure, 
heart rate, and the presence or absence of certain moleculesŠinclude both 
physical specimens and digital representations. The study also includes 
analysis of ancillary data, including participants™ high school transcripts. 
In compliance with FERPA, the investigators received individual written 
consent from each student in order to obtain access to the transcripts from 
their schools. To access these national data sets, a researcher must receive 
approval from the institutional review board at her or his home institution 
and provide a data security plan.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
Future Directions in Reconciling Research Access with Con˜dentiality
In the future, Gutmann said, all administrative data sets should be 
online, with ﬁreasonableﬂ restrictions on access. These future data systems 
will be very distributed and have the capability to combine data ﬁon the 
˚yﬂ to preserve con˜dentiality. They will have the capability to automati
-cally recognize and solve con˜dentiality issues before the data reach the 
user™s computer. In addition, these advanced future systems will build 
user communities on the basis of dynamic patterns of data usage.
Turning to future developments, Gutmann ˜rst contrasted FERPA 
with the Common Rule. He said that the Common Rule directs that 
requirements for reuse of data match the commitment contained in the 
original informed consent, although this does not always happen in real
-ity. In contrast, because education records are administrative in origin, 
they are collected without informed consent, and FERPA rules absolutely 
forbid reuse of the data in ways that have any potential for identi˜cation 
of individuals, Gutmann said. In some cases, it is possible for researchers 
to use education records in compliance with FERPA by obtaining retro
-spective consent. For example, at the time they wanted to access high 
school transcripts for inclusion in the adolescent health study, researchers 
were already planning to go into the ˜eld to interview study participants. 
Near the end of the interview, they requested access to the students™ tran
-scripts, and over 80 percent gave consent. More often, however, research
-ers do not want to ask participants in a long-term study for consent, 
because they may decline and drop out of the study altogether.
Gutmann said that research organizations like his have found 
approaches that work well for archiving and using education data. He 
observed that researchers often think of school administrators as partners 
in the research process. Finally, Gutmann emphasized that current data 
protection schemes appear to work very well, with no known examples of 
individuals having been harmed by con˜dentiality breaches (see Chapter 
1). This is important to keep in mind, he said, so that con˜dentiality does 
not become a higher priority than conducting good research.
In response to a question, Gutmann said he did not know of any stud
-ies about obtaining retrospective consent. Levine said that the process for 
obtaining a waiver of the informed consent requirement of the Common 
Rule from an institutional review board was well understood and used to 
facilitate research. Gutmann agreed, but cautioned that, in some cases, an 
institutional review board might grant a waiver under the Common Rule, 
but not under FERPA. Levine responded that FERPA was silent on this 
point. Because the law does not elaborate on the possibility of a waiver 
of informed consent, she said, lawyers and researchers can only assume 
that a waiver is not allowed. Gutmann responded that the Common Rule 
regulations have been revised several times over the years, on the basis of 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 63
the experiences of the large community of data producers and research
-ers that the regulations govern. In contrast, he said that the Department 
of Education recently announced the ˜rst proposed revisions to FERPA 
regulations (see Chapter 2).
Barbara Schneider said that universities are careful to comply with 
FERPA and that she knows of many planned studies in which the research
-ers have decided to obtain written consent for access to education records 
rather than seek a waiver. Robert Boruch observed that research partner
-ships represent the future of social science research and that investigators 
would not be able to obtain more data without cooperating with educa
-tion agencies and other data producers. He urged the research commu
-nity to share experiences and approaches to obtaining access to data, 
including memoranda of understanding with education agencies and 
legal arguments.
IMPACT OF THE HIPAA PRIVACY R
ULE ON RESEARCH
Roberta Ness (University of Pittsburgh) shared a survey she con
-ducted to assess the impacts on health research of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule. The survey was commissioned by an Institute of Medicine (2008) 
committee as part of a larger study of the impacts of this law on health 
research.
Privacy Rule Protections
Ness explained that Congress enacted HIPAA in 1996 partly because 
the Common Rule did not de˜nitively protect the privacy of individu
-ally identi˜able health information. The law was designed, she said, to 
protect the privacy of medical records. The Privacy Rule implementing 
HIPAA (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2000, 2002) 
permits health care provider organizations to disclose individually iden
-ti˜able health information for research purposes only if the researcher 
has obtained written consent from each patient or, if that is impractical, a 
waiver of this requirement from an institutional review board. Although 
the rule does permit health care providers to disclose limited data sets 
with all identi˜ers removed
3 to researchers who sign a formal data use 
agreement, Ness said that these data sets cannot be linked to any other 
medical records and are not useful for research. The HIPAA Privacy Rule 
also permits disclosures to public health authorities without written con
-sent for the purpose of public health surveillance. Institutional review 
3 
The rule speci˜es 18 identi˜ers that must be removed, including geographic information 
and dates related to the individual.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
boards at universities, hospitals, and other organizations implement the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule.
Ness said that an institutional review board will generally provide a 
waiver of the informed consent requirement if it determines that the pro
-posed research presents a low risk of disclosure of individually identi˜
-able information and that the proposed research could not be conducted 
without the waiver. She observed that there is ﬁa great deal of local inter
-pretationﬂ of these two conditions.
Survey Content
Ness presented several news reports describing epidemiological and 
clinical research studies that were halted or slowed after the enactment 
of HIPAA. Describing the reports as ﬁworrisome,ﬂ she noted that they 
provide only anecdotal evidence about the possible effects of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule on health research. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) com
-missioned a national survey in 2007 in order to make a more informed 
assessment of the effects of the rule, she said (Ness, 2007a).
The IOM survey was conducted in collaboration with 13 epidemiol
-ogy professional societies. Each society contacted all of its active mem
-bers, requesting that they respond to an anonymous, web-based survey 
about the HIPAA Privacy Rule. A total of 2,805 individuals accessed the 
website. Among this group, 1,527 indicated that they had submitted a 
research proposal to an institutional review board since the enactment of 
HIPAA, and the answers of this smaller group were analyzed.
Ness explained that the survey was designed to ask about positive 
and negative in˚uences of the HIPAA Privacy Rule. First, the survey 
presented questions with quantitative responses, such as such as how 
frequently respondents collected various types of data, changes in the 
numbers of participants recruited before and after implementation of 
the Privacy Rule, and the level of dif˜culty encountered when seeking 
waivers or approval for release of deidenti˜ed data sets from the insti
-tutional review board. A second group of questions focused on respon
-dents™ perceptions of the ease and dif˜culty of conducting research under 
the HIPAA Privacy Rule and its impact on privacy and con˜dentiality, 
using a 5-point Likert scale. Third, the web-based survey presented ˜ve 
hypothetical research proposals, asking respondents whether their insti
-tutional review board would approve them. Finally, respondents were 
asked open-ended qualitative questions, including a request for stories 
about HIPAA.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 65
Analysis of Responses
The respondents were predominantly women (59 percent), mostly 
employed in academia (66 percent), and they varied widely in age. In 
describing their perceptions, a large majority (84 percent) rated the degree 
to which the HIPAA Privacy Rule made research easier as low, at 1 to 2 
on a 5-point Likert scale anchored at 1 = none. Responding to another 
question, a somewhat smaller majority (67.8 percent) rated the degree 
to which the Privacy Rule made research harder as high, at 4 to 5 on 
a 5-point Likert scale anchored at 5 = a great deal. Few respondents 
(10.5 percent) perceived the rule as having strengthened public trust a 
great deal, and only about one-quarter believed that the rule had greatly 
increased participant con˜dentiality. With respect to cost and delay, about 
half of the respondents perceived the rule as adding costs and delaying 
time to completion by a great deal.
Ness was surprised that more respondents indicated that the rule had 
a negative effect on the protection of human subjects than the number 
of respondents indicating that the rule had a positive effect. Ness said 
this response was ﬁalmost bizarre on the face of it, because, of course, 
this is legislation that was purposely enacted to improve the protection 
of human subjects.ﬂ However, she went on to say that the respondents 
explained their responses in the qualitative section of the survey, indicat
-ing that they viewed the burden of paperwork resulting from adding 
HIPAA to the Common Rule as so great that medical patients no longer 
understood what they were giving informed consent for.
She said that about 15 percent of respondents indicated that, although 
their research proposals were approved by the institutional review board, 
the health care organization holding the medical records would not allow 
access because of Privacy Rule concerns. An additional 11.5 percent of 
epidemiologists surveyed had conceived of a study but not submitted 
it to an institutional review board because they thought they would be 
unable to obtain approval due to the Privacy Rule. More than half of the 
respondents said that an application they had submitted to an institu
-tional review board was strongly adversely impacted by HIPAA.
Presenting the responses to the case study section of the survey, in 
which respondents were asked whether their institutional review board 
would approve ˜ve different types of studies, Ness said that the key ˜nd
-ing was the wide variability (see Table 5-1). Such wide variation indicates 
that institutional review boards are interpreting the Privacy Rule in very 
different ways, Ness said.
In response to the ˜nal section of the survey, inviting HIPAA sto
-ries, Ness said they received almost 500 written responses, re˚ecting the 
ﬁangst that™s out there.ﬂ A total of 90 percent of the stories were negative, 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 TABLE 5-1 
Responses to Case Studies, Institute of Medicine Survey
Would Your IRB Approve This Study?, Number (%)
No
Yes, 
Unconditional
Yes, 
 with Waiver
Yes, with
Approval
Yes, Other
Conditions
Don™t Know
Participants from 
medical records 
contacted for 
interview/blood 
draw
184 (12.56)
123 (8.5)
262 (18.0)
522 (35.9)
135 (9.3)
229 (15.7)
Participants from cancer 
registry contacted to 
consent for interview
196 (13.5)
157 (10.8)
261 (18.0)
468 (32.3)
a175 (12.1)
193 (13.3)
Tissue bank to supply 
deidentified data for 
assay not in original 
consent
222 (15.6)
199 (14.0)
159 (11.2)
262 (18.4)
b291 (20.4)
c290 (20.4)
Medical record review 
from subjects now 
dead
 61 (4.7)
435 (33.8)
280 (21.8)
109 (8.5)
d121 (9.4)
281 (21.8)
Limited data set from 
another hospital; 
research cannot be 
done without some 
identifiers
239 (20.2)
 58 (4.9)
260 (21.2)
427 (36.0)
e123 (10.4)
317 (26.7)
NOTE: IRB = institutional review board.
 aWith physician approval.
 bWith authorization and reconsent from patients.
 cLimited data set or other special circumstances.
 dWith approval from executor of estate.
 eWith limited data set agreement.
SOURCE: Ness
 (2007).
  Copyright 2007 American Medical Association. Reprinted with permission.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 67
5 percent were neutral, and 5 percent were positive. For example, one 
respondent wrote (Ness, 2007b):
An already cumbersome patient consent form now has an additional 
page-and-a-half explaining HIPAA restrictions. This detracts from the 
informed consent process pertaining to the more critical issue: the actual 
medical risks and bene˜ts of participating.
In general, the written responses indicate that the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
had not stopped health research, but it had slowed research progress and 
increased costs. Many respondents expressed the view that the Privacy 
Rule was hurting public health surveillance and causing confusion in the 
public health community. Ness reminded the group that the HIPAA Pri
-vacy Rule speci˜cally permits disclosure of individual health information 
for public health surveillance.
Summarizing the IOM survey results, Ness reiterated that only 
about one-quarter of the respondents believed that the Privacy Rule had 
enhanced privacy. Among all respondents, the rule was seen as having a 
more negative than positive impact on the protection of human subjects. 
The analysis of the responses suggests that institutional review boards 
around the nation interpret the rule in quite different ways, making it 
unclear whether many of the problems described in the survey are a func
-tion of the Privacy Rule itself or local institutional review board interpre
-tation of it. She said that the limitations of the survey include respondent 
bias; it may be that the respondents were those who feel most negatively 
about HIPAA. Another limitation is that it was not possible to calculate a 
response rate, because of the anonymous Internet process.
In discussion, Ness explained that the primary audience for the sur
-vey was the IOM committee, and that the survey reached a wider audi
-ence through publication in the 
Journal of the American Medical Association 
(Ness, 2007a). She said that representatives of two agencies in the Depart
-ment of Health and Human ServicesŠthe Of˜ce for Civil Rights, which 
leads implementation of the Privacy Rule, and the National Institutes of 
Health, which funds a large amount of health researchŠhad attended the 
IOM committee™s meetings and were concerned about the wide variation 
in local interpretation of the rule. She observed that the IOM committee 
would decide how to respond to the problem in its ˜nal report.
Stephen Plank (Johns Hopkins University) asked if the word ﬁsur
-veillanceﬂ raised public fears. Ness responded that the IOM commit
-tee had commissioned a study of public attitudes toward privacy and 
health research (Westin, 2007), which found that language had a power
-ful in˚uence on individuals™ willingness to allow access to their health 
information.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
A NEW APPROACH TO HEALTH DATA STEWARDSHIP
P. Jon White (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality) opened 
his remarks with the observation that health care in the United States has 
a quality problem. The Institute of Medicine (2000) found that between 
50,000 and 100,000 deaths were caused each year by medical errors, and 
more recently, McGlynn (2003) found that health care recipients got the 
recommended level and type of care only about 55 percent of the time. At 
the same time, health care has a cost problem. The current annual expen
-diture of $2.2 trillion represents a signi˜cant fraction of the nation™s gross 
domestic product, and health care costs are rising steeply, at an annual 
average rate of 6.5 percent.
Current Efforts to Measure Health Care Quality
White said that one proposed solution to both of these problems is to 
pay for quality, rather than paying for individual visits to the doctor or for 
individual procedures or treatments. The Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality is one of several organizations working toward this solution; 
these organizations all face the key question of how to set the health care 
quality goals that would guide payments. In one effort to answer this 
question, his agency awarded grants to support health care information 
technology systems for ﬁenabling quality measurements.ﬂ
4 In addition, 
the Department of Health and Human Services™ Center for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services funded six regional pilot projects to provide better 
quality information for Medicare bene˜ciaries.
White provided an example to illustrate a key issue in using 
administrativeŠor in this case, electronic claimsŠdata to assess health 
care quality. If one wanted to assess the quality of Dr. White™s treatment 
of diabetic patients, any single payer could provide claims data for only 
10 to 15 percent of Dr. White™s diabetic patients. Doctors have successfully 
argued that measures based on their treatment of these small samples of 
patients are inaccurate. To address this problem, the Agency for Health
-care Research and Quality and other organizations are beginning efforts 
to assemble health claims data from multiple payers, including the infor
-mation assembled by the technology systems and regional pilot projects 
described above.
The agency has also funded development of 14 ﬁchartered valued 
exchangesﬂ around the country. These are coalitions of health care provid
-ers, payers, patients, and regulators who receive data from Medicare and 
from local payers and health care providers and try to use these data to 
4 
See http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-˜les/RFA-HS-07-002.html.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 69
measure quality. White explained that the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention™s Biosense Health Surveillance Program
5 taps into the existing 
streams of data in hospital information systems around the country and 
ﬁsends it up to the mother ship in Atlanta.ﬂ Analysts there can monitor 
spikes in certain diseases, medical conditions, or symptoms. In addition 
to these federal efforts, health insurance companies and health main
-tenance organizations are working to develop measures of health care 
quality. The New York attorney general™s of˜ce has signed agreements 
with several major health care organizations to rank doctors based on 
quality of care, rather than on how much they cost the organization (New 
York State Attorney General™s Of˜ce, 2007). Other organizations that are 
trying to assemble and analyze health care data to develop measures of 
quality include the National Quality Forum, a publicŒprivate partnership, 
Google, and Microsoft.
All of these efforts face the question of who owns the health care data, 
White said. In the past, medical records were maintained in paper ˜les, 
making it easier for any single doctor or hospital to own and keep them. 
With the change to digital records, it is possible for many individuals 
and organizations to own copies of health care records. White explained 
that he and his colleagues use the word ﬁstewardship,ﬂ which he de˜ned 
as ﬁtaking care of something that doesn™t belong to you.ﬂ He has been 
engaged in discussions of health data stewardship with many organiza
-tions over the past few years, including the Ambulatory Quality Alliance, 
the National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, which advises 
the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the American Medical 
Informatics Association.
These initiatives also face privacy and security issues, as individual 
health records are protected by HIPAA, the Common Rule, and state and 
local laws and policies. In 2005, the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality helped to fund a collaborative effort among more than 30 states 
and territories to study their privacy laws and regulations governing 
medical records. As a result of these studies, the participants have begun 
working to harmonize these laws and regulations, both within and across 
states.
A Data Stewardship Entity
Returning to the concept of stewardship, White explained that the 
idea of assembling multiple sources of data in order to improve health 
care quality emerged several years ago in the Ambulatory Quality Alli
-ance. The alliance includes representatives of White™s agency, two physi
-5 
See http://www.cdc.gov/BioSense/.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
cians™ organizations, and an association of health insurance companies. 
The alliance members recognize that doctors, laboratories, health insur
-ance plans, and patients all have separate pieces of the health care infor
-mation needed to measure quality. Through discussion, they developed 
principles for sharing and aggregation of these disparate sources of data, 
including (Ambulatory Quality Alliance, 2006):

transparency with respect to framework, process, and rules;

measurement of provider performance derived from standardized 
metrics and data collection protocols that can be compared with 
national, regional, or other suitable benchmarks and otherwise 
assists in the analysis of assessments of health care quality and cost 
of care;

useful data for physicians to improve the quality and cost of care 
they provide to their patients and other appropriate purposes (e.g., 
maintenance of certi˜cation);

public reporting to consumers of user-friendly, meaningful, and 
actionable information about physician quality and cost of care; 
and

the collection of both public and private data so that physician 
performance can be assessed as comprehensively as possible.
White explained that, as the Ambulatory Quality Alliance members 
discussed these principles, they reached agreement on the need for a 
new health care data stewardship entity. When developing the mission 
and scope of the entity (Ambulatory Quality Alliance, 2006), they were 
unclear about whether the entity would simply set guidelines for assem
-bling and managing data or would actually serve as a data archive. To 
solicit answers to this and other questions about the entity, the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality published a request for information. 
Over 100 public and private health care organizations and individuals 
responded to the request, and the agency published a qualitative sum
-mary of their comments (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 
2007). The varied responses included signi˜cant support for both possible 
roles of the entity: setting guidelines for data stewardship and acting as 
the data steward. At the same time, some respondents expressed signi˜
-cant concerns, and some were completely opposed to the idea of sharing 
their personal medical records. White said he found it very valuable to 
hear and understand these views from the public.
Near the end of his presentation, White posed several questions that 
his agency and others are discussing as they consider the possibility of 
creating a health care stewardship entity:
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 71

What is your problem? What are you trying to address? What do 
you need to do this for?

Do you need a referee to address your problem by helping to set 
and enforce the rules of the game?

Do you need someone to hold the information you need to address 
your problem?

How do you avoid unintended consequences, including breaches 
of privacy and con˜dentiality?
White closed by warning that websites exist today, at which, for a 
small fee, an individual can enter a medical condition and receive a list 
of people who have that condition. The website managers gather the 
information from sources that are not governed by HIPAA. Finally, he 
said there are many questions and no conclusions.
In discussion, White observed that lobbyists on Capitol Hill are telling 
Congress now that the patient ought to control her or his health records, 
although the doctor and the insurance company should also be allowed 
to access the records. White said that such proposals miss the possibility 
of using medical records for research that could improve the health care 
system for the public good.
DISC
USSION
: 
IMPLICATIONS
 FOR
 RESEARCH
 USIN
G 
ED
UCATION
 RECORDS
Re˚ecting on Lizanne DeStefano™s earlier presentation about devel
-opment of partnerships between researchers and schools (see Chapter 4), 
Miron Straf said that statistical agencies should work with administrative 
agencies, helping them to develop their data systems for statistical use. He 
asked whether there was a federal role in providing this type of assistance 
to education agencies.
Supporting Research Partnerships Through 
Trust and Technical Assistance
Marilyn Seastrom replied that 27 states currently have grants from 
the Department of Education™s Institute of Education Sciences to develop 
longitudinal databases of education records and that more funding will 
be provided to the states in ˜scal year 2009 (see Chapter 2). One require
-ment of these grants, she said, is that the states make the databases user-
friendly and accessible to researchers. She said that, even if FERPA were 
changed to make data-sharing easier, states and school districts might still 
refuse researchers™ requests for data access if they lack the resources and 
technical capacity to do so.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
DeStefano responded that, in addition to trust, the motivation of 
research partners is also important. When a school or state education 
agency does not have a strong motivation to participate in a research 
project, she argued, the agency™s leaders are more likely to say that they 
cannot share data because of FERPA. Seastrom agreed that trust and the 
development of relationships would continue to be very important for 
researchers to gain access to education data.
Paula Skedsvold (American Educational Research Association) asked 
whether legislative changes were needed in FERPA to clarify the mean
-ing of research ﬁfor, or on behalf ofﬂ an education agency. She observed 
that, in response to the American Educational Research Association™s 
survey about FERPA, some respondents indicated that they had simply 
abandoned research projects, because they could not obtain access to the 
education records they needed.
Seastrom asked workshop participants to describe how much state 
or local education agencies and researchers themselves alter education 
record data to protect con˜dentiality.
Schneider replied that, in one case, her team had helped to deiden
-tify a ˜le of teacher information. She observed that researchers outside 
her team who wish to use the ˜le are required to apply to their own 
institution™s institutional review board and to the state of Michigan™s 
institutional review board for the use of data, providing a data protection 
plan along with other information about the proposed research.
DeStefano and others agreed that researchers should provide techni
-cal assistance to state and local education agencies to increase their capac
-ity in techniques of deidenti˜cation.
Weighing Risks and Bene˜ts of Disclosure and Research
Martin Orland proposed that Gutmann™s matrix of risk and restric
-tion (see Figure 5-1) should include another dimensionŠthe likelihood 
of harm. Gutmann responded that the matrix included risk of harm and 
disclosure, and Orland replied that risk of harm and risk of disclosure 
should be two different dimensions. For example, he said, the risk of a 
nuclear power plant accident is minuscule, but this unlikely event could 
cause ﬁenormousﬂ harm. Orland expressed concern that the harm caused 
by even one disclosure of individually identi˜able information could 
adversely affect the entire research environment, especially in light of the 
public and congressional concerns about privacy that had generated the 
HIPAA legislation.
Gutmann agreed with Orland that it is important to differentiate 
between the risk of disclosure and the risk of harm. For example, he 
said, there is almost nothing on the short-form census questionnaire that 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECONCILING FEDERAL STATISTICAL AND HEALTH DATA
 73
should cause an individual to be concerned if it were publicly revealed. 
In contrast, he said, other data that individuals provide in surveys or that 
are included about them in administrative records would pose great risk 
of harm if they were revealed, as shown in his graphic (see Figure 5-1). 
He went on to explain that he is much more worried about the potential 
harm disclosure could cause to groups of individuals than he is about the 
harm to researchers of limited access to data. He said that the people who 
fund his data consortium do so because they do not want to see a front 
page story in the news about any revelation of individual identities based 
on data they collect.
Gerald Gates added that, unlike Gutmann, privacy laws do not distin
-guish between more sensitive and less sensitive individual information; 
these laws simply state that individual information cannot be disclosed. 
Although institutional review boards in federal agencies consider the 
sensitivity of different data sets when determining how to protect them, 
they focus primarily on complying with the letter of the law by protecting 
against any disclosure of any individually identi˜able information. Levine 
responded that one criticism of institutional review boards is that, when 
reviewing a research proposal, they fail to distinguish between the risk of 
disclosure and the magnitude of harm that a disclosure would cause.
Gutmann responded that institutional review boards do not always 
take advantage of the ˚exibility they have to allocate their time and 
resources. For example, the University of Michigan institutional review 
board has explicit rules stating that research proposals to use data from 
a list of speci˜c deidenti˜ed public data sources (including the Census 
Bureau, his institute, and other sources) do not require institutional review 
board approval (University of Michigan, 2008). Therefore, the board does 
not need to devote resources to reviewing these research proposals and 
can focus on other proposals in which protecting human subjects is more 
important. Gutmann suggested that the research community continue to 
work with institutional review boards to make sure that they are devoting 
their resources where they are most needed, especially because he sees 
most institutional review boards as ﬁoverwhelmed.ﬂ
Seastrom responded that, while she agreed with Gutmann, the exact 
opposite would be the case for a disclosure review board. This type of 
board would be very concerned about what type of public information a 
researcher would add to a data set, she said, and Gutmann agreed.
6Straf said that it was important not only to distinguish between the 
risk of a potential disclosure and the harm that could be caused, but also 
6 
The University of Michigan (2008) policy states that a researcher who plans to merge 
more than one public data set and recognizes that this may increase the risk of identi˜cation 
of individual research participants should consult the institutional review board.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
between the risk of disclosure and the bene˜ts of research. Gutmann 
responded that earlier workshop sessions had illustrated the bene˜ts of 
using education records for research (see Chapter 3). DeStefano said that, 
in the partnership model, education agencies and researchers discuss the 
speci˜c bene˜ts of particular research projects, rather than considering the 
general bene˜ts of research to society; she observed that the University of 
Illinois institutional review board had made note of these speci˜c bene˜ts 
when reviewing research partnership proposals.
Ness said that the Institute of Medicine committee extensively dis
-cussed the risks and bene˜ts of research using individual health infor
-mation. The committee commissioned surveys showing that the public 
is ﬁhungryﬂ for health information, and thinks that the United States 
should remain the world leader in generating new medical knowledge 
(Westin, 2007). She suggested placing the new knowledge resulting from 
research in ﬁa very central positionﬂ when weighing research bene˜ts and 
privacy risks. Levine agreed that the public increasingly recognizes the 
importance of health as a public good, saying that the public should view 
education in the same way.
Boruch said that an early report on privacy and con˜dentiality by 
the Committee on National Statistics (National Research Council, 1979) 
included an analysis of how people react to a request for personal infor
-mation presented in different ways. He suggested that the survey of pub
-lic attitudes commissioned by the Institute of Medicine Committee might 
be a valuable resource for understanding how to frame such requests, 
which is a challenging task across ˜elds of social science research; Ness 
said the survey is publicly available (Westin, 2007).
Schneider urged the American Educational Research Association to 
continue providing professional development on keeping data con˜den
-tial. While acknowledging her fear that a breach of individual identity 
was inevitable, she said it was critical to educate the research community 
about con˜dentiality and how best to safeguard it.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75
6Re˚ections and Next Steps
PLANNIN
G COMMITTEE REFLECTIONS
In the ˜nal session, members of the workshop planning committee 
re˚ected on what they had learned about reconciling access, privacy, and 
con˜dentiality of education records and offered suggestions for future 
research and policy. Felice Levine noted that, on one hand, the workshop 
had described several different models that allow researchers to access 
education and other administrative records while protecting con˜den
-tiality and had also illuminated the bene˜ts of research using education 
record data. On the other hand, she said, the workshop discussions had 
clari˜ed the challenges that result from the failure of the Family Educa
-tional Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) to reconcile privacy with research 
access in an effective way.
Robert Boruch reiterated his earlier call for researchers to use more 
uniform language to communicate with the public and clarify the distinc
-tion between statistical and administrative uses of administrative data. 
He said that the discussions about models of research access were very 
helpful, asking researchers and public agencies to share their formal data-
sharing agreements and memoranda of understanding. Boruch argued 
that sharing these agreements is essential to alleviate fears about comply
-ing with FERPA and other privacy laws. Boruch said that changes to the 
FERPA law or regulations, such as rede˜ning ﬁeducational institutionﬂ 
to include state education agencies, as called for by Steven Winnick (see 
Chapter 2), would help to facilitate researchers™ access to data. And he 
said that the process of obtaining a waiver of the FERPA informed consent 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
requirement from a state or local education agency presents an opportu
-nity to forge a research partnership.
Thomas Plewes (National Research Council) observed that federal 
agencies have developed innovative approaches to providing access to 
data for research purposes, including research data centers, data enclaves, 
and the data licensing agreements pioneered by the National Center 
for Education Statistics. However, these innovations at the federal level 
have not yet been tried by state or local education agencies. He noted 
that the No Child Left Behind Act generates the need to gather data 
on student performance and also drives the need for more education 
research. Constance Citro (National Research Council) agreed that the 
workshop had highlighted the value of different models of access tailored 
to different types of data, such as the Census Bureau™s research data cen
-ters, which severely limit access, as is appropriate for the sensitive data 
they maintain. Noting that state and local education agencies are most 
affected by FERPA, Citro asked which of the federal models would be 
most effective in helping these agencies provide data access while protect
-ing con˜dentiality.
Martin Orland said he had learned that ﬁfederalism is alive and wellﬂ 
through the workshop discussions, highlighting the question of what the 
federal role should be. He noted that Congress had not anticipated the 
possibility that education records might be used for research purposes 
when it wrote FERPA. He called for changes in the law that would rec
-ognize the value of using school records to bene˜t research and improve 
education policies and practices. He cautioned against concluding that 
ﬁall is well,ﬂ simply because presenters had described a few successful 
models of research access. In addition to changing FERPA, he said, suc
-cess in using education record data for research purposes requires four 
critical conditions:

There is researchable data.

There is a con˚uence of interest between a researcher and an edu
-cation agency.

Time and commitment are available to build trust between the 
researcher and the agency.

The education agency has the technical capacity to share data while 
protecting con˜dentiality of individual information.
Helen Ladd said that the critical issues of research access and con
-˜dentiality protection revolve around the use of state education data, 
re˚ecting the reality that education is a state function under the U.S. 
Constitution. She called for increased clarity in the Department of Educa
-tion™s guidance about FERPA, noting that state and local education agen
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFLECTIONS AND NEXT STEPS
 77
cies™ nervousness about data-sharing agreements poses a barrier to good 
research. Ladd agreed with Orland that FERPA is not the only barrier to 
high-quality education research, observing that community colleges in 
North Carolina have information technology systems that are not capable 
of providing deidenti˜ed data to researchers. In addition, she reminded 
participants that Florida™s education agency, with one of the most devel
-oped education data systems in the nation, lacks staff to respond to the 
many requests for access from individual researchers. Finally, she said 
that both researchers and education agencies must continually work to 
build trust.
Barbara Schneider noted that many speakers had agreed on the need 
to ˜x FERPA, because of its ﬁchilling effectﬂ on education and public 
health research. At the same time, she said that the workshop discussions 
had clari˜ed the tensions between the bene˜ts of research access and 
the harm that could come to an individual from an ﬁinevitableﬂ breach 
of sensitive personal information. Schneider repeated her earlier call for 
professional development about privacy and con˜dentiality in the educa
-tion research community.
REFLECTIONS BY KENNETH PREWITT
The workshop planning committee invited Kenneth Prewitt, a for
-mer Census Bureau director and long-time member of the Committee 
on National Statistics, to provide concluding re˚ections at the end of the 
workshop.
Administrative Data and Survey Data
Prewitt said that researchers must use administrative data because 
they have so much to offer. He said that, although many social science 
researchers are not very familiar with data mining, this technique for 
analyzing administrative data represents a more important methodologi
-cal breakthrough than any advance in survey methodology. For example, 
the Bureau of Economic Analysis now purchases credit card data from 
banks, mining the data for information to incorporate into its economic 
modeling.
Administrative and survey data differ in several important ways, 
he said. Administrative records are ﬁtheory indifferent,ﬂ poor in num
-ber of variables, and rich in number of cases. Because they are gathered 
for administrative purposes, these data are not based on any theory of 
human behavior and include only a very limited number of variables, 
which are related to the administrative purposes. For example, an agency 
may gather data on an individual™s earnings for purposes of providing 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
social bene˜ts, without gathering data on any other variables related 
to that individual. This leads to creation of very large data sets that are 
thin in the number of variables and are not designed to test any particu
-lar theory. In contrast, survey data are ﬁtheory embeddedﬂŠthat is, the 
design of the survey and therefore the characteristics of the resulting data 
are informed by theoryŠand rich in variables. Survey data are poor in 
number of cases, because of the expense of administering a survey; for 
example, a major national survey of public health includes only 5,000 
cases (see Table 6-1).
These characteristics affect privacy and con˜dentiality, Prewitt 
explained. Because administrative data sets are thin in variables, research
-ers must often link them to other data sets in order to address important 
research questions. But this linkage magni˜es the risk that individual 
information could be identi˜ed.
The two data sources also vary in quality, Prewitt said. The accuracy 
of variables in administrative data depends in part on the goals and mis
-sions of agencies that gather these data. For example, the Social Security 
Administration is unlikely to tolerate errors in age data, while the Depart
-ment of Housing and Urban Development may be less concerned about 
accuracy in this variable. Prewitt noted that survey theory and practice 
are well developed, with a history dating back to the 1930s, and today 
students can take many classes to learn about how to gather high-quality 
survey data. Asking how many classes are available on the quality of 
administrative data, Prewitt called for increased study and discussion 
focusing on the quality of these very important new data sources.
Developing Research Partnerships
Prewitt observed that, at the federal level, relationships between 
researchers and data-producing agencies have matured over the past 15 
years. Their ongoing discussions of research access, privacy, and con˜
-dentiality have informed the development of new models that recon
-cile access with protections, such as data enclaves and data licensing 
agreements. Prewitt suggested that a similar dialogue was needed at the 
TABLE 6-1
 Administrative and Survey Data
Characteristic
Administrative Records
Survey Data
Theory
Indifferent
Embedded
Number of variables
Poor
Rich
Number of cases
Rich
Poor
SOURCE
: Presentation by Kenneth Prewitt (2008).
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFLECTIONS AND NEXT STEPS
 79
state level, in order to support development of similar models there. He 
encouraged researchers to try to understand the motivations and ethical 
and emotional concerns of state of˜cials as part of that dialogue.
Echoing Boruch, Prewitt also called for increased sharing of formal 
memoranda of understanding between researchers and education agen
-cies, in order to address state and local of˜cials™ fears about sharing data 
while complying with FERPA and other privacy laws. When considering 
concerns about privacy and data con˜dentiality, he said, it is important 
to distinguish between the harm to an individual whose data might be 
released to the public and the harm that could result to the research enter
-prise. He said that he had participated in a discussion earlier that day 
about whether and how the National Center for Health Statistics might 
release DNA data. A knowledgeable expert said that, if individual DNA 
data ever were inadvertently released and this became publicly known, 
this would effectively mean the end of the National Center for Health 
Statistics. Prewitt urged the research community to assume responsibility 
for protecting data con˜dentiality, along with the data providers, in order 
to avoid harm to both research and agency missions.
Prewitt called for greater clarity about the different uses of adminis
-trative data. These data are used for administrative purposes, for research 
purposes, and also for program evaluation and policy design, he said. 
For example, the No Child Left Behind Act requires states to gather data 
for program evaluation. He asked the research community to avoid a 
tendency to project the way it wants to use administrative data onto all 
of these other uses.
Next Steps
Prewitt said that the workshop had been valuable in developing new 
ideas related to access to school record data for use in education research, 
going beyond a narrow focus on changing the legislative language in 
FERPA. He urged participants to offer comments to the Department of 
Education on its proposed revisions to the FERPA regulations. Based on 
his experience at the Census Bureau, he said, ﬁI can tell you that com
-ments are read carefully,ﬂ as agencies try to be responsive to interested 
stakeholders.
He noted that similar conversations about balancing data access for 
research and con˜dentiality were going on in health and other sectors, 
and he urged continued discussion across sectors. Such conversations 
about the complexities and challengesŠboth across sectors and across 
levels of governmentŠwill help to make agencies and researchers more 
comfortable with sharing data, he said. Finally, he said he thinks of the 
current situation as involving two sides. On one side are the school sys
-Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
tem, parents, and grandparents wishing for a better public school system. 
On the other side is a large education research enterprise, including the 
25,000 experts who participate each year in the American Educational 
Research Association™s annual conference. Somewhere in between the 
analytic capacity of the researchers and the concerned students and fami
-lies are the rich education data sets. The workshop discussions, he said, 
were about the way in which this research capacity can address the social 
challenge of improving education by using the rich data sets to generate 
evidence.
FINAL
 DISC
USSION
Michael Feuer (National Research Council) responded to Prewitt™s 
remarks about the quality of administrative data, focusing particularly on 
educational test score data. When thinking about linking test data with 
other data sets, Feuer said, it is important to consider how the validity of 
these test data might be compromised by the linkage. In addition, he cau
-tioned that students™ responses to certain conditionsŠsuch as high stakes 
attached to certain testsŠmay compromise their performance, affecting 
the quality of the resulting score data.
Moving on to FERPA, Feuer warned researchers to avoid exaggerat
-ing their complaints about privacy regulations, because this appears self-
serving. He suggested considering other stakeholders™ views of privacy 
and access issues, including the views of legal experts. Felice Levine 
responded that, as currently administered, FERPA does not address 
responsible research access to the data and is ﬁalmost exclusionary.ﬂ
Levine responded to Prewitt™s comments about the different uses of 
administrative data by observing that, while there has been more atten
-tion to these different uses for large administrative data sets, the federal 
government has provided little guidance. For example, the Common Rule 
provides guidance on how institutional review boards should review 
research proposals, but it devotes far less attention to how to protect 
privacy and con˜dentiality as the research plan is executed and when 
the results are being disseminated. In contrast, she said, she attended a 
recent meeting on biosecurity at which the entire discussion focused on 
dissemination and on the potential for unwanted uses of information. 
For example, if a researcher wants to publish the invention of an aerosol 
spray that could potentially be used to disperse airborne spores that could 
annihilate populations, biosecurity rules provide guidance on how to 
present the research ˜ndings in a way that would avoid this unwanted 
use. Levine then invited a team of researchers and public school repre
-sentatives from Baltimore, Maryland, who participated in the workshop 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFLECTIONS AND NEXT STEPS
 81and have formed a research partnership, to offer any comments about the 
workshop or pose any ˜nal questions.
Ike Diibor (Baltimore City Public Schools) responded that the work
-shop had been very helpful in increasing his understanding of current 
activities in the research community. He said that he and other school 
of˜cials have interpreted FERPA with the guidance of the school system™s 
legal counsel, without devoting much thought to researchers™ perspec
-tive on the law. Observing that the team was in the process of creating a 
formal research consortium, he said that the information gathered at the 
workshop about con˜dentiality and privacy would be very valuable.
Stephen Plank said that the workshop participants had seen the team 
of researchers and school of˜cials from Baltimore try to practice the pro
-cess of building trust and developing shared understandings. Re˚ecting 
on earlier discussions, he agreed with Helen Ladd that researcherŒschool 
system partnerships should not depend only on trust and personal rela
-tionships but should be codi˜ed in formal memoranda of understanding. 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83References
Abowd, J.M., Stephens, B.E., Vilhuber, L., Andersson, K.L., McKinney, M.R., Roemer, M., 
and Woodcock, S. (2005). 
The LEHD infrastructure ˜le and the creation of the quarterly 
workforce indicators
. Technical Paper #TP-2006-01. Suitland, MD: U.S. Census Bureau. 
Available: http://lehd.did.census.gov/led/library/techpapers/tp-2006-01.pdf [ac
-cessed July 2008].
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. (2007). 
Summary of responses
. National Health 
Data Stewardship Entity Request for Information issued by the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, June 4, 2007. Rockville, MD: Author. Available: http://healthit.
ahrq.gov/portal/server.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_3882_816199_0_0_18/National
-HealthDataStewardship_SummaryResponses.doc [accessed July 2008].
Ambulatory Quality Alliance. (2006). 
Data sharing and aggregation work group
. Washing
-ton, DC: Author. Available: http://www.aqaalliance.org/datawg.htm [accessed July 
2008].
American Educational Research Association. (2008). Letter on FERPA. 
Educational Researcher, 
37
(5), 304-306. Available: http://www.aera.net/uploadedFiles/Publications/Journals/
Educational_Researcher/3705/07EdR08_302-306.pdf [accessed August 2008].
Bettinger, E.P., and Long, B.T. (2008). Addressing the needs of under-prepared students in 
higher education: Does college remediation work? 
Journal of Human Resources. 
Avail
-able: http://gseacademic.harvard.edu/~longbr/Bettinger_Long_-_Addressing_needs_
of_under-prepared_students_(4-08).pdf [accessed October 2008].
Bifulco, R., and Ladd, H.F. (2007). School choice, residential segregation and test-score gaps: 
Evidence from North Carolina™s Charter School Program. 
Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management, 
26
(1), 31-56.
Boyd, D., Lankford, H., Loeb, S., and Wyckoff, J. (2005). The draw of home: How teachers™ 
preferences for proximity disadvantage urban schools. 
Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management,
 24
(1), 113-132.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
Boyd, D., Lankford, S.H., Loeb, J.S., Rockoff, J., and Wyckoff, J. (2008). 
The narrowing gap 
in New York City teacher quali˜cations and its implications for student achie
vement in high 
po
verty schools
. Working Paper 2007-001. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Institute 
for Research on Education Policy and Practice. Available: http://irepp.stanford.edu/
publications/working_papers/ [accessed July 2008].
Bradburn, N.M., and Straf, M.L. (2003). The eleventh Morris Hansen lecture. Information 
and statistical data: A distinction with a difference. 
Journal of Of˜cial Statistics, 
19
(4), 
321-331.
Bryk, A.S., and Schneider, B. (2002). 
Trust in schools: A core resource for impro
vement. 
New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation.
Calcagno, J.C., and Long, B.T. (2008). 
The impact of postsecondary remediation using a regression 
discontinuity approach: Addressing endogenous sorting and noncompliance.
 Working Paper. 
New York: Columbia University, Teacher™s College, National Center for Postsecondary 
Research. Available: http://www.postsecondaryresearch.org/i/a/document/6964_
CalcagnoLong.pdf [accessed July 2008].
Cook, P., MacCoun, R., Muschkin, C.G., and Vigdor, J. (2007). The negative impact of starting 
middle school in sixth grade. 
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
 27
(1), 104-121.
Cornell University. (2008). 
VirtualRDC News@Cornell: What is the VirtualRDC?
 Available: 
http://www.vrdc.cornell.edu/news/?page_id=9 [accessed May 2008].
Council of Chief State School Of˜cers and Standard & Poor™s. (2008). 
SchoolDataDirect. 
Avail
-able: http://www.schooldatadirect.org/ [accessed May 2008].
Ewell, P., and Boeke, M. (2006). 
Tracking student progression: The state of the states
. Unpub
-lished manuscript. Available: http://www.nchems.org/c2sp/sur/SURSurveyReport.
pdf [accessed July 2008].
Fanning, J.P. (2007). 
Policies and best practices for ensuring statistical and research con˜dentiality
. Washington, DC: Of˜ce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services.
Gates, G. (2008). 
Pro
viding researchers with authorized, safe, useful access to administrati
ve data
. Paper prepared for the Workshop on Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Edu
-cation Research, April 24-25, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Gutmann, M. (2008). 
Protecting con˜dentiality in research data: Successful approaches in the aca
-demic research setting
. Presentation to the Workshop on Protecting Student Records and 
Facilitating Education Research, April 24-25, National Research Council, Washington, 
DC.
Handford, M. (1997). 
Where™s Waldo? 
Somerville, MA: Candlewick Press.
Hanushek, E.A. (2007). 
Plain talk with Eric Hanushek
. Washington, DC: Center for Analysis 
of Longitudinal Data in Educational Research. Available: http://www.caldercenter.
org/news/ptEHanushek.cfm [accessed July 2008].
Hanushek, E.A., Kain, J.F., and Rivkin, S.G. (2004). Why public schools lose teachers. 
Journal 
of Human Resources, 
39
(2), 326-354.
 Available: http://www.utdallas.edu/research/tsp/
pdfpapers/paper25.pdf [accessed July 2008].
Institute of Medicine. (2000). 
To err is human: Building a safer health system.
 Committee on 
Quality of Health Care in America, L.T. Kohn, J.M. Corrigan, and M.S. Donaldson, eds. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press. Available: http://www.nap.edu/catalog.
php?record_id=9728 [accessed November 2008].
Institute of Medicine. (2008). 
Health research and the pri
vacy of health information: The HIPAA 
pri
vacy rule
. Available: http://www.iom.edu/CMS/3740/43729.aspx [accessed July 
2008].
Jacob, B., and Lefgren, L. (2004). Remedial education and student achievement: A regression-
discontinuity analysis. 
Re
view of Economics and Statistics, 8
6(1), 226-244.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES
 85Jacob, B., and Lefgren, L. (2007). 
The effect of grade retention in high school completion
. NBER 
Working Paper No. 13514. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Available: http://www.nber.org/papers/w13514 [accessed July 2008].
Kain, J. (2000). 
Description of the UTD Texas Schools Project
. Dallas: University of Texas-Dallas. 
Available: http://www.utdallas.edu/research/tsp/pdfpapers/paper16.pdf [accessed 
July 2008].
Kain, J.F., and Singleton, K. (1996). Equality of educational opportunity revisited. 
New Eng
-land Economic Re
view
, May/June, 88-110.
Keesler, V., Wyse, A., Jones, N., and Schneider, B. (2008). 
Calculating the ability of within-school 
teacher supply to meet the demands of new requirements: The example of the Michigan Merit 
Curriculum
 (REL Technical Brief, REL 2008-No.005). Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education Evalua
-tion and Regional Assistance, Regional Educational Laboratory Midwest. Available: 
http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs/ [accessed August 2008].
Lee, C., and Goldfarb, Z.A. (2006). Stolen VA laptop and hard drive recovered. 
The Wash
-ington Post, 
June 30, p. A-1. Available: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/
content/article/2006/06/29/AR2006062900352.html [accessed July 2008].
Loeb, S. (2008). 
Uni
versity research and the Family Education and Pri
vacy Rights Act
. Paper 
prepared for the Workshop on Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education 
Research, April 24-25, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
McDonald, S., Andal, J., Brown, K., and Schneider, B. (2007). 
Getting the e
vidence for e
vidence-
based initiati
ves: How the Midwest states use data systems to impro
ve education processes 
and outcomes
. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Institute for Education 
Sciences, National Center for Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance, Regional 
Educational Laboratory Midwest. Available: http://ies.ed.gov/ncee/edlabs/projects/
project.asp?projectID=29&productID=15 [accessed October 2008].
McGlynn, E.A. (2003). The quality of health care delivered to adults in the United States. 
New England Journal of Medicine, 
34
8, 26.
Miranda, M.L., Kim, D., Overstreet, A., Paul, C.J., Hull, A.P., and Morgan, S.P. (2007). The 
relationship between early childhood blood lead levels and performance on end-of-
grade tests. 
En
vironmental Health Perspecti
ves, 
115
(8), 1242-1247.
Muschkin, C., and Ladd, H. (2008). 
Research access to state education administrati
ve data: The 
North Carolina Education Research Data Center
. Paper prepared for the Workshop on 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research, April 24-25, National 
Research Council, Washington, DC.
National Center for Educational Achievement. (2008). 
Data quality campaign
. Available: 
http://www.dataqualitycampaign.org/ [accessed June 2008].
National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral 
Research. (1979). 
The Belmont report: Ethical principles and guidelines for the protection of 
human subjects of research.
 Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health Of˜ce of Hu
-man Subjects Research. Available: http://ohsr.od.nih.gov/guidelines/belmont.html 
[accessed July 2008].
National Research Council. (1979). 
Pri
vacy and con˜dentiality as factors in sur
vey response. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (1993). 
Private li
ves and public policies: Con˜dentiality and accessibil
-ity of go
vernment statistics
. Panel on Con˜dentiality and Data Access, G.T. Duncan, T.B. 
Jabine, and V.A. de Wolf, eds. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2007). 
Putting people on the map: Protecting con˜dentiality with 
linked social-spatial data. 
Panel on Con˜dentiality Issues Arising from the Integration of 
Remotely Sensed and Self-Identifying Data.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
Ness, R.B. (2007a). In˚uence of the HIPAA privacy rule on health research. 
Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 
29
8(18), 2164-2170
. 
Available: http://jama.ama-assn.org/
cgi/content/full/298/18/2164 [accessed July 2008].
Ness, R.B. (2007b). 
Impact of implementation of the HIPAA pri
vacy rule on research
. Presentation 
to the Workshop on Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research, 
April 24-25, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
New York State Attorney General™s Of˜ce. (2007). 
Attorney General Cuomo announces doctor 
ranking agreement with GHI and HIP.
 Albany: Author. Available: http://www.oag.state.
ny.us/press/2007/nov/nov20b_07.html/ [accessed October 2008].
Prince, D., and Jenkins, D. (2005). 
Building pathways to success for low-skill adult students: Les
-sons for community college policy and practice from a statewide longitudinal tracking study
. Olympia: Washington State Board for Community and Technical Colleges. Available: 
http://www.sbctc.ctc.edu/docs/education/ford_bridges/bldg_pathways_to_success_
for_low-skilled_adult_stdts.pdf [accessed July 2008].
Privacy Protection Study Commission. (1977). 
Personal pri
vacy in an information age. 
Washing
-ton, DC. Available: http://epic.org/privacy/ppsc1977report/ [accessed July 2008].
Purnell, R., and Blank, S. (2004). 
Support success: Ser
vices that may help low-income students 
succeed in community college
. New York: MDRC. Available: http://www.mdrc.org/
publications/399/abstract.html [accessed July 2008].
Ropp, M., Gosa, K., Schneider, B., McDonald, S.-K., and Dawson, M. (2008). 
Creating high-
impact information from longitudinal data
. Presentation to 2008 MIS Conference Lon
-gitudinal Data Systems Strand, February, San Francisco, CA. Available: http://nces.
ed.gov/programs/slds/mis_08.asp#sessionV [accessed August 2008].
Schneider, B. (2008). 
Lessons from the data: A collaboration between MDE/CEPI and MSU.
 Pre
-sentation to the Workshop on Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education 
Research, April 24-25, National Research Council, Washington, DC.
Sellers, J. (2008). 
Florida™s PK-
20 education data systems.
 Presentation to the Workshop on 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research, April 24-25, National 
Research Council, Washington, DC.
University of Michigan. (2008). 
Research using publicly-a
vailable data sets: UM policy
. Avail
-able: http://www.research.umich.edu/hrpp/Documents/datasets.html [accessed July 
2008].
U.S. Department of Education. (2008a). Family educational rights and privacy: Proposed 
rule. 
Federal Register, 
73
(57), 15573-15602. Available: http://www.ed.gov/legislation/
FedRegister/proprule/2008-1/032408a.html [accessed June 2008].
U.S. Department of Education. (2008b). 
The
 ED
Facts
 initiati
ve. Available: http://www.
ed.gov/about/inits/ed/edfacts/index.html [accessed June 2008].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2000). Standards for privacy of individu
-ally identi˜able health information: Final rule. 
Federal Register, 
65
(250), 82461-82510. 
Available: http://aspe.hhs.gov/ADMNSIMP/˜nal/PvcPre01.htm [accessed October 
2008].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2002). Standards for privacy of individu
-ally identi˜able health information: Final rule. 
Federal Register, 
67
(157), 58181-53273. 
Available: http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/privruletxt.txt [accessed December 2008].
VanWey, L.K., Rindfuss, R.R., Gutmann, M.P., Entwisle, B. and Balk, D.L. (2005). Con˜den
-tiality and spatially explicit data: Concerns and challenges. 
Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 
102(43), 15227-15342.
Westin, A. (2007). 
How the public 
views pri
vacy and health research
. Results of a national sur
-vey commissioned by the Institute of Medicine™s Committee on Health Research and 
the Privacy of Health Information. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine. Available: 
http://www.iom.edu/CMS/3740/43729/48528.aspx [accessed July 2008].
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87Appendix A
Workshop Agenda and Participants
AGENDA
Workshop on Protecting Student Records and 
Facilitating Education Research
April 24-25, 2008
April 
24
, 
2008
8:30-8:45 AM
 Welcome and Introductions
 Felice Le
vine
, Chair
8:45-9:30 AM
 Session 1: Overview of the Issues
  
Miron Straf
, Deputy Director, DBASSE, National 
Academy of Sciences
9:30-10:45 AM
  
Session 2: Review, History, and Proposed Changes to 
FERPA Affecting Research Access 
 Moderator: 
Robert Boruch
 Ł  
Ellen Campbell, Deputy Director, Family Policy 
Compliance Of˜ce, U.S. Department of Education
 Ł  
Steven Winnick, Nelson Mullins Riley & 
Scarborough
 10:45-11:00 AM
 Break
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
11:00 AM -
 Session 3: Reconciling Privacy, Con˜dentiality, 
12:15 PM
  
Consent, and Access in Federal Statistical and Health 
Programs
 Moderator: 
Constance Citro
 Ł  
Gerald Gates, U.S. Bureau of the Census (Retired)
 Ł  
Jonathon White, Health IT Director, Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality
12:15-1:30 PM
 Lunch
1:30-2:45 PM
  
Session 4: Reconciling Privacy, Con˜dentiality, 
Consent and Access: Department of Education 
Programs
 Moderator: 
Constance Citro
 Ł  
Ross Santy, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Data 
and Information, U.S. Department of Education
 Ł  
Marilyn Seastrom, National Center for Education 
Statistics, U.S. Department of Education
2:45-3:00 PM
 Break
3:00-4:30 PM
  
Session 5: Options for Research Access to State 
Administrative Data That Protect Privacy and 
Con˜dentiality
 Moderator: 
Martin Orland
 Ł  
Jay Pfeiffer, Deputy Commissioner, Florida 
Department of Education
 Ł  
Helen Ladd, Stanford Institute of Public Policy, 
Duke University
 Ł Barbara Schneider, Michigan State University
4:30-5:00 PM
 Wrap-Up and Issues of the Day
 Felice Le
vine
, Chair
April 
25
, 
2008
8:30-10:00 AM
  
Session 6: Critical Importance of Research from 
Administrative Record Systems Using Individually 
Identi˜able Student and School Record Data
 Moderator: 
Helen Ladd
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 89 Ł  
Jane Hannaway, Director, Education Policy Center, 
Urban Institute
 Ł  
Thomas Bailey, Director, Community College 
Research Center, Teachers College, Columbia 
University
 Ł Susanna Loeb, Stanford University
10:00-10:15 AM
 Break
10:15 AM-
12:00 PM
  
Session 7: Other Models for Assuring Data Access 
and Privacy
 Moderator: 
Miron Straf
 Ł  
Myron Gutmann, Director, Inter-University 
Consortium for Political and Social Research, 
University of Michigan
 Ł  
Lizanne DeStefano, Bureau of Educational 
Research, College of Education, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
 Ł  
Roberta Ness, Graduate School of Public Health, 
University of Pittsburgh
12:00-1:15 PM
 Lunch
1:15-3:00 PM
 Session 8: Feasibility of Change: Strategic Steps
 Moderator: 
Felice Le
vine
 Ł  
Kenneth Prewitt, Columbia University
 Open Discussion
3:00 PM
 Adjourn
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
PARTICIPANTS
Thomas R. Bailey, Columbia University
Robert Boruch, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
Ellen Campbell, Family Policy Compliance Of˜ce, U.S. Department of 
Education
Jeanetta Churchill, Family League of Baltimore City
Constance Citro, National Research Council
Stephen Cohen, National Science Foundation
Elizabeth Cranley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
Matthew Dawson, Learning Point Associates
Lizanne DeStefano, University of Illinois
Ike Diibor, Baltimore City Public Schools
Bridget Dooling, Of˜ce of Management and Budget
Rachel Durham, Johns Hopkins University
Michael J. Feuer, National Research Council
Stefanie Fricano, California Legislative Analyst™s Of˜ce
Norma Garza, U.S. Department of Education
Gerald Gates, U.S. Census Bureau (retired)
Aimee Guidera, Data Quality Campaign
Myron Gutmann, Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social 
Research, University of Michigan
Jane Hannaway, Urban Institute
Kimberly Harris, North Carolina State University
Jeanine Hildreth, Baltimore City Public Schools
Margaret Hilton, National Research Council
Dominique Johnson, Temple University
Helen Ladd, Duke University
Felice Levine, American Educational Research Association
Thomas Lindsley, National Center for Educational Achievement
Susanna Loeb, Stanford University
Mary Lummus-Robinson, National Center for Educational Achievement 
Shelly Martinez, U.S. Of˜ce of Management and Budget
Roberta Ness, University of Pittsburgh
Denis Newman, Empirical Education, Inc.
Martin Orland, WestEd
Stephen Plank, Johns Hopkins University
Thomas Plewes, National Research Council
Kenneth Prewitt, Columbia University
Jeffery Rodamar, U.S. Department of Education
Margaret Ropp, Michigan Center for Educational Performance & 
Information
Michael Ross, National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. Department 
of Education
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 91
Ross Santy, Of˜ce of Planning, Evaluation, and Policy Development, 
U.S. Department of 
 Education
Barbara Schneider, Michigan State University
Marilyn Seastrom, National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. 
Department of Education
Jeff Sellers, Florida Department of Education
Michael J. Siri, National Research Council
Paula Skedsvold, American Educational Research Association
Gerald Sroufe, American Educational Research Association
Miron Straf, National Research Council
Francie Streich, Spencer Foundation
Karen Studwell, American Psychological Association
Bridget Thomas, American Educational Research Association
Kevon Tucker-Seeley, Education Development Center, Inc.
Andrew White, National Center for Education Statistics, U.S. 
Department of Education
Dennis White, George Washington University
P. Jonathon White, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
Steven Winnick, Nelson Mullins Riley & Scarborough
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93
Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of 
 Planning Committee Members
Felice J. Levine 
(Chair) 
is executive director of the American Educational 
Research Association. Previously, she was executive of˜cer of the Ameri
-can Sociological Association from 1991 to 2002.
  Her research specialties 
include children and youth and the dynamics underlying their social 
development.
  She also has done considerable work on research and sci
-ence policy issues, academic and scienti˜c professions, and the ethics of 
research.
  She is a member of the executive committee of the Consortium 
of Social Science Associations and served as chair from 1997 to 2000.
  She 
serves on the advisory committee of the National Consortium on Violence 
Research and the Research Advisory Committee for the American Bar 
Foundation.
  She also chairs the Social and Behavioral Sciences Working 
Group on Human Research Protections and served in 2001-2002 on the 
National Human Research Protections Advisory Committee. She is a fel
-low of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the 
American Psychological Society and is a past president of the Law and 
Society Association. She has an A.B. in sociology and A.M. and Ph.D. 
degrees in psychology (social), all from the University of Chicago.
Robert F. Boruch 
is university trustee chair professor of education and 
professor of statistics at the Wharton School of the University of Penn
-sylvania. He is codirector of the Center for Research and Evaluation 
of Social Policy and codirector of the
 Policy Research, Evaluation, and 
Measurement Program, both in the Graduate School of Education. He has 
served on advisory committees for the U.S. Department of Education, the 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 PROTECTING STUDENT RECORDS
National Institutes of Health, and many other federal agencies. He is also 
on the advisory boards for the Coalition for Evidence-Based Policy and 
the Society for Research on Educational Effectiveness and serves on the 
editorial board of 
Evaluation Re
view
 and other journals. He is an elected 
fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and of the Ameri
-can Statistical Association and a lifetime national associate of the National 
Academies. His work focuses on research methods for determining the 
severity and scope of social and education problems, implementation of 
programs and policies, and estimating the effects and the effectiveness 
of interventions. He contributes to work on randomized trials in educa
-tion and training, welfare reform, health services, housing, and crime 
and justice, with a particular interest in the assessment or improvement 
of programs sponsored by federal agencies in the United States and by 
private foundations. He has a B.E. from Stevens Institute of Technology 
and a Ph.D. from Iowa State University.
Helen F. Ladd
 is the Edgar Thompson professor of public policy stud
-ies and professor of economics at Duke University. Most of her current 
research focuses on education policy. At the National Research Council, 
she cochaired the Committee on Education Finance, which issued two 
volumes: Equity and Adequacy in Education Finance
 and 
Making Money Mat
-ter: Financing America™s Schools
. She has written articles on charter schools, 
school-based accountability, market-based reforms in education, parental 
choice and competition, and a series of papers on teacher quality and 
student achievement. Currently she is continuing her research on teacher 
labor markets and teacher quality using North Carolina data as well as 
on various issues related to charter schools and parental choice of schools. 
Ladd has also written extensively on the ˜scal implications of growth, 
property taxation, education ˜nance, tax and expenditure limitations, 
intergovernmental aid, state economic development, and the ˜scal prob
-lems of U.S. cities. She has been active in the National Tax Association 
(serving as president in 1993-1994) and the Association for Public Policy 
and Management and has consulted on tax policy and intergovernmental 
relations for all three levels of government. She has a B.A. from Wellesley 
College, an M.A. from the London School of Economics, and a Ph.D. in 
economics from Harvard University.
Martin Orland
 is director of evaluation and policy research at WestEd, 
a research and development organization specializing in education and 
human services. He leads a nationwide staff of methodologists, research 
scientists, content experts, and evaluators, with the responsibility for 
ensuring that their work employs the highest standards of methodological 
rigor and provides usable knowledge to decision makers. Previously he 
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 95
served as director of the Center for Education at the National Research 
Council. Orland has authored a number of publications for both academic 
journals and government and has regularly presented at international, 
national, and regional conferences in the ˜elds of education and human 
development. He currently serves on the editorial board for 
Education 
Finance and Policy
 and has had two stints on the board of directors of the 
American Education Finance Association. He has B.A. and M.A. degrees, 
both in political science, from Brooklyn College, City University of New 
York, and a Ph.D. in social science from Syracuse University.
Jay Pfeiffer
 is deputy commissioner in the Division of Accountability, 
Research, and Measurement of the Florida Department of Education. He 
has been employed in the Florida government since 1972, beginning with 
the State Manpower Council. In 1984, he started the Florida Education 
and Training Placement Information Program, a ˜rst-of-its-kind program 
linking data from multiple administrative data resources for accountabil
-ity purposes. In the Department of Education, he was the director of edu
-cation information and accountability in the Division of Accountability, 
Research, and Management and, in February 2005, was promoted to his 
current position. He has a B.S. in chemistry/biology from the University 
of Florida, with graduate work in bacteriology and anthropology.
Barbara Schneider
 is the John A. Hannah distinguished university pro
-fessor in the College of Education and the Department of Sociology at 
Michigan State University. She worked for 18 years at the University of 
Chicago, holding positions as professor in sociology and human develop
-ment and as a senior researcher at the National Opinion Research Center 
(NORC). She continues to hold an appointment as a university faculty 
research associate at the University of Chicago and as senior fellow at 
NORC, where she is the principal investigator of the Data Research and 
Development Center. She also continues to direct the Alfred P. Sloan 
Center on Parents, Children, and Work at Michigan State University, 
an initiative that began at the University of Chicago, where she was 
codirector. She uses a sociological lens to understand societal conditions 
and interpersonal interactions that create norms and values that enhance 
human and social capital. Her research focuses on how the social contexts 
of schools and families in˚uence the academic and social well-being of 
adolescents as they move into adulthood. She has published 12 books and 
numerous articles and reports on family, the social context of schooling, 
and the sociology of knowledge. She is the current editor of 
Sociology of 
Education
. She has B.S. and M.A. degrees from National Louis University 
and a Ph.D. from Northwestern University.
Protecting Student Records and Facilitating Education Research: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.