DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12572Computational Technology for Effective Health Care:Immediate Steps and Strategic Directions120 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38699-9 | DOI 10.17226/12572William W. Stead and Herbert S. Lin, Editors; Committee on Engaging the ComputerScience Research Community in Health Care Informatics; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilComputational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.William W. Stead and Herbert S. Lin, 
Editors
Committee on Engaging the Computer Science Research Community in 
 Health Care Informatics
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences







Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Library of Medicine and 
the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, National Insti
-tutes of Health (Award Number N01-OD-04-2139, Task Order 182); the National 
Science Foundation (Award Number CNS-0638373); the Vanderbilt University 
Medical Center; Partners HealthCare System; the Robert Wood Johnson Foun
-dation (Award Number 59392); and the Commonwealth Fund (Award Number 
20070083). Any opinions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily re˜ect the views of the agencies and organizations that provided 
support for the project.
International Standard Book Number 13:
 978-0-309-13050-9
International Standard Book Number 10:
 0-309-13050-6
Library of Congress Control Number:
 2009921035
Copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20055
800/624-6242
202/334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2009 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˚t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˚c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˚c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 
Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˚c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE
 ON
 ENGAGING THE COMPUTER SCIENCE 
RESEARCH COMMUNITY IN HEALTH CARE INFORMATICS
WILLIAM W. STEAD, Vanderbilt University, 
Chair
G. OCTO BARNETT, Massachusetts General Hospital
SUSAN B. DAVIDSON, University of Pennsylvania
ERIC DISHMAN, Intel Corporation
DEBORAH L. ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
ALON HALEVY, Google, Inc.
DONALD A. NORMAN, Northwestern University
IDA SIM, University of California, San Francisco School of Medicine
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc. 
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ANDRIES VAN DAM, Brown University
GIO WIEDERHOLD, Stanford University
Staff
HERBERT S. LIN, Study Director (and Chief Scientist, CSTB)
DAVID PADGHAM, Associate Program Of˚cer (through May 2008)
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant (from May 2008)
JANICE M. SABUDA, Senior Program Assistant (through March 2008)
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
Chair
ERIC
 B
ENHAMOU
, Benhamou Global Ventures, LLC
FREDERICK R. CHANG, University of Texas, Austin
WILLIAM DALLY, Stanford University
MARK E. DEAN, IBM Almaden Research Center
DEBORAH L. ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
JOAN FEIGENBAUM, Yale University
KEVIN KAHN, Intel Corporation
JAMES KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation
MICHAEL KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
RANDY H. KATZ, University of California, Berkeley
SARA KIESLER, Carnegie Mellon University
TERESA H. MENG, Stanford University
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research
FRED B. SCHNEIDER, Cornell University
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research and Columbia University
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc.
WILLIAM W. STEAD, Vanderbilt University
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC
PETER WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial Associate
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist, CSTB
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˚cer
MORGAN MOTTO, Senior Program Assistant
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its Web site at http://www.cstb.
org, write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., 
Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the CSTB at cstb@
nas.edu.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
It is essentially axiomatic that modern health care is an information- 
and knowledge-intensive enterprise.
1 The information collected in health 
care includesŠamong other thingsŠmedical records of individual 
patients (both paper and electronic, spread across many different health 
care organizations), laboratory test results, information about treatment 
protocols and drug interactions, and a variety of ˚nancial and administra
-tive information. Knowledge resides in the published medical literature, 
in the higher-order cognitive processes of individual clinicians and care 
providers, and in the processes of health care organizations that facilitate 
the provision of care. 
Whereas the practices of 20th century health care were based largely 
on paper, there is now a broad consensus that realizing an improved 
21st century vision of health care will require intensive use of informa
-tion technology to acquire, manage, analyze, and disseminate health care 
information and knowledge. Accordingly, the Administration and Con
-gress have been moving to encourage the adoption, connectivity, and 
interoperability of health care information technology. President George 
W. Bush called for nationwide use of electronic medical records by 2014,
2 1Institute of Medicine and National Academy of Engineering, 
Building a Better Deli
very Sys
-tem: A New Engineering/Health Care Partnership
, The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 2005, available at http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=11378.
Commission on Systemic Interoperability, 
Ending the Document Game
, U.S. Government 
Printing Of˚ce, Washington, D.C., 2005, available at http://endingthedocumentgame.
gov/.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 PREFACE
and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is involved in 
various aspects of achieving this goal.
3 The National Library of Medicine launched this study to support the 
engagement of individuals from the computer science research commu
-nity in meeting two challenges posed by health care information technol
-ogy: identifying how today™s computer science-based methodologies and 
approaches might be applied more effectively to health care, and explicat
-ing how the limitations in these methodologies and approaches might be 
overcome through additional research and development.
The study described in this report was conducted by an interdisci
-plinary committee of experts in biomedical informatics, computer science 
and information technology (including databases, security, networking, 
human-computer interaction, and large-scale system deployments), and 
health care providers (e.g., physicians who have worked with information 
technologies). Appendix A provides brief biographical information on the 
members and the staff of the Committee on Engaging the Computer Sci
-ence Research Community in Health Care Informatics.
The committee™s work focused primarily on understanding the nature 
and impact of the information technology investments made by major 
health care organizations. By design, the committee™s effort was both 
time- and resource-limited, and thus the primary function of this report is 
to lay the groundwork for future efforts that can explore in a second phase 
some of the identi˚ed questions and issues in greater detail. Perhaps most 
importantly, this study does not touch, except in the most peripheral way, 
on a myriad of complex social, political, and economic issues that compli
-cate the task of health care reform.
For example, although this report emphasizes the role of the clini
-cian, there are other important decision makers in the health care system, 
including patients, family caregivers, and other health care professionals, 
whose health care information technology needs the report addresses 
only peripherally. Similarly, although the data-gathering efforts of the 
committee were focused primarily on major health care organizations, 
the majority of health care is delivered in small-practice settings (of two 
to ˚ve physicians) that lack signi˚cant organizational support.
  These 
omissions do not diminish the signi˚cance of the committee™s efforts and 
recommendations, although they do point to the need for more work to 
understand health care information technology (IT) needs more thor
-oughly in the areas that the committee did not examine carefully.
3Institute of Medicine, 
Opportunities for Coordination and Clarity to Ad
vance the National 
Health Information Agenda
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007, available 
at http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12048.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ix
Other important issues omitted in this report that are worthy of seri
-ous attention in follow-on reports include the explicit inclusion of instruc
-tion in health/biomedical informatics and health care IT in various forms 
of health care education (e.g., medical and nursing school curricula); legal 
and cultural barriers to sharing information among various care provid
-ers; the development of a strategic plan or roadmap that articulates the 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats to the development 
of health care IT; standards-development processes in the health care 
IT industry that might facilitate interoperability; and issues related to 
personal health records for use by patients, the relationship of education 
in computer science to health care and biomedical informatics (and vice 
versa), and organizational support for health care providers that operate 
on a small scale.
The evidentiary basis for this study involved several threads. The 
primary observational evidence was derived from committee site visits to 
eight medical centers around the country (Appendix B provides the agen
-das for the site visits that the committee conducted). Obviously, a com
-prehensive view of the current state of the art in the nation™s health care 
information technology cannot be derived from eight site visitsŠthus, 
the organizations visited must be regarded as a sampling of the state of 
practice throughout the country. Care was taken to ensure that the site 
visits were to medical centers that varied along important dimensions: 
governance and ownership (government-operated, non-pro˚t, for-pro˚t), 
academic and community, and in-house technology development and 
vendor-supplied technology. The centers visited shared one character
-isticŠfor the most part, they were widely acknowledged to be leaders 
in the use of IT for health care. This choice was made because the com
-mittee felt that many of the important innovations and achievements for 
health care IT would be found in organizations thought to be leaders in 
the ˚eld.
The ˚ndings from the site visits are presented in Appendix C as a 
table of observations, consequences, and opportunities for action. The 
observations are de-identi˚ed generalizations of detail from multiple 
sites. The consequences and opportunities for action re˜ect the commit
-tee™s judgment. In the main text of the committee™s report, observations 
from site visits are cross-referenced where appropriate with the notation 
CxOy. C
x refers to Category 
x of the committee™s observations as grouped 
in Table C.1 (which lists six categories of observations), and O
y refers to 
a particular observation as numbered in Table C.1 (which includes a total 
of 25 observations).
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
The ˚ndings from the site visits were combined with other eviden
-tiary threads: 
Ł Pre
vious work of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) and the National 
Academy of Engineering
. Rather than starting from scratch, the committee 
adopted as a point of departure for its work the IOM series ﬁCrossing the 
Quality ChasmﬂŠa vision of 21st century health care that is safe, effective, 
patient-centered, timely, ef˚cient, and equitable.
Ł Selecti
ve literature re
view
. In many instances in this report, a claim 
is made that is based not on direct observation but rather on one or more 
papers in the scienti˚c literature.
Ł Committee expertise
. The committee included a number of indi
-viduals with substantial clinical and business expertise in medical centers 
similar to those visited by the committee and other similar settings. Expe
-riences from these individuals were added to this report as needed.
Eight site visits cannot support development of a statistically sig
-ni˚cant set of examples and illustrationsŠnevertheless, the committee 
believes that its observations and conclusions meet the more important 
test of substantive signi˚cance, especially since they arose as a result of 
visits to organizations regarded as among the best in the country in apply
-ing IT to solve health care problems. 
Finally, although the committee™s charge (Box P.1) calls attention to 
the computer science research community, the health/biomedical infor
-matics research community is also a key player for doing the necessary 
research. The ˚eld of health/biomedical informatics emerged from medi
-cal informatics, which was described in 1990 by Greenes and Shortliffe as 
ﬁthe ˚eld that concerns itself with the cognitive, information processing, 
and communication tasks of medical practice, education, and research, 
including the information science and the technology to support these 
tasks.ﬂ
4 ﬁHealth informaticsﬂ and ﬁbiomedical informaticsﬂ are more 
recent terms that acknowledge the increasing importance of informatics 
for aspects of health beyond medicine and for the basic biological sciences 
in medicine.
Computer science as a discipline does not subsume health/biomedical 
informatics, although computer scientists can and do make major contri
-butions to that ˚eld. Health/biomedical informatics is more than medical 
computer science, drawing also on the decision, cognitive, and informa
-tion sciences as well as engineering, organizational theory, and sociology 
4Robert Greenes and Edward H. Shortliffe, ﬁMedical Informatics: An Emerging Academic 
Discipline and Institutional Priority,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 263(8):1114-
1120, 1990.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xi
with a health and biomedical emphasis that is largely lacking in the world 
of computer science research. In the context of this report, specialists in 
health/biomedical informatics can serve a bridging function between the 
computer science community and the world of biomedicine with which 
computer science researchers are largely unfamiliar.
The committee thanks the National Library of Medicine, the National 
Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering, the National Science 
Foundation, the Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Partners Health
-Care System, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the Common
-wealth Fund for the ˚nancial support needed to conduct this study. 
For providing information and hosting site visits for the commit
-tee, the committee expresses its appreciation to a number of organiza
-tions: Partners HealthCare (David Bates, Henry Chueh, Anuj Dalal, John 
Glaser, and Jeff Schnipper), the University of Pittsburgh Medical Cen
-ter (Jocelyn Benes, Jody Cervenak, Jacque Dailey, Steven Docimo, Tom 
Box P.1 Study Statement of Task
The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board will conduct a 2-
phase study to examine information technology (IT) problems faced by the health 
care system in realizing the emerging vision of patient-centered, evidence-based, 
ef˜cient health care using electronic health records and other IT. The study will 
focus on the foundation issue of the electronic health record.
In phase 1, the committee will conduct a series of site visits to a variety of 
health care delivery sites. A short (roughly 5000 word) phase 1 report, based 
largely on the site visits, will assess the match between today™s health information 
systems and current plans for using electronic health records nationwide, identify 
important information management problems that could be solved relatively eas
-ily and inexpensively (i.e., where short payback periods and quick improvements 
would be possible) by today™s technologies, provide (non-comprehensive) illustra
-tions of how today™s knowledge about computer science and IT could be used to 
provide immediate short-term bene˜ts to the health care system, and lay out im
-portant questions that future reports (from this or other studies) should address.
In phase 2, the committee will prepare a phase 2 report identifying technical 
areas where additional computer science and IT research is needed to further 
advance the state of the art of health care IT; priorities for research that will yield 
signi˜cantly increased medical effectiveness or reduced costs; information man
-agement problems whose solutions require new practices and policies; and public 
policy questions that need to be resolved to allow such research to proceed. 
Both reports are intended to identify technical solutions to advance health 
care IT, to expose the information technology and computer science research 
communities to important technical problems, and to provide a foundation for other 
studies related to health care informatics.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 PREFACE
Dongilli, William Fera, Kim Gracey, Robert Kormos, James Levin, Daniel 
Martich, Ed McCallister, Tami Merryman, Sean O™Rourke, Vivek Reddy, 
Paul Sikora, Michele Steimer, and Jeff Szymanski), HCA Tristar (David 
Archer, Darryl Campbell, Kimberly Lewis, Annette Matlock, Jon Perlin, 
Melody Rose, Ruth Westcott, and Kelly Wood), Intermountain Healthcare 
(Lynn Elstein, Stan Huff, Marc Probst, and Brent Wallace), the Palo Alto 
Medical Foundation (Albert Chan, Steve Hansen, Neil Knutsen, Charlotte 
Mitchell, Tomas Moran, Gil Radtke, and Paul Tang), the University of 
California, San Francisco (Sharon Friend, Gail Harden, Michael Kamerick, 
Jon Showstack, and Deborah Yano-Fong), Vanderbilt University Medi
-cal Center (Rashid M. Ahmad, John Doulis, Mark Frisse, David Greg
-ory, Ken Holroyd, Sara Hutchison, Marsha Kedigh, Randy Miller, Neal 
Patel, Corey Slovis, and Jack Starmer), San Francisco General Hospital 
(Geoff Manley), and the Department of Veterans Affairs (Stanlie Daniels, 
Neil Eldridge, Neil Evans, Ross Fletcher, Raya Kheirbek, Tracie Loving, 
Joaquin Martinez, Linwood Moore, Fernando O. Rivera, and Kenneth 
Steadman). 
A number of individuals also briefed the committee during open ses
-sions: B. Alton Brantley (principal, the CCI Group), Kenneth D. Mandl 
(Harvard Medical School and Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences 
and Technology), Greg Walton (HIMSS Analytics), Denis Cortese (Mayo 
Clinic), Peter Neupert (Microsoft), Scott Wallace (National Coalition for 
Health Care IT), Janet Corrigan (National Quality Forum), Alicia A. Brad
-ford (Of˚ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Tech
-nology), Peter J. Fabri (University of South Florida and Northwestern 
University), and Gina Grumke and Monique Lambert (Intel). Betsy Hum
-phreys and Donald A.B. Lindberg from the National Library of Medicine 
provided the charge to the committee at its ˚rst meeting.
The committee also appreciates the efforts of David Padgham, associ
-ate program of˚cer, who left the National Research Council in May 2008, 
in organizing these site visits and other information-gathering sessions 
of the committee. Finally, the committee thanks Herbert Lin, study direc
-tor and chief scientist of the Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board, for his counsel throughout the project and his effort in developing 
the report. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
xiii
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˚dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Gregory D. Abowd, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Alton Brantley, Cardinal Consulting, Inc.,
Janet Corrigan, National Quality Forum,
Peter J. Fabri, University of South Florida College of Medicine,
Chuck Geschke, Adobe Systems,
Sara Kiesler, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Isaac Kohane, Harvard University,
Prasenjit Mitra, Pennsylvania State University,
Peter Neupert, Microsoft Corporation,
Ted Shortliffe, University of Arizona College of Medicine, Phoenix, 
   
and
Lee Sproull, New York University.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˚nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by David G. 
Hoel of the Medical University of South Carolina and Victor Vyssotsky. 
Appointed by the National Research Council, they were responsible for 
making certain that an independent examination of this report was car
-ried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˚nal con
-tent of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the 
institution.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvContents
SUMMARY
  
11 HEALTH
 C
ARE
 IN
 THE
 U
NITED
 S
TATES
 T
ODAY
 13
 1.1
 The Tasks and Work˜ow of Health Care, 14
 1.2
 The Institution and Economics of Health Care, 15
 1.3
  
Current Implementations of Health Care Information 
Technology, 17
 1.4
 Trends, 17
 1.5
 The Structure of This Report, 18
2 A V
ISION
 FOR
 21
st
 C
ENTURY
 H
EALTH
 C
ARE
  19
 AND
 W
ELLNESS
3 CROSSING
 THE
 H
EALTH
 C
ARE
 IT C
HASM
 25
4 PRINCIPLES
 FOR
 S
UCCESS
 30
 4.1
 Evolutionary Change, 31
  
4.1.1
  
Principle 1: Focus on Improvements in CareŠ
 Technology Is Secondary, 31
  
4.1.2
  
Principle 2: Seek Incremental Gain from Incremental 
 Effort, 32
  
4.1.3
  
Principle 3: Record Available Data So That They Can Be 
Used for Care, Process Improvement, and Research, 32
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvi CONTENTS
  
4.1.4
  
Principle 4: Design for Human and Organization
 Factors, 32
  
4.1.5
  
Principle 5: Support the Cognitive Functions of All 
Caregivers, Including Health Professionals, Patients, and 
Their Families, 33
 4.2
 Radical Change, 33
  
4.2.1
  
Principle 6: Architect Information and Work˜ow Systems 
to Accommodate Disruptive Change, 33
  
4.2.2
  
Principle 7: Archive Data for Subsequent 
 Re-interpretation, 34
  
4.2.3
  
Principle 8: Seek and Develop Technologies That Identify 
and Eliminate Ineffective Work Processes, 34
  
4.2.4
  
Principle 9: Seek and Develop Technologies That Clarify 
the Context of Data, 35
5 RESEARCH
 C
HALLENGES
 36
 5.1
  
An Overarching Research Grand Challenge: 
 Patient-Centered Cognitive Support, 39
 5.2
 Other Representative Research Challenges, 45
  
5.2.1
 Modeling, 45
  
5.2.2
 Automation, 46
  
5.2.3
 Data Sharing and Collaboration, 49
  
5.2.4
 Data Management at Scale, 53
  
5.2.5
  
Automated Full Capture of Physician-Patient 
 Interactions, 56
6 RECOMMENDATIONS
 59
 6.1
 Government, 60
 6.2
 The Computer Science Community, 65
 6.3
 Health Care Organizations, 66
7 CONCLUDING
 T
HOUGHTS
 68
APPENDI
XES
A Committee Members and Staff
 71
B Meeting and Site Visit Agendas and Site Visit Methodology
 80
C  
Observations, Consequences, and Opportunities: The Site 
 93
 Visits of the Committee
 Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary
BACKGROUND AND INTRODUCTION
Health care is an information- and knowledge-intensive enterprise. 
In the future, health care providers will need to rely increasingly on 
information technology (IT) to acquire, manage, analyze, and dissemi
-nate health care information and knowledge. Many studies have identi
-˚ed de˚ciencies in the current health care system, including inadequate 
care, super˜uous or incorrect care, immense inef˚ciencies and hence high 
costs, and inequities in access to care. In response, federal policy makers 
have tended to focus on the creation and interchange of electronic health 
information and the use of IT as critical infrastructural improvements 
whose deployments help to address some (but by no means all) of these 
de˚ciencies.
Any systematic effort to change the medical and health information 
management paradigm from one based on paper to one based on IT must 
address two basic challenges: using the best technology available today 
to build and deploy systems in the short term and identifying the gaps 
between the best of today™s technology and what is ultimately needed 
to improve health care. The ˚rst provides opportunities for near-term 
improvement; the second informs basic research and the design of future 
systems. 
The present study was chartered by its sponsors to help elucidate 
how the computer science research community can help to meet both of 
these challenges. Members of this community are familiar with the newest 
ideas in computer science and are thus in a position both to offer insight 
1Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
into how they might apply to the health care problems of today and to 
identify opportunities for new advances. However, the study described 
in this report was conducted by an interdisciplinary committee of experts 
not only from the computer science community (including members with 
expertise in ˚elds such as databases, security, networking, human-com
-puter interaction, and large-scale system deployments), but also from 
health/biomedical informatics and from health care per se (e.g., physi
-cians who have worked with information technologies) to provide a suit
-able grounding in the realities of and thinking in these disciplines. 
By design, the effort of the Committee on Engaging the Computer 
Science Research Community in Health Care Informatics was both time- 
and resource-limited. In its work, the committee focused primarily on 
understanding the nature and impact of the IT investments made by 
major health care organizations. Thus, this study does not touch except 
in the most peripheral way on a myriad of complex social, political, and 
economic issues that complicate the task of health care reform.
The evidentiary basis for this study involves several threads. The 
primary observational evidence was derived from committee site visits 
to eight medical centers around the countryŠfor the most part acknowl
-edged leaders in applying IT to health careŠon the theory that many of 
the important innovations and achievements for health care IT would be 
found in such organizations thought to be leaders in the ˚eld. In addi
-tion, this study built on previous work of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) 
and the National Academy of Engineering on health care (speci˚cally, the 
committee adopted as a point of departure the IOM series ﬁCrossing the 
Quality Chasmﬂ
1) and on a selective literature review. 
These multiple sources of evidenceŠviewed from the committee™s 
perspectiveŠsuggest that current efforts aimed at the nationwide deploy
-ment of health care IT will not be suf˚cient to achieve the vision of 21st 
century health care, and may even set back the cause if these efforts 
continue wholly without change from their present course. Speci˚cally, 
success in this regard will require greater emphasis on providing cogni
-tive support for health care providers and for patients and family caregiv
-ers on the part of computer science and health/biomedical informatics 
researchers. Vendors, health care organizations, and government will 
also have to pay attention to cognitive support, which refers to computer-
based tools and systems that offer clinicians and patients assistance for 
thinking about and solving problems related to speci˚c instances of health 
care. This point is the central conclusion of this report. 
1Institute of Medicine, 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 
21
st Cen
-tury
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005, available at http://www.nap.
edu/catalog.php?record_id=10027.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3HEALTH
 C
ARE
 IN
 THE
 U
NITED
 S
TATES
 T
ODAY
It is widely recognized that today™s health care fails to deliver the 
most effective care and suffers substantially as a result of medical errors. 
In addition, many medical interventions undertaken today are in fact 
not necessary. These persistent problems do not re˜ect incompetence on 
the part of health care professionalsŠrather, they are a consequence of 
the inherent intellectual complexity of health care taken as a whole and 
a medical care environment that has not been adequately structured to 
help clinicians avoid mistakes or to systematically improve their decision 
making and practice. Administrative and organizational fragmentation, 
together with complex, distributed, and unclear authority and responsi
-bility, further complicates the health care environment. 
Many of the relevant factors can be classi˚ed largely into three dis
-tinct areas: the tasks and work˜ow of health care, the institution and 
economics of health care, and the nature of health care IT as it is currently 
implemented.
Ł The tasks and work˜ow of health care
. Health care decisions often 
require reasoning under high degrees of uncertainty about a patient™s 
medical state and the effectiveness of past and future treatments for 
the particular patient. In addition, medical work˜ows are often complex 
and non-transparent and are characterized by many interruptions, inad
-equately de˚ned roles and responsibilities, poorly kept and managed 
schedules, and little documentation of steps, expectations, and outcomes. 
Complex care is increasingly provided to patients in a time- and resource-
pressured environment because of the need to contain costs.
Ł The institution and economics of health care
. The large number of 
health care payers and coverage plans, each with its own rules for cover
-age, complicates administration. In addition, incentives for payment are 
often distorted or perverse, leading (for example) to more generous com
-pensation for medical procedures than for communication with patients 
or for diagnosis or preventive care. Patients and providers must also navi
-gate a confusing landscape of tertiary care centers, community hospitals, 
clinics, primary and specialist doctors and other providers, payers, health 
plans, and information sources.
Ł Current implementations of health care IT
. Many health care organiza
-tions do spend considerable money on IT, but the IT is often implemented 
in systems in a monolithic fashion that makes even small changes hard to 
introduce. Furthermore, IT applications appear designed largely to auto
-mate tasks or business processes. They are often designed in ways that 
simply mimic existing paper-based forms and provide little support for 
the cognitive tasks of clinicians or the work˜ow of the people who must 
actually use the system. Moreover, these applications do not take advan
-Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
tage of human-computer interaction principles, leading to poor designs 
that can increase the chance of error, add to rather than reduce work, and 
compound the frustrations of executing required tasks. As a result, these 
applications sometimes increase workload, and they can introduce new 
forms of error that are dif˚cult to detect.
A number of trends will put additional pressure for change on the 
health care environment. These trends include an aging population and a 
corresponding increase in the complexity and weight of the disease bur
-den, the emergence of genome-based personalized medicine, a larger role 
for patients in managing their own health care, and yet greater emphasis 
on ef˚ciency and cost control in health care. As a result, health care pro
-cesses will become more complex and more time-constrained, and the 
demands placed on care providers will become more intense.
A V
ISION
 FOR
 21
st
 C
ENTURY
 H
EALTH
 C
ARE
 AND
 W
ELLNESS
The IOM de˚nes health care quality as ﬁthe degree to which health 
services for individuals and populations increase the likelihood of desired 
health outcomes and are consistent with current professional knowl
-edge,ﬂ
2 and in recent years, a broad consensus has emerged on the future 
health care environment. In the words of the IOM, health care should be 
safe, effective, patient-centered, timely, ef˚cient, and equitable.
3 Achiev
-ing this vision entails many different factors (e.g., systemic changes in 
how to pay for health care, an emphasis on disease prevention rather than 
disease treatment), but none is more important than the effective use of 
information.
The committee identi˚ed seven information-intensive aspects of the 
IOM™s vision for 21st century health care: 
Ł Comprehensive data on patients™ conditions, treatments, and 
outcomes;
Ł Cognitive support for health care professionals and patients to 
help integrate patient-speci˚c data where possible and account for any 
uncertainties that remain;
Ł Cognitive support for health care professionals to help inte
-grate evidence-based practice guidelines and research results into daily 
practice;
2Institute of Medicine, 
Medicare: A Strategy for Quality Assurance
, National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 1990, available at http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=1547.
3Institute of Medicine, 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 
21
st Cen
-tury
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005, available at http://www.nap.
edu/catalog.php?record_id=10027.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5Ł Instruments and tools that allow clinicians to manage a portfolio 
of patients and to highlight problems as they arise both for an individual 
patient and within populations;
Ł Rapid integration of new instrumentation, biological knowledge, 
treatment modalities, and so on into a ﬁlearningﬂ health care system that 
encourages early adoption of promising methods but also analyzes all 
patient experience as experimental data;
Ł Accommodation of growing heterogeneity of locales for provision 
of care, including home instrumentation for monitoring and treatment, 
lifestyle integration, and remote assistance; and 
Ł Empowerment of patients and their families in effective manage
-ment of health care decisions and their implementation, including per
-sonal health records, education about the individual™s conditions and 
options, and support of timely and focused communication with profes
-sional health care providers.
CROSSING
 THE
 H
EALTH
 C
ARE
 IT C
HASM
The committee observed a number of success stories in the imple
-mentation of health care IT. But although seeing these successes was 
encouraging, they fall far short, even in the aggregate, of what is needed 
to support the IOM™s vision of quality health care. IT-related activities of 
health professionals observed by the committee in these organizations 
were rarely well integrated into clinical practice. Health care IT was rarely 
used to provide clinicians with evidence-based decision support and 
feedback; to support data-driven process improvement; or to link clinical 
care and research. Health care IT rarely provided an integrative view of 
patient data. Care providers spent a great deal of time in electronically 
documenting what they did for patients, but these providers often said 
that they were entering the information to comply with regulations or to 
defend against lawsuits, rather than because they expected someone to 
use it to improve clinical care.
  Health care IT implementation time lines 
were often measured in decades, and most systems were poorly or incom
-pletely integrated into practice. 
Although the use of health care IT is an integral element of health 
care in the 21st century, the current focus of the health care IT efforts that 
the committee observed is not suf˚cient to drive the kind of change in 
health care that is truly needed. The nation faces a health care IT chasm 
that is analogous to the quality chasm highlighted by the IOM over the 
past decade. So that the nation can cross the health care IT chasm, the 
committee advocates re-balancing the portfolio of investments in health 
care IT to place a greater emphasis on providing cognitive support for 
health care providers, patients, and family caregivers; observing proven 
principles for success in designing and implementing IT; and accelerating 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
research related to health care in the computer and social sciences and in 
health/biomedical informatics. 
PRINCIPLES
 FOR
 S
UCCESS
Change in the health care system can be viewed from two equally 
important perspectivesŠthose of evolutionary and of radical change. 
Evolutionary change means continuous, iterative improvement of exist
-ing processes sustained over long periods of time. Radical change means 
qualitatively new ways of conceptualizing and solving health and health 
care problems and revolutionary ways of addressing those problems. 
Any approach to health care IT should enable and anticipate both types 
of change since they work together over time. 
The committee identi˚ed ˚ve principles related to evolutionary 
change and four related to radical change to guide successful use of health 
care IT to support a 21st century vision of health care. These principles 
are elaborated in Chapter 4.
Principles for Evolutionary Change
1.
 Focus on improvements in careŠtechnology is secondary.
2.
 Seek incremental gain from incremental effort.
3.
  
Record available data so that today™s biomedical knowledge can be 
used to interpret the data to drive care, process improvement, and 
research. 
4.
  
Design for human and organizational factors so that social and 
institutional processes will not pose barriers to appropriately tak
-ing advantage of technology.
5.
  
Support the cognitive functions of all caregivers, including health 
professionals, patients, and their families.
Principles for Radical Change
6.
  
Architect information and work˜ow systems to accommodate dis
-ruptive change.
7.
  
Archive data for subsequent re-interpretation, that is, in anticipa
-tion of future advances in biomedical knowledge that may change 
today™s interpretation of data and advances in computer science 
that may provide new ways of extracting meaningful and useful 
knowledge from existing data stores.
8.
  
Seek and develop technologies that identify and eliminate ineffec
-tive work processes.
9.
 Seek and develop technologies that clarify the context of data. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7RESEARCH
 C
HALLENGES
 There are deep intellectual research challenges at the nexus of health 
care and computer science (and health/biomedical informatics as well). 
The committee found it useful to conceptualize necessary research efforts 
along two separate dimensions. The ˚rst dimension is the extent to which 
new fundamental, general-purpose research is needed. Some problems 
in health care can be seen as having solutions on a relatively clear path 
forward from existing technologies (e.g., aggregation of patient health 
care information into a common data repository), whereas others are 
genuinely advanced problems (e.g., aggregation of patient health care 
information into a trustworthy database with explicit representation of 
uncertainty). (Also, note that this ˚rst dimension aligns to a large degree 
with the evolutionary/radical change dichotomy described above, where 
evolutionary change can be associated with straightforward extrapolation 
of current knowledge and technology, and radical change with problem 
domains that will require successes in fundamental research.)
A second dimension is the extent to which new research speci˚c to 
health care and biomedicine is needed. This second dimension is rooted 
in the observation that some advances needed for improving health care 
are general problems in computer science (e.g., achieving high availability 
with low system management overhead), and others are highly speci˚c 
to health care (e.g., developing high-quality devices for human-computer 
interaction that do not inadvertently help to spread infection as care pro
-viders move from patient to patient).
  
This distinction is helpful because 
a broad coalition might fund and pursue the former, whereas the latter 
might be of interest to a narrower set in the health and biomedical infor
-matics communities. 
During the committee™s discussions, patient-centered cognitive sup
-port emerged as an overarching grand research challenge to focus health-
related efforts of the computer science research community, which can 
play an important role in helping to cross the health care IT chasm. 
An Overarching Research Grand Challenge: 
 Patient-Centered Cognitive Support
Much of health care is transactionalŠadmitting a patient, encoun
-tering a patient at the bedside or clinic, ordering a drug, interpreting a 
report, or handing off a patient. Yet transactions are only the operational 
expression of an understanding of the patient and a set of goals and plans 
for that patient. Clinicians have in mind a conceptual model of the patient 
re˜ecting their understanding of interacting physiological, psychological, 
societal, and other dimensions. They use new ˚ndingsŠraw dataŠto 
re˚ne their understanding of the model they are using. Then, based on 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
medical knowledge, medical logic, and mostly heuristic decision making, 
they make orders (transactions) that they hope will improve the condition 
of or even cure the (real) patient.
Today, clinicians spend a great deal of time and energy searching and 
sifting through raw data about patients and trying to integrate these data 
with their general medical knowledge to form relevant mental abstrac
-tions and associations relevant to the patient™s situation. Such sifting 
efforts force clinicians to devote precious cognitive resources to the details 
of data and make it more likely that they will overlook some important 
higher-order consideration.
The health care IT systems of today tend to squeeze all cognitive sup
-port for the clinician through the lens of health care transactions and the 
related raw data, without an underlying representation of a conceptual 
model for the patient showing how data ˚t together and which are impor
-tant or unimportant. As a result, an understanding of the patient can be 
lost amidst all the data, all the tests, and all the monitoring equipment. 
In the committee™s vision of patient-centered cognitive support, the 
clinician interacts with models and abstractions of the patient that place 
the raw data into context and synthesize them with medical knowledge 
in ways that make clinical sense for that patient. Raw data are still avail
-able, but they are not the direct focus of the clinician. These virtual patient 
models are the computational counterparts of the clinician™s conceptual 
model of a patient. They depict and simulate a theory about interac
-tions going on in the patient and enable patient-speci˚c parameterization 
and multicomponent alerts. They build on submodels of biological and 
physiological systems and also of epidemiology that take into account, 
for example, the local prevalence of diseases. The use of these mod
-els to establish clinical context would free the clinician from having to 
make direct sense of raw data, and thus he or she would have a much 
easier time de˚ning, testing, and exploring his/her own working theory. 
What links the raw data to the abstract models might be called medical 
logicŠthat is, computer-based tools that examine raw data relevant to a 
speci˚c patient and suggest their clinical implications given the context 
of the models and abstractions. Computers can then provide decision 
supportŠthat is, tools that help clinicians decide on a course of action in 
response to an understanding of the patient™s status. At the same time, 
although clinicians can work with abstractions that keep them from being 
overwhelmed by data, they must also have the ability to access the raw 
data as needed if they wish to explore the presented interpretations and 
abstractions in greater depth.
There are many challenging computer science research problems 
associated with this vision. Future clinician and patient-facing systems 
would draw on the data, information, and knowledge obtained in both 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9patient care and research to provide decision support sensitive to work
-˜ow and human factors. The decision support systems would explicitly 
incorporate patient utilities, values, and resource constraints (e.g., cost-
effectiveness analysis, value of information, and so on). They would sup
-port holistic plans, intentions, and multiple decision makers. They would 
allow users to simulate interventions on the virtual patient before doing 
them for real. These decision support systems would have transactions 
built into them to help users carry out orders, in contrast to today™s sys
-tems in which decision support is commonly an add-on to systems and 
is designed primarily for transaction processing. Rather than having data 
entered by clinicians into computer systems, the content of clinical inter
-actions would be captured in self-documenting environments with little 
or no additional effort on the part of the clinicians. (That is, an intelligent, 
sensor-rich environment would monitor clinical interactions and reduce 
sensor input to notes that document the medically signi˚cant content of 
those interactions.) 
In addition to the research challenges related to modeling the virtual 
patient and biomedical knowledge, there are challenges in modeling and 
supporting multiplayer decision making (e.g., involving family, patient, 
primary care provider, specialist, payer, and so on). Techniques to inter
-connect the components are likely to be equally challenging.
Other Representative Research Challenges
Ł Modeling
. One aspect of the virtual patient involves modeling vari
-ous subsystems within a real patient (e.g., different organs, digestive 
system, and so on) to show how they interact. One approach to modeling 
physiological subsystems in a speci˚c patient is to appropriately param
-eterize a generic model of those subsystems. But ˚nding appropriate 
parameterizations for any given model and coupling the different models 
and the data to drive them pose signi˚cant intellectual challenges. For 
example, coupling models will require a computational platform that 
can support multiple interacting components that can be combined into 
larger and more complex models. Such a platform must not only support 
parallel operation of the analytical processes but also allow assembly of 
hierarchical simulation and information structures, dynamically built, 
exploited, modi˚ed when possible on the basis of empirical data, and 
abandoned when no longer effective. 
Ł Automation
. When automated systems are deployed in an opera
-tional environment, they must work harmoniously with each other. But 
in practice, because they have been developed in isolation, they do not, 
with the result that they provide contradictory signaling and have dif
-ferent monitoring requirements and raise different safety concerns. Most 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
importantly, they raise issues of trust in these systemsŠexcessive trust 
leads personnel to believe erroneous indicators and operations, while 
inadequate trust forces them to check up on these systems, wasting valu
-able time. Overcoming these operational integration problems for auto
-mated systems remains a major challenge.
Ł Data sharing and collaboration
. The data relevant to health care are 
highly heterogeneous. To exploit such data effectively, users need to be 
able to ask queries that span multiple data sources without requiring the 
data to be standardized or requiring the user to query each single data
-base in isolation. Today, data integration usually entails a major and costly 
effort. Research challenges in this area involve data integration systems 
that are fundamentally easier to use, data integration methodologies that 
can proceed incrementally while remaining compatible with previous ver
-sions, and more ˜exible architectures for data sharing and integration. 
Ł Data management at scale
. Presuming the existence of large inte
-grated corpora of data, another major challenge is in managing those data. 
Some of the important dimensions of medical information management 
include annotation and metadata, linkage, and privacy. 
Ł Automated full capture of physician-patient interactions
. Such cap
-ture would release clinician time for more productive uses and help to 
ensure more complete and timely patient records. Some of the important 
dimensions in this problem domain include real-time transcription and 
interpretation of the dialog between patient and provider, summariza
-tion of physical interactions between patient and provider based on the 
interpretation of images recorded by various cameras in the patient care 
room (subject to appropriate privacy safeguards), and correlation of the 
information contained in the audio and visual transcripts. 
RECOMMENDATIONS
 Government
Federal and state governments play important roles as supporters of 
research, payers for health care, and stimulators for education. The com
-mittee believes that government organizationsŠespecially the federal 
governmentŠshould explicitly embrace measurable health care qual
-ity improvement as the driving rationale for its health care IT adoption 
efforts, and should shun programs that focus on promoting the adop
-tion of speci˚c clinical applications. Although this principle should not 
be taken to discourage incentives to invest in infrastructure (networks, 
workstations, administrative transaction processing systems, platforms 
for data mining, data repositories, and so on) that provides a foundation 
on which other speci˚c clinical applications can be built, a top-down focus 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11
on speci˚c clinical applications is likely to result in a premature ﬁfreezingﬂ 
of inef˚cient work˜ows and processes and to impede iterative change. 
In focusing on the goal to be achieved, namely better and/or less 
expensive health care, clinicians and other providers will appropriately 
be drawn to IT only if, where, and when it can be shown to enable them 
to do their jobs more effectively. Blanket promotion of IT adoption where 
bene˚ts are not clear or are oversoldŠespecially in a non-infrastructure 
contextŠwill only waste resources and sour clinicians on the true poten
-tial of health care IT.
IT can be a fundamental enabler for both large-scale and small-scale 
improvement efforts. Because many health care groups have capacities 
for only a few large-scale improvement methods at a time, small-scale 
optimization is an important complement. An example of a small-scale 
optimization would be the use of a guideline alert system that enables 
individual physicians and/or their clinical teams to continually target 
areas of practice for self-improvement on guideline-concordant care. But 
for the most part, the health care IT available in today™s market is not 
well suited to support small-scale optimization, which requires applica
-tions that are rapidly customizable in the ˚eld by end users. Federally 
inspired or supported initiatives that incentivize health care organizations 
to achieve iterative small-scale optimization and subsequent translation 
of successes to a larger scale are likely to help stimulate the creation of a 
new market for these customizable applications.
This analysis leads to six important recommendations for the federal 
government:
Ł Incentivize clinical performance gains rather than acquisition of IT 
per se. 
Ł Encourage initiatives to empower iterative process improvement 
and small-scale optimization. 
Ł Encourage development of standards and measures of health care 
IT performance related to cognitive support for health professionals and 
patients, adaptability to support iterative process improvement, and effec
-tive use to improve quality. 
Ł Encourage interdisciplinary research in three critical areas: (a) 
organizational systems-level research into the design of health care sys
-tems, processes, and work˜ow; (b) computable knowledge structures 
and models for medicine needed to make sense of available patient data 
including preferences, health behaviors, and so on; and (c) human-com
-puter interaction in a clinical context. 
Ł Encourage (or at least do not impede) efforts by health care orga
-nizations and communities to aggregate data about health care people, 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
processes, and outcomes from all sources subject to appropriate protection 
of privacy and con˚dentiality. 
Ł Support additional education and training efforts at the intersec
-tion of health care, computer science, and health/biomedical informatics. 
Current programs of the National Library of Medicine and other institutes 
of the National Institutes of Health are exemplars of such support. 
The Computer Science Community
The computer science community can ˚nd deep, meaningful, and 
fundamental intellectual challenges in the health care problem domain (as 
indicated above). Accordingly, the committee believes that the computer 
science community should:
Ł Engage as co-equal intellectual partners and collaborators with 
health care practitioners and experts in health/biomedical informatics 
and other relevant disciplines, such as industrial and process engineering 
and design, in an ongoing relationship to understand and solve problems 
of importance to health care. 
Ł Develop institutional mechanisms within academia for rewarding 
work at the health care/computer science interface. 
Ł Support educational and retraining efforts for computer science 
researchers who want to explore research opportunities in health care. 
Health Care Organizations
The senior management in health care organizations and health care 
payers have often taken the lead in the deployment of IT for health care. 
They should: 
Ł Organize incentives, roles, work˜ow, processes, and supporting 
infrastructure to encourage, support, and respond to opportunities for 
clinical performance gains. 
Ł Balance the institution™s IT portfolio among automation, connectiv
-ity, decision support, and data-mining capabilities. 
Ł Develop the necessary data infrastructure for health care improve
-ment by aggregating data regarding people, processes, and outcomes 
from all sources.
Ł Insist that vendors supply IT that permits the separation of data 
from applications and facilitates data transfers to and from other non-
vendor applications in shareble and generally useful formats. 
Ł Seek IT solutions that yield incremental gains from incremental 
efforts.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Health Care in the United States Today
Today™s health care fails to deliver the most cost-effective care and 
suffers substantially from medical errors and waste. One often-cited data 
point is the 1998 Institute of Medicine (IOM) estimate that preventable 
medical errors lead to as many as 98,000 deaths per year in the United 
States;
1 a more recent paper from 2005 suggests that there is still much 
more work to be done to make signi˚cant progress in reducing this 
˚gure.
2 It has been estimated that, on average, Americans receive about 
half of the medical care that is recommended for them.
3 Conversely, the 
available evidence suggests that many medical interventions undertaken 
today are in fact not necessary or are recommended without adequate 
personalization.
4 For example, based on an analysis of regional disparities 
in Medicare expenditures, Fisher et al. suggest that the United States as 
a whole could save annually up to 30 percent of Medicare expenditures 
1Institute of Medicine, 
To Err Is Human: Building a Safer Health System,
 National Academy 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2000, available at 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id 
=972
8.2Lucian L. Leape and Donald M. Berwick, ﬁFive Years After 
To Err Is Human
: What Have 
We Learned?,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 293(19):2384-2390, 2005.
3Elizabeth A. McGlynn et al., ﬁThe Quality of Health Care Delivered to Adults in the 
United States,ﬂ 
New
 England Journal of Medicine
 348(26):2635-2645, 2003, available at http://
content.nejm.org/cgi/content/abstract/348/26/2635.
4K.A. Kuhn et al., ﬁInformatics and Medicine, from Molecules to Populations,ﬂ 
Methods of 
Information in Medicine
 47(4):296-317, 2008.
 13
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
with no compromise in medical outcomes or patient satisfaction;
5 if so, 
resources might be freed to implement additional coverage for the unin
-sured and/or additional best practices that are not re˜ected in today™s 
health care practices. 
For the most part, these persistent problems do not re˜ect incompe
-tence on the part of health care workers.
6 Instead, they are a consequence 
of the inherent intellectual complexity of health care taken as a whole 
and a medical care environment that provides insuf˚cient help for clini
-cians to avoid mistakes or to inform their decision making and practice. 
Administrative and organizational fragmentation, together with complex, 
distributed, and unclear authority and responsibility, further complicates 
the health care environment.
Many of the relevant factors can be classi˚ed into three distinct areas: 
the tasks and work˜ow of health care, the institution and economics of 
health care, and the nature of health care IT as it is currently implemented. 
(In this report, observations from site visits are cross-referenced where 
appropriate with the notation C
xOy. C
x refers to the Category 
x (1-6) of 
observation made in Table C.1 (Appendix C), and O
y refers by number 
(1-25) to a particular observation as listed in Table C.1. 
1.1
 THE TASKS AND WORKFLOW OF HEALTH CARE
Ł Health care decisions that require reasoning in the face of uncertainty
. Sources of uncertainty include biological variability,
7 uncertainty about 
the medications that a patient is actually taking because of missing medi
-cal records at the point of care,
8 uncertainty about the effectiveness of past 
and future treatments for the particular patient [C1O1], simple random
-ness arising from inherently stochastic processes, and imperfect models 
or understanding of causality. 
Ł Complex and non-transparent work˜ow
 [C2O6] that is characterized 
by many interruptions [C2O7], inadequately de˚ned roles and responsi
-bilities, poorly kept and managed schedules, and little documentation of 
5Elliott S. Fisher et al., ﬁThe Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending. Part 
2: Health Outcomes and Satisfaction with Care,ﬂ 
Annals of Internal Medicine
 138(4):288-298, 
February 18, 2003.
6U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Factsheet: ﬁImproving Patient Safety and 
Preventing Medical Errors,ﬂ 
HHS Factsheet
, March 25, 2002. 
7Ute Schwarz et al., ﬁGenetic Determinants of Response to Warfarin During Initial Antico
-agulation,ﬂ 
New England Journal of Medicine
 358(10):999-1008, March 6, 2008.
8 As much as 30 percent of the information an internist needs is often not accessible during 
a patient™s visit because of missing clinical information and missing laboratory reports. See 
D.G. Covell, G.C. Uman, and P.R. Manning, ﬁInformation Needs in Of˚ce Practice: Are They 
Being Met?,ﬂ 
Annals of Internal Medicine
 103(4):596-599, 1995.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE IN THE UNITED STATES TODAY
 15
steps, expectations, and outcomes.
9 Poor information ˜ow is particularly 
apparent at the interfaces of health care (e.g., when a patient transitions 
from inpatient to outpatient, when nurses change shifts) [C2O5].
Ł Increasing complexity of the care pro
vided to patients in a time-pressured 
en
vironment
.10
 The aging patient population has a growing number of 
chronic disease conditions that must be managed.
11
 According to Yarnall 
et al.,
12
 managing in accordance with the preventive guidelines relevant 
to ﬁaverageﬂ adult patients would require an average of approximately 
40 minutes per patient per year. A typical patient sees his primary care 
physician only 4 times a year for a 15-minute appointment (for a total of 
60 minutes of interaction), which would leave only 20 minutes per year 
(60 minutes Œ 40 minutes) for everything other than matters related to the 
guidelines for preventive care (by 2030, about half of all Americans will 
have at least one chronic disease).
13
1.2
 THE INSTITUTION AND ECONOMICS OF HEALTH CARE
Ł A large number of payers for health care, each with their own rules for 
coverage. For example, a large medical center may have to handle the com
-plexity associated with managing thousands of different health insurance 
plans.
14
 A typical family physician or internist in the United States wastes 
9See, for example, S. Panzarasa et al., ﬁImproving Compliance to Guidelines Through 
Work˜ow Technology: Implementation and Results in a Stroke Unit,ﬂ 
Studies in Health Tech
-nology and Informatics
 129(Pt. 2):834-839, 2007.
10
Center for Studying Health System Change. Physician Survey, available at http://
CTSonline.s-3.com/psurvey.asp.
11
Brian Raymond and Cynthia Dold, 
Clinical Information Systems: Achie
ving the Vision
, Kaiser Permanente Institute for Health Policy, Oakland, Calif., February 2002, available at 
http://www.kpihp.org/publications/docs/clinical_information.pdf. 
12
Kimberly S.H. Yarnall, Kathryn I. Pollak, Truls Østbye, Katrina M. Krause, and J. 
Lloyd Michener, ﬁPrimary Care: Is There Enough Time for Prevention?,ﬂ 
American Journal 
of Public Health
 93(4):635-641, April 2003, available at 
http://www.ajph.org/cgi/content 
/full/93/4/63
5.13
Shin-Yi Wu and Anthony Green, 
Projection of Chronic Illness Pre
valence and Cost In˜ation, 
RAND Corporation, October 2000.
14
Respondents to an informal poll of the ACMI discussion list in June 2008 indicated that 
their home organizations (medical centers) often had to cope with many dozens of health 
care payers (usually insurers), each of which had hundreds of different plans with different 
rules for coverage. (ACMI, the American College of Medical Informatics, consists of elected 
fellows from the United States and abroad who have made signi˚cant and sustained contri
-butions to the ˚eld of medical informatics.) The range reported was from a low of 578 plans 
to a high in excess of 20,000.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
40 to 50 minutes each day on dealing with managed care administrative 
hassles.
15
Ł Distorted or per
verse incenti
ves for payment
. For example, as a general 
rule, health care providers are compensated more readily and more gen
-erously for performing medical procedures than for communication and 
cognitive work such as diagnosis or preventive care. In many cases, the 
reimbursement rate is higher when patients develop complications rather 
than when patients receive quality careŠthat is, physicians are generally 
paid to ˚x the problems their medical care may have caused or did not 
prevent.
16
 In addition, the current medical care system offers little recog
-nition or reward for coordinating care and pays primarily for face-to-face 
(of˚ce) visits.
17
Ł A fragmented and "siloedﬂ en
vironment of health care organizations
. Both patients and providers must navigate a confusing landscape of ter
-tiary care centers, community hospitals, clinics, primary and special
-ist doctors and other providers, payers, health plans, and information 
sources.
18
Ł Increasing tightness in the health care labor market for certain specialties
, such as nurses,
19
 primary care physicians,
20
 health care paraprofessionals, 
and clinicians with informatics training. (Health/biomedical informatics 
training is not generally a requirement in most curricula for health care 
professionals, thus contributing to a scarcity of individuals so trained.)
15
L.S. Sommers, T.W. Hacker, D.M. Schneider, P.A. Pugno, and J.B. Garrett, ﬂA Descriptive 
Study of Managed Care Hassles in 26 Practices,ﬂ 
Western Journal of Medicine
 174(3):175-179, 
2001. The term ﬁhasslesﬂ was used in the study to refer to issues that interject themselves 
directly into the doctor-patient visit, including ﬁrestricted formularies, limited access to 
medical specialists, the requirement of prior approvals for procedures, unavailable treat
-ments, lengthy appeals processes, and physician payment delays.ﬂ
16
Vinod K. Sahney, ﬁEngineering and the Health Care Organization,ﬂ in National Academy 
of Engineering and Institute of Medicine, 
Building a Better Deli
very System: A New Engineer
-ing/Health Care Partnership
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
17
Institute of Medicine, 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 
21
st Century
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., March 2001. As a concrete example, the com
-mittee heard of the incentives for an insurance company to do very little for a 62-year-old 
man developing type 2 diabetes because the costly complications would most likely arise 
after he turns 65, and would thus be covered by Medicare. Pay-for-performance programs 
are a notable exception to such perverse incentives, although they have not been widely 
adopted.
18
Thomas Bodenheimer, ﬁCoordinating CareŠA Perilous Journey Through the Health 
Care System,ﬂ 
New England Journal of Medicine
 358(10):1064-1071, March 6, 2008.
19
D.E. Hecker, ﬁOccupational Employment Projections to 2014,ﬂ 
Monthly Labor Re
view
 128(11):70-101, 2005.
20
National Association of Community Health Centers, ﬁAccess Transformed: Building a 
Primary Care Workforce for the 21st Century,ﬂ Washington, D.C., 2008, available at http://
www.nachc.com/client/documents/ACCESS%20Transformed%20full%20report.PDF.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HEALTH CARE IN THE UNITED STATES TODAY
 17
1.3
 CURRENT IMPLEMENTATIONS OF HEALTH CARE 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Ł Monolithic and ﬁsiloedﬂ information technology
. Many health care 
organizations, especially large ones, do spend considerable money on 
information technology (IT), but the IT is implemented in ways that make 
even small improvements hard to introduce [C4O14]. Even across the 
systems within an organization, interoperability is often awkward and 
slow [C4O14, C5O21, C5O23]. Information exchange with the information 
systems of other organizations is rare.
21
 Ł IT applications that appear designed to automate tasks or business pro
-cesses for administrati
ve ef˚ciency,
22 and that pro
vide little support for the cogni
-ti
ve tasks of clinicians
 [C1O4 and con˚rmed by IOM
23
]. IT-based systems for 
health care are often designed in ways that simply mimic existing paper-
based forms and work˜ow [C1O2, C1O3] and do not take advantage of 
human-computer interaction principles [C5O20]. One result is poor sys
-tem design that can increase the chance of error, add to rather than reduce 
work˜ow, and compound the frustrations of doing the required tasks. 
As a result, the computer system frequently increases the workload (for 
example, lack of trust in a system may force providers to maintain dupli
-cate paper-based data records) and can introduce new forms of error that 
are dif˚cult to detect. Complex policy and implementation issues relating 
to protecting privacy also make automation signi˚cantly more dif˚cult.
1.4
 TRENDS
A number of trends will put additional pressure for change on the 
health care environment. These trends include an aging population and 
a corresponding increase in the complexity and weight of the disease 
burden, the emergence of genome-based personalized medicine,
24
 a larger 
21
J. Halamka, J.M. Overhage, L. Ricciardi, W. Rishel, C. Shirky, and C. Diamond, ﬁEx
-changing Health Information: Local Distribution, National Coordination,ﬂ 
Health Affairs
 (Millwood) 24(5):1170-1179, 2005.
22
William Stead, ﬁChallenges in Informatics,ﬂ in National Academy of Engineering and 
Institute of Medicine, 
Building a Better Deli
very System: A New Engineering/Health Care Partner
-ship,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
23
Institute of Medicine, 
Building a Better Deli
very System: A New Engineering/Health Care 
Partnership
, 2005, p. 15. See also Institute of Medicine, 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New 
Health System for the 
21
st Century
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001, p. 67.
24
For example, a 2008 study suggests the personalization of drug regimens based on 
genetic pro˚les as an important step toward the ultimate goal of providing individualized 
treatment guided by genetic information. See Amy I. Lynch, Eric Boerwinkle, Barry R. Davis, 
et al., ﬁPharmacogenetic Association of the NPPA T2238C Genetic Variant with Cardiovas
-cular Disease Outcomes in Patients with Hypertension,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Medical 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
role for patients in managing their own health care,
25
 and yet greater 
emphasis on ef˚ciency and cost control in health care. As a result, health 
care processes will become more complex and more time-constrained, and 
the demands placed on care providers will become more intense.
1.5
 THE S
TRUCTURE
 OF THIS REPORT
Chapter 2 reviews the IOM vision of 21st century health care and 
wellness as the appropriate point of departure for the committee™s work. 
Chapter 3 describes a chasm between current efforts to deploy health 
care IT and what the committee believes is needed to achieve the IOM 
vision. Chapter 4 describes the committee™s perspective on principles for 
developing and deploying successful health care IT, with success de˚ned 
as progress toward the IOM vision. Chapter 5 describes some illustrative 
research challenges for the computer science community that emerge 
from the IOM vision. Chapter 6 presents the committee™s recommenda
-tions, based on the results of its study, for government, for the computer 
science community, and for health care organizations.
Association
 299(3):296-307, 2008. See also K.A. Kuhn et al., ﬁInformatics and Medicine, from 
Molecules to Populations,ﬂ 
Methods of Information in Medicine
 47(4):296-317, 2008.
25
Institute of Medicine, 
Building a Better Deli
very System: A New Engineering/Health Care 
Partnership
, 2005, p. 65.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2A Vision for 21st Century Health Care 
and Wellness
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) de˚nes health care quality as ﬁthe 
degree to which health services for individuals and populations increase 
the likelihood of desired health outcomes and are consistent with current 
professional knowledge,ﬂ and in recent years, a broad consensus has 
emerged on the future health care environment. In the words of the IOM, 
health care should be:
1Ł Safe
Šavoiding injuries to patients from the care that is intended to 
help them.
Ł Effecti
veŠproviding services based on scienti˚c knowledge to all 
who could bene˚t and refraining from providing services to those not 
likely to bene˚t, avoiding underuse and overuse, respectively.
Ł Patient-centeredŠ
providing care that is respectful of and responsive 
to individual patient preferences, needs, and values and ensuring that 
patient values guide all clinical decisions.
Ł Timely
Šreducing waits and sometimes harmful delays for both 
those who receive and those who give care.
Ł Ef˚cientŠavoiding waste, including waste of equipment, supplies, 
ideas, and energy.
Ł Equitable
Šproviding care that does not vary in quality because of 
1Institute of Medicine, 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 
21
st Century
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., March 2001.
19
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
personal characteristics such as gender, ethnicity, geographic location, and 
socioeconomic status.
The IOM vision calls for a health care system that is systematically 
organized and acculturated in ways that make it easy and rewarding for 
providers and patients to do the right thing, at the right time, in the right 
place, and in the right way. This vision entails many different factors (e.g., 
systemic changes in paying for health care, an emphasis on disease pre
-vention rather than disease treatment). But none is more important than 
the effective use of information.
2Based on its observations and expertise, the committee identi˚ed 
a number of information-intensive aspects of the IOM™s vision for 21st 
century health care. Each bullet phrase below summarizes one of these 
important health care IT capabilities, followed by an illustrative vignette 
of what might be possible. The vignettes (displayed in italic type) are not 
comprehensive (i.e., they do not cover all aspects of the capability). 
Ł Comprehensive data on patients™ conditions, treatments, and 
outcomes.
A clinician needs to know what medications an elderly, memory-
challenged patient is taking. Recognizing the important difference 
between medications prescribed and medications taken, the clinician 
asks the patient to bring all of his pill containers, both prescription 
and o
ver-the-counter, to the appointment. She asks the patient to place 
all of the containers on a surface table computer, which automatically 
identi˚es the medications in each of the containers and counts the num
-ber of pills remaining in each container. The pill containers also carry 
RFID [radio-frequency identi˚cation] tags, on which the initial ˚ll-up 
quantities of the containers are stored. The table can read these tags, 
and thereby make an inference about what pills were actually taken and 
pro
vide information about likely compliance with a particular medica
-tion regime.
3 Farther in the future, recognizing the differences in how 
2Institute of Medicine, 
The Computer-Based Patient Record: An Essential Technology for Health 
Care 
(Revised Edition), National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1997, available at 
http://
www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=030905532
6; Institute of Medicine, 
Key Capabilities of an 
Electronic Health Record System: Letter Report
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 
2003, available at 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=1078
1; Institute of Medicine, 
Patient Safety: Achie
ving a New Standard for Care, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., 2004, available at http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309090776.
3If purchase history were available to provide information on when the container was 
˚lled, inferences could be made about the frequency and timing of pill-taking, rather than 
only the total number of pills taken.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A VISION FOR 
21
st CENTURY HEALTH CARE AND WELLNESS
 21
indi
viduals absorb or clear medications from their bodies, a blood sample 
of the patient in question is analyzed with a mass spectrometer or other 
similar de
vice, and the resulting spectrum identi˚es the actual le
vel of 
all drugs in the patient™s body. Combined with information from the 
smart table, a pro˚le of the patient™s compliance and pharmacokinet
-ics for each drug is generated. The clinical signi˚cance of the smart 
medications table and the mass spectrometer is that together they help 
to reduce uncertainty by synthesizing different 
views into the patient™s 
medication history.
Ł Cognitive support for health care professionals and patients to 
help integrate patient-speci˚c data where possible and account for any 
uncertainties that remain.
4A primary care clinician needs to monitor a patient™s heart condition. 
Cardiac information is pro
vided to the clinician not in the form of tables 
of numbers or indi
vidual EKG plots, but rather as an o
verlay on a 
visual animated structural model of the patient™s heart (not a generic heart) 
deri
ved from 
various imaging modalities. The system displays the rel
-evant functional information in summary form and pro
vides an image 
of the heart in operation dri
ven by all of the data that ha
ve been collected 
about the patient o
ver time. Different time scales are a
vailable for dis
-play, and the clinician can display an animated image of the patient™s 
heart in operation as the patient is resting or exerting himself (i.e., in 
near-real time), or track how the structure of the heart has changed 
over the last 
2 years using time-lapse-like sequences. Functional histo
-ries are also a
vailable. Histories are instantly a
vailable in easy-to-read 
form, with different parameter histories presented on similar-looking 
charts normalized to z-scores and timescales, showing upper and lower 
ﬁnormalﬂ and physiologic bounds.
5 The clinician also has the ability 
to drill down to any supporting piece of information that underlies the 
display. The clinical signi˚cance of an animated structural model is 
that it drastically reduces the cogniti
ve effort needed for the clinician to 
visualize the heart functioning in this particular patient, freeing her to 
use those cogniti
ve resources for other related tasks. The model also helps 
the patient to understand the medical situation at hand and assists both 
clinician and patient in determining an appropriate course of action. 
4In this report, ﬁcognitive supportﬂ refers to IT-based tools and systems that provide users 
(clinicians and patients) with the information, abstractions, and models needed to achieve 
the IOM™s vision of health care quality.
5See, for example, Seth Powsner and Edward Tufte, ﬁGraphical Summary of Patient Sta
-tus,ﬂ 
The Lancet
 344(8919):386-389, August 6, 1994, available at http://www.stottlerhenke.
com/projects/IPDRA2/info_resources/powsner_tufte_graphical_patient_summary.pdf.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
Ł Cognitive support for health care professionals to help integrate evi
-dence-based practice guidelines and research results into daily practice.
A primary care clinician has a number of patients with 
various heart 
conditions. In order to help stay current with recent literature, he sub
-scribes to alerts from the medical literature and learns that a particular 
heart disease guideline has been updated to include a new drug that 
reportedly pre
vents a dif˚cult and expensi
ve complication. After com
-paring it to other guidelines that he belie
ves to be trustworthy, he decides 
to incorporate this new guideline into his practice. By clicking on a 
link, the clinician can download the guideline to his system, which also 
searches for and constructs se
veral potential action ˜owcharts to meet 
the guideline™s goals, based on an internal computable model of clinic 
work˜ow and resources. He selects one and his disease management 
dashboards, order sets, and reminder systems are updated. (A dashboard 
is an easily 
viewed display that summarizes the health status of multiple 
patients.) The clinical signi˚cance of the literature alert system is that it 
enables the clinician to keep current and to systematically translate new 
knowledge into his practice while enabling the clinician and the patient 
to decide on the appropriate course of treatment.
Ł Instruments and tools that allow providers to manage a portfolio 
of patients and to highlight problems as they arise both within individual 
patients and within populations.
The computer of an outpatient care pro
vider displays the summary 
health status (a ﬁdashboardﬂ) of her 
300 diabetic patients with color-
codes and carefully designed graphical displays for clinical measures 
of the disease (blood sugar le
vels, A
1C counts, and so on) that pro
vide 
rapid assessment, at a glance, of the status of all patients: those who are 
managing illnesses successfully, those requiring inter
vention, and those 
who are marginal cases. When a diabetic patient 
visits her, the system 
re
views applicable guidelines, customizes an order set to the patient™s 
state and insurance plan (e.g., picks the preferred drug from the drug 
class), and reminds the physician to discuss the selected drug with the 
patient. Feedback indicating success is pro
vided when the pro
vider sees 
that the display indicators of her patients show successful management. 
The clinical signi˚cance of a summary health status display is that it 
gi
ves the pro
vider prompt feedback about where her attention is most 
needed in time to take correcti
ve action.
Ł Rapid integration of new instrumentation, biological knowledge, 
treatment modalities, and so on, into a ﬁlearningﬂ health care system that 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A VISION FOR 
21
st CENTURY HEALTH CARE AND WELLNESS
 23
encourages early adoption of promising methods but also analyzes all 
patient experience as experimental data.
A pediatrician in Los Angeles ˚nds herself working with an e
ver grow
-ing set of young patients with se
vere asthma. A group of them ha
ve added her to their Facebook page where they run a special widget that 
shows her when and where they did moderate or high physical acti
vity 
outdoors. The application does not rely on self-reporting. Rather, the 
young people run an application on their mobile phones that uploads 
an SMS message containing their current location e
very 
30 seconds to 
a pri
vate account where an application processes and summarizes loca
-tion-acti
vity data generated from accelerometers on their phones. The 
doctor has recently introduced a new feature whereby her patients use 
special Bluetooth-equipped inhalers that report 
via the mobile phone each 
time the inhaler is used. The website then displays when and where they 
used their Bluetooth-enabled inhalers. In addition to 
viewing trends o
ver 
time, and patterns based on time of year and day of the week, she runs an 
application that relates her patients™ acti
vity to real-time pollution expo
-sure models made a
vailable by the city. She uses the data to make a case 
to the city about other possible acti
vity locations (e.g., different outdoor 
parks) and is soon going to enable her patients to sign up for automated 
customized alerts when they are o
verexerting themsel
ves under hazard
-ous en
vironmental conditions. The clinical signi˚cance of an automated 
acti
vity reporting and processing system is that it pro
vides reliable data 
on what patients actually do (rather than what they say they do) in a 
form that is easy to understand, as well as additional detail to link to 
other data sources to clarify patterns, and deli
very that is timely enough 
to support real-time feedback in time to change beha
vior.
Ł Accommodation of the growing heterogeneity of locales for the 
provision of care, including home instrumentation for monitoring and 
treatment, lifestyle integration, and remote assistance.
A diabetic patient wears an acti
ve sensor that pro
vides continuous 
blood-sugar readings. When these readings approach le
vels that indi
-cate that actions need to be taken (e.g., taking an insulin shot, eating 
something), the sensor pro
vides an indication to the patient. Acting 
with the patient™s prior consent, if the patient fails to take the necessary 
action (as would be indicated by increasingly dangerous readings), the 
sensor communicates with a cell phone to place a call to an emergency 
caregi
ver. Along with the patient™s 
vital signs and intake information 
(name, present location, and so on), the call also pro
vides a summary of 
the rele
vant readings so that the caregi
ver can be dispatched to the site 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
of the emergency and be prepared for what action should be taken. The 
clinical signi˚cance of an acti
ve sensor is that emergency inter
vention 
can be requested in the absence of patient action, and that the emergency 
response can be pro
vided in ad
vance with information that would other
-wise ha
ve to be gathered immediately upon arri
val.
Ł Empowerment of patients and their families in effective manage
-ment of health care decisions and execution, including personal health 
records (as contrasted to medical records held by care providers), educa
-tion about the individual™s conditions and options, and support of timely 
and focused communication with professional health care providers.
The son of an elderly man hospitalized by a stroke needs to know about 
his father™s medical condition. Rather than waiting for hours by his 
father™s bedside to intercept a physician on rounds so that he can obtain 
authoritati
ve information, he logs into a secure application that makes 
his father™s electronic health record (EHR) a
vailable on the Internet. 
But since he is not a physician himself, he in
vokes a data interpreta
-tion application that examines the data in the EHR and pro
vides in 
lay language a summary of the important aspects of a patient™s medi
-cal condition, pre
viously pro
vided treatments, and treatment options 
under consideration. The application pro
vides an interpretation (and 
the reasoning behind the interpretation) that is comparable to that which 
an experienced clinician could pro
vide. The clinical signi˚cance of an 
automated EHR lay interpretation system is that the family can be 
kept in the decision-making loop, in a culturally sensiti
ve way and on 
a more timely basis than is possible today, and potentially a
void delays 
often in
vol
ved when families need time to make decisionsŠsince they 
learn rele
vant facts sooner (perhaps e
ven days sooner), they can start 
the process sooner. In addition to the data ˜owing from caregi
vers, the 
son can also enter information based on his knowledge of his father™s 
present state and medical history, pro
viding caregi
vers with another 
source of information, and empowering the son to ha
ve a greater role in 
his father™s treatment.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Crossing the Health Care IT Chasm
The committee observed a number of success stories in implementa
-tion of health care information technology (IT). For example, one orga
-nization had implemented a pharmacy/medication administration sys
-tem in what appeared to be an exemplary fashion. Making extensive 
use of robotics and bar coding of medication, patients, and providers, 
this organization had implemented procedures and practices that appar
-ently reduced error rates in dispensing and administration signi˚cantly. 
Another organization had almost completely transitioned to electronic 
clinical ordering and documentation in both its inpatient and outpatient 
facilities. Another had made progress in using evidence-based medicine 
through clinician-customizable order sets to decrease the variability of 
care. Another had implemented effective data support for management 
of clinical process improvement and was able to support systematic deci
-sions about where to focus organizational energy and attention. 
Although seeing these successes was encouraging, in the committee™s 
judgment they fall far short, even in the aggregate, of what is needed to 
support the Institute of Medicine™s (IOM™s) vision of quality health care. 
Apart from a few exceptional examples, the IT-related activities of health 
professionals observed by the committee in these organizations were 
not well integrated into clinical practice [C1O1, C1O2, C1O3, C4O17, 
C5O22, C6O24]. Health care IT was rarely used to provide clinicians with 
evidence-based decision support and feedback [C1O4]; to support data-
driven process improvement [C2O6]; or to link clinical care and research 
[C2O10]. The committee saw virtually no effective computer-based sup
-25
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
port of an integrative view of patient data [C1O1]. Care providers had to 
˜ip among many screens and often among many systems to access data; 
in some cases, care providers found it easier to manage patient informa
-tion printed or written on paper.
A reviewer of this report in draft form noted the non-intuitive behav
-ior of most health care IT systems and the training requirements that 
result from that behavior.  Hospitals often require 3- or 4-hour training 
sessions for physicians before they can get the user names and passwords 
for access to new clinical systems. Yet much of the computing software 
that these people use in other settings (e.g., of˚ce software) adopts a con
-sistent interface metaphor across applications and adheres to prevailing 
design/interface norms. As a result, there is much less need for training, 
and the user manual need only be consulted when special questions arise. 
In contrast, health care IT lacks these characteristics of conventional soft
-ware packagesŠa fact that re˜ects the failure of these systems to address 
some basic human interface considerations.
The committee also saw little cognitive support for data interpreta
-tion, planning, or collaboration. For example, even in situations where dif
-ferent members of the care team were physically gathered at the entrance 
to a patient™s room and looking at different aspects of a patient™s case 
on their individual computers, collaborative interactions took place via 
verbal discussion, not directly supported in any way by the computer 
systems, and the discussions were not captured back into the system or 
record (i.e., the valuable high-level abstractions and integration were nei
-ther supported nor retained for future use). 
Instead, committee members repeatedly observed health care IT 
focused on individual transactions (e.g., medication 
X is given to the 
patient at 9:42 p.m., laboratory result 
Y is returned to the physician, and 
so on) and virtually no attention being paid to helping the clinician under
-stand how the voluminous data collected could relate to the overall health 
care status of any individual patient. Care providers spent a great deal of 
time in electronically documenting what they did for patients [C1O3], but 
these providers often said that they were entering the information to com
-ply with regulations or to defend against lawsuits, rather than because 
they expected someone to use it to improve clinical care. 
These shortfalls are not necessarily for lack of investment; although 
health care organizations as a whole spend a relatively smaller percent
-age of their revenues on IT than do other ˚elds such as banking,
1 one 
organizationŠa major integrated health care enterprise with yearly rev
-1David W. Bates, ﬁThe Quality Case for Information Technology in Healthcare,ﬂ 
BMC 
Medical Informatics and Decision Making
 2:7, 2002, available at http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1472-6947/2/7.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSSING THE HEALTH CARE IT CHASM
 27
enue in the billionsŠthat the committee visited had invested over a 
half-billion dollars in IT in the past decade. The health care organiza
-tions visited demonstrated both deep and sustained organizational and 
˚nancial commitment to using information technology to improve health 
care. Yet their health care IT implementation time lines are measured 
in decades, and it is common to see the implementation of a new gen
-eration of health care IT begin while rollout of the prior generation is 
still underway [C4O16]. Centralization of management and reduction in 
the number of systems are the predominant method for standardization 
[C4O15], whereas innovation requires systems that can adapt to local 
needs [C6O25]. System response times are often slow and long downtimes 
are common [C4O18]. 
Consistent with many other reports,
2 the committee recognizes com
-mitment to 21st century use of IT in health care as an essential part of 
achieving the IOM™s vision of 21st century health care. But health care IT 
is merely a means to the desired end, namely better and/or less expensive 
health care. The committee believes that clinicians and other providers 
will, appropriately, be drawn to IT only if, where, and when it can be 
shown to enable them to do their jobs more effectively. Blanket promotion 
of IT adoption where bene˚ts are not clear or are oversold will only waste 
resources and sour clinicians on the true potential of health care IT. 
In short, the nation faces a health care IT chasm that is analogous 
to the quality chasm highlighted by the IOM over the past decade. In 
the quality domain, various improvement efforts have failed to improve 
health care outcomes, and have sometimes even done more harm than 
good.
3 Similarly, based on an examination of the multiple sources of 
evidence described above and viewing them from the committee™s per
-spective, the committee believes that the nation faces the same risk with 
health care ITŠthat current efforts aimed at the nationwide deployment 
of health care IT will not be suf˚cient to achieve the vision of 21st cen
-tury health care, and may even set back the cause if these efforts continue 
wholly without change from their present course. Success in this regard 
2See, for example, Institute of Medicine, 
Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for 
the 
21
st Century
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001; President™s Information 
Technology Advisory Committee, 
Re
volutionizing Health Care Through Information Technology
, National Coordination Of˚ce for Networking and Information Technology, Washington, 
D.C., 2004, available at http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/reports/20040721_hit_report.pdf; Of
-˚ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, 
The ONC-Coordinated 
Federal Health Information Technology Strategic Plan: 
200
8-2012
, U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services, Washington, D.C., 2008, available at http://www.hhs.gov/healthit/
resources/HITStrategicPlan.pdf.
3See, for example, the studies of the Dartmouth Atlas Project at http://www.dartmouthatlas.
org/.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
Box 3.1 Four Domains of Information 
 Technology in Health Care
Motivated by a presentation from Intermountain Healthcare™s Marc Probst, 
the committee found it useful to categorize health care information technology 
(IT) into four domains:
Ł Automation
. Automation is the use of IT to perform tasks that can be re
-peated with little modi˜cationŠexamples include bar code medication administra
-tion, generation of laboratory results, and issuing invoices for payment. 
Ł Connectivity
. Connectivity begins with physical infrastructureŠensuring 
base-level electronic connections between various physical facilities so that data 
can be transmitted electronically. Examples might include high-speed ˜ber lines 
and routing capabilities throughout a physical plant, wide-area networks, and the 
deployment of wireless infrastructure. Connectivity includes interfaces that map 
data from one system into another. At the highest level, connectivity involves con
-necting people to systems and to each other.
Ł Decision support
. Decision support (DS) involves the use of IT-based ap
-plications to provide information at a high conceptual level to clinicians to facilitate 
or improve decisions made about care. For example, DS can include simple rule-
based alerts such as reminders to physicians about possible drug interactions 
when medication orders are entered.  DS can also involve the presentation of 
information to care providers in ways that make it easier for them to know how to 
direct their attentionŠa ﬁdashboardﬂ indicating patient status across an entire ward 
or for a physician™s 50 sickest patients would be an example of DS for presentation. 
Finally, DS can also refer to statistical and heuristic decision support re˚ecting an 
intelligent synthesis of information about the patient, information from the care set
-ting, and biomedical knowledgeŠfor example, a DS system might recommend a 
particular antibiotic based on the patient™s condition and a database of the recent 
sensitivity of microorganisms to different antibiotics in their hospital. 
Ł Data-mining capabilities.
 Data-mining capabilities use knowledge discovery 
techniques to analyze various similar or dissimilar datasets to recognize known 
or unknown relationships. Data mining converts raw data signals into clinical vari
-ables and models to provide a rich source for new approaches to evidence-based 
medicine and personalized care. Examples range from identi˜cation of a marker for 
breast cancer therapeutic response from microarray data, through mining the text 
literature for little-known drug-drug interactions, to mining multimedia electronic 
health records to identify a patient™s condition from a text note or a change in heart 
size from a sequence of images, and extracting ideas or relationships from a recent 
publication in a leading journal and pushing the information to the physicians who 
are treating patients who may bene˜t from those ˜ndings. Data mining provides 
many of the inputs needed for decision support.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CROSSING THE HEALTH CARE IT CHASM
 29
will require greater emphasis on the goal of improving health care by pro
-viding cognitive support for health care providers and even for patients 
and family caregivers on the part of computer science and health/bio
-medical informatics researchers. Vendors, health care organizations, and 
government, too, will also have to pay greater attention to cognitive sup
-port. This point is the central conclusion articulated in this report.
So that the nation can cross the health care IT chasm, the commit
-tee advocates re-balancing the portfolio of investments in health care IT; 
adhering to proven principles for success; and accelerating research in 
computer science, social sciences, and health/biomedical informatics (and 
concomitant education about each ˚eld for practitioners in the others).  
Motivated by a presentation from Intermountain Healthcare™s Marc 
Probst, the committee found it useful to categorize health care IT into four 
domains: automation, connectivity, decision support, and data-mining 
capabilities. See Box 3.1.
The majority of today™s health care IT is designed to support auto
-mation, with some investment in supporting connectivity, and little in 
support of data mining or decision support.  Yet the IOM™s vision for 21st 
century health care expects health care IT that is capable of supporting 
cognitive activities and a learning health care system. These activities are 
much more about connectivity, decision support, and data mining than 
they are about automation. The health care IT investment portfolio must 
be re-balanced to address this mismatch.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Principles for Success
Change in the health care system can take two formsŠevolutionary 
change and radical change. In this context, evolutionary change refers to 
continuous, iterative improvement of existing processes, sustained over 
long periods of time, that does not depend strongly on new technologi
-cal capabilities. The Institute of Medicine (IOM) vision of health care as a 
ﬁlearning systemﬂ is one of a system 
designed
 to bene˚t from evolutionary 
change. By contrast, radical change means new ways of looking at health 
problems and revolutionary new ways of addressing those problems. 
Radical change often involves a new capability such as the advent of 
antibiotics in the 1930s and developments in genomics and proteomics 
today. Some of the automatic data recording, use of novel sensors, data 
mining, and visualization techniques recommended in this report ˚t the 
radical, revolutionary mode of change. Other committee suggestions ˚t 
the evolutionary, incremental change mode. Any approach to health care 
IT should enable and anticipate both types of change since they work 
together over time. 
Abstracting from its site visit observations, the experience of its mem
-bers, and the extant literature,
1 the committee identi˚ed principles to 
1For a sampling of the relevant literature, see M. Leu et al., ﬁCenters Speak Up: The Clini
-cal Context for Health Information Technology in the Ambulatory Care Setting,ﬂ 
Journal of 
General Internal Medicine: Of˚cial Journal of the Society for Research and Education in Primary 
Care Internal Medicine
 23(4):372-378, April 2008; M.R. Jones, ﬁ™Computers Can Land People 
on Mars, Why Can™t They Get Them to Work in a Hospital?™: Implementation of an Electronic 
Patient Record System in a UK Hospital,ﬂ 
Methods of Information in Medicine
 42(4):410-415, 
30Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES FOR SUCCESS
 31
guide successful use of health care IT to support a 21st century vision of 
health care. In most instances, these principles are not newŠbut even 
ﬁoldﬂ principles applied properly in a given ˚eld or to a given organiza
-tion can have the impact and signi˚cance of new ones. To place emphasis 
on the importance of each, the text below categorizes these principles into 
ones related to evolutionary change and those related to revolutionary 
change.
4.1
 EVOLUTIONARY
 C
HANGE
4.1.1
 Principle 1: Focus on Improvements in CareŠ
 Technology Is Secondary
The most important principle for guiding evolutionary change in 
health care is to focus efforts on achieving the desired improvements in 
health care rather than on the adoption of health care IT as a goal in itself.
2 For example, efforts should be structured around clear health care goals 
(such as those described by the IOM criteria), and with a transparent 
understanding of the gap between the existing baseline and goal. Only 
then should there be a focus on process changes needed to close the gap, 
and an identi˚cation of what technology if any is needed to enable the 
process changes. If early experience shows that the gap is not closing, pro
-cess and technology can be adapted until the improvement is achieved.  In 
this approach, health care IT is selected and implemented on an as-needed 
basis to support iterative improvement, instead of being implemented 
for its own sake at the outset and then potentially becoming a constraint 
rather than a facilitator of iterative improvement.
2003; J. Øvretveit et al., ﬁImproving Quality Through Effective Implementation of Informa
-tion Technology in Healthcare,ﬂ 
International Journal for Quality in Health Care: Journal of the 
International Society for Quality in Health Care
 19(5):259-266, October 2007; Jane Hendy et al., 
ﬁChallenges to Implementing the National Programme for Information Technology (NPfIT): 
A Qualitative Study,ﬂ 
British Medical Journal
 331:331-336, August 6, 2005; Heather Heath˚eld, 
David Pitty, and Rudolph Hanka, ﬁEvaluating Information Technology in Health Care: 
Barriers and Challenges,ﬂ 
British Medical Journal
 316:1959-1961, June 27, 1998; C. Sicotte, 
J.L. Denis, P. Lehoux, and F. Champagne, ﬁThe Computer-Based Patient Record Challenges 
Towards Timeless and Spaceless Medical Practice,ﬂ 
Journal of Medical Systems
 22(4):237-256, 
August 1998; J.P. Glaser, ﬁToo Far Ahead of the IT Curve?,ﬂ 
Har
vard Business Re
view
 85(7-
8):29-33, 190, July-August 2007.
2A similar perspective can be found in Carol C. Diamond and Clay Shirky, ﬁHealth Infor
-mation Technology: A Few Years of Magical Thinking?,ﬂ 
Health Affairs
 27(5):383-390, August 
19, 2008.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
4.1.2
 Principle 2: Seek Incremental Gain from Incremental Effort
An important corollary is to engage in a portfolio of activities, start
-ing with ones that require modest investment and are likely to return 
perhaps modest, but short-term, visible improvements. If programs can 
be structured so that small investments yield visible success, stakehold
-ers and the relevant decision makers are more likely to be persuaded to 
continue along such a path. In contrast, programs that require large initial 
investments of money, effort, and/or time before exhibiting useful results 
are dif˚cult to sustain and are often politically vulnerable. 
4.1.3
 Principle 3: Record Available Data So That They Can Be Used 
for Care, Process Improvement, and Research
Systematic improvement of health care is data-driven. Therefore, 
health care providers should aggregate as much data as feasible about 
people, processes, and outcomes from all sources, acknowledging the 
never-ending challenge of maintaining reasonable degrees of patient con
-˚dentiality in such a data collection effort. Of potential relevance are data 
about people (e.g., their medical condition and health status, their diet 
and environmental conditions), processes (e.g., actual health care services 
received, when, and where with detailed process logs), and outcomes 
(e.g., clinical and functional status at multiple points in time in multiple 
different conditions). Even if such collected data cannot immediately 
be regularized to a common semantic standard necessary for full data 
interoperability, they are still potentially useful for incremental care or 
process improvement and for researchŠfuture needs cannot be fully 
foreseen, especially in light of anticipated needs for clinical and envi
-ronmental data to correlate with personalized genomic data. Moreover, 
systematic advances in process improvement and knowledge may require 
collection of new data types that cannot be anticipated today, suggest
-ing the need for a collection infrastructure whose scope can be easily 
expanded. 
 Automatic recording of actions and interactions at the source 
will facilitate data capture and is needed
 to avoid increasing the workload 
of caregivers and ancillary personnel.
4.1.4
 Principle 4: Design for Human and Organization Factors
Providers of health care IT can design systems to support people in 
doing the right thingŠby providing incentives for and eliminating bar
-riers to doing those things. Entirely apart from technology, barriers and 
incentives can be sociological, psychological, emotional, cultural, legal, 
economic, or organizational. Human-centered design pays attention to 
all of these factors as they relate to technical function and form. Such 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES FOR SUCCESS
 33
work necessarily involves social scientists who understand real human 
needs and capabilities, why people err, where workload considerations 
are essential, and how to develop systems that enhance capabilities, that 
are understandable with minimal training, and that reduce subsidiary 
task requirements. The use of health care IT designed in the absence 
of such input may well lead to greater errors, more stress, and lower 
productivity.
3 In short, success requires not just technology but alsoŠand 
perhaps more importantlyŠsocial and organizational processes to appro
-priately take advantage of technology.
4.1.5
 Principle 5: Support the Cognitive Functions of All Caregivers, 
Including Health Professionals, Patients, and Their Families
Organizations investing in health care IT can support the cognitive 
functions of individuals and organizations as they iteratively adapt roles 
and work processes. Such support includes analysis of data from practice 
to identify high-priority improvement opportunities among populations 
or work processes, analysis of applicable evidence, tools such as order 
sets for linking evidence into work˜ow, and aggregation of patient data 
into decision-centric displays. Importantly, cognitive support needs tend 
to center on high-level decision making (e.g., diagnosis) for populations, 
patients, or situations, and tend to span granular transactional tasks such 
as test ordering or prescribing. Cognitive support is not well served by 
the task-speci˚c automation systems that make up the majority of today™s 
health care IT.  
4.2
 RADICAL CHANGE
4.2.1
 Principle 6: Architect Information and Work˜ow Systems to 
Accommodate Disruptive Change
Organizations should architect health care IT for ˜exibility to support 
disruptive change rather than to optimize today™s ideas about health care. 
It is axiomatic that health care will change dramatically into the future. 
New knowledge will become availableŠe.g., genomic medicine. Popula
-tion demographics will changeŠe.g., more people will be elderly, with a 
correspondingly different emphasis on different kinds of care. Care ven
-3See, for example, Yong Y. Han et al., ﬁUnexpected Increased Mortality After Implemen
-tation of a Commercially Sold Computerized Physician Order Entry System,ﬂ 
Pediatrics
 116(6):1506-1512, December 2005; also, Ross Koppel et al., ﬁRole of Computerized Physician 
Order Entry Systems in Facilitating Medication Errors,ﬂ 
Journal of the American Medical As
-sociation
 293(10):1197-1203, 2005. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
ues will changeŠe.g., more care will be provided at home, and patients 
will be required to assume greater responsibilities for care (with the assis
-tance of professional care providers). Policy is likely to changeŠthere will 
be different payment models or reimbursement rates, for example. Thus, 
any IT-based infrastructure to support today™s health care needs must 
be designed to accommodate changes in roles and process tomorrowŠa 
point suggesting that architectures based on standard interconnection 
protocols are much easier to change in comparison to monolithic, tightly 
integrated all-encompassing systems. Otherwise, even deployment of 
health care IT successful in solving a problem today could stand in the 
way of solving tomorrow™s challenges.
 4.2.2
 Principle 7: Archive Data for Subsequent Re-interpretation
Vendors of health care IT should provide the capability of record
-ing any data collected in their measured, uninterpreted, original form, 
archiving them as long as possible to enable subsequent retrospective 
views and analyses of those data.
4 Advances in biomedical science and 
practice will change today™s interpretation of data. In addition, advances 
in computer science and related disciplines will lead to new ways to extract 
meaningful and useful knowledge from existing data stores allowing re-
analysis of pre-existing data to reveal medically signi˚cant relationships 
and correlations that are currently unknown. Perhaps most importantly, 
the committee believes that the availability of large amounts of data is 
itself a driver for progress likely to inspire medically oriented research in 
machine learning, display technology, data mining, and so on. 
4.2.3
 Principle 8: Seek and Develop Technologies That Identify and 
Eliminate Ineffective Work Processes
Organizations should seek and develop
 technologies that allow iden
-ti˚cation and elimination of ineffective work processes and implementa
-tion of new approaches to achieving their purpose. Automation of work 
processes developed in an era when paper was the medium for commu
-nicating and archiving is fraught with cost and unintended consequences. 
For example, some of the work done within the health care system might 
be accomplished outside health care by providing support for patients 
4See, for example, Werner Ceusters and Barry Smith, ﬁStrategies for Referent Tracking in 
Electronic Health Records,ﬂ 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics
 39(3):362-378, June 2006. Some 
of the technology issues involved in archiving are discussed in National Research Council, 
Building an Electronic Records Archi
ve at the National Archi
ves and Records Administration: 
Recommendations for Initial De
velopment
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 
2003.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRINCIPLES FOR SUCCESS
 35
to better understand their medications and treatment plans. Redesign of 
work to take advantage of ubiquitous information access and communica
-tion may be much more effective than automating existing work processes 
in an attempt to eliminate errors and effort.
4.2.4
 Principle 9: Seek and Develop Technologies That Clarify the 
Context of Data
Organizations should seek and develop technologies that present 
new information in the context of other information available about the 
patient and relevant biomedical knowledge. The combination of new 
biomedical technologies, together with increased access to data through 
health care IT, is increasingly overwhelming health professionals™ ability 
to make sense of individual ˚ndings. ﬁAlert fatigueﬂ is an example. New 
approaches are needed to present information in context so that patterns 
and choices stand out. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Research Challenges
There are deep intellectual challenges where the disciplines of com
-puter science and engineering, health/biomedical informatics, related 
social sciences, information technology (IT), and health care overlap. 
Indeed, interdisciplinary work will be necessary to go beyond incremen
-tal improvement of existing health care IT or the automation of traditional 
paper-based work˜ows. Systematic development of the health care IT-
related research agenda is beyond the scope of this brief study, but the 
committee offers a framework for organizing such an agenda. 
It is important to distinguish between a solution to a speci˚c problem 
in the health care domain and the technology-related efforts needed to 
realize it. The committee conceptualized the necessary technology-related 
efforts with respect to two separate dimensions. The ˚rst lies along an 
axis describing the extent to which new, generally applicable research 
is needed. A second lies along an axis describing the extent to which 
new research speci˚c to health care and biomedicine is needed. Technol
-ogy-related efforts can thus be separated into four (2 × 2) quadrants, as 
illustrated in Box 5.1.
1 From a research management standpoint, such a clustering is helpful 
for better understanding the parties needed to undertake any given tech
-nology-related research effort, the likelihood of its success, the timescale 
1Conceptually, the segmentation of the domain into these four quadrants is quite similar 
to the division proposed in Donald Stokes, 
Pasteur™s Quadrant: Basic Science and Technological 
Inno
vation, 
Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C., 1997.
36
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 37
needed to achieve success, the appropriate funding mechanisms, and 
other such parameters. For example, efforts in quadrants 1 and 3 might 
be pursued by computer science researchers working in loose coopera
-tion with the health and biomedical informatics communities, whereas 
efforts in quadrants 2 and 4 would require much tighter coordination 
and cooperation.
These two dimensions emerge from the observation that health care 
IT draws on classic computer science challenges such as providing high 
availability with low system management overhead [C4O18], high data 
integrity, and a very high degree of usability. Such goals are essential 
foundations of many IT systems but are especially challenging to achieve 
in the context of health care IT, given the scale and diversity of the health 
care establishment and, in some cases, the need to support a large, broad 
user base. In addition, many bene˚ts of systems often accrue only when 
they are viewed by researchers and caregivers as suf˚ciently trustworthy 
to replace older solutions. At the same time, some problems related to 
health care IT involve solutions that are highly speci˚c to health care (e.g., 
developing high-quality devices for human-computer interaction [C1O2] 
that do not inadvertently help to spread infection as care providers move 
from patient to patient). 
As an illustration of how a solution to a major problem in health care 
might be decomposed into a technology-related research agenda, consider 
that most clinicians spend a signi˚cant amount of time in documenting 
the care provided to a patient.
2 One challenge for health care IT would be 
2The committee noted this point in its site visits. And the literature has important examples 
as well. For instance, a survey of more than 2500 clinical oncologists showed that the amount 
Box 5.1
 A Segmentation of Health-Care-Related 
 Technology Efforts
 General applicability
 Health care speci˜c
    
Relatively clear path 
 Quadrant
 1: 
Quadrant 2:  
forward from existing 
  
technologies GeneralŠapplied 
 Health careŠapplied 
 efforts
 efforts
  
Advanced research 
 Quadrant 3: 
Quadrant 4:  
needed GeneralŠadvanced
 Health careŠ
 efforts
 advanced efforts
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
the creation of a self-documenting environment in which the necessary 
documentation could be generated with little or no additional effort on 
the part of the clinicians [C5O19] (see Section 5.2.5). But making progress 
toward this goal calls for efforts in all four quadrants of the matrix shown 
in Box 5.1.
The existing technology and general applications of Quadrant 1 pro
-vide a clear path for indexing voice recordings. Speech-to-text transcrip
-tion is a relatively mature technology for vocabularies of modest size 
as indicated by the variety of commercial software packages available. 
Speaker identi˚cation is routinely performed using voiceprints of the 
known participants, the patient typically being the remaining unknown 
speaker during a clinical encounter, and once a voice recording is tran
-scribed to text, indexing within a known domain borders on the trivial. 
Full-text transcription today has relatively high error rates that make it 
unreliable as a basis for making clinical decisions, although as the technol
-ogy further matures, error rates can be expected to drop.
3 Another general application is information extraction from discourse 
analysisŠa computer listening to a dialog (or examining a transcript) 
between two people would be able to make inferences about the topics 
under discussion. Research in this area would build on work in computa
-tional linguistics that dates to the 1980s. For deep information extraction 
(e.g., linking the conversations to key terms in the medical literature), fun
-damental research in Quadrant 3 is needed (for example) to understand 
how to relate concepts embedded in the words themselves to the rich 
store of background knowledge about the world that informs everyday 
discourse.
As for health-care-speci˚c applications, there is a fairly clear path 
using existing technology to develop systems that support patient-sup
-plied documentation or documentation provided by the patient™s support 
system (e.g., family), which would increase the continuity and richness 
of information available for the clinician, as well as being helpful in deal
-ing with expected future burdens on patients to manage their own care 
outside traditional health care organizations; this research agenda would 
˚t into Quadrant 2. On the other hand, a system to provide a patient or 
caregivers with interactive explanations of a disease, particularized by the 
of time they spend ˚lling out paperwork and documenting patient care has increased more 
than fourfold over the past 25 years. See S. Mayor, ﬁU.S. Cancer Care Is Worse Due to More 
Paperwork,ﬂ 
British Medical Journal
 322(7296):1201, 2001.
3To be sure, claims regarding the impending maturity of speech recognition have been 
made for a long time, but as with user customization of interfaces (see Footnote 22), speech 
recognition is another example of an idea that was dif˚cult to implement with the technol
-ogy of 20 years ago but now is much more feasible with today™s technology and just as 
important today to pursue.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 39
patient™s culture, learning style, value system, education, and life experi
-ence, remains beyond the current state of today™s science and would ˚t 
into Quadrant 4. 
Other examples of technology-related research efforts in each of the 
four quadrants are provided below:
Ł Quadrant 
1 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Adaptation of existing IT 
and process solutions from other domains and industries, e.g., process 
and data integration technologies, human-computer interaction technolo
-gies, ubiquitous networking technologies, security, search, blogging, and 
social networking.
Ł Quadrant 
2 (Health careŠapplied efforts). Identi˚cation of the best 
examples of coupled health care improvement and health care IT that have 
been successfully deployed or prototyped, followed by wide deployment 
of those examples. Use of existing data and process standards to obtain 
low-hanging fruit, e.g., portals, electronic messaging, disease manage
-ment dashboards, decision support and reminders, process automation, 
and so on.
Ł Quadrant 
3 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Invention of new infor
-mation technologies that are needed in health care, such as ontology 
management, systems that help to explain why decisions are made, large-
scale machine learning, voice technologies, natural language processing, 
privacy management for access and data mining, and so on.
Ł Quadrant 
4 (Health careŠadvanced efforts). Speci˚c advanced 
work on advanced ontologies and reasoning in the medical domain, 
modeling of the human body and the virtual patient, interpretation of 
medical information to different communities, approaches to learning and 
improving data quality, aggregation of patient health care information 
into a trustworthy database with explicit representation of uncertainty 
[C4O17, C5O23]), and so on.
5.1
 AN OVERARCHING RESEARCH GRAND CHALLENGE: 
PATIENT-CENTERED COGNITIVE SUPPORT
Patient-centered cognitive support emerged as an overarching 
grand research challenge during the committee™s discussions. This sec
-tion discusses how a research agenda might be assembled, together with 
representative research challenges, to illustrate the magnitude of the 
opportunity.
Much of health care is transactionalŠadmitting a patient, encoun
-tering a patient at the bedside or clinic, ordering a drug, interpreting a 
report, or handing off a patient. Yet transactions are only the operational 
expression of an understanding of the patient and a set of goals and plans 
for that patient. Clinicians have a ﬁvirtual patientﬂ in mindŠa conceptual 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
model of the patient re˜ecting their understanding of interacting physi
-ological, psychological, societal, and other dimensions. They use new 
˚ndingsŠraw dataŠto re˚ne their understanding of their virtual patient. 
Then, based on medical knowledge, medical logic, and mostly heuristic 
decision making, they formulate a plan, expressed as an order (transac
-tion), to try to change the (real) patient for the better. 
Today, clinicians spend a great deal of time and energy searching and 
sifting through raw data about patients and trying to integrate the data 
with their general medical knowledge to form relevant mental abstrac
-tions and associations relevant to the patient™s situation. As reported by 
Kushniruk, decision making by health care professionals is often compli
-cated by the need to integrate ill-structured, uncertain, and potentially 
con˜icting information from various sources.
4 These various sources 
include but are not limited to myriad journal articles; memories from 
personal clinical experience; clinical guidelines; medical records from a 
host of providers (often working for different health care organizations); 
informal observations and thoughts from colleagues; and patient com
-mentary and insights. Efforts to sift the data from this collection of sources 
force clinicians to devote precious cognitive resources to the details of 
data and make it more likely that they will overlook some important 
higher-order consideration.
The health care IT systems of today tend not to provide assistance 
with this sifting task. Rather, they squeeze all cognitive support for the 
clinician through the lens of health care transactions and the related raw 
data, without an underlying representation of a conceptual model for the 
patient showing how data ˚t together and which data are important or 
unimportant. There is little or no cognitive support for clinicians to reason 
about their ﬁvirtual patient.ﬂ So the health care IT systems force clinicians 
to a transactional view of the raw data. As a result, an understanding of 
the patient can be lost amidst all the data, all the tests, and all the moni
-toring equipment. 
In the committee™s vision of patient-centered cognitive support, the 
clinician interacts with models and abstractions of the patient that place 
the raw data into context and synthesize them with medical knowledge 
in ways that make clinical sense for that patient.
5 Raw data are still avail
-4A. Kushniruk, ﬁAnalysis of Complex Decision-Making Processes in Health Care: Cog
-nitive Approaches to Health Informatics,ﬂ 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics
 34(5):365-376, 
2001.
5The notion of putting individual medical facts into an appropriate context is not new, 
having been described in the literature as early as 1969 (Lawrence L. Weed, 
Medical Records, 
Medical Education and Patient Care
, Case Western Reserve University Press, 1969). Neverthe
-less, IT has progressed a long way since then, providing a more suitable medium in which 
to implement such a notion.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 41
able, but they are not the direct focus of the clinician. These virtual patient 
models are the computational counterparts of the clinician™s conceptual 
model of a patient. They depict and simulate the clinician™s working the
-ory about interactions going on in the patient and enable patient-speci˚c 
parameterization and multicomponent alerts. They build on submodels 
of biological and physiological systems and also exploit epidemiological 
models that take into account the local prevalence of diseases. The avail
-ability of these models would free clinicians from having to scan raw 
data, and thus they would have a much easier time de˚ning, testing, and 
exploring their own working theories. What links the raw data to the 
abstract models might be called medical logicŠthat is, computer-based 
tools examine raw data relevant to a speci˚c patient and suggest their 
clinical implications given the context of the models and abstractions. 
Computers can then provide decision supportŠthat is, tools that help 
clinicians decide on a course of action in response to an understanding of 
the patient™s status. At any time, clinicians have the ability to access the 
raw data as needed if they wish to explore the presented interpretations 
and abstractions in greater depth.
One possible framework for future health care IT is depicted in Figure 
5.1. This framework, which emerged over the course of the committee™s 
discussions and contrasts with the limited focus of today™s health care 
IT, represents an all-encompassing view of components and interactions 
among components needed to support the Institute of Medicine™s vision 
of 21st century health care. 
Future clinician and patient-facing systems would draw on the data, 
information, and knowledge obtained in both patient care and research to 
provide decision support sensitive to work˜ow and human factors. The 
decision support systems would explicitly incorporate patient utilities, 
values, and resource constraints such as those mentioned above. They 
would support holistic plans and would allow users to simulate interven
-tions on the virtual patient before doing them for real. To carry out orders, 
clinicians would use transactional systems like today™s, but built into the 
decision support system rather than the other way around. In today™s 
systems, decision support is commonly an add-on to systems designed 
primarily for transaction processing and does not bene˚t directly from 
results of data mining. Rather than having data entered by clinicians into 
computer systems, the content of clinical interactions would be captured 
in self-documenting environments with little or no additional effort on 
the part of the clinicians. (That is, an intelligent, sensor-rich environment 
would monitor clinical interactions and reduce sensor input to notes that 
document the medically signi˚cant content of those interactions.) 
In addition to the research challenges related to modeling the virtual 
patient and biomedical knowledge are the challenges in modeling and 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
PATIENT CARE
 RESEARC
HDecision su
pp
or
tMedical logi
cVirtual Patient
Medica
lknowledge
Where clinicians want to stay
Transactions
Raw dat
aClinicalresearch
 transactions
Raw research
 data
Where health 
IT chains 
clinicians
 Workflow modeling and su
pport, usability, cognitive support,
 computer-supported cooperative work, and so on
FIGURE 5.1 The virtual patientŠa component view of systems-supported, evi
-dence-based practice. 
 The left side of the ˚gure concerns patient care. Raw data about a patient (the 
electronic health record) constitute the foundational base. Next come the trans
-actional systems that both produce and use raw data as health care is provided. 
These two components make up the majority of today™s health care IT. Above 
them, the committee envisions a computational model of the virtual patient.
 The right side of the ˚gure represents biomedical science and research and its
integral role in health care. Again, raw research data about biological and medical 
phenomena are at the base. Clinical research transactional systems add to and use 
raw data during the process of executing or running clinical research protocols. 
At the top are the models and abstractions that constitute biomedical knowledge. 
The thread connecting the top three components is what might be called medical 
logic.
 Mapping from medical logic to cognitive decision support is the process of 
applying general knowledge to a care process and then to a speci˚c patient and 
his or her medical condition(s). This mapping involves work˜ow modeling and 
support, usability, cognitive support, and computer-supported cooperative work 
and is in˜uenced by many non-medical factors, such as resource constraints (cost-
effectiveness analysis, value of information), patient values and preferences, cost, 
time, and so on.
 The virtual patient poses the greatest research challenge but is only one com
-ponent. Smooth integration with other components is the goal.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 43
supporting multiparty decision making (that is, medical decisions made 
by family, patient, primary care provider, specialist, payer, and so on). 
Techniques to interconnect the components are likely to be equally chal
-lenging (see, for example, the discussions in Sections 5.2.3 and 5.2.4 on 
data integration and data management).
Box 5.2 describes some of the technical research challenges for patient-
centered cognitive support organized by quadrant.
On the non-technical side, a variety of questions arise as to how the 
use of clinically oriented systems such as those described above might ˚t 
into the actual work˜ow of a health care organization. How would such 
support ˚t into the work patterns of future clinicians? What would the 
impact be on their work ef˚ciency? How and under what circumstances 
would clinicians trust the output of these systems? How would responsi
-bility for clinical error be apportioned given the integrative functions of 
these systems? A failure to answer such questions adequately may well 
impede clinician acceptance of new approaches, even if the technical chal
-lenges can be overcome. 
The committee™s vision for patient-centered cognitive support is not 
wholly new. Indeed, development of IT-based tools that examine raw 
data relevant to a speci˚c patient and suggest their clinical implications 
was the focus of a great deal of medical expert system work a number 
Box 5.2
 Research Problems Categorized by Quadrant for 
Patient-Centered Cognitive Support
Ł  
Quadrant 1
 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Data and process integration tech
-nologies, high-quality graphics and sensitive user interface design, coding and 
application of existing human/health models, application of human language 
translation technology in some regions
Ł  
Quadrant 2 
(Health careŠapplied efforts). Careful use of existing data stan
-dards and models, codi˜cation of best practices
Ł  
Quadrant 3
 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Reasoning, machine learning, ex
-planation (why the software reaches a particular conclusion), multimodal inter
-faces (see Section 5.2.5 below); a model of models that would support needed 
extensibility
Ł  
Quadrant 4
 (Health careŠadvanced efforts). Creation of new advanced models 
of differential diagnosis; automated machine learning at large-population scale, 
based on outcomes; a model of models for this domain supporting requisite 
extensibility
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
of decades ago.
6 Similarly, biomedical informaticians have worked for 
decades on the problem of how best to summarize and present data 
using visual methods, a point of special import in the setting of hospital 
intensive care units (ICUs), where multiple streams of real-time data can 
be overwhelming. Much of that research also had to deal with issues of 
acceptance by ICU clinicians and with trust of the technology.
7 And the 
importance of connecting biological knowledge to clinical applications 
has been given new emphasis by a recent focus on translational research 
by the National Institutes of Health.
8 Nevertheless, the committee believes 
both that new challenges have indeed emerged and that many ﬁoldﬂ 
problems have proven more dif˚cult to address effectively than was ˚rst 
appreciated. 
Advances in IT such as the World Wide Web and ubiquitous 
computing challenge the health care IT community to think differently 
about how to exploit IT for health care purposes. 
A ˚nal and signi˚cant bene˚t for the committee™s vision of patient-
centered cognitive support is that patients themselves should be able to 
make use of tools designed with such support in mind. That is, entirely 
apart from being useful for clinicians, tools and technologies for patient-
centered cognitive support should also be able to provide value for 
patients who wish to understand their own medical conditions more com
-pletely and thoroughly. Obviously, different interfaces would be required 
(e.g., interfaces that translate medical jargon into lay language)Šbut the 
underlying tools for medical data integration, modeling, and abstraction 
designed for patient-centered cognitive support are likely to be the same 
in any system for lay end users (i.e., patients).
6One of the primary lessons from this work was that although well-designed medical 
expert systems did have potential to improve clinical diagnoses and recommendations for 
treatment, many other issues needed to be addressed before they were ready for ﬁprime-
timeﬂ application. In addition, much of the early work on medical expert systems focused on 
relatively small problem domains, whereas the overarching medical context for improving 
health care involves the large problem domain of how all of the patient™s data and problems 
˚t together.
7See, for example, R.A. Fleming and N.T. Smith, ﬁDensity ModulationŠA Technique for 
the Display of Three-Variable Data in Patient Monitoring,ﬂ 
Anesthesiology
 50(6):543-546, 
June 1979; M.M. Shabot, P.D. Carlton, S. Sadoff, and L. Nolan-Avila, ﬁGraphical Reports 
and Displays for Complex ICU Data: A New, Flexible and Con˚gurable Method,ﬂ 
Computer 
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine
 22(1):111-116, March 1986; I.A. Galer and B.L. Yap, ﬁEr
-gonomics in Intensive Care: Applying Human Factors Data to the Design and Evaluation 
of Patient Monitoring Systems,ﬂ 
Ergonomics
 23(8):763-779, August 1980; Y. Shahar and C. 
Cheng, ﬁIntelligent Visualization and Exploration of Time-Oriented Clinical Data,ﬂ 
Topics in 
Health Information Management
 20(2):15-31, November 1999.
8See, for example, Jocelyn Kaiser, ﬁNIH Funds a Dozen ‚Homes™ for Translational Re
-search,ﬂ 
Science
 314(5797):237, October 13, 2006, available at http://www.sciencemag.
org/cgi/content/full/314/5797/237a.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 45
5.2
 OTHER REPRESENTATIVE RESEARCH CHALLENGES
In addition to patient-centered cognitive support, there are for the 
computer science community many other interesting research challenges 
relevant to health care. Several examples are provided to illustrate this 
main point, but there are indeed many more that are not covered in this 
report.
5.2.1
 Modeling
 One aspect of the ﬁvirtual patientﬂ in Section 5.1 involves modeling 
various subsystems within a real patient (e.g., different organs, diges
-tive system, and so on) to show how they interact.
9 Such models might 
operate on different or variable timescalesŠa model focusing on the 
absorption of nutrients through the digestive system might operate on a 
timescale of hours, whereas a model focusing on skeletal health, calcium 
depletion, osteoporosis, or particular bones might operate over years. 
Similarly, some models might represent molecular interactions, and others 
might represent particular cells, organs, or organisms. 
To ˚rst order, the physiological subsystems of all human beings are 
identical. Thus, a sensible approach to modeling subsystems in a speci˚c 
patient is to appropriately parameterize a generic model of those subsys
-tems. But ˚nding appropriate parameterizations for any given model and 
coupling the different models and the data to drive them pose signi˚cant 
intellectual challenges. Some insight into model interoperability can be 
gained through the use of ad hoc techniques (e.g., 
XML-based ﬁmash-
upsﬂ [Web applications that combine data from multiple sources] used in 
Web 2.0 applications) or through other existing component frameworks, 
but the overall problem of model interoperability for health care purposes 
is vastly more complex than applications that have been tackled before. 
Progress is being made in understanding speci˚c metabolic path
-ways.
10
 The effects of a medication, as well as of some other treatments, 
are candidates for modeling. Such models will still require many of the 
parameters used to manage and classify the data.
11
 Genetic makeup, 
9The notion of a computational virtual human being that would provide a high-˚delity 
computational model of a human being that would respond realistically to various stimuli is 
not new. See, for example, ﬁThe Virtual Human Project: An Idea Whose Time Has Come?,ﬂ 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory Re
view
 33(1), 2000.
10
See, for example, www.HumanCyc.org.
11
See, for example, PharmGKB, a project to curate information that establishes knowledge 
about the relationships among drugs, diseases, and genes, including their variations and 
gene products, available at http://www.pharmgkb.org/.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
including the capability to produce pathway-controlling enzymes, is one 
of the most challenging aspects of making such simulations relevant.
Coupling models will require a computational platform that can sup
-port multiple interacting components that can be combined into larger 
and more complex models. Such a platform must not only support par
-allel operation of the analytical processes but also allow assembly of 
hierarchical simulation and information structures, dynamically built, 
exploited, modi˚ed when possible on the basis of individual patient 
data and statistical aggregates thereof, and abandoned when no longer 
effective. At the supporting levels, multiple processing alternatives will 
exist. Speci˚c, detailed simulations will provide the most speci˚c and cur
-rent results. Cached results can greatly reduce the computational effort 
for repeated sub-analyses. Where no analytical methods exist, results 
from biological or clinical trials or clinician assessments can be provided. 
Search and interpretation can provide yet another set of inputs. Being 
able to operate with a variety of computational paradigms in one setting 
can greatly enhance collaboration among communities that have similar 
objectives but that now ignore each other. Yet another challenge in mod
-eling is building multilevel models that can successfully couple highly 
detailed physiologic models to the much looser clinical ﬁmodelsﬂ that 
typically are based more on phenomenological relationships than on true 
underlying causes.
Finally, keeping records of predictions and actual patient outcomes 
will allow incremental tuning of the approach. It will take much experi
-ence as well as careful approaches to do so in a way that converges on 
a stable and more optimal outcome. The actual determination of patient 
treatment will remain in the hands and minds of the clinician. But the 
feedback that can be provided by bringing data collections, metabolic 
models, and their processing to an interactive care setting is essential to 
extract value out of the many technology investments that are in process 
or being planned. 
Box 5.3 describes some of the technical research challenges for model
-ing organized by quadrant.
5.2.2
 Automation
The technical de˚nitions of automation allow for multiple forms, 
depending on the degree of intelligence and autonomy exhibited. Systems 
that are completely automatic and that can be trusted to work properly 
without any need for human oversight or attention have proven to be 
effective and valuable. Systems that require human oversight or control, 
which in actuality is almost any complex system, fall under the category 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 47
of 
human-automation interaction
 and require considerable care in their 
design and implementation.
12
 Automatic systems, especially in medicine, do not operate in a 
vacuum.
13
 They are part of a complex network, and the outputs and 
alarms of automatic systems have to be integrated with other components 
and often interpreted and, when necessary, overridden by human opera
-tors. The intermix of different complex systems plus humans provides 
widespread opportunity for both good and harm. 
Historically, automated systems have often been developed and 
deployed quite independently of the others with which they must co-exist, 
leading to confusing and sometimes contradictory signaling, monitoring 
requirements, and safety concerns. The result is an ever-growing set of 
alarms (often indistinguishable from one another) and different operating 
requirements, meaning that new users may not know how to proceed, yet 
the proliferation of new systems makes it impossible for training to keep 
apace. The problem of alert fatigue is well known, as evidenced by the 
12
For more discussion of this point, see J.D. Lee, ﬁHuman Factors and Ergonomics in Au
-tomation Design,ﬂ in G. Salvendy (Ed.), 
Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics
, 3rd ed., 
Wiley, New York, pp. 1570-1596, but especially see pp. 1580-1590, 2006; also, T.B. Sheridan 
and R. Parasuraman, ﬁHuman-Automation Interaction,ﬂ in R.S. Nickerson (Ed.), 
Re
views 
of Human Factors and Ergonomics
, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Santa Monica, 
Calif., 2006.
13
See, for example, National Research Council, 
The Future of Air Traf˚c Control: Human Op
-erators and Automation
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1998; National Research 
Council, 
Flight to the Future: Human Factors in Air Traf˚c Control
, National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C., 1997; National Research Council, 
The Case for Human Factors in Industry 
and Go
vernment
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1997.
Box 5.3
 Research Problems Categorized by 
 Quadrant for Modeling
Ł  
Quadrant 1
 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Development of a framework for easy 
use of existing, piecemeal models, to gain experience and create a framework 
for evolutionary advance
Ł  
Quadrant 2
 (Health careŠapplied efforts). Coding and deployment of existing 
health care models
Ł  
Quadrant 3
 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Development of models that self-
adapt (or propose self-adaptation) on the basis of changing evidence 
Ł  
Quadrant 4
 (Health careŠadvanced efforts). Integration of multiple models, 
and development of new models
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
large number of publications and symposia dedicated to this problem in 
all industries that are affected: aviation, process control, and medicine.
14
 The worst problem of automatic systems is an issue of trust. If person
-nel trust them, the trust is often over-generous, so that personnel are apt 
to believe erroneous indicators and operations for longer than is prudent, 
or they may neglect attending to and monitoring of the system even 
though it is not fully reliable. Similarly, a lack of trust may also be inap
-propriate, leading people to add to their workload to continually check 
on the operation of a system that is, in fact, quite capable of autonomous 
operation.
The problems of over- and underautomation have been well docu
-mented in other domains and industries, but the committee believes 
that they have not been appropriately appreciated within the medical 
community. Much can be gained in an industry by the introduction of 
more intelligent, more autonomous systems, but the lessons from other 
disciplines must also be acquired and followed.
15
 Automation has been 
implemented most successfully in aviation and process-control manufac
-turing. Automation is also used in warehousing and traditional manufac
-turing, as well as in many modern electronic-commerce back-end systems. 
Stock trading is another example of an activity in which automation can 
be used successfully. 
All these cases differ from medicine (although prescription ˚lling and 
checking may come closest to matching order-˚lling systems), however, 
and the lessons they provide cannot be carried over directly into medi
-cine. But drawing on such hard-earned experience as a point of departure 
for medicine makes good sense.
Finally, the introduction of automation is always a systems problem 
14
In the medical domain, see, for example, J. Edworthy and E.J. Hellier, ﬁFewer But Better 
Auditory Alarms Will Improve Patient Safety,ﬂ 
Quality and Safety in Health Care
 14:212Œ215, 
2005; J. Edworthy and E.J. Hellier, ﬁAlarms and Human Behaviour: Implications for Medi
-cal Alarms,ﬂ 
British Journal of Anaesthesia
 97(1):12-17, 2006; A. Otero, P. Felix, F. Palacios, C. 
Perez-Gandia, and C.O.S. Sorzano, ﬁIntelligent Alarms for Patient Supervision,ﬂ 
Proceedings 
of the
 IEEE International Symposium on Intelligent Signal Processing
, WISP 2007, pp. 1-6, 2007.
15
See, for example, T.B. Sheridan, 
Humans and Automation: System Design and Research 
Issues
, Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, Santa Monica, Calif. (Wiley Series in Sys
-tems Engineering and Management), 2002; D.A. Norman, ﬁThe ‚Problem™ of Automation: 
Inappropriate Feedback and Interaction, Not ‚Over-Automation™,ﬂ in D.E. Broadbent, A. 
Baddeley, and J.T. Reason (Eds.), 
Human Factors in Hazardous Situations
, pp. 585-593, Ox
-ford University Press, Oxford, 1990; C.E. Billings, 
Aviation Automation: The Search for a Hu
-man-Centered Approach
, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, Mahwah, N.J., 1997; D.A. 
Norman, 
The Design of E
veryday Things
, Doubleday, New York, 1990; B. Lussier, A. Lampe, 
R. Chatila, J. Guiochet, F. Ingrand, M.-O. Killijian, and D. Powell, ﬁFault Tolerance in Au
-tonomous Systems: How and How Much?,ﬂ in 
4th IARP-IEEE/RAS-EURON Joint Workshop 
on Technical Challenges for Dependable Robots in Human En
vironments
, Nagoya, Japan, 2005.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 49
that intermixes equipment, administrative procedures, and real people. 
Accordingly, research on automation for medicine will require a multi
-disciplinary team approach, including technical, medical, and social sci
-ence expertise. Good design cannot be added on afterward, and intensive 
cooperative efforts involving people from all disciplines affected by any 
IT-based system are necessary from the start.
Box 5.4 describes some of the technical research challenges for auto
-mation organized by quadrant.
5.2.3
 Data Sharing and Collaboration
The data relevant to health care are highly heterogeneous, and the 
types and quantity of data evolve rapidly. In addition to patient-record 
information that exists in multiple forms, health care requires data about 
drugs and diagnoses, including data from signals captured by biomedical 
devices, voice recordings, and data captured as codes. Data are typically 
stored in multiple locations on multiple systems. Sometimes such data 
are stored in structured databases, and in other cases relevant data are 
found in legacy systems, structured ˚les, and databases and text ˚les 
behind Web forms. Data are increasingly multimedia and high-dimen
-sional, including voice, imaging, and continuous biomedical signals. Data 
of various types have different degrees of reliability, ranging from test 
Box 5.4
 Research Problems Categorized by 
 Quadrant for Automation
 Ł  
Quadrant 1
 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Application of automation systems that 
exist; more use of business process integration technology as it exists in infor
-mation technology; application of simple rules that can make a big difference
Ł  
Quadrant 2 
(Health careŠapplied efforts). Codi˜cation of low-hanging fruit; use 
of open-source and other community techniques to pool necessary informa
-tion to produce better automation rules; application of simple things ˜rst, like 
electronic messaging, automated scheduling of various resources, and so on, 
and an emphasis on avoiding paralysis by analysis
Ł  
Quadrant 3
 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Explanation, self-testing of ef˜ca
-cy, advanced learning, and management of false-negative and false-positive 
conditionsŁ  
Quadrant 4
 (Health careŠadvanced efforts). Extension of underlying data uses 
and modeling to improve model precision (e.g., more data feeding into drug 
interactions systems could be used to reduce false alarms); efforts to ensure 
that outcomes are known to the system so that it can self-report and learn
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
results (which may be quite conclusive) to patient-provided data (which 
could contain signi˚cant biases). Numerous health care IT challenges 
require the ability to share and integrate data across multiple systems and 
seamlessly move data from one system to another.
To exploit highly heterogeneous data effectively, usersŠsuch as care
-givers, medical researchers, and patientsŠneed the ability to ask queries 
that span multiple data sources without requiring the data to be stan
-dardized or requiring the user to query each single database in isolation. 
That is, the user wants a single interface through which any query can 
be posed. 
Today, the challenge for data integration, by which is meant systems 
that enable data owners to share data and collaborate in ˜exible ways 
without having to store all the data in a single repository or have them 
all conform to a common schema, is understood from the systems and 
logical perspectives. One approach is to aggregate patient health care 
information into a common data repository [C4O14]. Although aggrega
-tion is a basic building block of data integration, aggregating all relevant 
data into a single repository is likely to be infeasible. As a result of a sig
-ni˚cant amount of research, there are commercial systems today that are 
capable of answering queries that span multiple sources without
 loading 
all the data into a single warehouse with a uniform schema. The user of 
such a system accesses the data through an abstraction called a 
mediated 
schema
, and queries are then reformulated from the mediated schema onto 
the relevant data sources using a set of 
semantic mappings
. These systems 
perform adequately, and the small additional cost of accessing remote sys
-tems at query time is offset by the management bene˚ts of having systems 
that can share locally owned and maintained components. 
The main shortcoming of current data integration systems is that 
they are too hard to use. Designing a mediated schema and creating the 
semantic mappings between the sources and the mediated schema entail a 
signi˚cant effort that requires considerable subject-matter expertise. This 
is especially true when the schema is large, complicated, and likely to be 
continually evolving, as in the case of health care data. As a consequence, 
integration projects often fail midway since the costs of this design work 
are incurred up front before the bene˚ts from that work are obtained. 
The above challenge suggests three speci˚c research directions:
Ł Data integration systems that are fundamentally easier to use
. The sys
-tem should be able to examine the data sources available and suggest 
to the designers a possible mediated schema and mappings from the 
data sources to semantically related entries in the mediated schema. The 
system should point to gaps in the coverage of the data sources so that 
additional sources can be discovered or enhanced. The system should 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 51
present to the designer effective visualizations of the data and the sche
-mata to further facilitate the process. Gaps in the system™s coverage can 
be detected by analyzing queries (e.g., frequent queries asking for an 
attribute of a patient which is not represented in any of the data sources 
of which the system is aware).
Ł Data integration that can proceed incrementally
. It should not be neces
-sary to completely integrate data sources in order to get some bene˚t from 
the collection of sources. One approach to reducing the effort required in 
data integration is what might be called ﬁpay-as-you-goﬂ data integration. 
A design goal should be the construction of systems that offer access to 
multiple data sources with little or no human effort, and that improve 
over time as the users realize where integration is needed most. For 
example, a system could begin by guessing approximate (and possibly 
incorrect) semantic mappings; over time, semantic mappings would be 
improved, thereby enabling more comprehensive answers to queries over 
the collection of data sources. Some of the speci˚c challenges to obtain
-ing such systems are (1) leveraging user interactions with the system to 
understand the semantics of the data, (2) developing collaborative tech
-niques for improving the semantic cohesion of a collection of data sources, 
and (3) maintaining compatibility of incremental integration efforts with 
previous versions.
Ł More ˜exible architectures for data sharing and integration
. Currently, 
the common architecture for such systems envisages a single mediated 
schema and mappings to that schema.
16
 While this architecture has the 
advantage that the data can still remain in the sources and be managed 
there, the creation of the mediated schema is still a centralized effort. 
Systems are needed that enable data owners to share data in a more ad 
hoc fashion and extend the coverage of data sharing as they see ˚t.
17
 Peer-to-peer architectures are needed for sharing data whereby it is easy 
to (1) discover data sources, (2) join the network of available sources with
-out signi˚cant effort, and (3) retain control over the data and its privacy 
as necessary.
18
 In addition, such a system should enable tracking differ
-ent versions of the data as the data evolve over time, and highlight the 
changes when appropriate.
If these challenges can be met, it will be much easier to build and 
deploy data integration systems that require minimal set-up time and pro
-16
See, for example, a common architecture for enterprise information integration products 
from IBM (http://www-01.ibm.com/software/data/integration/) and BEA (now Oracle) 
(http://edocs.bea.com/liquiddata/docs81/index.html).
17
This embodies the philosophy underlying the Semantic Web approach.
18
See for example, Gio Wiederhold, ﬁMediators in the Architecture of Future Information 
Systems,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
 25(3):38-49, March 1992.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
vide valuable services without specifying complete and accurate semantic 
mappings. For example, certain data regarded as critical might be made 
interoperable through explicitly designed semantic mappings. But all data 
might be made available (i.e., visible) subject to control for con˚dentiality 
even if no mappings had been created. A care provider needing data for 
which no mappings were available would have to work harder to query 
those data, but those data would at least be visible and usable for clini
-cal purposes. If and when a need is recognized for making a particular 
class of data semantically consistent, mappings could be createdŠand the 
system™s overall interoperability could be incrementally improved.
Box 5.5 describes some of the technical research challenges for data 
sharing and collaboration organized by quadrant.
To illustrate the importance of data integration, consider its applica
-tion to the personal health record. In its ideal future form (not that of 
today), a personal health record contains an individual™s entire medical 
history, that is, from all interactions with all health care providers (and 
self-provided care as well) and is under the control of the patient.
19
 For 
information to be easily accessible to the patient, data supplied by differ
-ent providersŠlikely each with their own local health care IT systems gen
-erating data in idiosyncratic formats and with different meaningsŠmust 
be integrated in a way that they appear to have common semantics. Data 
19
See, for example, Kenneth D. Mandl and Isaac S. Kohane, ﬁTectonic Shifts in the Health 
Information Economy,ﬂ 
New England Journal of Medicine
 358(16):1732-1737, April 17, 2008.
Box 5.5
 Research Problems Categorized by Quadrant for 
 Data Sharing and Collaboration
Ł  
Quadrant 1
 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Application of known data integration 
technology, ontology management and analysis tools, and state-of-the-art 
search techniques (including user-machine learning and information retrieval 
technology to enable systems to self-tune)
Ł  
Quadrant 2
 (Health careŠapplied efforts). Application of existing ontologies 
and knowledge sources in scalable, ef˜cient systems
Ł  
Quadrant 3
 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Development of easier-to-use data in
-tegration and ontology management systems, to allow for incremental creation 
and annotation of semantic information; work toward resolving understanding 
about how to decide when and where semantics must be added, and when se
-mantics can be induced based on raw information stored and usage models 
Ł  
Quadrant 4
 (Health careŠadvanced efforts). Advanced privacy management 
that supports needs for aggregative, epidemiological research
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 53
protectionŠa key element of personal health records, in that the patient 
is empowered to apply ˚ne-grained control of the information contained 
thereinŠalso requires that patient-speci˚ed security and privacy policies 
act on all data elements referring to the targets of those policies. This 
requirement presents yet another data integration task.
 5.2.4
 Data Management at Scale
20
Presuming the existence of large integrated corpora of data (the focus 
of Section 5.2.3 on data integration), another major challenge is in manag
-ing those data. Some of the important dimensions of medical information 
management include:
Ł Annotation and metadata
. Raw data almost never speak for them
-selves, and their interpretation inevitably relies on metadataŠannotations 
to the primary data that provide the necessary context. For example, the 
primary data for the human genome consist of a sequence of some 3 bil
-lion nucleotides. Metadata associated with the primary data help scien
-tists to identify signi˚cant patterns within those dataŠa given sequence 
might be annotated as a gene or a regulatory element. Metadata could 
also be used to trace the provenance or lineage of data. For example, the 
value of certain data in an electronic health record could be enhanced if 
the data included information about the conditions under which certain 
data were obtained (e.g., physician observations of a patient™s description 
of symptoms might be accompanied by video and audio recordings of the 
session with the patient). With metadata, a primary problem is the design 
and development of tools to facilitate machine-readable annotations in 
large databases.
Ł Information extraction from text
. The volume of medically signi˚cant 
information rendered in text form (e.g., physician or nursing notes) is 
large, and may in various instances be as or more signi˚cant than infor
-mation rendered in different forms (e.g., lab instrument readings). Extract
-ing useful medical information from textual notes is therefore an impor
-tant problem that calls for computer science expertise in text processing, 
natural language processing, and statistical text-mining techniques as 
well as medical expertise to understand the concepts and ideas to which 
the information refers. New techniques are needed for extracting informa
-tion such as patient names, doctor names, medicine names, and disease 
names from textual notes, and for generating automatic linkages between 
20
An extended discussion of the data management challenges in biomedical data can be 
found in National Research Council, 
Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing and Biol
-ogy,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
different relevant entities. Such extraction would make it possible to piece 
together a larger picture automatically while pulling information from 
multiple heterogeneous data and information sources. Extraction of data 
from tables and ˚gures in reports is another example of a useful informa
-tion extraction capability.
Ł Linkage
. Clinicians often rely on multiple types of data to render a 
diagnosisŠe.g., blood tests and clinical observations and imaging. Rela
-tionships between different types of data are best captured in ontologies,
21
 which are descriptions of concepts and relationships that exist among the 
concepts for a particular domain of knowledge. In addition to providing 
controlled, hierarchically structured vocabularies for medical terminol
-ogy, they specify object classes, characteristics, and functions in ways that 
capture important concepts and relationships between those concepts 
(perhaps in a given area, such as internal medicine or cardiology or oncol
-ogy). Ontologies containing such information facilitate the representation 
of working hypotheses and the evidence that supports and refutes them in 
machine-readable form, and can help clinicians reason their way through 
complex cases. Ontologies must also be revisable in the light of new 
research that may discover previously unknown relationships or develop 
new interpretations of existing concepts. An important research problem 
is thus the design of appropriate ontologies and automated approaches to 
populating and updating them through sources such as medical dictionar
-ies, textbooks, and recent articles in the relevant literature, although it is 
an open question to what extent declarative approaches can capture and 
exploit all the relevant relationships. Fallback to programmed solutions 
provides an escape and should be possible to allow putting into practice 
implementations that can provide feedback and thus enable progress.
Ł Pri
vacy
. Epidemiological research and phase IV drug testing (post-
approval) both depend on the aggregation of select medical data from 
large numbers of individual records, even if individual identities need 
not be associated with these data. The electronic storage of these records 
facilitates such aggregation, but aggregation on a large scale also has 
many privacy implications. An important research problem is thus how to 
mine these data without unduly compromising individual privacy when 
individuals have not explicitly granted data access permission. Addition
-ally, even outside the world of epidemiological research, the management 
21
The term ﬁontologyﬂ is a philosophical term referring to the subject of existence. The 
computer science community borrowed the term to refer to ﬁspeci˚cation of a conceptual
-izationﬂ for knowledge sharing in arti˚cial intelligence. (See, for example, T.R. Gruber, ﬁA 
Translation Approach to Portable Ontology Speci˚cation,ﬂ 
Knowledge Acquisition
 5(2):199-
220, 1993.)
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 55
of data in ways that permit data sharing among those with a need to 
know, while prohibiting other access, is a signi˚cant technical challenge.
Ł Scale and other systems issues
. There are many challenges in creating 
and implementing the protocols and systems that will allow a variety of 
interlocking systems to provide a robust, high-performance information 
store that can be reliably and easily accessed by a variety of different 
classes of users, ranging from the patient and her designees to caregiv
-ers. For example, interlocking health care IT systems must enable and 
preserve the relationships among the different applications and work
-˜ows. In addition, the need to store data for a lifetime presents signi˚cant 
technical challenges if only because the storage lifetime could exceed the 
lifetime of some organizations.
Ł User interface
. While technically not data management per se, the 
data models, data federation technologies, and security and privacy 
approaches must all support the wide variety of usage that is expected. 
What an emergency room physician needs is very different from what is 
required by a physician reviewing the data with an eye toward wellness, 
a point understood by at least some in the biomedical informatics com
-munity since the 1980s.
22
 Visualization tools that help users integrate and 
manage data pulled from multiple sources might also be considered part 
of a sophisticated user interface, and coupled with analytic techniques 
may help to solve problems that are not possible to solve using analytic 
techniques alone.
There are many more dimensions to the problem than those described 
above, which are intended to be illustrative rather than exhaustive. In 
addition, Box 5.6 describes some of the technical research challenges for 
data management at scale organized by quadrant.
In summary, the problems addressed in Section 5.2.3 and in this 
section are core problems that would lead to the creation of health care 
records with enormously diverse applications. These applications include 
providing the information that would, among others things, (1) power the 
virtual patient described in Section 5.1, (2) provide a strong foundation 
for epidemiological research, (3) improve communication throughout the 
caregiver ecosystem, and (4) offer information storage and retrieval that 
would enable patients and their family and friends to be more involved 
in their own health care.
22
See, for example, Eric Sherman and Edward Shortliffe, ﬁA User-Adaptable Interface to 
Predict Users™ Needs,ﬂ pp. 285-315 in M. Schneider-Hufschmidt, T. Kuhme, and U. Mal
-linowski (Eds.), 
Adapti
ve User Interfaces
, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1993. User customization of 
an interface is an example of an idea that was dif˚cult to implement with the technology of 
20 years ago but now is much more feasible with today™s technology and just as important 
today to pursue.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
5.2.5
 Automated Full Capture of Physician-Patient Interactions
As noted above, care providers spend a great deal of time in docu
-menting their interactions with patients. Automated capture of patient-
provider interactions would release such time for more productive uses 
and help to ensure more complete and more timely patient records.
A comprehensive environment for capturing interactions would nec
-essarily be multimodal, involving ways of capturing and interpreting 
visual images and conversations. Rather than one general-purpose envi
-ronment, capture environments would likely be specialized to different 
settingsŠsuch as hospital room (e.g., nurse/patient), emergency room 
(e.g., ER physician/patient), routine consultation (primary care provider/
patient), and specialist consultation (e.g., cardiologist or surgeon and 
patient).
Some of the important dimensions in this problem domain include:
Ł Real-time transcription and interpretation of the dialog between patient 
and pro
vider
. Individual voices must be identi˚ed as being associated with 
the provider or the patient. The transcript must be parsed unambiguously, 
irrelevant information identi˚ed and ignored, and relevant information 
interpreted. 
Ł Summarization of physical interactions between patient and pro
vider 
based on the interpretation of images recorded by 
various cameras in the patient 
care room
. In a hospital room, the system must be able to distinguish 
Box 5.6
 Research Problems Categorized by Quadrant for 
 Data Management at Scale
Ł  
Quadrant 1
 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Creation of systems that scale, using 
notions of ﬁcloudﬂ computing, coupled with local information to reduce manage
-ment complexity
Ł  
Quadrant 2
 (Health careŠapplied efforts). Compression, understanding of 
what to store and what not to store, prioritization of information; privacy of 
patient information
Ł  
Quadrant 3
 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Techniques for correcting or coding 
degrees of accuracy and precision in data; techniques for learning about and 
forming aggregate data sets; automated management techniques for large, 
highly valuable data sets that are often used across many organizations
Ł  
Quadrant 4 
(Health careŠadvanced efforts). Applications for handling inaccu
-rate data to improve input to health care data models, better coding techniques 
for information
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH CHALLENGES
 57
Box 5.7
 Research Problems Categorized by Quadrant for 
Automated Full Capture of Physician-Patient Interactions 
Ł  
Quadrant 1
 (GeneralŠapplied efforts). Use of photographic technology, inte
-gration of sensor systems (perhaps, from the simple temperature sensor to 
imaging), use of speech dictation for transcription and/or indexing of audio ˜les, 
natural language processing on existing textual records
Ł  
Quadrant 2
 (Health careŠapplied efforts). Creation of high-quality work˚ows, 
customization of physical devices for the hospital environment (e.g., with due 
regard for infection control and to minimize physician/patient distance), creation 
and use of appropriate language models to maximize machine capabilities, 
work˚ows to make transcripts available to patients, use of software systems 
post-visit to provide information
Ł  
Quadrant 3
 (GeneralŠadvanced efforts). Ever-improved speech recognition, 
multimodal interface development, summarization and extraction of key infor
-mation, sentiment analysis, automatic privacy management
Ł  
Quadrant 4
 (Health careŠadvanced efforts). Development of new modes of 
caregiver-patient-computer interaction where the interaction is tri-partite and 
the computer is not ﬁin the wayﬂ; advanced empirical, health care informatics 
work aimed at understanding how to ef˜ciently acquire and provide information 
via computer systems 
between the administration of an intravenous antibiotic or a tubal feed
-ing. In an examination room, the system must be able to identify parts of 
the body to which the patient or provider is pointing and correlate such 
gestures with the dialog. In all settings, cameras should be able to iden
-tify documents presented to patients, and to capture written annotations 
made by patient or provider, subject to appropriate privacy safeguards. 
The goal would be a system able to produce a useful summary and/or 
the equivalent of a video transcript that describes what happened.
Ł Transcript 
visibility for patients, and patients™ ability to correct and anno
-tate the transcript
. Ł Correlation of the information contained in the audio and 
visual tran
-scripts
. Use of both types of information should increase the accuracy and 
utility of the resulting summaries.
Some pieces of this technology exist, but even when they do, integrat
-ing them and making the results available smoothly, with little latency, are 
challenges to today™s computer science.
Box 5.7 describes some of the technical research challenges for 
automated full capture of physician-patient interactions organized by 
quadrant.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
Lastly, a key non-technical issue to be faced by any full-capture sys
-tem is patient acceptance. In some of today™s interactions between clini
-cian and patient, a patient may rely on a clinician™s discretion to refrain 
from entering into the record certain sensitive information related by 
the patient. In the absence of believable assurances in full-capture clin
-ical interactions that such sensitive information will not be recorded, 
patients may well be less forthcoming or complete in their accounting of 
their medical histories and circumstances. Such problems will have to be 
addressed before any such system will be widely acceptable.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 Recommendations
Many advances in computer science and engineering in the last 10 
to 20 years speak to the problems in health care information technology 
(IT) observed by the committee. These advances include ontologies, data 
fusion techniques, large-scale search capabilities, information visualiza
-tion, and modern computer system architectures to support large-scale 
distributed systems in a heterogeneous operating environment. But for 
various reasons, these advances have not often been re˜ected in generally 
available clinical information systems.
Organizations face dif˚cult economic decisions regarding whether to 
emphasize short-term ˚nancial gains relative to longer-term advantages 
wherein cost savings are associated with quality improvement. In addi
-tion, the acquisition processes of many health care provider organizations 
are not often compatible with the development and deployment of future 
health care IT systems that provide cognitive support and are evolvable 
into the future. Poorly understood or de˚ned requirements, poor develop
-ment processes, and failures to adopt iterative or evolutionary approaches 
or user-centered design are often seen.
In addition, it is fair to say that the integration of health care IT into 
operational work processes has proven both more essential and more 
dif˚cult than was ˚rst expected, at least in part because many attempts 
to deploy health care IT have not taken into account the systems engi
-neering issues inherent in viewing health care as a complex, adaptive 
system. In other words, the research problems have become signi˚cantly 
more demanding when conceptualizing the whole as a set of components 
59
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
working together to provide a working information and knowledge infra
-structure for 21st century health care.  
Lastly, there are many unsolved problems related to health care IT, 
including supporting appropriate access while respecting the con˚den
-tiality of medical records, managing the cognitive load on care provid
-ers that results from the availability of large volumes of information, 
and managing the information in a medical record over the multidecade 
lifetime of individuals in the context of rapidly changing scienti˚c and 
medical knowledge.
Three distinct groups have a meaningful role in addressing these 
areas. Federal and state government and the health care community must 
speak to acquisition policy. The health care community must insist that 
vendors supply health care IT systems that provide meaningful cognitive 
support. And the research community, including researchers in computer 
science and health/biomedical informatics, must play a lead intellectual 
role in advancing the current state of the art in health care IT systems.
6.1
 GOVERNMENT
Federal and state governments play important roles as supporters of 
research, payers for health care, and stimulators for education. The com
-mittee believes that government organizationsŠespecially the federal 
governmentŠshould explicitly embrace measurable health care qual
-ity improvement as the driving rationale for its health care IT adoption 
efforts, and should shun programs that focus on promoting the adoption 
of speci˚c clinical applications. While this principle should not be taken 
to discourage incentives to invest in infrastructure (networks, worksta
-tions, administrative transaction processing systems, platforms for data 
mining, data repositories, and so on) that provides a foundation on which 
other speci˚c clinical applications can be built, a top-down focus on spe
-ci˚c clinical applications is likely to result in a premature ﬁfreezingﬂ of 
inef˚cient work˜ows and processes and to impede iterative change. In 
focusing on the goal to be achieved, namely better and/or less expensive 
health care, clinicians and other providers will be eager to use new health 
care IT-enabled clinical applications if, where, and when such applications 
can be shown to enable them to do their jobs more effectively. 
Health care quality improvement efforts scale from practice groups 
and individual practitioners to large health care organizations to the 
health care system as a whole. Traditionally, quality improvement efforts 
tend to occur at the level of larger practice groups and health care organi
-zations, and are slowed by the requirement to develop consensus among 
the universe of relevant clinicians. Indeed, these efforts require such vol
-ume of collective effort that most organizations cannot sustain more than 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS
 61
a few quality improvement initiatives at a time. Given the quality chasm 
facing many health care organizations, such a slow rate of change is 
unacceptable. 
In contrast, iterative local improvement at the small group or even 
individual practitioner level has the major advantage of being faster and 
cheaper to accomplish because of its small scale. This allows for improve
-ment efforts to be conducted in parallel, increasing the chances of ˚nding 
successful approaches, while unsuccessful approaches can be rapidly and 
inexpensively discarded. Local successes also tend to build support for 
additional improvement efforts. Government should promote explora
-tion of methods and models for small-scale improvement efforts as well 
as efforts to integrate these small-scale improvements on a larger scale. A 
balance with many small-scale efforts providing the evidence base for a 
smaller number of large-scale efforts seems appropriate. 
IT is a fundamental enabler for both large-scale and small-scale 
improvement efforts. But for the most part, the health care IT available 
in today™s market is not well suited to support small-scale optimization, 
which requires applications that are rapidly customizable in the ˚eld by 
end users. Federally inspired or supported initiatives that incentivize 
health care organizations to undertake iterative small-scale optimization, 
and subsequent translation of successes to a larger scale, are likely to 
help stimulate the creation of a new market for these applicationsŠfor 
example, such incentives might take the form of payment premiums for 
demonstrations of major improvement of a result (process or clinical) for 
a unit of the organization.
A last point is that work at the health careŒIT nexus is interdisciplin
-ary. A lack of familiarity with the domain-speci˚c problems in the health 
care domain has often impeded the efforts of well-meaning computer 
scientists. Formal and elegant computer science, as understood by most 
computer science researchers, is often a poor match with the complex 
cultural and organizational environment of health care and biomedi
-cineŠtopics about which a well-trained computer science graduate is 
generally ignorant. Academic medical centers often fail to take advantage 
of relevant expertiseŠespecially in health/biomedical informaticsŠthat 
is available to them. Such organizations are often inclined to turn to inter
-nal expertiseŠthe in-house health care IT professionalsŠrather than to 
the relevant health/biomedical informatics and computer science faculty 
on campus. Progress at this nexus will require contributions of health 
care experts, computer science experts, experts from the health/biomedi
-cal informatics community, and health care IT experts working together 
to understand the problems related to improving health care and how IT 
might be applied to address those problems.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
This analysis leads to six important recommendations for the federal 
government:
Ł Incenti
vize clinical performance gains rather than acquisition of IT per 
se
. This is not to say that IT is irrelevant, but the acquisition of health care 
IT is better guided by what is needed to support improvement efforts.
1 For example, the development and redesign of work processes to provide 
effective feedback to clinicians logically precede implementation of IT to 
automate work˜ow, rather than simply acquiring health care IT ˚rst. 
Ł Encourage initiati
ves to empower iterati
ve process impro
vement and 
small-scale optimization
. Because the market does not today provide the IT 
required for small-scale optimization (the committee saw no such health 
care IT in its site visits), these initiatives should also provide support for 
clinicians to work with computer science and IT experts to design pro
-totype applications to support their improvement efforts. In this short 
report, the committee did not address the nature or scale of support 
needed, and believes that this is an issue best addressed in a second phase 
of this study.
Ł Encourage de
velopment of standards and measures of health care IT 
performance related to cogniti
ve support for health professionals and patients,
2 adaptability to support iterati
ve process impro
vement, and effecti
ve use to 
impro
ve quality
. One lever is to shift the focus of certi˚cation efforts from 
task-speci˚c transactional capabilities to capabilities that provide better 
cognitive support for health professionals and patients. An example of a 
standard oriented toward cognitive support would be a requirement to 
test system effectiveness or human comprehension in the context of the 
data received by the system or person, perhaps in a simulation environ
-ment or in an actual work environment.
1The federal government has two primary policy levers for promoting an agenda to im
-prove health care qualityŠpublic reporting of comparative performance information and 
pay-for-performance payment policies. Both of these levers depend on the ability to aggre
-gate and analyze data over entire patient episodes, and thus the federal government should 
require or incentivize submitting the data rather than specifying the particular health care IT 
to obtain it. Once the data are submitted, their aggregation and analysis can be accomplished 
through the kinds of health care IT described in Section 5.2.3.
2Standards are not a new idea in health care ITŠindeed, they are a critical element of 
ﬁplug-and-playﬂ architectures that enable the infusion of new technologies when they are 
available (in contrast to monolithic architectures that make it dif˚cult to take advantage of 
new technologies). However, to the best of the committee™s knowledge, standards oriented 
toward cognitive support essentially do not exist.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS
 63
Ł Encourage interdisciplinary research in three critical areas
:3 (a) orga
-nizational systems-level research into the design of health care systems, 
processes, and work˜ow (i.e., research in systems engineering for a health 
care delivery context); (b) computable knowledge structures and models 
for medicine needed to make sense of available patient data including 
preferences, health behaviors, and so on; and (c) human-computer inter
-action in a clinical context.  
   
a.
 Examples of process and work˜ow research include languages 
and systems to describe and visualize health care work˜ows; mod
-eling of health care work˜ow at scale while enabling explicit step-
by-step escalation rules; support for distributed, multiplayer deci
-sion making among players with sometimes con˜icting views of 
what factors are important; rigorous analysis and documentation 
of the work˜ow demands of routine practice to understand how 
computer technology could be used to facilitate and support the 
work˜ow of the practitioner; and use of queuing theory to opti
-mize organizational performance.
   
b.
 Examples of research into computable knowledge structures 
and models include computable guidelines and approaches for 
comparing, assessing, updating, and integrating these guidelines 
into a library of guidelines for a given patient; and systems that 
can infer clinical conditions from raw data (e.g., inferring that 
ﬁpatient is feeling more painﬂ from the report of an upward adjust
-ment in the intravenous drip of a pain management drug). Because 
the clinical interpretation of data depends on the current state of 
knowledge about medicine and about physiology and how people 
respond to treatments and so on, computable structures are impor
-tant because they connect medical knowledge to patient data in 
machine-readable and machine-executable form. Thus, they can 
3It is beyond the scope of this report to describe in detail the infrastructure needed to 
sustain computer science research as it might apply to health care. However, the recommen
-dations from another National Research Council report on research at the interface between 
computing and biology are instructive in this regard. That report indicated that 
. . . agencies and foundations should support awards that can be used for retraining purposes; 
balance quality and excellence against openness to new ideas in the review process; encourage 
team formation; provide research opportunities for investigators at the interface who are not 
established enough to obtain funding on the strength of their track record alone; use fund
-ing leverage to promote institutional change; use publication venues to promote institutional 
change; support cyberinfrastructure for biological research; recognize quality publicly; recognize 
the costs of providing access to computing and information resources; de˚ne speci˚c challenge 
problems that stretch the existing state of the art but are nevertheless amenable to progress in a 
reasonable time frame; work with other agencies; and provide the funding necessary to capital
-ize on the intellectual potential of 21st century biology. (p. 383) 
See Chapter 11, National Research Council, 
Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Computing 
and Biology,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2005.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
provide needed abstractions for the health care provider and the 
clinician to help them understand what is going on with a given 
patient. 
   
c.
 Examples of research into clinically oriented human-com
-puter interaction would include the development of systems for 
maximizing the capture, retrieval, and display of clinically rel
-evant information and handling related uncertainties in ways that 
minimally distract from attention to the patient and situation yet 
provide information in a manner that is immediately understand
-able and interpretable. Such uncertainties include those associated 
with the information itself and those associated with other mat
-ters as well, such as how a patient might respond to treatment or 
scienti˚c uncertainties about the nature of a disease. Specialized 
systems would provide different presentations for the different 
relevant audiences: caregivers, medical staff, insurance compa
-nies, patients, and relatives.
 The research challenge is to be able to 
extract information relevant to the moment in a way that can read
-ily be assimilated from the tables, graphs, and free-text informa
-tion about the patient. The collection and recording of information 
should be incorporated into the normal examination and caregiv
-ing actions so that these actions do not disrupt caregiving (as is 
the case now), yet provide a comprehensive record. Information 
dashboards would allow a rapid overview of multiple patients, 
calling attention to cases that require closer examination.
As before, the committee did not address in this short report the 
nature or scale of support needed and believes that this is an issue best 
addressed in a second phase of this study.
Ł Encourage (or at least do not impede) efforts by health care organizations 
and communities to aggregate data about health care people, processes, and out
-comes from all sources subject to appropriate protection of pri
vacy and con˚den
-tiality
. Data aggregation efforts, which should be regarded as infrastruc
-tural in nature, will entail some expense, and reimbursement schedules 
should not discourage such expenses. Recognize that the time for payoff 
from these systems may be lengthy, while a critical mass of data is being 
acquired, while data quality is improved, and while systems and pro
-cesses are developed that can utilize the data.  Encourage the decoupling 
of data from applications (e.g., more reimbursement might be allowed for 
organizations that have the capability to export data in standard formats 
that accommodate heterogeneous data types). Where possible, reduce or 
eliminate organizational and legal barriers to data sharing while taking 
due note of relevant privacy concerns.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS
 65
Ł Support additional education and training efforts at the intersection of 
health care, computer science, and health/biomedical informatics
. The purpose 
of such efforts is to produce more individuals with expertise in both 
domainsŠphysicians or nurses with undergraduate or graduate degrees 
in computer science or industrial and systems engineering, computer 
science researchers knowledgeable about medicine (e.g., with a master™s 
degree in medical innovation) who work on health care problems, and so 
on. The National Institutes of Health career development programs (often 
known as the K program) and institutional training programs for medi
-cal informatics are models for such support,
4 as are the research training 
programs in health/biomedical informatics supported by the National 
Library of Medicine at many educational organizations in the United 
States.
5 6.2
 THE
 C
OMPUTER
 S
CIENCE
 C
OMMUNITY
As early as 1992, the computer science community was exhorted to 
seek intellectual challenges in problem domains of societal signi˚cance.
6 Nowhere are such challenges more apparent and important than in health 
care. Accordingly, the committee believes that the computer science com
-munity should:
Ł Engage as co-equal intellectual partners and collaborators with health 
care practitioners and experts in health/biomedical informatics
 and other rele
vant disciplines, such as industrial and process engineering and design, in an ongoing 
relationship to understand and sol
ve problems of importance to health care
. Such 
engagement will require overcoming important differences of intellectual 
style that inevitably separate disciplines. For example, there may be intel
-lectual tensions between simpli˚cation and abstraction in the service of 
understanding on the one hand and the capture of details in the service 
of clinical ˚delity on the otherŠand such tensions will have both positive 
and negative consequences.
Ł De
velop institutional mechanisms within academia for rewarding work 
at the health care/computer science interface
. As argued in other reports,
7 institutional dif˚culties often arise in academia when interdisciplinary 
4See http://grants.nih.gov/training/careerdevelopmentawards.htm.
5See http://www.nlm.nih.gov/ep/GrantTrainInstitute.html.
6National Research Council, 
Computing the Future
, National Academy Press, Washington, 
D.C., 1992, available online at 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=198
2. 7See, for example, National Research Council, 
Catalyzing Inquiry at the Interface of Comput
-ing and Biology
, 2005; or National Research Council, 
Fostering Research on the Economic and 
Social Impacts of Information Technology
, National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1998. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
work is involved. Collaborators from different disciplines must ˚nd and 
maintain common ground, such as agreeing on goals for a joint project, 
but must also respect one another™s separate priorities, such as having to 
publish in primary journals, present at particular conferences, or obtain 
tenure in their respective departments according to departmental crite
-ria. Such cross-pressures and expectations from home departments and 
disciplinary colleagues remain even if the participants in a collaboration 
have similar goals for a project. (An example might be the Harvard-MIT 
program in health sciences and technology.)
Ł Support educational and retraining efforts for computer science research
-ers who want to explore research opportunities in health care
. Such efforts 
might be offered across a broad front and might span a range in several 
dimensions, including time and format (e.g., weeks to years; courses, 
workshops, degree programs, postdoctoral fellowships), content (i.e., dif
-ferent problems within health care), and target audience (i.e., undergradu
-ates to fully tenured faculty). 
6.3
 HEALTH
 C
ARE
 O
RGANI
ZATIONS
The senior management in health care organizations (including the 
chief executive of˚cer, chief quality of˚cer, chief medical informatics of˚
-cer, chief information of˚cer, and chief ˚nancial of˚cer) and health care 
payers have often taken the lead in the deployment of IT for health care 
and are thus the primary audience to whom the following recommenda
-tions are directed. 
Ł Organize incenti
ves, roles, work˜ow, processes, and supporting infra
-structure to encourage, support, and respond to opportunities for clinical perfor
-mance gains
. Focus on identifying, prioritizing, and managing changes in 
process and work˜ow, and only after doing so support them by technol
-ogy. Use the context of the organization™s quality improvement strategy 
to guide and correct IT decisions. 
Ł Balance the institution™s IT portfolio among the four domains of automa
-tion, connecti
vity, decision support, and data-mining capabilities
. Ł De
velop the necessary data infrastructure for health care impro
vement by 
aggregating data regarding people, processes, and outcomes from all sources
. Ł Insist that 
vendors supply IT that permits the separation of data from 
applications and facilitates data transfers to and from other non-
vendor applica
-tions in shareable and generally useful formats
.  
Ł Seek IT solutions that yield incremental gains from incremental efforts
. Efforts that make progress in many small steps build support and con
-sensus from the grass roots. One example of such an approach might 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RECOMMENDATIONS
 67
be an institutional commitment to digitize all paper records and make 
them available electronically in image format to all care providers. Even 
if capturing paper records in such a form would not make all of their 
content machine readable, it would go a long way toward eliminating 
the widely acknowledged problem of record unavailability that plagues a 
large number of patient-provider visits. And the infrastructure needed for 
such efforts could be used in the future to support other applications. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7Concluding Thoughts
The nation has made a commitment to achieve the nationwide use of 
electronic medical records by 2014. Many meaningful and useful steps can 
be taken today toward this goal. However, this goal re˜ects expectations 
for improvement in the quality and cost-effectiveness of health care that 
will require more than just wider implementation of today™s health care 
information technology. 
At the start of its work, the committee had set out to identify a vari
-ety of long-term opportunities for greater involvement of the computer 
science research community in addressing health care problems. And 
indeed, the committee did identify a number of such opportunities, which 
are described above. But it was also struck by the number of other oppor
-tunities for meaningful progress that do not depend on researchŠthat 
is, areas of improvement in which today™s information technologies are 
reasonably adequate for initiating and sustaining meaningful progress 
and yet are not being fully leveraged for health care. In addition, the com
-mittee was surprised to see how little attention had been paidŠacross the 
boardŠto support for the cognitive functions that clinicians use to man
-age, organize, and coordinate the vast amounts of information needed 
for effective health care. It is in this domain that the committee believes 
enormous leaps and bounds are possible, and also where a substantial 
number of grand research challenges reside.
68
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A 
Committee Members and Staff
COMMITTEE
 M
EMBERS
William W. Stead,
 Chair
, is associate vice chancellor for strategy/
transformation and director of the Informatics Center at Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center. He serves as chief information of˚cer of the 
Medical Center and chief information architect for the university. The 
Informatics Center is a unique blend of the units that manage the medi
-cal center™s information technology infrastructure, the Department of 
Biomedical Informatics of the School of Medicine (research and educa
-tion), the Eskind Biomedical Library (knowledge management), and the 
Center for Better Health (accelerating change). Dr. Stead received his 
B.A. and M.D. from Duke University, where he also completed specialty 
and subspecialty training in internal medicine and nephrology. As an 
undergraduate in the 1960s, he was a member of the team that developed 
the Cardiology Databank, one of the ˚rst clinical epidemiology projects 
to change practice by linking outcomes to process. As a faculty member 
in nephrology, he was the physician in the physician-engineer partner
-ship that developed The Medical Record (TMR), one of the ˚rst practical 
electronic medical record systems. He helped Duke build one of the ˚rst 
patient-centered hospital information systems (IBM™s PCS/ADS). He led 
(as principal investigator) two prominent academic health centers, Duke 
in the 1980s and Vanderbilt in the 1990s, through both planning and 
implementation phases of large-scale, Integrated Advanced Information 
Management System (IAIMS) projects. At Vanderbilt, his team has been 
successful in creating informatics techniques for linking information into 
71
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
clinical work˜ow, in overcoming the barriers to technology adoption, 
and in reducing the cost and time required to implement enterprise-wide 
information technology infrastructure. Dr. Stead is the McKesson Founda
-tion Professor of Biomedical Informatics and a professor of medicine. He 
is a founding fellow of both the American College of Medical Informat
-ics and the American Institute for Engineering in Biology and Medicine, 
and an elected member of both the Institute of Medicine of the National 
Academies and the American Clinical and Climatological Association. 
He was the founding editor-in-chief of the 
Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association,
 and he served as president of the American Asso
-ciation for Medical Systems and Informatics and the American College of 
Medical Informatics. Dr. Stead served as chair of the Board of Regents of 
the National Library of Medicine, as a presidential appointee to the Com
-mission on Systemic Interoperability, and as a member of the Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. 
In addition to his academic and advisory responsibilities, he is a director 
of HealthStream. Dr. Stead is co-inventor of two patient medical record 
productsŠone licensed to McKessonHBOC, Inc., and one licensed to 
Informatics Corporation of AmericaŠfrom which he receives royalties 
through Vanderbilt University.
G. Octo Barnett
 is a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School 
and senior research director at the Laboratory of Computer Science 
(LCS), the clinical and research informatics division of the Department 
of Medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), which provides 
clinical and research information systems support to the hospital and 
conducts active research into the application of computer technology in 
medical record systems, physician workstations, clinical problem solv
-ing, expert systems in medical diagnosis, knowledge management, and 
clinical research. Dr. Barnett™s current projects include D
Xplain
®, a deci
-sion support system developed at LCS that has the characteristics of both 
a medical diagnosis aid and a medical reference system; Primary Care 
Of˚ce Insite (PCOI), a focused primary-care-physician-oriented Web site 
that gathers in a single, easily navigable site a wealth of practical, useful 
material, including patient care guidelines, therapy information, educa
-tional material for patients, and work˜ow support; and Pulmonary Artery 
Catheter Waveform Interpretation Tool (PACath), a program that will 
provide expert knowledge in interpreting and troubleshooting pulmonary 
artery catheter waveforms. In 1996, Dr. Barnett won the American Medical 
Informatics Association™s Morris F. Collen Award.  He is a member of the 
Institute of Medicine. 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 73
Susan B. Davidson
 joined the University of Pennsylvania in 1982 
and is now the Weiss Professor and Chair of Computer and Information 
Science of the School of Engineering and Applied Science. She is an ACM 
fellow and a Fulbright scholar, and she recently stepped down as found
-ing co-director of the Penn Center for Bioinformatics (PCBI). Preceding 
the formation of the PCBI, Dr. Davidson was involved with planning 
and administering an NSF-funded research training program in compu
-tational biology, which has been run at the University of Pennsylvania 
since 1995. She also helped establish undergraduate degree programs in 
bioinformatics and computational biology run through the Department of 
Biology and Department of Computer and Information Science, as well as 
tracks in this ˚eld in the Master™s of Biotechnology degree program. Dr. 
Davidson™s research interests include database systems, database model
-ing, distributed systems, and bioinformatics. Within bioinformatics she 
is best known for her work in data integration, 
XML query and update 
technologies, and more recently provenance in work˜ow systems. She 
received the B.A. degree in mathematics from Cornell University in 1978, 
and the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer 
science from Princeton University in 1980 and 1982. 
Eric Dishman
 is the founder, general manager, and global direc
-tor of Intel Corporation™s Health Research & Innovation Group. Trained 
as a communication scholar and social scientist, Dr. Dishman has used 
qualitative research methods for more than 13 years to help technology 
companies understand and invent new market, business, and technol
-ogy opportunities. He and his team borrow from anthropological and 
other social scienti˚c methods to interview, observe, and even live with 
thousands of people around the world at home, work, and play. Dr. 
Dishman™s research has focused primarily on medical anthropology, med
-ical informatics, health care IT technologies, home health care, chronic 
disease management, telehealth, and aging-in-place technologies, ˚rst 
for Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen, and now for Intel Corporation. As 
general manager of Intel™s Health Research & Innovation GroupŠpart 
of Intel™s newly formed Digital Health GroupŠDr. Dishman is respon
-sible for driving global R&D for new health care and wellness-related 
technologies across the continuum of care from hospital to home. He also 
directs the Intel Proactive Health Research laboratory focused on home 
health technologies for seniors and their families who are struggling with 
cognitive decline, cancer, and cardiovascular disease. Most recently, his 
group has been conducting pioneering ﬁbehavioral biomarkerﬂ research 
by deploying wireless sensor network, digital home, and machine learn
-Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
ing technologies into the homes of seniors for unprecedented early detec
-tion, differentiation, and personalized treatment of conditions such as 
Alzheimer™s and Parkinson™s. Dr. Dishman spends much of his time on 
the national circuit speaking about and lobbying for new technologies 
that can help improve health care quality while reducing costs by shifting 
health care from a reactive, crisis-driven paradigm to a proactive, preven
-tion-driven paradigm. He is a nationally known speaker on the topics of 
aging and home health care technologies, and he serves as an advisor to 
numerous companies, universities, and congressional members on assis
-tive technologies, telehealth, and home health care. 
Deborah L. Estrin
 is a professor of computer science with a joint 
appointment in electrical engineering at UCLA, holds the Jon Postel Chair 
in Computer Networks, and is founding director of the NSF-funded Cen
-ter for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS). She received her Ph.D. 
(1985) in computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technol
-ogy, her M.S. (1982) from MIT, and her B.S. (1980) from University of 
California., Berkeley. Before joining UCLA in 2000 she was a professor in 
the University of Southern California™s Computer Science Department. In 
1987, Dr. Estrin received the NSF Presidential Young Investigator Award 
for her research in network interconnection and security. Dr. Estrin has 
been a co-principal investigator on many NSF- and DARPA-funded proj
-ects. She chaired a 1997-1998 ISAT study on sensor networks and the 
2001 NRC study on networked embedded computing which produced 
the report 
Embedded, E
verywhere
. She chaired the Sensors and Sensor Net
-works subcommittee of the NEON Network Design Committee. Dr. Estrin 
is currently a member of the Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board and sits on the board of TTI/Vanguard. She is a member of the 
American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a fellow of the ACM and 
IEEE, and she received the ˚rst ACM Athena Lecturer Award (2006) and 
the Anita Borg Women of Vision Award (2008). 
Alon Halevy
 is a research scientist at Google, Inc. Before joining 
Google, Dr. Halevy was a professor of computer science at the University 
of Washington, Seattle. Prior to joining the University of Washington, Dr. 
Halevy was a principal member of the technical staff at AT&T Bell Labo
-ratories, and then at AT&T Laboratories. The main goal of his research is 
to build tools that simplify people™s access to data, typically in complex 
data environments, which he refers to as dataspaces. To support this 
goal, his areas of research are integrating data from multiple (structured 
and unstructured) sources, machine-learning approaches to resolving 
schema heterogeneity, personal information management, management 
of 
XML data, and query processing and optimization. He is very inter
-ested in the combination of techniques from arti˚cial intelligence and 
data management. He believes that the data management community 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 75
should shift its focus away from enterprise computing and consider con
-sumer-facing applications. Dataspace support platforms aim to offer an 
abstraction at which problems relevant to consumer-facing applications 
can be addressed. In 1999, Dr. Halevy co-founded Nimble Technology, 
one of the ˚rst companies in the enterprise information integration space. 
In 2004, Dr. Halevy founded Transformic, Inc., a company that created 
search engines for the deep Web (i.e., content residing in databases behind 
Web forms). Dr. Halevy was a Sloan fellow (1999-2000) and received the 
Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers in 2000. He 
serves on the editorial board of the 
Very Large Databases
 Journal
 and on the 
advisory board of the 
Journal of Arti˚cial Intelligence Research
. He served as 
the program chair for the ACM SIGMOD 2003 Conference and has given 
several keynote addresses at top conferences. In 2006 Dr. Halevy received 
the VLDB 10-year Best Paper Award for his work on data integration, and 
he was elected as a fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery. 
He received his Ph.D. in computer science from Stanford University in 
1993. 
Donald A. Norman
 is the Breed Professor of Design at Northwestern 
University, where he co-directs MMM, the dual-degree MBA and engi
-neering program offered jointly by Northwestern™s schools of manage
-ment and engineering that focuses on managing products and services 
from design to execution. He is also co-director of the Segal Design Insti
-tute. He is co-founder of the Nielsen Norman Group and has been vice 
president of Apple Computer and an executive at Hewlett Packard. He 
serves on many advisory boards, such as the editorial advisory board of 
Encyclopedia Britannica, and the advisory board for the Department of 
Industrial Design at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Tech
-nology (KAIST). He has received honorary degrees from the University 
of Padova (Italy) and the Technical University of Delft (the Netherlands); 
the Lifetime Achievement Award from SIGCHI, the professional orga
-nization for Computer-Human Interaction; and the Benjamin Franklin 
Medal in Computer and Cognitive Science from the Franklin Institute 
(Philadelphia).
Ida Sim
 is an associate professor of medicine and director, Center 
for Clinical and Translational Informatics at the University of California, 
San Francisco. She received her M.D. and her Ph.D. in medical informat
-ics from Stanford University and her primary care internal medicine 
training from the Massachusetts General Hospital. She is also fellowship-
trained in general internal medicine at Stanford University. Dr. Sim™s 
research focus is on knowledge-based technologies for clinical research 
and evidence-based practice. She received the United States Presidential 
Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers in 2000 for her work on 
the Trial Bank Project, which developed fundamental informatics tech
-Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
nologies for a computable knowledge base of randomized trials. She has 
since led multiple projects related to semantic standards and visualization 
methods for clinical research, clinical trial reporting bias, new models of 
scienti˚c e-publication of clinical research, and work on the adoption of 
electronic health records in primary care practices for quality improve
-ment. In policy work, Dr. Sim was the founding project coordinator of 
the World Health Organization™s International Clinical Trials Registry 
platform, which sets global standards on clinical trial registration and 
reporting. Dr. Sim serves on the editorial board of the 
Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics
, is on the advisory board for PLoS One, and is a fellow of the 
American College of Medical Informatics.
Alfred 
Z. Spector
 is vice president of Research and Special Initiatives 
at Google, Inc. Previously, he was vice president of Strategy and Technol
-ogy for IBM™s Software Group. In other jobs at IBM, Dr. Spector was the 
vice president of Services and Software Research, the general manager of 
Marketing and Strategy for IBM™s AIM business, responsible for a num
-ber of IBM software product families including CICS, WebSphere, and 
MQSeries, and also the general manager of IBM™s Transaction Systems 
business. Dr. Spector was also founder and CEO of Transarc Corporation, 
a pioneer in distributed transaction processing and wide-area ˚le sys
-tems, and an associate professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon 
University. He is an advisor to the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer 
Science and is a member of the visiting committee of the Harvard School 
of Engineering and Applied Science. Dr. Spector received his Ph.D. in 
computer science from Stanford University and his A.B. in applied math
-ematics from Harvard University. He was the 2001 recipient of the IEEE 
Computer Society™s Tsutomu Kanai Award for major contributions to 
state-of-the-art distributed computing systems and their applications. He 
is a fellow of the IEEE and ACM. In 2004, he was elected to the National 
Academy of Engineering. 
Peter Szolovits
 is a professor of computer science and engineering 
in the MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science 
(EECS), professor of health sciences and technology in the Harvard/
MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology (HST), and head of the 
Clinical Decision-Making Group within the MIT Computer Science and 
Arti˚cial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL). His research centers on the 
application of AI methods to problems of medical decision making and 
design of information systems for health care institutions and patients. 
He has worked on problems of diagnosis, therapy planning, execution, 
and monitoring for various medical conditions; computational aspects of 
genetic counseling; controlled sharing of health information; and privacy 
and con˚dentiality issues in medical record systems. His interests in AI 
include knowledge representation, qualitative reasoning, and probabilis
-Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 77
tic inference. His interests in medical computing include Web-based het
-erogeneous medical record systems, lifelong personal health information 
systems, and design of cryptographic schemes for health identi˚ers. He 
teaches classes in arti˚cial intelligence, programming languages, medi
-cal computing, medical decision making, knowledge-based systems, and 
probabilistic inference. Professor Szolovits has been on the editorial board 
of several journals, has served as program chair and on the program com
-mittees of national conferences, and has been a founder of and consultant 
for several companies that apply AI to problems of commercial interest. 
Professor Szolovits was elected to the Institute of Medicine and is a fel
-low of the American Association for Arti˚cial Intelligence, the American 
College of Medical Informatics, and the American Institute for Medical 
and Biological Engineering. 
Andries van Dam
 has been on the Brown University faculty since 
1965 and was one of the Computer Science Department™s co-founders 
and its ˚rst chair, from 1979 to 1985. He was a principal investigator in, 
and director from 1996-1998 of, the NSF Science and Technology Center 
for Graphics and Visualization, a research consortium including Brown, 
Caltech, Cornell University, the University of North Carolina (Chapel 
Hill), and the University of Utah. His research has concerned computer 
graphics; hypermedia systems; post-WIMP user interfaces, including pen-
centric computing, and educational software. He has been working for 
nearly four decades on systems for creating and reading electronic books 
with interactive illustrations for use in teaching and research. Professor 
van Dam received the B.S. degree with honors in engineering sciences 
from Swarthmore College in 1960 and the M.S. and Ph.D. from the Uni
-versity of Pennsylvania in 1963 and 1966, respectively. He is a member of 
the National Academy of Engineering.
Gio Wiederhold
 is a professor emeritus of computer science at Stan
-ford University, with courtesy appointments in medicine and electrical 
engineering. His recent research includes privacy protection in collab
-orative settings, large-scale software composition, access to simulations 
to augment decision-making capabilities for information systems, and 
developing algebra over ontologies. His current research supports the 
U.S. Treasury in assessing international intellectual property transfers. 
Prior to his academic career he spent 16 years in the software industry. His 
career followed computer technologies, starting with numerical analysis 
applied to rocket fuel, FORTRAN and PL/1 compilers, real-time data 
acquisition, and a time-oriented database system for ambulatory care, 
leading to his eventually becoming a corporate software architect. He has 
been elected a fellow of the ACMI, the IEEE, and the ACM. He spent 1991-
1994 as the program manager for knowledge-based systems at DARPA 
in Washington, D.C. He has been an editor and editor-in-chief of several 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
IEEE and ACM publications. Professor Wiederhold served as a contribu
-tor and reviewer for several CSTB reports, including 
Information Technol
-ogy Research, Inno
vation, and E-Go
vernment;
 Youth, Pornography, and the 
Internet;
 Technical, Business, and Legal Dimensions of Protecting Children from 
Pornography on the Internet: Proceedings of a Workshop;
 Nontechnical Strate
-gies to Reduce Children™s Exposure to Inappropriate Material on the Internet: 
Summary of a Workshop;
 Re
view of the FBI™s Trilogy Information Technology 
Modernization Program;
 and a letter report to the FBI. Professor Wiederhold 
received a degree in aeronautical engineering in Holland in 1957 and a 
Ph.D. in medical information science from the University of California at 
San Francisco in 1976.
STAFF
 M
EMBERS
Herbert S. Lin
 is chief scientist at the Computer Science and Telecom
-munications Board, National Research Council, where he has been the 
study director of major projects on public policy and information technol
-ogy. These studies include a 1996 study on national cryptography policy 
(Cryptography™s Role in Securing the Information Society
), a 1991 study on the 
future of computer science (
Computing the Future
), a 1999 study of Defense 
Department systems for command, control, communications, computing, 
and intelligence (
Realizing the Potential of C
4I: Fundamental Challenges
), a 
2000 study on workforce issues in high technology (
Building a Workforce 
for the Information Economy
), a 2002 study on protecting kids from Internet 
pornography and sexual exploitation (
Youth, Pornography, and the Internet
), 
a 2004 study on aspects of the FBI™s information technology moderniza
-tion program (
A Re
view of the FBI™s Trilogy IT Modernization Program
), a 
2005 study on electronic voting 
(Asking the Right Questions About Electronic 
Voting)
, a 2005 study on computational biology (
Catalyzing Inquiry at the 
Interface of Computing and Biology
), a 2007 study on privacy and informa
-tion technology (
Engaging Pri
vacy and Information Technology in a Digital 
Age
), and a 2007 study on cybersecurity research (
Toward a Safer and More 
Secure Cyberspace
). Prior to his NRC service, he was a professional staff 
member and staff scientist for the House Armed Services Committee 
(1986-1990), where his portfolio included defense policy and arms control 
issues. He received his doctorate in physics from MIT. Avocationally, he 
is a longtime folk and swing dancer and a poor magician. Apart from 
his CSTB work, he is published in cognitive science, science education, 
biophysics, and arms control and defense policy. He also consults on K-12 
math and science education.
During this study, 
David Padgham
 was associate program of˚cer 
at the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) of the 
National Research Council. His work comprised a robust mix of writing, 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 79
research, and project management, and he contributed to the development 
and publication of numerous CSTB studies. Prior to CSTB, Mr. Padgham 
was a policy analyst with the Association for Computing Machinery 
(ACM), working closely with ACM™s public policy committee, USACM, 
to develop and support the organization™s policy principles and promote 
its policy interests. He holds a master™s degree in library and information 
science (2001) from Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C., 
and a bachelor of arts in English (1996) from Warren Wilson College in 
Asheville, N.C.
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Meeting and Site Visit Agendas and 
 Site Visit Methodology
B.1
 MEETING
 AND SITE 
VISIT A
GENDAS
B.1.1
 Meeting 1ŠApril 23, 2007 (Washington, D.C.)
Entirely closed session for NRC housekeeping
B.1.2
 Meeting 2ŠJune 13-14, 2007 (Washington, D.C.)
June 
13
, 
200
7ŠOpen Session
9:30 a.m.
 Welcome
 William W. Stead, Chair
 Jon Eisenberg, CSTB
9:40 a.m.
 Charge to the committee
  
Donald A.B. Lindberg, Director, National Library of 
Medicine
11:00 a.m.
 Panel 1: Health Care IT Industry 
 Ł  
Industry overviewŠGreg Walton, Senior VP of HIMSS 
and HIMSS Analytics 
80Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 81
 Ł  
Penetration/adoption gaps, cost, and time to 
implementŠB. Alton Brantley, Consultant
 Ł  
Untoward consequencesŠRandy Miller, Vanderbilt 
 University Medical Center
12:30 p.m.
 Group discussion and working lunch 
1:00 p.m.
 Panel 2: Federal Health Care IT Landscape
 Ł  
Federal landscapeŠAlicia A. Bradford, Of˚ce of 
the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology
 Ł  
Commission on Systemic Interoperability 
recommendations and statusŠScott Wallace, National 
Coalition for Health Care IT
 Ł  
Standards initiativesŠBetsy Humphreys, National 
Library of Medicine
2:45 p.m.
 Panel 3: Visions for Health Care
 Ł  
Vision for evidence based personalized medicineŠIOM 
EBM RoundtableŠDenis Cortese, Mayo Clinic [via 
videoconference]
 Ł  
VA's quality transformation: Quality, IT and outcomesŠ
Jon Perlin, HCA
 Ł  
Vision of a health care system for the 21st century 
(IOM ﬁQuality Chasmﬂ series, and the challenges in 
translating visions into practice)ŠJanet Corrigan, 
National Quality Forum
June 
14
, 
200
7ŠEntirely closed session for NRC housekeeping
B.1.3
 Meeting 3ŠOctober 12, 2007 (Washington, D.C.)
11:45 a.m.
  
Opportunities for improving health care through computer 
science: Work life of primary care physicians, acute care 
nurses, and emergency medical technicians
   Eric Dishman, Gina Grumke, and Monique Lambert
B.1.4
 Meeting 4ŠJanuary 28-29, 2008 (San Francisco)
Entirely closed session for report de
velopment
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
B.1.5
 Online Brie˚ngs
No
vember 
27
, 
200
7 Peter J. Fabri
  
Professor of Surgery and Associate Dean, University of 
South Florida 
 Adjunct Professor of Surgery, Northwestern University
No
vember 
28
, 
200
7 Peter Neupert, 
 Corporate Vice President, Health Solutions Group
 Microsoft Corporation
December 
4, 
200
7 Kenneth D. Mandl
  
Assistant Professor of Pediatrics,
 Harvard Medical School
  
Af˚liated Faculty, Harvard-MIT Division of Health 
Sciences and Technology
B.1.6
 Site Visit on September 12-13, 2007 
 (University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh)
September 
12
, 
200
76:20 a.m.
  
Physician rounds at Children™s Hospital of Pittsburgh of 
UPMC
 James Levin 
8:00 a.m. 
 Welcome: UPMC and ISD Overview
  
(General information on the number and different types of 
IT systems in use at UPMC, e.g., clinical support systems, 
inventory management, medication management, etc.)
 William Fera
 Sean O™Rourke
 Jody Cervenak
 Ed McCallister
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 83
9:15 a.m. 
 Magee-Womens Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC 
  
overview and demonstration: PPID (Positive Patient 
Identi˚cation)
 (Nursing shadowing session)
 Kim Gracey
 Michele Steimer
11:30 a.m.
 Children™s Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC 
  
overview and demonstration: CPOE (Computerized 
Physician Order Entry)
 (Shadowing session)
 Jacque Dailey
 Steven Docimo
 James Levin
 Jocelyn Benes
2:30 p.m. 
 Tour of Wiser Institute
 Tom Dongilli
4:00 p.m. 
 Tour of data center
 Jeff Szymanski
4:30 p.m. 
  
Discussions of UPMC IT systems™ technical underpinnings
 Paul Sikora
September 
13
, 
200
76:30 a.m. 
 Informal chat session with physicians
 Robert Kormos
 Vivek Reddy
7:30 a.m.
 Overview of quality initiatives and Theradoc
 Tami Merryman
9:00 a.m. 
 eRecord overview
 Daniel Martich
10:00 a.m. 
 dbMotion and intraoperability
 William Fera
 Sean O™Rourke
12:00 p.m.
 Break
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
2:00 p.m.
 UPMC Presbyterian, Physician Rounds
 Robert Kormos
3:00 p.m.
 Adjourn information-gathering portion of meeting
B.1.7
 Site Visit on October 10-11, 2007 
 (Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Washington, D.C.)
October 
10, 
200
71:00 p.m.
 VistA and patient care services 
  Stanlie Daniels, Deputy Chief Of˚cer, Patient Care Services 
 Mike Mayo-Smith, Chief Consultant, Primary Care
2:30 p.m.
 VistA and patient safety
   
Neil Eldridge, Executive Assistant, National Center for 
Patient Safety
3:30 p.m.
 VistA™s information technology architecture
  
Joaquin Martinez, Director, Software Engineering and 
Integration
  
Tracie Loving, Acting Portfolio Management Of˚cer, 
Management, Enrollment, and Financial Systems
5:00 p.m.
 Break and debrie˚ng
October 
11
, 
200
78:00 a.m.
 Chief residents™ rounds
  Medical Service Conference Room
9:00 a.m.
 Round with nurse or round with teams
  Fourth Floor 
10:00 a.m.
 Greetings and facility overview
 Fernando O. Rivera, Medical Center Director
 Director™s Conference Room
10:30 a.m. 
 Electronic health records (EHR), My HealtheVet
 Ross Fletcher, Chief of Staff
 Director™s Conference Room
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 85
12:00 p.m.
 Lunch    
  
1:00 p.m.
 Surgical admissions nurse
  Admissions Of˚ce, First Floor
1:30 p.m.
 Emergency room
 Kenneth Steadman
2:00 p.m.
 Pharmacy
 Linwood Moore, Assistant Chief
   
2:30 p.m.
 Primary care (Yellow)
 Neil Evans, Co-Chief, Ambulatory Care
      
3:00 p.m.
  
Comprehensive nursing and rehabilitation center/
polytrauma rooms
  Raya Kheirbek, Medical Director 
3:45 p.m.
 Adjourn information-gathering portion of visit
B.1.8
 Site Visit on November 15-16, 2007 
 (HCA TriStar, Nashville, Tenn.)
No
vember 
15
, 
200
78:30 a.m. 
 Welcome and overview of HCA 
 Kimberly Lewis, CIO, TriStar Division
9:00 a.m. 
 HCA information technology systems 
  
General information on the number and different types of 
IT systems in use (e.g., clinical support systems, inventory 
management, medication management, etc.) 
 Annette Matlock, HDIS, Centennial Medical Center
 David Archer, Director, Application Services-Technical
 Darryl Campbell, Director, Application Services-Clinical
10:00 a.m.
 Session with content development team 
 Melody Rose, Senior Clinical Analyst
 11:00 a.m.
 Visit medical surgery, ICU
 Kelly Wood, Medical Director
 ICU Nurses
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
1:00 p.m. 
 Shadowing session: Doctor(s) on rounds 
1:45 p.m. 
 Shadowing session: Nursing
2:30 p.m. 
 Observe work˜ow at a central nursing station
3:30 p.m. 
 Discussion with chief quality/safety of˚cer 
 Ruth Westcott, Vice President of Quality, TriStar Division 
 4:15 p.m. 
  
Observe work˜ow at pharmacy/central medication 
management location 
5:00 p.m. 
 Adjourn information-gathering activities for the day
No
vember 
16
, 
200
7ŠObser
vation Session
8:30 a.m. 
 Shadowing session: Doctor(s) on morning rounds 
 John Wilters
, 
Obstetrics and Gynecology
9:15 a.m. 
 Shadowing session: Nursing
10:15 a.m. 
  
Observe admissions and/or discharge process (perhaps 
including transition from outpatient to inpatient) 
10:45 a.m. 
  
Observe work˜ow in or take tour of emergency 
department
11:30 a.m. 
  
Informal chat session with a small selection of doctors and 
nurses 
1:00 p.m. 
 Adjourn information-gathering activities for the day
B.1.9
 Site Visit on November 16-17, 2007 
 (Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tenn.)
No
vember 
16
, 
200
72:00 p.m. 
 VUMC overview
  
William W. Stead, Associate Vice Chancellor for Strategy 
and Transformation
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 87
2:30 p.m. 
 Bed management
  
Marsha Kedigh, Manager, VUH Admitting/ED 
Registration
3:15 p.m. 
  
Operating room schedule coordination and technology-
enabled supervision
 Ken Holroyd, Assistant Vice Chancellor for Research
4:00 p.m. 
 Pharmacy
  
David Gregory, Assistant Director for Education and 
Research, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences
4:45 p.m. 
 Demo-process control dashboards and decision support
  
Neal Patel, Associate Professor of Pediatrics and 
Anesthesia
5:30 p.m. 
 Physician work rounds
 Sara Hutchison, Manager, Trauma Unit
6:15 p.m. 
 Evidence-based content
 Jack Starmer, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Informatics
6:45 p.m. 
 Nursing shift change
 Sara Hutchison, Manager, Trauma Unit
No
vember 
17
, 
200
78:30 a.m. 
 CVICU
 Rashid M. Ahmad, Chief Informatics Of˚cer
 Vanderbilt Heart Institute
9:15 a.m. 
 Emergency Department
 Corey Slovis, Chair, Emergency Medicine
10:00 a.m. 
 Architecture
 John Doulis, Assistant Vice Chancellor
 Chief Operations Of˚cer
10:45 a.m. 
 RHIO
 Mark Frisse, Director, Regional Informatics Program
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
11:30 a.m.
 Biomedical Informatics
  
William W. Stead, Associate Vice Chancellor for Strategy 
and Transformation
12:00 p.m. 
 Adjourn information-gathering portion of visit
B.1.10
 Site Visits on December 3, 2007 
 (Partners, Boston, Mass.)
8:30 a.m.
 Brigam and Women™s Hospital (BWH)
 John Glaser and David Bates
9:40 a.m. 
  
Overview of BWH inpatient clinical activities: Current and 
future state
10:00 a.m.
 General discussion, questions and answers
10:30 a.m.
 Tour of the BWH 
 Jeff Schnipper and Anuj Dalal
  
(Asked to emphasize contact/observation/interaction with 
doctors/nurses)
11:45 a.m.
  
Tour of central pharmacy and overview of medication 
safety from pharmacist™s perspective
1:00 p.m.
 Massachusetts General Hospital
  
Henry Chueh, Director, Laboratory of Computer Science
  
Challenges and opportunities for information 
technologyŠwhat has worked at MGH
1:30 p.m.
 Ambulatory care practiceŠInternal Medical Associates
 Blair Fosburgh, Internist, IMA 
  
What are important issues and opportunities for 
information technology in the practice of medicine?
2:00 p.m.
 Carol Mannone, Nurse Leader
  
What are important issues and opportunities for 
information technology in nursing ambulatory care?
2:30 p.m.
 Virginia Manzella, Administrator, IMA
  
What are important issues and opportunities for 
information technology in nursing ambulatory care?
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 89
3:30 p.m.
 John Goodson, Senior Internist, IMA
  
See and discuss the issues and problems of ambulatory 
care practice and the issues and opportunities for 
information technology
4:00 p.m.
 Adjourn information-gathering portion of meeting
B.1.11
 Site Visit on January 7-8, 2008 
 (Intermountain Healthcare, Salt Lake City, Utah)
January 
7, 
200
88:30 a.m. 
  
Welcome and overview of Intermountain Healthcare, Marc 
Probst, VP and Chief Information Of˚ce
9:00 a.m. 
 Intermountain Healthcare information technology systems
  
General information on the number and different types of 
IT systems in use (e.g., clinical support systems, inventory 
management, medication management)
 Stan Huff, Chief Medical Informatics Of˚cer
11:00 a.m.
  
Introduction to clinical programs at Intermountain 
Healthcare 
  
Overview of integration of clinical practices with goals, 
direction, and information systems initiatives
 Brent Wallace, Chief Medical Of˚cer
11:45 a.m.
 Discussion with chief quality/safety of˚cer
  
How are quality, safety, and risk management issues 
addressed at Intermountain? What role does information 
technology play in ensuring quality and safety?
 Lynn Elstein 
Obser
vation Session 
1 
Latter Day Saints Hospital
 2:00 p.m.
  
Latter Day Saints Hospital: Shadowing session: Doctor(s) 
on rounds
2:45 p.m.
 Latter Day Saints Hospital: Shadowing session: Nursing
3:30 p.m.
  
Latter Day Saints Hospital: Observe work˜ow at a central 
nursing station
 4:30 p.m.
 Observe work˜ow in or take tour of ED 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
January 
8, 
200
8 Obser
vation Session 
2ŠIntermountain Medical Center
8:00 a.m.
 Welcome and facility/setting overview 
8:30 a.m.
 Shadowing session: Doctor(s) on rounds
9:15 a.m.
 Shadowing session: Nursing
10:00 a.m.
  
Observe work˜ow at pharmacy/drug dispensary/central 
medication management location
10:45 a.m.
 Session with content development team (e.g., order sets)
11:30 a.m.
  
Informal chat session with a small selection of doctors and 
nurses 
  
Topics include quality, safety, technology, technology 
implementation, technology™s effects on work˜ow and 
patient care, and so on
12:30 p.m.
 Adjourn information-gathering activities for the day
B.1.12
 Site Visit on January 14, 2008 (UCSF, San Francisco)
8:00 a.m.
 UCSF, Mount Zion Campus, Women™s Health Center
 Introduction, overview, and quick tour
 Jon Showstack, Michael Kamerick
8:30 a.m.
 Regulatory overhead in clinical research
 Jon Showstack
 Ł  
Extent and complexity of regulatory overhead of clinical 
research 
 Ł  
Clinical health research considerations (Sharon Friend, 
Deborah Yano-Fong)
9:30 a.m.
 Lack of integration of EMR and clinical research
 Gail Harden
10:45 a.m.
 San Francisco General Hospital 
 Brief introduction and tour of SFGH neurosurgical ICU
 Geoff Manley 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 91
11:00 a.m.
  
Complexity of data and metadata for querying across 
heterogeneous databases, especially for translational 
research
  Geoff Manley 
B.1.13
 Site Visit on January 14, 2008 
 (PAMF, Palo Alto, California)
12:35 p.m.
 Palo Alto Medical Foundation 
 Welcome and introductions (including working lunch)
 Paul Tang
1:00 p.m.
 Walk-through of ambulatory care setting
 Steve Hansen
1:30 p.m. 
  
Discussion of physician work˜ow challenges in EHR 
implementation
 Paul Tang, Albert Chan, Charlotte Mitchell
2:30 p.m.
 Pitfalls of deriving quality measures from EHRs
 Paul Tang, Tomas Moran
3:45 p.m.
 Billing and administrative costs from care
 Gil Radtke, Neil Knutsen
4:15 p.m.
 General discussion
4:45 p.m.
 Adjourn information-gathering portion of meeting
B.2
 SITE
 V
ISIT
 M
ETHODOLOGY
For each site visit, the committee sought to:
Ł  
Observe the best of what the site had been able to achieve.
Ł Ask about what the site needed but did not have.
Ł  
Obtain site input on the gap between needs and the state of the art 
of the health care information technology industry.
Ł  
Identify, clarify, and categorize ﬁpain pointsﬂ for the site.
Ł  
Identify where improvement is possible through application of 
existing knowledge and where further research is needed.
To preserve face time for interactive questions and answers, each site 
host was asked to provide as much background as possible as pre-visit 
reading material. Hosts were requested to limit formal presentations to a 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
10-minute overview of their key messages, leaving the majority of each 
time block for interactive exploration. Where possible, hosts arranged for 
committee visitors to shadow care providers engaged in workday activi
-ties (e.g., on rounds, at the central nursing station). Shadowing teams 
were generally composed of one health care provider and one computer 
scientist (and one staff person), so that teams could operate in parallel.
Information requested in pre-visit reading material included:
Ł  
Organization ﬁfactsﬂ (FTEs, admissions, visits, research dollars, 
and so on)
Ł Health care organization's organizational chart
Ł Health care organization's strategic plan
Ł IT organization chart
Ł Information management or IT strategic plan
Ł Information system inventory
Ł Information technology architecture or standards speci˚cations
Ł Most recent wired survey responses
Ł Last joint commission visit report
During each visit, the committee visitors sought to see or to hear about 
as many of the following facility components as possible:
  Ł Enterprise overview
Ł IT/systems overview
Ł Question and answer sessions
 ŠChief quality/safety of˚cer
 ŠRisk management
Ł Observation points
 ŠTransition points
  
ŒBed control, transfer center, life ˜ight
  
Œ 
Emergency room to inpatient, outpatient to operating room to 
intensive care unit to intermediate care
  
Œ Medicationreconciliation,outpatienttoinpatienttooutpatient
Medication reconciliation, outpatient to inpatient to outpatient
  
ŒNursing shift change, house of˚cer signout
Ł Settings
 ŠShadow a nurse during medication administration
 ŠShadow a doctor on morning rounds
 ŠPharmacy
 ŠInventory management
 ŠEligibility/billing
Ł Content management
 ŠCharge master, reimbursement contracts
 ŠFormulary, drug-drug interactions
 ŠOrder sets, pathways
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Observations, Consequences, 
 and Opportunities: 
 The Site Visits of the Committee 
Table C.1, which summarizes the committee™s observations from the 
site visits, is structured as follows.

Column 1ŠObservations (what committee members saw during 
the site visits).
 Under each observation are listed one or more de-
identi˚ed data points. The high-level observation is the abstraction 
for those data points. The committee grouped the observations into 
six categories:
 Š 
Category 1. The medical record itselfŠthe display, the applica
-tion, the paper; in general, what the user interacts with directly.
 Š 
Category 2.  The health care delivery processŠthe work˜ow, 
what happens when, who does it, how decisions are made, how 
communication occurs.
 Š 
Category 3.  Health care professionalsŠwhat they are like, how 
they react to IT, and so on.
 Š 
Category 4. IT infrastructure and managementŠthe underlying 
computing substrate and how it is managed.
 Š 
Category 5. Data capture and ˜owŠhow data are gathered, 
recorded, and passed among systems, records, and people.
93
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
Š 
Category 6. Change in a sociotechnical systemŠhow to create envi
-ronments that facilitate large-scale change.

Column 2ŠConsequences (why the observations matter).
 For 
each observation, the committee infers one or more consequences. 
That is, why do we care about the observation in question? How 
might it affect health care delivery?

Column 3ŠOpportunities for Action (what we can do about the 
consequences).
 Every observation-consequence pair should pro
-vide one or more opportunities for action. Solutions known today 
but not yet implemented are indicated by an ﬁSﬂ (for short-term) in 
Column 3; challenges for research, where solutions are not known 
today, are indicated by an ﬁRﬂ (for research) in Column 3.
In Table C.1, the notation C
xOy is used. C
x refers to Category 
x of 
the committee™s observations as grouped in the table (which lists six 
categories of observations), and O
y refers to a particular observation as 
numbered in the table (which includes a total of 25 observations).
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 95
TABLE C.1
 Committee™s Observations from Its Site Visits
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
ActionŠWhat We Can Do 
About It
aCategory 1. The Medical Record Itself
1Patient records are 
fragmented

Computer-based 
and paper records 
co-exist

Computer records 
are divided among 
task-specific 
transaction-
processing systems

Users have to know 
where to look

Individual 
manually annotated 
work lists are the 
norm

Synthesis depends 
on intra-team 
conversation

Problem recognition 
is left to chance

Team members 
waste time getting 
information in the 
form they want to 
use

Techniques to 
synthesize and 
summarize information 
about the patient in 
and across systems 
with drill-downs for 
detail (S/R)

Mechanisms to focus 
on a constellation of 
related factors (S/R)

Single search box that 
returns all appropriate 
information in the 
appropriate format (R) 

Alerts to problems or 
trends for investigation 
(S/R)

ﬁVirtual patientﬂ 
displays leveraging 
biological and disease 
models to reduce 
multiple data inputs to 
intelligent summaries 
of key human systems 
(R)
2Clinical user interfaces 
mimic their paper 
predecessors

The flow sheet is 
the predominant 
display construct

No standardization 
of location of 
information or use 
of symbols and 
color

Font size is 
challenging

Important 
information and 
trends are easily 
overlooked

Cognitive burden 
of absorbing the 
information detracts 
from thinking 
about what the 
information means

Design reflecting 
human and safety 
factors (S)

Automatic capture and 
use of context (what, 
who, when. . .) (S)

Techniques to 
represent and capture 
data at multiple levels 
of abstraction (CareŠ
plan, order, charting; 
dataŠraw signal, 
concept derived from 
the signal; biology) 
(S/R)
continued
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
3Systems are used most 
often to document 
what has been done, 
frequently hours after 
the fact

Missed opportunity 
for decision or 
workflow support

Variable 
completeness and 
accuracy

Redundant work

See Category 5, 
observation 19 (C5O19)
4Support for evidence-
based medicine and 
computer-based advice 
is rare

Lost opportunity 
to provide patient-
specific decision 
support

Peer-to-peer and social 
networking techniques 
for development 
of guidelines and 
decision support 
content (S/R)

Mass customization 
techniques for practice 
guidelines (modules) 
(R)

Computable 
knowledge structures 
and models (R)
Category 2. The Health Care Delivery Process 
5High complexity 
and coordination 
requirements of care

Within teams

Across teams and 
services within 
settings

Across settings

Reactive care

Handoff errors

Redundant care

Dynamically 
computable models to 
represent plan for care, 
workflow, escalation, 
and so on (R)
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
ActionŠWhat We Can Do 
About It
aCategory 1. The Medical Record Itself (continued)
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 97
continued
6Non-transparent 
workflow

Clinical roles and 
responsibilities are 
not explicit

Scheduling is 
negotiated and 
manual

Care processes 
steps and outcomes 
are rarely 
documented in 
machine-readable 
manner

No clear thinking 
about overall 
workflows, 
process design, 
and efficiency and 
handoff errors

Unpredictable 
escalation and 
response

Scripting languages for 
decision and workflow 
support content (S/R)

Uniform provider ID 
(S)

Explicit team roles and 
escalation paths (S/R)

Capabilities for 
context-aware efficient 
scheduling (S/R)
7Work is frequently 
interrupted with gaps 
between steps and 
manual handoffs at 
seams of the process

See observations 5 
and 6 (C2O5, C2O6)

See observations 5 and 
6 (C2O5, C2O6)
8Shift of care from 
inpatient, to 
outpatient, home, 
patients, families

See observations 5 
and 6 (C2O5, C2O6)

See observations 5 and 
6 (C2O5, C2O6)

Support for varying 
cultures and education 
(R)
9Errors and near misses 
are frequent and use 
of data to identify 
patterns is rare

Low voluntary 
reporting that limits 
proactive use of 
near misses for 
system correction

Instrumented process 
to track steps (S/R)

Automated 
surveillance for 
potential problems 
(S/R)
10
Clinical research 
 activities not well 
integrated into ongoing 
clinical care

Difficulty deciding 
what to charge to 
whom for research or 
care

Barriers to subject 
enrollment

Duplication of research 
and care processes

Limited learning from 
routine practice

Computable models 
of research plan, 
workflow, researcher 
roles, etc. (S/R)

Data exchange 
between care and 
research systems (S/R)

De-identification 
algorithms (S/R)
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
ActionŠWhat We Can Do 
About It
aCategory 2. The Health Care Delivery Process (continued)
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
11
Clinical users choose 
speed over all else

Time is money

Each second added 
to the time to write 
each prescription 
in the United 
States adds 470 
physician full-time 
equivalents

See Category 5, 
observation 19 (C5O19)
12
Clinical users do not 
have a consistent 
understanding of the 
purpose of a system or 
the functionality of the 
user interface 

Inefficient 
workflow

Incomplete or 
inaccurate data 
entry

Misinterpretation of 
information

System work-
arounds

Design system 
modules for use in 
production (operation) 
and simulation 
(training) (S)
13
Health professionals™ 
understanding of 
how IT might help is 
limited

Health 
professionals do not 
know what to ask 
for

Health 
professionals do 
not know how to 
test whether an IT 
intervention will 
solve their problem 
in their setting

Educate health 
professionals in 
systems approaches

Imbed informatics 
experts in clinical 
teams (as is done with 
pharmacists)

Expand informatics 
training programs
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
ActionŠWhat We Can Do 
About It
aCategory 3. Health Care Professionals
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 99
continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
 ActionŠWhat We Can 
 Do About It
aCategory 4. IT Infrastructure and Management 
14
Legacy systems are 
predominant

Each is handled 
as a separate 
implementation 
(set-up, profiles, 
management of 
decision support 
content, etc.)

Implementation 
focuses on the 
technology, not on 
enabling process 
and role changes 

Management of 
change holds all 
units supported 
by a system to the 
implementation 
rate of the slowest 
member

Data flow among 
an organization™s 
systems is very 
limited

Rigid workflow 
in an era of rapid 
change

Semantic meaning 
of clinical content 
is not explicit

Data are not 
easily shared 
within or across 
organizations

Clinical best 
practice and 
decision support 
content are not 
easily shared
Architectures to permit 
holistic management 
of patient information 
and decision support 
information across 
information systems

Decouple infrastructure, 
transaction processing, 
data aggregation, and 
decision/workflow 
support (S)

Wrap purchased 
applications as Web 
services (S)

Leverage ontology and 
document architectures 
(S)

Use open-source 
techniques for 
infrastructure layer (S)

Develop utility 
approaches to ﬁoperating 
system on demandﬂ 
(mass virtualization) (S)
15
Centralization 
of management 
and reduction in 
the number of 
information systems 
is the predominant 
method for 
standardization

Does not support a 
dynamic learning 
health care system 
that can adapt 
to accommodate 
local needs and 
capabilities

See Category 2, 
observations 5 and 6 
(C2O5, C2O6)

See observation 14 
(C4O14)
TABLE C.1
 Continued
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
16
Implementation time 
lines are long and 
course changes are 
expensive

Actual 
implementation 
time lines for 
enterprise-wide 
functionality 
commonly exceed 
a decade 

New systems 
are being 
implemented 
while the previous 
generations are 
still being rolled 
out

Requires 
investment far in 
advance of benefit

Inconsistent with 
president™s goal 
for electronic 
medical records by 
2014

See observation 14 
(C4O14)
17
Security and 
privacy compete 
with workflow 
optimization

Neither is effective

Techniques to 
authenticate a patient to 
his/her record (S/R)

Techniques to loosely 
couple the individual 
and his/her identities 
(S/R)

Architectures that 
enable confidentiality by 
limiting access according 
to need to know while 
supporting transparency 
in authorization (S/R)
18
Response times 
are variable (from 
subsecond to 
minutes) and long 
down-times occur 
(clinical systems 
down for >24 hours 
and equipment down 
for weeks)

Work-arounds

Redundant 
processes

Flying blind

Approaches that balance 
local caching of data 
with timeliness of data 
(S/R)
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
 ActionŠWhat We Can 
 Do About It
aCategory 4. IT Infrastructure and Management (continued) 
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 101continued
19
Data capture/data 
entry are commonly 
manual

More time spent 
entering data than 
using data

Variable 
completeness and 
accuracy

Loss of opportunity 
for decision and 
workflow support

Redesign roles, 
process, and 
technology to capture 
data at the source as 
data are created (S/R)

Self-documenting 
sensor-rich 
environments 
(multimedia) (S/R)

See Category 1, 
observation 2
20
User interfaces do not 
reflect human factors 
and safety design

Improperly 
structured pull-
down lists

Inconsistent use of 
location, symbol, 
and color

Systems intended to 
reduce error create 
new errors

Design reflecting 
human and safety 
factors (S)
21
Biomedical devices are 
poorly integrated in 
every location

Inefficient charting 
and intra-team 
conflict

Inaccurate charting 
(errors of omission 
and inappropriate 
copying)

Unsafe (5 rights 
errors)

Mechanism for 
positively identifying 
relationship of device 
to patient and to use 
(e.g., drip composition) 
(S)

Handle a physician™s 
drip order (order for 
substance, titration 
parameter), the current 
setting (nurse response 
to order), and amount 
actually administered 
(charting) as three 
related but separate 
concepts (S)
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
 ActionŠWhat We Can 
 Do About It
aCategory 5. Data Capture and Flow
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 COMPUTATIONAL TECHNOLOGY FOR EFFECTIVE HEALTH CARE
22
Implementation of 
positive identification 
technology is 
problematic

Gaps in the 
chain of positive 
identification

Work-arounds 
are common 
because of missing 
or mismatched 
information

Portable devices 
are task-specific 
(different device 
for lab specimen 
and medication 
administration)

Unit doses of 
medication are not 
manufactured with 
computer-readable 
tags

Defeats safety 
objective

Limit use to 
subprocesses where the 
technology is adequate 
for the workflow (S)

Measure and 
systematically 
eliminate work-
arounds (S)

Find better technology 
workflow matches 
(S/R)
23
Semantic 
interoperability is 
almost non-existent

Lack of 
interoperability 
limits data and 
knowledge reuse

Interfaces that enable 
entry of data in 
flexible ways, but that 
guide the user into 
using common fields 
and terminologies in a 
non-obtrusive fashion 
(S/R)

Methods to reconcile 
multiple references to 
the same real-world 
entities (e.g., different 
ways of referring to 
penicillin) (S/R)

Mechanisms for 
mining data to 
discover emerging 
patterns in data (S/R)
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
 ActionŠWhat We Can 
 Do About It
aCategory 5. Data Capture and Flow (continued)
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 10324
Most systems are 
partially or poorly 
or incompletely 
integrated into practice

Inconsistent use 
and work-arounds 
increase error

Benefits are 
significantly less 
than anticipated

Reduced 
investment

Focus on the desired 
outcomes instead of 
the technology (S/R)
25
Innovation requires 
locally adaptable 
systems but 
interoperability 
and evidence-based 
medicine require more 
standardization

Limited innovation 
and standardization

Management that 
encourages initiation 
of improvements by 
health professionals (S)

Technology and 
processes that allow 
local innovation and 
flexibility but foster 
collaboration and 
learning at a national 
scale (R)
 aR, solutions still to be discovered (research); S, solutions known today but not imple
-mented (short term).
TABLE C.1
 Continued
ObservationsŠWhat 
Committee Members 
Saw 
ConsequencesŠWhy 
the Observations 
Matter
Opportunities for 
 ActionŠWhat We Can 
 Do About It
aCategory 6.  Change in a Sociotechnical System
Computational Technology for Effective Health Care: Immediate Steps and Strategic DirectionsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.