DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12687The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information onDigital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding ofDifferent Access and Reuse Policies: Workshop Summary104 pages | 8.5 x 11 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38351-6 | DOI 10.17226/12687Paul F. Uhlir, Rapporteur; U.S. National Committee for CODATA; Board on ResearchData and Information; Policy and Global Affairs; Working Party on theInformation Economy Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development;National Research CouncilThe Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: Workshop...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   THE SOCIOECONOMIC EFFE
CTS OF PUBLIC SECTOR 
INFORMATION ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
TOWARD A BETTER UNDERS
TANDING OF DIFFERENT 
ACCESS AND REUSE POLICIES 
  
 WORKSHOP SUMMARY    Paul F. Uhlir, Rapporteur    
 
 U.S. National Committee for CODATA 
Board on Research Data and Information 
Policy and Global Affairs   in collaboration with the Working Party on the Information Economy 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
 
 
 
 
  
     THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS  Washington, D.C. www.nap.edu 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, N.W. Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are draw
n from the councils of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the National Academy of 
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the 
committee responsible for the report were chosen fo
r their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance. 
 This study was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. GEO-0738128 
and by the United States Geological Service under Grant No. 07HQGR0177
. Any opinions, 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in 
this publication are those of the author(s) and 
do not necessarily reflect the views of the organi
zations or agencies that provided support for the 
project.  
International Standard Book Number 13: 978-0-309-13968-7 
International Standard Book Number 10: 0-309-13968-6 
 
 
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, 

N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington 
metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu
.  Copyright 2009 by the National Academ
y of Sciences. All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America 

   The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society 
of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific 
and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of scienc
e and technology and to their us
e for the general welfare. Upon
 the 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, 
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federa
l government on scientific and te
chnical matters. Dr. Ralph J. 
Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a 
parallel organization of outstandi
ng engineers. It is autonomous in its administra
tion and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences
 the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of 
Engineering also sponsors engineering pr
ograms aimed at meeting natio
nal needs, encourages education and research, and 
recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M.
 Vest is president of the Na
tional Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sc
iences to secure the services of eminent members 
of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters 
pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts unde
r the 
responsibility given to the National Academy of
 Sciences by its congressional charter to
 be an adviser to the federal governmen
t and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, 
research, and education. Dr. Harv
ey V. Fineberg is president 
of the 
Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of 
science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of furtheri
ng knowledge and advising the fede
ral government. Functioning in 
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the 
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the Natio
nal Academy of Engineering in providing se
rvices to the government, the public, and 
the scientific and engineering communities. 
The Council is administered jointly by bot
h Academies and the Institute of Medicine
. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
  
 
 
 
 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v   STEERING COMMITTEE ON THE SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS  
OF PUBLIC SECTOR INFORMATION  
ON DIGITAL NETWORKS   
 Roberta Balstad (Chair), Columbia University 
Christine Borgman
, University of California, Los Angeles   John Houghton, Victoria University, Australia     Harlan Onsrud
, University of Maine  
   Knut Rexed, Rexed & Spröndly, DB, Sweden  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi    U.S. NATIONAL COMMITTEE FOR CODATA 
(as of February 2008) 
Roberta Balstad (Chair), Columbia University  
 Bonnie Carroll, Information International Associates
   Hal Abelson
, Massachusetts Institute of Technology   Peter Arzberger
, University of California, San Diego   Helen M. Berman
, Rutgers University  
 Christine Borgman
, University of California, Los Angeles   Sara Graves, University of Alabama  
 Myron Gutmann, Inter-University Consortium for 
Political and Social Research  
 Krishna Rajan, Iowa State University   David Scott, Rice University  
 Mary Waltham, Publishing Consultant   Working Party on the Information Economy (WPIE)
1   Daniela Battisti (Chair ad interim), Italy   Josie Brocca (Vice Chair), Canada  Antti Eskola
 (Vice Chair), Finland  Sangwon Ko
 (Vice Chair), Korea  Doreen McGirr (Vice Chair), United States    Egypt (Regular Observer)  Russian Federation (Regular Observer)
  Estonia (Regular Observer)  Singapore (Regular Observer)
  India (Regular Observer)  South Africa (Regular Observer)  Israel (Regular Observer)
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                  1 WPIE membership is open to all thirty member states
 of the OECD; regular observers are not currently member 
states. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii  Preface  Governments are the compilers 
and owners of a great deal of digital information, from 
geospatial data to statistical compilations and re
al estate records. In particular, the member 
countries of the Organisation for Economic Co
-operation and Development (OECD) have made 
huge investments in generating and disseminating pub
lic sector information (PSI), in large part 
because of the recognition that there are very sign
ificant socioeconomic values of and effects from 
this information. This is recognized to be especi
ally true for PSI on the Internet. Unfortunately, 
however, there is relatively little empirical data
 available on the effects of PSI disseminated online or on the various policy approaches that are now being taken to this dissemination, and what data 
that do exist are generally neither detailed nor comprehensive. This state of affairs leaves policy makers and information managers without the facts 
they need to assess and improve these policies. 
Thus there is a clear and compelling need to bette
r understand what the large public investment in 
the creation of public sector informati
on can produce or is already producing.   Because of the important potential economic a
nd social benefits of PSI activities in the United States and in other OECD countrie
s, the U.S. National Committee for CODATA
1 and the OECD organized an international workshop on 
February 4-5, 2008, aimed at obtaining an 
improved understanding of the methods, models, and 
techniques used to assess the specific effects of different access and reuse policies for PSI disseminated online. Specifically, the workshop was 
designed to address the following questions:  1. Why is a better understanding of the specific economic and non-economic values and 
effects of policies of access to and reuse2 of PSI important? What could be done to 
improve knowledge of these issues?  
2. What is the state of the art in different approaches for evaluating the direct and indirect 
economic and non-economic benefits and costs of access and reuse policies for PSI in the 
online environment? Define the underlying conc
epts and survey the literature about these policies and assessment methods.  
3. How have these methods been applied, for what types of information, and by which 
organizations? What are the commonalities a
nd differences among the various methods in 
relation to the types of informa
tion and policies being assessed? 
                                                 1 CODATA is the Committee on Data for Science and Tech
nology, an interdisciplinary body of the International 
Council for Science in Paris. The mission of CODATA is to 
strengthen international science for the benefit of society 
by promoting improved scientific and technical data management and use. See, http://www.codata.org/. The U.S. 
National Committee for CODATA has been the U.S. national member in CODATA at the National Academy of 

Sciences for more than three decades. 
2 According to the OECD report, 
Digital Broadband Content: Public Sector Information and Content,
 2006. Working 
Party on the Information Economy. DSTI/ICCP. Paris: OECD, ﬁreuseﬂ is focused on exploiting the economic value of 

public information (p.10). There are also many other cases, however, in which end users only ﬁuseﬂ this information for 
their own purposes, such as personal education and other socially focused activities without adding any value to the 
original PSI. Because reuse potentially 
involves much broader and greater econom
ic (as well as non-economic) effects, 
the workshop focused primarily on the reuse of PSI and distinguished between reuse and end use only where that 
distinction was important. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viii  4. What are the criteria to assess the validity and reliability of such methods? What is known 
or still needs to be known about the application of these methods to the evaluation of 
public information policies in the online environment?  
5. Identify a range of best practices, theoretical frameworks, a
nd models that are currently 
used to assess the economic and non-economic value and effects of 
different policies of access to and reuse of digital PSI,  
6. Identify a range of activities that might 
be undertaken by information managers and 
policy makers in the OECD countries to 
enhance understanding of the economic and non-
economic value and effects of different polic
ies of access to and reuse of digital PSI. 
The first day and a half of the workshop were focused on tasks 1-4, and the final half day 
addressed tasks 5 and 6. The OECD hosted the workshop at its headquarters in Paris. The entire 
workshop discussions were recorded, but not for 
attribution, with the exception of the invited presenters on the first day of the meeting. Th
e workshop presentations and discussions were subsequently summarized and edited, and U.S. National Committee for CODATA produced this 
report in collaboration with the OECD. We hope that
 the report will contribute to the improvement 
of methods and techniques for obtaining a better
 understanding of different policies for managing 
public sector information online. 
 Roberta Balstad 
Chair, Project Steering Committee 

Columbia University 

 
Paul F. Uhlir 
Project Co-Director 

The National Academies 

 Graham Vickery 
Project Co-Director 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ix  Acknowledgments 
 The U.S. National Committee for CODATA and 
the Board on International Scientific 
Organizations of the National Research Council of the National Academies wish to express their 
sincere thanks to the many individuals who played
 significant roles in planning the international workshop, The Socioeconomic Effects of Public S
ector Information on Digital Networks: Toward 
a Better Understanding of Different Access and 
Reuse Policies. The workshop steering committee 
was chaired by Roberta Balstad of Columbia Univ
ersity, and the other members of the committee 
were Christine Borgman of the University of 
California at Los Angeles, John Houghton of the University of Melbourne in Australia, Harlan Onsrud of the University of 
Maine, and Knut Rexed of Rexed & Spröndly AB, Sweden. We also would like to thank the experts who made 
presentations during the workshop, who are listed in the table of contents below, as well as the session chairs and rapporteurs who are listed in the meeting agenda in Appendix A. 
 This report has been reviewed in draft fo
rm by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the National 
Academies™ Report Review Committee. The purpose 
of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for quality and objectivity. 

The review comments and draft manuscript remain
 confidential to protect the integrity of the 
process.  We wish to thank the following individuals 
for their review of this report: Antti Eskola, 
Ministry of Employment and the Economy, Finla
nd; Anne Fitzgerald, Queensland University of 
Technology; Jeff Lazo, National Center for Atmospheric Research; Knut Rexed, Ministry of Finance, Sweden (Retired); and J. Timothy Spre
he, Sprehe Information Management Associates.  
 Although the reviewers listed above have
 provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the report, nor did they see the final draft before its release. Responsibility for the final co
ntent of this report rests entirely with the author 
and the institution. Finally, the U.S. National Committee for CODAT
A and the OECD would like to recognize the contributions of the following individuals to the completion of this project and the publication: 
Tilman Merz helped to organize the meeting at
 the OECD, and Chad Abel
-Kops and Daniel Cohen, both on assignment to the National Academies from th
e U.S. Library of Congress, assisted with the editing and the production of the manuscript. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. xi   Contents  PART ONE  Page 1. Introduction  Paul Uhlir, The National Academies 

 United States 
12. Overview of U.S. Federal Government Information Policy 
 Nancy Weiss
, Institute of Museum and Library Services  United States
 33. PSI Implementation in the UK: Successes and Challenges  
 Jim Wretham
, Office of Public Sector Information  United Kingdom
 74. The Value to Industry of PSI: The Business Sector Perspective  Martin Fornefeld, MICUS Management Consulting 
  Germany
 10 DISCUSSION BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
145. Achieving Fair and Open Access to PSI for Maximum Returns 
 Michael Nicholson, PSI Alliance 

 United Kingdom 
17 DISCUSSION BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
19PART TWO 
 6. Public Sector Information: Why Bother? 
 Robbin te Velde, Dialogic 
 The Netherlands
 25 7. Measuring the Economic Impact of the PSI
 Directive in the Context of the 2008 
Review   Chris Corbin, ePSIplus 

 United Kingdom
 298. Different PSI Access Policies and Their Impact 
 Frederika Welle Donker, Delft University of Technology 

 The Netherlands
 319. The Price of Everything but the Value of Nothing  
 Antoinette Graves
, Office of Fair Trading  United Kingdom
 37The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. xii   10. Enhancing Access to Government Info
rmation: Economic Theory as It 
Applies to Statistics Canada 
 Kirsti Nilsen, University of Western Ontario  

 Canada 4011. Assessing the Impact of Public 
Sector Geographic Information 
 Max Craglia, Institute for Environment and Sustainability, JRC 

 Italy 4512. Assessing the Economic and Social
 Benefits of NOAA Data Online 
 Rodney Weiher, NOAA 

 United States
 4713. Exploring the Impacts of Enhanced 
Access to Publicly Funded Research 
 John Houghton, Victoria University 

 Australia 51 DISCUSSION BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
56PART THREE  14. Measuring the Social and Economic Co
sts of Public Sector Information 
Online: A Review of the Literature and Future Directions  Paul F. Uhlir, Raed M. Sharif, and Tilman Merz 
6115. Summary of the First Breakout Session 
 Juan Carlos de Martin, Rapporteur 
6916. Summary of the Second Breakout Session 
 Tilman Merz, Rapporteur 
73PART FOUR  17. General Discussion of Results from th
e Breakout Sessions and Possible Next 
Steps  Paul F. Uhlir, Rapporteur 
75APPENDIXES 

 A. Workshop Agenda  83B. Biographical Summaries of Work
shop Chairs, Presenters, and 
Rapporteurs 87  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1PART ONE   1. Introduction  Paul Uhlir The National Academies, United States
    Governments generate vast amounts of digital data and information, and 
increasingly they are disseminating it 
online. The Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) defines public sector information as having 
characteristics of being ﬁdynamic and conti
nually generated, directly generated by the 
public sector, associated with the functio
ning of the public sector (for example, meteorological data, business statistics)
, and readily useable in commercial applications–ﬂ.
1 The OECD distinguishes PSI from ﬁpublic contentﬂ, which it characterizes as being ﬁstatic (i.e., it is an 
established record), held by the public sector rather than being generated by it (cultural archives, artistic works where third-party rights 
may be important), not direc
tly associated with the functioning of government, and not 
necessarily associated with commercial 
uses but having other public good purposes (culture, education)ﬂ
2. Most governments have initiatives of vari
ous kinds for promoting the use of the 
Internet as a way of disseminating their in
formation products to the public. Governments 
use legislative and regulatory (administrative) mechanisms to implement policies 
concerning access to and reuse of this PSI. Some
 of these policies extend across the entire 
government, while others are specific to certai
n types of information or agencies within 
the government.  
Governments throughout the world have diffe
rent approaches to how they make 
their PSI available and the terms under whic
h the information may be reused. Access 
policies vary greatly, from fully open access to a
ccess that is restricted in various ways, 
and provided either without charge or at some
 cost to the user. Reuse policies range from 
allowing unrestricted reuse to imposing a broa
d range of restrictions. Furthermore, the 
variations on access and reuse policies a
nd conditions vary not only across national 
governments, but also in many cases within ea
ch country at the state and local levels. There also appears to be significant variabil
ity in the implementation and enforcement of 
these access and reuse policies.  
At the same time, there appears to be 
a broad recognition in both the public and private sectors of the importance of digita
l networks and PSI to the economy and to society. The public investment in PSI in the Un
ited States alone has been estimated to be 
in the tens of billions of dollars. The intangib
le, non-market social benefits of different 

types of PSI are harder to measure, but they
 also can be very significant. They include 
educational, research, good-governance, and various other benefits that help improve the 
                                                 1 OECD. 2006.
 Digital Broadband Content: Public Sector Information and Content
. Paris: OECD, p. 8. 
2 Ibid. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. SOCIOEONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DITIGAL NETWORKS  
2 welfare of society. Many other countries also have large investme
nts in generating and disseminating PSI and an interest in stimula
ting greater rates of socioeconomic returns 
from those activities. Some very large PSI programs, such as the Global Earth 
Observation System of Systems, are not ju
st national programs but are coordinated and 

utilized on a global basis, and there are many 
others whose scope and potential effects are smaller but still significant.  
Despite the huge investments in PSI and 
the even larger estimated effects, 
surprisingly little is known about the costs and benefits of different information policies 
on the information society and the knowle
dge economy. There is relatively little 
empirical data available on th
e effects of PSI disseminated on the Internet or on the 
different policy approaches to this dissemination, and what data  do exist are generally 

neither detailed nor comprehensive. Sma
ll changes in access and use conditions may 

have large consequences. By understanding the strengths and weaknesses of the current assessment methods and their underlying criteri
a, it should be possible to improve and apply such tools to help rationalize the policies and to clarify the special role of the 
internet in disseminating PSI. This in tu
rn can help promote the efficiency and 
effectiveness of PSI investments and mana
gement, and to improve their downstream 
economic and social results. Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify, understand, 

and evaluate the current methods 
and underlying criteria that are used in this area in order to provide a more solid framework for making such policies. 
The workshop that is summarized in this report was intended to review the state 
of the art in assessment methods and to im
prove the understanding of what is known and what needs to be known about the effects of PSI activities. Part One provides some 
background on the goals, values, and the policy perspectives of government PSI 
producers, one in Europe and one in the United States, as well as of the users of PSI in industry. Part Two offers a number of examples of assessment methods used by those 
who study the effects of placing PSI online.  Part Three summarizes a 
discussion of what the different elements of the 
methodologies are and what might be done to
 improve them. We begin with a brief 
overview of the literature and of some of the strengths and weaknesses associated with the current methodologies. This presentati
on also provides some suggestions for 
discussion of future work in this area. Following the overview, there were two moderated 
breakout discussions at the workshop, one focused on the producers from the public sector and one on the users' perspectives. 
We designated rapporteurs who synthesized 
those discussions and which are summarized in
 this report. In Part Four, the rapporteur provides a summary of the subse
quent plenary discussion and identifies some next steps. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3 2. Overview of U.S. Federal 
Government Information Policy1  Nancy Weiss Institute of Museum and Library Services, United States 
 Information policy in the United States 
has a long history, dating back to the establishment of the nation. The founding fath
ers, who drafted the U.S. Constitution and 
the country™s early laws, faced significant in
formation policy and access challenges. They 
had helped to establish a new democracyŠw
ith a government of the people, for the 
people, and by the peopleŠin a country in which people were widely dispersed and generally uneducated. They needed to create different mechanisms of communication and 
information dissemination in order to prom
ote trade and economic development. They 
also had to ensure that individuals were able to obtain the information and skills 
necessary to participate meaningfully in their own governance. As James Madison,
 one of the founders, said, ﬁA popular government without popular information or the means of 
acquiring it is but a prologue to a farce, or a tragedy, or both.ﬂ  As a result, in the United States we have a long cultural and social history of 
supporting and encouraging public access to inform
ation, an attitude that is closely linked 
with our constitutional and statutory guarantees
 of freedom of expression, freedom of the 
press, transparent governance, and democracy. From the beginning, our nation 
recognized that access to and use of informati
on benefits the nation's citizens as well as 
the broader global community by promoting the advancement of knowledge, cultural 

understanding, economic growth, and th
e general welfare of society.  Of course, access to government information is just as important to nations with 
highly developed technological and industrial capacity as it was to the United States in 
the late 1700s. Governments today create va
st amounts of information with economic and 
social value, including but not limited to 
consumer information, statistical compilations, 
and information for academic and scientific
 uses. This presentation provides a brief 
overview of the public sector information pol
icies and practices in the United States. There are numerous federal laws th
at govern access to U.S. government 
information, ranging from a right to info
rmation provided under the Freedom of 
Information Act and the right to know what
 is going on in the government, guaranteed by 
the Sunshine in Government Act, to the Unite
d States Copyright Act and a host of others. U.S. federal government information policy is
 synthesized in a document called Office of 
Management and Budget Circular A-130, which se
ts forth a number of general principles 
that government agencies are supposed to
 apply when dealing with government 
information:  
 Government information is a valuable na
tional resource. It provides the public with knowledge of the government, soci
ety, and economyŠpast, present, and 
future. It is a means to ensure the acc
ountability of government, to manage the 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/28/0/40047022.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.         SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS  
4 government's operations, to maintain th
e healthy performance of the economy, 
and is itself a commodity in the marketplace. 
 The free flow of information between th
e government and the public is essential 
to a democratic society. It is also es
sential that the government minimize the 
Federal paperwork burden on the public, minimize the cost of its information 
activities, and maximi
ze the usefulness of government information.  
 In order to minimize the cost and 
maximize the usefulness of government 
information, the expected public and private benefits derived from government 

information should exceed the public and private costs of the information, 

recognizing that the benefits to be derived from government information may not 
always be quantifiable.   The nation can benefit from government
 information disseminated both by 
Federal agencies and by diverse nonfederal parties, including State and local government agencies, educational and ot
her not-for-profit institutions, and for-profit organizations.   Because the public disclosure of governme
nt information is essential to the 
operation of a democracy, the management of Federal information resources 

should protect the public's right of access to government information.  
 The open and efficient exchange of scientific and technical government 
information, subject to applicable national security controls 
and the proprietary rights of others, fosters excellence in scientific research and effective use of 
Federal research and development funds. 
In addition to these principles setting forth the importance of public exchange and 
access to government information, Circular A-
130 also contains policies that describe 
how to avoid restrictive practices. A government agency should avoid establishing or 
permitting others to have arrangements that are exclusive, restricted, or otherwise 
interfere with making information available 
on a timely and equitable basis. That does 
not imply, however, that a person or enti
ty may not take government information, 
repackage it, and make it available commercia
lly. Indeed, that is the desired outcomeŠ
that a variety of products be developed from the underlying government information. But, 
generally speaking, government information cannot
 be transferred to one corporation or private entity without also ma
king it available to others.  Government agencies also operate with
 the understanding that public access to government information is important and that
 they should avoid unnecessary restrictions 
or regulations limiting such access. For example,
 an agency must avoid charging a fee or royalties on the reuse, resale, or dissemination of government information. Indeed, 
Circular A-130 encourages agencies to set user fees for government information products 
at the marginal cost of dissemination. (The Ci
rcular provides that th
e calculation of user charges must exclude the costs associated w
ith the original collec
tion and processing of the information.) As a result, agencies ofte
n post information on th
e Internet, where the marginal cost of dissemination is zero. 
The U.S. Copyright Act affects another area of public information policy. Under Section 105 of the copyright law, works created by federal government employees within 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW OF US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT INFORMATION POLICY 
 5the scope of their employment are part of 
the public domain. This policy has contributed 
to the development of a very robust public
 domain and to the unfettered reuse of 
information. In fact, the federal government 
is the largest producer of public domain 
information in the United States. Another importa
nt factor is that in the United States it is 
not possible to copyright facts or ideas, whether produced by government or in the 
private sector. This, too, encourages the broad dissemination and reuse of information.  
The United States recognizes many lega
l, economic, and other public policy 
reasons for placing government-generated info
rmation in the public domain, subject to 
conditions of open availability and unrestricted reuse. First, a government entity requires 
no incentive from exclusive property rights 
to create information, unlike authors or 
publishers in the private sector. Second, government-generated information is a public 
good. The public has already paid for the collection of the information through its taxes, 
and so it should not have to pay a second time when accessing the information. Third, the 

democratic values and transparency of gove
rnment would be underm
ined by restricting citizens from access to and use of public sector
 information. Finally, information is not an 

exhaustible resource. Multiple people can use the same data or information for different 

purposes, without diminishing the value of the information. 
Of course, there are some countervailing policies in practice that limit the access 
to government information. These are generally
 based on national security concerns and the need to protect personal privacy and confidential information. The government 
generally protects the proprietary rights of information that has originated from the 
private sector and been made available for government use.  
One recent noteworthy development in the area of access to government-funded 
(as compared to government-produced) informa
tion is legislation that was just passed, after several years of development, that 
applies to research supported by the U.S. National Institutes of Health 
(NIH). In 2003 the NIH instituted a data-sharing policy that 
required any recipient of grant funds totaling more than $500,000 in any single year to 
include with its grant application a data-sha
ring plan describing how the research data would be disseminated to the public. Subs
equently the NIH adopted a policy that requested, but did not require, investigators to submit an el
ectronic version of the final manuscript of whatever study resulted from 
the publicly funded research to a central repository of the NIH called PubMed Central.  In order to further encourage the prac
tice of making this information openly 
available to the public, the U.S. Congress passed a law in late 2007 that requires researchers to deposit a copy of any journal articles resulting from NIH-funded research to this central database within 12 months of the official date of publication. The goal of the law is to derive the greatest possible so
cioeconomic benefits from information that 
has been generated with federal governmen
t investment by promoting access to that 
information to any citizens who can use this re
search information and to other researchers 
who are trying to advance particular areas of science or to accelerate innovation.  There are many different federal agencies within the United States that provide 
access to their information. Their policies for information access tend to be mission 

driven, that is, related to whatever the agency is trying to accomplish. Although there are 
a number of different areas of emphasis, 
most federal agencies stress creating an 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.         SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS  
6 environment that is open and that minimizes ba
rriers to access. As we look at the social and economic impacts of public sector inform
ation online, it is important to understand 
the motivations and the dr
ivers of each agency.  To summarize, U.S. policy has a default 
rule of open availability and reuse of public sector information with the goal 
of maximizing the benefits of the public 
investment made in producing that information. Government information is normally 

placed in the public domain, reflecting a belief
 in the public™s right to access and reuse government information. U.S. policy promotes the dissemination of government 

information at no more than marginal cost
s as well as balancing the many different 
interests in adopting any new laws without limiting the public™s access to public sector 
information. As Thomas Jefferson, one of th
e country™s founding fathers, explained, ﬁInformation is the currency of democracy.ﬂ 
U.S. policy continues to build on this core 
principle.  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 73. PSI Implementation in the United Kingdom: Successes and 
Challenges1  Jim Wretham 
Office of Public Sector Information, United Kingdom 
  This presentation provides a brief overvie
w of what has been happening recently 
in the United Kingdom with regard to public
 sector information (PSI), including what 
lessons have been learned and, perhaps more
 important, what the principal challenges 
are. Over the past ten years or 
so, there has been an increasing 
interest in PSI. Before that 
time, the reuse of such information was of in
terest to only a select fewŠto those in the information industry, to publishers, and to t
hose who were interested in the subject because of copyright and licensing issu
es. But in the United Kingdom and, more 
generally, throughout the West
ern world, this is now all changing. Public sector information appears to be grabbing th
e public™s imagination. Why is this? 
First of all, in the United Kingdom, as 
in many other countries, there is a very 
well established and thriving information industry. Many of the organizations or companies in this industry rely 
heavily on public sector information. 
Second, the Internet is affording to society a great variety of new opportunities. The ability to access and manipulate data is in
creasingly greater than it has been in the 
past, and that trend looks as if it will continue. And third, in the United Kingdom, as well as
 in other parts of Western Europe in 
particular, there has been a growing emphasis on legislation 
concerning access to PSI, or freedom of information laws. So the public is now increasingly thinking of access to 
information as being a democratic right. This
 is a tremendously important development. 
There have been many milestones in the e
volution of the reuse of public sector information. One of the major ones in Europe was the issuance of the European Union 

Directive on Reuse of Public Sector Information. The Unite
d Kingdom put this directive 
into effect in 2005, and it supported the law by producing a guide to best practices. This 
guide is still a work in progress.  The United Kingdom has seen a number of
 successes in this area, and these 
successes have depended on different factors. One of these factors, at least as far as 
central government information is concer
ned, is the fact that most government 
information is licensed by the Office of Pub
lic Sector Information (OPSI). This makes it 
possible to have a ﬁone stop shop.ﬂ  The OPSI has developed the click use license
, which is an online licensing system 
that was set up about seven years ago and has produced some good results. There are now 
about 14,000 of these licenses worldwide. Pe
ople can access and reuse a great amount 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/28/3/40046991.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
8   and variety of information generated by the 
public sector. Nevertheless, there is some 
room for liberalizing this further, for exam
ple, by moving away from the current demand 
that a person must register before be
ing allowed to access and reuse information. 
The OPSI also has developed a system known as the information fair trader 
scheme (IFTS). The system is intended to 
produce and promulgate standards across the 
public sector, to acknowledge best practices 
for encouraging fairness, transparency, and 
openness, and to make sure that organizations
 have the proper processes in place. The 
OPSI operates two versions of the information fair trader scheme. The more 
comprehensive version is aimed at major trad
ers of public sector information, such as 
organizations that produce mapping or mete
orological data. They use the full IFTS accreditation, which involves the OPSI sending e
xperts into these organizations to review 
practices and processes. Not a
ll holders of PSI are major traders, however, so the OPSI 
has identified and developed an online assessment process that is much simpler and that 
is aimed at these smaller users. 
Working with representatives from industr
y and other parts of the public sector, the OPSI has also created an advisory panel on public sector information. This advisory 
panel provides an independent focus for the producers of PSI, who represent the interests 
of the information industry. These producers of
 PSI also are instrumental in identifying 
trends, providing research, and informing those 
in OPSI about the best approaches to the reuse of public sector information. This advi
sory panel is carrying out a very important 
function. The OPSI also is looking at ways in which to improve access to PSI. Working 
with the information industry, the organiza
tion has initiated a number of different 
activities aimed at helping people access info
rmation more easily and at teaching them 
how to use the Web and the various automatic tools available for searching for and 

connecting with information. Of course, this is a long journey, and major challenges lie 
ahead. One of the most important challenges is 
to make sure that there is a correct 
balance between the various trading models and some of the public sector organizations. 
In the United Kingdom is a set of organi
zations known as trading funds. Although a trading fund is an operation of a government
 department, these organizations enjoy a 

certain amount of self sufficiency in terms of
 funding, and they are encouraged to behave in a commercial manner. There are some challenges to setting up this model, and it is 

important to make sure that the balance is right. 
A second challenge, which is identified in the EU PSI Directive, concerns the 
definition of a public task. This definition need
s further refinement so that its meaning is 
precisely clear. A public task refers to activit
ies that are regarded as being part of the public sector organization™s mission. The conseq
uences of activities falling within the organization™s public task are limits on the ex
tent to which that organization may operate 
in the information reuse domain itself as a prod
ucer of value-added products or services. A third challenge concerns the ﬁno obligationﬂ aspect of the PS
I directive, which 
is reflected in U.K. regulations as well. In the public sector, as perhaps in all of life, 

unless people have to do something, they tend 
not to do it. So the fact that there is no obligation to allow reuse has 
tended to lead many public s
ector organizations to bury The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PSI IMPLEMENTATION IN THE UK  
9 their heads in the sand and to say that reuse is not for them to worry about. There is no 
quick and easy solution to this other than to make sure that the OPSI encourages and 
publicizes the benefits of reus
e of public sector information. 
Getting this message across will require th
e use of many resources, notably from 
the OPSI, which is only a small part of
 the government. There are about 100,000 public 
sector organizations in the United Kingdom, so
 getting that message across will not be 
easy. Resources will be important.  A final challenge centers on awareness and impactŠraising awareness through 
training and then measuring the impact, that 
is, what the economic benefits of PSI use 
are. The PSI Discussion Forum is a private-public
 initiative in this area. It has opened up the debate across the public and private se
ctors and recently received some favorable 
coverage in the press. The OPSI also developed a Web channel to deal with requests by 
people wanting to reuse public sector information. 
Maintaining standards is, of course, highly important as well. The OPSI works 
closely with some of the a
udit bodies so that it has experts available who can go into public sector organizations and test what is actually happening in the reuse field. The 
OPSI works closely with the United Kingdom™s 
Office of Fair Trading (OFT) in the areas of competition and how markets operate. The OPSI plans to do some spot audits on 

public sector information. There is a majo
r focus on government reviews, and some 
independent economic analysis has been comm
issioned that will look at how the various 
models across the United Kingdom operate. That
 analysis is expected to provide some 
guidance for the future. Two key reports have been released over the past eighteen months. One was on the commercial use of public information and was produced by the OFT.
2 The second was the Power of Information
3 review. Although both of these 
reports deal with the reuse of public information, they come at it from
 somewhat different perspectives. The OFT 
report takes the point of view of a commercial reuser, looking at how to add value to this huge resource in order to benefit the economy. The 
Power of Information review, on the other hand, focuses mainly on the benefits of
 PSI to the citizen. It looks at how the Internet gives everyone the opportunity to use information in ways that were not possible 
just 10 years ago, using applications such as data mashing, or integrating, and it examines 
ways in which citizens can take information 
and share it with like-minded individuals. 
One example in the 
Power of Information
 described people who had visited restaurants in Los Angeles and who then shared inform
ation about the standards of the food, cleanliness, and other factors.
 One result of this activity was to elevate the standards 
across those restaurants. 
In conclusion, the U.K. government is wo
rking to achieve three objectives. First, it seeks to embrace the information needs of
 the citizen. Second, it is attempting to 
encourage information reuse and commercial ex
ploitation. And finally, it wishes to create 
easy-to-find and easy-to-use public sector information.                                                   2 http://www.opsi.gov.uk/a
dvice/poi/oft-cupi.pdf 
3 http://www.opsi.gov.uk/advice/poi/p
ower-of-information-review.pdf 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 104. The Value to Industry of PSI: The Business Sector Perspective1 Martin Fornefeld MICUS Management Consulting, Germany 
 This presentation discusses the value of PSI to industry from the perspective of 
the business sector. MICUS is a management
 consulting company based in Düsseldorf and Berlin. Besides management c
onsulting, it focuses on e-government
 projects for the German federal government and market studi
es. In particular, MICUS does many market 
studies concerning PSI and the economic value of innovation. Its clients generally come 
from the public sector, the energy sector, a
nd the service sector. MICUS plans to publish three studies in 2008: Business Models for German Companies in International Geo-
Information Markets; The Impact of Broa
dband and Growth in Productivity; and The Assessment of the Reuse of Public Sector 
Information in the Geographical Information, 
Meteorological Information, and Legal Information Sectors. 
What are the problems in obtaining PSI 
in Germany today? Negotiations about 
PSI reuse often fail. The private sector is requesting new pricing and licensing models for 
PSI reuse throughout Europe, but these requests for easier and more liberal licensing 
models and lower prices for the procurement 
of PSI have not been very successful. There 
are barriers to PSI reuse. There is insuffici
ent market transparency by the PSI holders 
who are responsible for the data. And despite strong demand there have been a number of 
bad experiences, such as those that happened in securing data for maps, which have 
resulted in the gradual emergence of econom
ical alternatives from private sources.  
There are also barriers on the PSI holders™ side, especially the lack of knowledge about how the market works and a tendency to overestimate the value of their products. 

In the meteorological market, for example, 
there are now parallel infrastructures in 
Germany, with weather stations maintained
 by the National Meteorological Service and similar stations maintained by private i
ndustry. This happened only after negotiations with the German government for PSI reuse fa
iled. Because data production is costly, the 
government believes that the corresponding pr
ice must also be set high, and so the 
distribution network does not work. Consequently, there remain many unexploited 

business opportunities. In Germany the market for geo-information increased from •1 billion in 2000 to 
•1.6 billion in 2006. What is especially intere
sting is how this is divided. In 2000 the emphasis was on planning and maintenance syst
ems, from which utility and engineering 
companies bought a great deal of cadastral
2 information. However, by 2004 the 
navigation market had exploded, and two years 
later more than 50 percent of the demand 
for geo-information was being driven by the navigation market, much of this based on 

ﬁfreeﬂ private data (cf., Intergraph, Google Earth).                                                   1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/27/9/40047551.pdf 
2 Merriam-Webster defines cadastre as 
ﬁan official register of the quan
tity, value, and ownership of real 
estate used in apportioning taxes.ﬂ 2009. In 
Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary
. Retrieved February 12, 
2009, from http://www.merriam-web
ster.com/dictionary/cadastre. 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VALUE TO INDUSTRY OF PSI 
   
11At about the same time, in 2007, the Germ
an government™s revenue from PSI was 
only •164,000. That revenue came from three main areas: legal information, vehicle 
information, and meteorological data. Mean
while, cartography, statistics, medical 
information, geo-information, and environmental information from the government 

garnered little revenue. Although the market indicates that
 statistics and cartographic information have more potential value, the 
government did not appear
 to take advantage of this potential. 
So what is the value of PSI? In discussing 
this, it is important to remember that 
the source data are only the starting point. For each application that puts these data to 
work and for every additional function and data set one adds, the value is increasedŠa higher step on the value chain. For a comple
x combination of data like statistics and 
geographical data, the value of the source data is increased by,
 say, a factor of five. And with information-based services like mapping, geocoding, and analyzing tools or 

applications, that factor may be 10. The fu
rther along the value chain, the greater the value that can be assigned to the data. This process of adding value is done by the private market. The PSI holder should make the offer,
 and the rest should be done by the service provider. This is called value chain production. The value of the source data are quite low, but the costs of the source data in most 
cases are quite high. So how do we discover the value of the additional factors? In 2007 we had the chance to observe bids on some 
companies that provided cartographic data, su
ch as Tele Atlas and Navteq. TomTom was 
bidding on Tele Atlas, and Nokia was bidding on Navteq, and the prices being discussed were about •2-3 billion for Tele Atlas and nearly •6 billion for Navteq. That was about ten times the annual sales of these companies. 
Tele Atlas was not even profitable. TomTom™s profit in 2006 was •22 million, on 
sales of •1.8 billion. The interesting thing was that although the Tele Atlas and Navteq data maps were their own maps, the companie
s had bought the original maps from public 
bodies in the late 1990s. Afterwards, they added their own updates and digitized the data, and today these maps are proprietary and we
ll along the value chain. There have been two other interesting acquisitions in the industry. Pitney Bowes bought MapInfo, a geomarketing software company, and Mi
crosoft just bought Multimap, a Web map 
provider, for two to five times the annual sales. 
Meanwhile, the reuse of geographical PSI lags, so what would be the right strategy for the PSI holder to open the PSI market? To answer
 that question we developed a performance matrix 
that facilitates strategic de
velopment. On one side we 
list PSI availability and qualit
y of services (including usability of web services) from low 
to high. On the other side we list the price for PSI from low to high.
  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
12 FIGURE 1: Slide 11 from presentation 
of Martin Fornefeld, MICUS Management 
Consulting, Germany.   Source: http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/27/9/40047551.pdf Within the graph are four squares, the fi
rst being a sleeping market, that is, one with unrecognized potential. This unrecognized potential includes statistical information that has not yet been marketed. The second 
square holds a question mark representing a 
situation characterized by th
e question, Why do we see high pr
ices but low availability 
and low quality of services? This is a market where replacement of PSI by private data 
may take place. The third square is a cash cow, e.g., a situation with high prices, high 

availability, and good service. This represents a successful public monopoly; an example 
would be Juris GmbH, a data-sharing plan 
in Germany that holds a monopoly on legal 
information, with high prices
 and high availability. The fourth square is the ideal of what we would wish to achieve in a dynamic
 marketŠhigh availabilit
y, low prices, and a demand-oriented PSI market. EuroLex, another European provider of legal information, 

is a good example.
 So what strategies can we offer for thes
e four squares? First, a sleeping market 
needs improvement in services and marketing. 
One needs to rethink the PSI strategy here. That is, is there a need anymore for a public 
service, or can it be 
replaced with a private service? The cash cows in the third square
 can increase the reus
e of PSI by reducing prices and finding new customers,
 but are low prices for PSI a risk for the public service? 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VALUE TO INDUSTRY OF PSI 
   
13In my opinion, no; rather, the risk is if you do 
not change your pricing policy at all. If we continue with the pricing models now in
 use across Europe, the sales will go down. Private alternatives may be found 
to substitute for PSI products. Moreover, if one reduces prices, this will 
increase PSI and sales, and, in the short 
term, the price reduction will be compensa
ted by the increasing demand. For example, 
Austria reduced prices last year, and many new customers have been found there. Thus, 
reducing prices and enhancing the availabil
ity of PSI will lead to a dynamic market. 
In summary, what is our advice for be
tter PSI reuse? Firs
t, one should raise awareness of the potential for PSI in the reuse of private sector information. There is a 
huge unexploited potential with a high economic
 impact. Exploiting the potential in the 
PSI market requires lower pricing and less re
strictive licensing agreements. To be sure, 
there is no such thing as a free lunch. Reusable, high-quality information requires 

investment. There is also a need for innovativ
e business models that consider the whole 
value chain. These models must be aware of 
product substitution. Finally, there is a need to rethink and review public services. If product substitution occurs, the question 

becomes: Is there still a demand for the public 
service, or may it be replaced by a private 
service? 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
14 DISCUSSION BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
  PARTICIPANT: Typically the costs of buying or acquiring PSI are really a small 
part of the costs for the reuser, perhaps 1, 2, or 3 percent. So why bother about decreasing the price if it is just such a small part of th
e costs anyway? Is it not 
more in the quality of 
the data where the pain is? Dr. Fornefeld stated that if one reduces the price, the demand 
goes up and everyone will be happy. But if only 1 percent of the reuser™s costs are in PSI, 
the effects will not be that strong, un
less price elasticity is very strong. DR. FORNEFELD: We have to use inte
lligent, innovative business models to 
increase the reuse of data. It is not a question of whether there should be a price, but there should be a market price, and 
that is a problem especially 
for the public body. What is the 
market price? A public body cannot calculat
e the market price, but public-private 
partnerships can help to define it. PARTICIPANT: From the perspective 
of the European Commission, the 
important thing is to maximize the value of
 PSI. The earnings for the public bodies that 
charge only the marginal costs are very 
limited. Those bodies that have succeeded are 
those that have high licensing prices and high earnings. But this is only one way of seeing things. Perhaps one can have much more success if there are much lower earnings but a 

high degree of use because a very act
ive reuse market has been created.  
The Commission has a license, 
a reuse policy, in which we do not charge at all for such uses as EuroLex. Very recently we put our language resources onlineŠgigabytes of 
pairs of languages from machine translations
 that allow translations into 23 languages. These resources, which are unique, are works of a team of, I would say, thousands of 
translators during many, many years. This is something for which it is very difficult to 

substitute the work of private companies.  
We put it on the Web. We issued a press 
release, and we had between 1,000 and 1,500 downloads of the whole dataset in the first week. So I would offer the message of 
thinking in these terms about the value deri
ved from making the work of public sector 
organizations freely available. For a public sector body, or at least for the Commission, 
talking about a business model seems inappropriate, because we are not a commercial business. You may talk about financing models, 
and then we would have to talk with the financial ministers, but to talk about busine
ss models seems to me a very one-sided way 

to see things, and perhaps this is part of the problem. Thinking in terms of business 
models when the context is not a real business creates some of the challenges. 
For my last comment, I would encourage everybody to come forward with 
examples of what Dr. Fornefeld mentioned;
 that is, whether usage increases if you diminish your licensing costs or th
e cost of PSI. If this can be proven to be the case with examples, that would be, as you say in Br
itain, the proof of the pudding being in the eating. So we have established that you really can provide geographical information this 
way. If there were sufficient examples perhaps 
there would be no further need to be here discussing it, as the proposition would be so straightforward. That would leave simply the 
question of implementation. Of course, this br
ings us to another issue that we will be 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.VALUE TO INDUSTRY OF PSI 
   
15talking about, which was mentioned previous
ly in the United States, and that is the 
question of quality. In the United States, of course, there are also critics of the lack of funding from 
the national agencies in some areas, especia
lly in geographical information. The critics 
argue that the government data is of limited 
value, so if you really want good data you have to go to the private sector to buy it. In the end, perhaps PSI is free or available at only marginal cost, but the value of it is lim
ited for certain applications. That is another 
debate, however.  
PARTICIPANT: Dr. Fornefeld mentioned 
the importance of private-public partnerships and the possibility of determining a price. One of the experiences we have 
had with geographical information in the Europe
an Union, for instance, is that there have been a number of public-private partnerships
 working since the mid-1990s, and they have 
been fairly successful in terms of their data
 quality and the distribution of data among the 
major players. When one has established su
ccessful models like that, however, changing 
them later on to allow access for everybody and dismantle the barriers inevitably put up 
by the public-private partnership can lead to a problem.         
So, there is no such thing as a free lunch in this trade o
ff. It would be interesting for us to hear if all the governments have been
 in that position and what they have done.  PARTICIPANT: I found the question raised by the European Commission quite 
interesting and a crucial one. Are we talking about a business model or a business case? 
Are we as governments or public authorities 
talking about cost recovery when actually 
the business side is clearly thinking in terms of a business model and making something 
profitable? I think as policymakers we have
 certain policy imperatives. This discussion 
does remind me of some of the work we did on e-government
 both at the national and the European levels, but also work at the OECD when we were looking at the business case for e-government
 and we had a clear policy imperative. We were pushing information 
and communication technologies into the public sector and thereby indirectly encouraging the adoption of the new technologiesŠthe new media and the Internet. 
This is very much along the same lines, 
but we are going maybe one step further, 
which is that we are contributing to innovation, to growth, and to productivity. Research by the OECD has proved that already, but I think it will be interesting to see how we can transformŠor whether we need to transfor
mŠthe way of thinking in the public sector, 
where thinking about a business model is still 
foreign. It would be helpful to have a good quantification of how we do that
 both in terms of 
recovering costs from the public sector 
and also knowing how much effort we should put into it because we know what the end game may be. 
But that was supposed to be only a side comment, and I actually had a question 
for Dr. Fornefeld, which was that I was very in
terested in the map that he showed about 
the weather system in Germany. I was just 
wondering if he could elaborate on why the talks between the public authority and the private entity broke down. I wonder whether 

there are some lessons that we can take fr
om this particular case study as to how we 
could improve collaboration between the 
public and private sectors in PSI.  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
16 DR. FORNEFELD: How did it work with 
the weather stations in Germany? 
There have always been, and still are, a lot of discussions about pricing of the meteorological data from the DWD, the Ge
rman meteorological government agency.  
The private meteorological providers comp
lain that there is a natural monopoly, 
especially on the data from satellites, that 
affects the prices. What 
is the right price for 
satellite photos for the weather station information? Due to the inability of the DWD to 
resolve this pricing question, the whole effort to provide this PSI meteorological data did 
not succeed. When the DWD could not determin
e the price at which to make the data 
available to the private meteor
ological data providers, the private data providers built their own grid of weather stations. This experience led to some critical discussions about 
public monopolies and the power of a na
tural monopoly in setting prices. 
 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17   5. Achieving Fair and Open Acce
ss to PSI for Maximum Returns1  Michael Nicholson PSI Alliance, United Kingdom   The PSI Alliance is an associ
ation of private sector PSI reusers, located primarily 
in Europe. My own knowledge is of the situation in the United Kingdom.  Public sector information is an e
normously underexploited market throughout 
Europe. In general, innovative PSI reuse is being driven by small companies. In the 
United Kingdom it is relatively easy to co
mmunicate with PSI holders, but in other 
countries this is not always the case. In all countries the reactions from PSI holders to 
proposals for reuse vary from holder to holder.  
For example, the Environment Agency 
in the United Kingdom has stated that while it could create a list of the agency™s PSI an
d make it available to potential users, 
such a move would cost money which may be
 better used in flood defenses. ﬁWould you 
prefer data or flooding?ﬂ is the question they
 asked. Other PSI discussions have run into the issue of public safety and security. For instance, the Coal Authority holds information 
on underground workingsŠundoubtedly PSIŠwhich could be made available to the 
public. If this were done, however, hundreds of thousands of homeowners might be 
appalled to discover that there are mines some 500 feet below their houses. They would 
assume the worst, despite being entirely secure in most cases. 
Many PSI holders are simply unaware of the reuse opportunity. Some PSI holders 
do little to encourage reuse; others positively obstruct it. They either consider PSI to be 
ﬁtheirﬂ data, the ﬁcitizens™ data,ﬂ or anyone else™s data except the private sector™s (ﬁAll they will do is profit from itﬂ). Some PSI holders see making the data available as a low 
priority; others see it as vitally important; 
and still others want to exploit the PSI themselves. In the United Kingdom, for example,
 the focus in the areas of geospatial and meteorological data is on revenue protection rather than value maximization. This creates 

substantial barriers to reuse. Essentially, instead of the tap being turned full on, it is half off. There are also some well-placed and 
powerful civil servants in charge of 

organizations that are consider
ed to be national treasures who see no reason to change the status quo. This is an issue that all too often can be dealt with only by the politicians, but it is not a vote-winner and so does not attract their attention. Parts of the U.K. and French 
establishments are beginning to consider th
ese issues in greater 
depth, and it will be 
interesting to see the outcome. 
Despite the laggards, some PSI holders ar
e exemplars and actively seek partners 
for PSI reuse. Entrepreneurs are thus sometimes welcomed and sometimes resisted. 

Remember, however, that if there is only one 
obstacle left, this will still prevent PSI from 
being reused. So in order to increase the value of PSI, all material barriers must be 

removed. I would suggest that whatever re
use policies are adopted, they must be straightforward. Complex policies will not work.  
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/52/40064545.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS  
18Small companies report problems with unfair competition arising from poorly 
defined reuse policies. Some PSI holders th
at exploit their own data create so many 
restrictions to protect their own activities that the private 
sector ends up attempting to 
develop its own data as an alternative. Apart from the duplicated investment, the risk in 
this situation is that the PSI holder will th
en loosen its restrictions, undercutting the 
private sector™s investment and making it potentially worthless.  
While Dr. Fornefeld claimed that hi
gh prices for PSI were a result of overestimating the value of data, that is not necessarily correct. In my experience, prices 
can be high simply because those who set them are risk averse and have no competition 

in a market with no pricing comparisons. Ther
e is a reluctance to experiment with the 
market and to drop prices when there is no competition. 
There needs to be a mechanism for countries
 to define what information must be 
collected as PSI. It is clearly not accept
able for the public bodies creating PSI to 
themselves determine what data to collect. Rather, the state has to decide what it needs to 

own and collect as part of the national informa
tion infrastructure and then to decide on its 
policy for wider distribution. Whatever the st
ate decides to own itself should be very easily accessible. The question should also be 
asked whether the private sector should be collecting any of this data instead. The prime minister speaks enthusiastic
ally about how the use of technology has grown in the United Kingdom. It is certainly 
true that, over the last
 ten years, software, hardware, bandwidth, and other technologies have improved immeasurably. It is also 
remarkable what has been achieved with the 
digitization of public resources. Ten years ago, user skill levels were a real constraint, but today the majority
 of people can use a computer and the Internet. So the constraints 
of user skills and technical delivery are no longer the key issues. As these problems have 
been solved, the most important constraint 
has instead become access to information. What
ever the costs of limiting access to PSI at 
present, they can only grow. These costs of limiting access to PSI fall in
to three categories.
 First, there are direct and indirect costs to the public sector, which are generally not measured. If 
efficiency improved in the public sector by only 1 percent as a result of free or improved 
access to the geospatial element of PS
I (e.g., in the United Kingdom, the Ordnance 
Survey or the Met Office), the sum saved would 
be the equivalent of eight times the cost 
to the state of collecting the data in the first place.  
Second, there are costs to the private sector, both directŠexcessive time spent 
negotiating, managing, and complying with licen
ses or additional costs collecting data that should be openly availableŠand indirect, such as the loss of opportunity. Finally, the economic cost to the citi
zen when knowledge is available, but inaccessible, cannot be overlooked. For inst
ance, in the United Kingdom and France 
public bodies have created excellent maps, but their license 
terms do not always allow the 
ready use of these maps, such as making them
 available on the Internet. Job opportunities are lost, higher taxes may result, and there is 
less choice. If U.K. citizens were offered a 
choice between a continuation of the current situation (cost and restrictive licensing) and 
one where their taxes would be increased 
by £1.25 but they had free access to Ordnance Survey maps on the Internet, would they
 not reach in their pockets for the £1.25?The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 19    DISCUSSION BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT: I would like to focus a bit more on the importance of digital 
networks and the characteristics of digital inform
ation in this context. One thing that this 
discussion so far has not alluded to, much less talked about in any serious way, is the power of networks and network effects that arises from putting information freely online 
to perhaps a billion Internet users. If you have free informati
on online that is accessible to each person with access to the Internet, one ha
s the potential of a billion entrepreneurs 
who can take that information and recombine it with other information to create new 

knowledge and new products and services that are not possible if there are barriers to that knowledge in the form of either a high 
price of access or reuse restrictions. One of the fundamental aspects of di
gital information is that it can be reconfigured and combined with other informa
tion to make new information in ways that 
cannot be anticipated. So the potential always exists of serendipitous results that whoever may be providing the information online cannot 
fully anticipate. Therefore, in terms of 
the costs associated with these business models, there may 
be a tremendous amount of 
lost opportunity costs that are very difficult to measure and largely hidden but that are 
related to the fact that there is a great amount of potent
ial social and economic value from 
the reuse of that informati
on in many unanticipated ways. 
I would also like to note that we are flooded with a deluge of information, and a 
resulting characteristic of digital informati
on on networks is that if one is to make 
optimum use of it, one needs 
to do that by automated mean
s. This is because people cannot possibly find, sift through, and process the information themselves. The future of 
value creation online, therefore,
 is to handle that information automatically with various 
kinds of new software tools that are able to extract and recombine the data and 
information, creating new knowledge and 
new value from existing information 

automatically rather than through human intervention. 
Both the costs and, in particular, the legal restrictions on reuse are a complete 
barrier to machine-automated value creation fr
om existing information online. This could 
certainly be a problem for the policy community
 with regard to the economic exploitation 
of information online. 
PARTICIPANT: I think the 2007 Power of Information 
report in the United 
Kingdom really has some very good examples of
 the big potential of networks, of new uses, and of matching up information.   
PARTICIPANT: I would like to get back 
to something that Michael Nicholson 
raised very eloquently about the funding problem, since funding is one of the keys. You 

pointed out that we should develop some clear 
ideas about what the role of government is 
in general and then within defined areas, such as mapping, weather information, and the 
like, to be clear that these are a part of public
 tasks. Then it is necessary to organize the funding in such a way that those particular
 roles of government are accomplished well. I 
would like to get more opinions about that, 
however, because it was an issue when we 
were writing the policy principles for public sector information. In 
fact, there initially was a paragraph about this, but some of the 
drafters felt it was straying into areas of The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS  
20telling governments what they should do. So it wa
s very hard to write this in a way that one did not get into a philosophical debate about what governments should or should not 
be doing. It is a pity in some ways
Šand I think this is an essential pointŠwhich is why we 
had it in some of the earlier dr
afts. This debate is not just about access and use, but it is essential to think about what happens if data are given away or sold at very low, marginal 
cost. What are the incentives then, and how 
can one structure a system that produces 
good quality data and then distributes them in a timely fash
ion if suddenly part of the revenue stream that supported 
this function is cut off? 
I would like to get the participants™ opinions about this. Is it really about going back to Parliament to debate this and getting them to fund the PSI activities out of a 
general purpose tax? Michael Nicholson said 
it would cost £1.25 per head in the United Kingdom to open up the data held by the Ordnan
ce Survey. An interesting parallel is that in France President Sarkozy launched a debate in January 2008 about how to fund public sector TV. He said that he thought it should not be funded by advertisingŠwhich means that now the public sector TV and radio probably have to find about •1.2 billion a year in new revenues, which they did not have to find before because they were supporting part 
of their activities with advertising. Maybe advertising is something to consider because 
the BBC is going down the track of thinking mo
re about advertising revenue as well as having a license fee. Is the solution for maintaining the production and dissemination of 

PSI licensing fees, advertising, or general tax revenues? 
PARTICIPANT: In Finland there is a historical burden in the funding model for public sector organizations. It used to be that if you were a public sector organization, a good way to get a project growing steadily and get more staff was if you could invent 
more public tasks for yourself. But then, in the 1980s or 1990s, there was a trend toward 
the philosophy that these public sector organizations should earn their living by selling their services, including public sector information, and quite a 
lot of liberty was given to these public sector organizati
ons to define their own public sector pricing policies. So in Finland we now have a terrible me
ss of pricing policies, different public sector organizations charging different kinds of fees and with different policies. Now that the EU PSI directive has come into force and there is some political pressure for 
changing the system, our Finance Ministry is, or
 seems to be, quite reluctant to touch this 
mess because their first question has been: Wh
at would be the increase in revenue or 
public good that we would gain from unifying these pricing policies? If you cannot 
calculate it or if you say that it is, for inst
ance, •50 million a year, we will not touch it 
because this is a too small an issue for an organization as important as the Finance 

Ministry. So this is a problem: How to convin
ce the Finance Ministry to interfere with the independence of our public sector organizations and to also risk upsetting the precarious situation that has been created by giving all these public sector organizations such broad discretion to define their own pricing policies. I do not 
have a solution, but rather, I am 
raising the issue. 
PARTICIPANT: I do not have a solution, either. I think it is absolutely right that in the United Kingdom there has been a huge am
ount of thought given to this, but part of the problem is that the thinking has not been 
translated into action. What I would say is 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACHIEVING FAIR AND OPEN ACCESS TO PSI  
  21that my rather rudimentary examination of th
e accounts of some of 
these trading funds in the United Kingdom suggests that the actual co
sts of licensing, pricing, and managing the 
PSI is far higher than one would normally expect
. I was very interested to see that when there were some changes made in this regard 
in Australia, the actua
l cost of distribution went down when the process became simplified.  
PARTICIPANT: Actually, there is very litt
le hard statistical evidence to back up 
this assertion. 
PARTICIPANT: Well, there is absolute evidence
 that in the United Kingdom the cost of 
the organizations would go down if licensing were not a factor. I think there is a much 
bigger issue though about what they should be doing in the first place. It is a very awkward question. But in a sense I think we have to find a way in the United Kingdom of making sure that there is a way of getting 
to the answer without asking the people who are providing the data. It has to be something where instead of asking the last executioner 
if abolishing capital punishment is a good 
idea or not, you actually find some better way 
of establishing what governments should 
be collecting for their own needs. PARTICIPANT: May I just follow up on the Australian experi
ence? We do not 
actually have any statistics, and we have not in fact moved to a simplified licensing 
regime yet. But one of the studies that I 
was involved in, the Queensland government™s 
stage two report on the government information licen
sing framework, actually looked 
specifically at this licensing issue and at the complexities of traditional licensing. One of the participants in that study was a long-term government lawyer who had assisted in 
doing the simplified version of the government 
licenses about ten years ago, so he really knew the whole history. It is obvious: You must
 have something that is standardized and 
readily available so that you are not having to actually negotiate and draft a license on every occasion of access of this sort or where reuse is required. Without standard licenses 
it going to be a very expensive process. Wh
at we have been looking at, although it has not yet been implemented, is beginning some
 projects that adopt what we call ﬁopen content licensing.ﬂ There is a lot of support in Australia at the state and federal levels for this approach. We scoured the world for the best practice we could find. We are aware of the 
OPSI click-use license. What we would prefer, however, is an approach where the 
licensing terms are made available with the in
formation product as it is made available. 
So in Australia we have a preference for something like the Creative Commons license. 
Now what we use might not be precisely the Creative Commons license that is used 

elsewhere, and if so we might have to rei
nvent something that essentially does the same 
thing as Creative Commons. So the default position in Australia now is to use the Creative Commons 
attribution license and maybe, in some situ
ations, the Creative Commons attribution and 
non-commercial use license. If we find that
 there are difficulties with that, we will probably draft a specific Creative Commons-like government license. But we want 
something that is interopera
ble within the federal governme
nt system. We are a country 
of only 20 million people. We cannot reinve
nt the wheel every time we look around, 
which is the tendency. So we want something 
that will operate not only throughout all the The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS  
22Australian states and territories, but that w
ould be consistent with concepts and licensing practices internationally. 
So, basically, at this stage in Australia 
we are on the brink of some projects being 
implemented that would use such licenses
. Although no study has been done to see whether it is actually cost effective, we know from practice that it is going to be more 
cost effective than what has prevailed to date. 
PARTICIPANT: In my presentation th
is afternoon I will touch upon Creative 
Commons licensing as well. I will give you an 
example of one Dutch agency using one, 
so I can explore that issue a bit more. 
PARTICIPANT: I have one suggestion for our Norwegian colleagues. It would be interesting to find out what the savings have been in the management of the geographical 
information (GI) in which all public bodies pool
ed their resources. Correct me if I am 
wrong, but my understanding is that because of the way that the GI is published, there is 
no license required between governments, and anybody in the 
public services can reuse the shared data and information. 
So it would be very interesting to find out what the management costs savings 
have been from both sides, that is, both fr
om the geographical mapping agency and also 
from other government bodies that do not ha
ve to enter into any sort of licensing mechanisms. That could provide some hard ev
idence that could be used to change some of these policies for the better. 
PARTICIPANT: I wanted to speak about two things. The first is about Dr. Fornefeld™s presentation on the value chain of
 PSI, particularly the data producers and the service providers of meteorol
ogical or geospatial information with a natural monopoly. 
There is no debate about the fact that there is a public need for this type of information. It 
is because this information is important that 
it is created. The data producer needs to be 
publicly funded because the market 
itself will not be able to pa
y for satellites, and it will not be able to pay for the experts who are able to establish maps and cartographical data. 
We spoke about weather information, where ther
e can be a question as to whether or not this is a natural monopoly, but in most cases
 there is a natural monopoly for the public 
sector to produce data and then to produce a service. We s
ee that public services have a lot of difficulties in, for example, provi
ding new distribution platforms for this 
information and new kinds of services and then coming up with innovations in the 

services to be provided with this information. 
I think there is value in distinguishing 
between data providers who are a natural monopolyŠand who thus need public financingŠand service providers. For service providers maybe there is not a natural monopoly. Perhaps public services should limit 
themselves to data production and provision 
and rely upon outside service providers who are able to do that work better. By this I do not mean that all the PSI produced should go 
to private organizations that will bring it to the commercial sector. Some of the 
information produced can be used directly
 from the source and not through service 
providers. My second point concerns financing. It is clear that somebody has to pay for the 
data. The question is, Does the taxpayer have to pay for the production of data? We say 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACHIEVING FAIR AND OPEN ACCESS TO PSI  
  23that the production itself costs a lot and brings little. Production of the data is the basis of everything, but when there are no sellers, nothing is done with the data. In itself the data brings only a little return. So it has to be pa
id for. Who will pay for it? Are the taxpayers 
going to pay for it, or are the users going to pay for it? In this debate I really have a lot of
 respect and admiration for the American 
approach. It is also clear, due to its historical heritage, that the United States is based on the circulation of information. That is not th
e case in Europe, at least up to now. So in Europe there is a debate: Who has to pay for the 
data? Is it the taxpayer,
 or is it the user? 
We heard this morning about the cost of
 the licensing, the cost to buyers for the distribution of the data. I really agree that this is a cost, but
 it also is a potential benefit 
because if the data are free there is no l
onger a link between the data provider and the 
service provider. Having a business relationship between the data provider and the service provider encourages both sides to provide something that is usable. 
Let me give you an example. If all the 
data are free, then the reusers have no leverage to ask the provider to improve th
e data. If the reuser partly finances the production of data, then the reuser has a right to say something to the producer of the data 
about the quality, because they are bearing part of the cost. This negotiation has a cost, 
but it is also a way to bring together the data producers and service providers so that they can work together. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25 PART TWO  6. Public Sector Information: Why Bother?1  Robbin te Velde Dialogic, The Netherlands  I have posed the question ﬁWhy bother?ﬂ 
so you are already warned about the 
tone of this presentation. I have been involved in studying this topic for a while, and I am 
a bit chastened by it, but just to put it into
 perspective, there have been other studies before and after, and there will be more studies in the future, so it is good to compare. 
One may start with the Pira study in 2000,
2 which was popularized by Peter Weiss (see 
his ﬁBorders in Cyberspaceﬂ at http://www.epsiplus.net/report/borders_in_cyberspace). A 
year later, in 2001, there was a study by the Dutch government. At that time the Dutch 
government supported the open access stream. 
They did a really good quantitative study 
on the value of geo-information, but they have 
lost much of the study™
s effect ever since that time. More recently, the Office of 
Fair Trading in the United Kingdom also published a fine study. In terms of methods, what Pira didŠand 
what most of the other studies have doneŠwas to talk to some firms and then ge
neralize the results. That is actually the way to go, in my view. It is sensib
le to go directly to the users because there are no standard methods available yet.  
The MEPSIR3 study was a little different. That study focused more on transparency and accessibility, on a massive 
pan-European scale. People were asked 
directly about the size of the market, what th
eir roles were in it, and so on. One of the problems was that many people just did 
not know. They had no clue about PSI whatsoever, so this was clearly an immature ma
rket. In this situation, the only way to get some hard data is to go directly to the firms, 
but it is just not feasible to do this on a large 
scaleŠand the generalizations remain problematic. 
Again, Pira started it all. The reason why 
we are here today is because Pira said 
the United States has twice the investment 
value for PSI, but they earn 40 times more 
from it. Why? The answer is that in the 
United States you have an open access model, 
and in the European Union you have a cost recovery model. This was the argument 
brought forward by, for instance, Peter Weiss. Although I believe the argument itself is 

still valid, the figures used by Pira were rather doubtful. Look, for example, at the added 
value of PSI quoted for the United States: a staggering $750 billion (against •68 billion for the European Union). That is almost 8 percent of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP). 
These are massive numbers. I think fighting in
 Iraq costs the United States $100 billion a year, so you can fight another 7-8 years for the same amount of money. Regardless, the 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/49/40064800.pdf 
2 Commission of the European Communities, 30 October 2000. 
Commercial exploitation of Europe™s 
public sector information: Final Report for the European Commission Directorate General for the 
Information Society
. Pira International. ftp://ftp.cordis.lu/econtent/docs/2000-1558.pdf 
3 http://www.epsiplus.net/reports/mepsir_measur
ing_european_public_sector_resources_report 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                                SOCIOECONIMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
26creative bookkeeping that the study did (very 
successfully) raised the interest of the 
European Commission in PSIŠand es
pecially its potential value. 
Nearly five years later, we did the MEPSIR study. You would expect that the value would be higher by that time, because ev
en with a modest growth of 3 percent, the 
EU™s •68 billion would now be •80 billion, but we actually arrived at a lower number, a 
base number of •27 billion. To be honest, that wa
s still pretty much an overestimate. One 
of the things we asked for was the market si
ze, which is different from the value added 
and much larger. Because all the studies had used estimates of value added, it was 

important in this study to use it as 
well in order to make comparisons. 
Another issue was that it seemed the sm
all countries tended to overestimate the 
value of the market significantly. Compensati
ng for that, we divided the numbers by two. 
Finally, in order to fill in the missing values, 
we had to correct the method used. Just as 
Pira had done, we had used GDP as a base. But that really does not make sense because 

you are dealing with some big countries, such
 as Poland, that just do not have a vibrant information industry. So it is probably better 
to use the economic value of the publishing 

industry as a distributor of PSI, and if you do that, you arrive at lower numbers again. When we make all of these corrections, we drop from •27 to •5 billion or even •3 
billionŠtruly a big difference. Obviously, these are not precise numbers, but they give us 
an order of magnitudeŠabout 15 to 20 tim
es less than the Pira study estimated. 
Now let us look at the more recent OFT study, which covered only the United 
Kingdom. It arrived at an 
overall number of almost £600 million. If you take away all the 
distortionsŠdue to trading tricks and so onŠyou arrive at a value of £1.1 billion, or almost double the original figure. If you then 
use this method to calculate a value for the 
European Union as a whole, you arrive at a total of •3 to •5.5 billionŠpretty close to the MEPSIR figures. Finally, let us return to the initial 2001 
Dutch study. It was rather detailed, but it was focused only on geo-information and cove
red only the Netherlands. Extending this to 
all PSI sectors for all of the European Union is, of course, a very tricky business, but if you do so you end up with values of between •5 to •7 billion. Again, that is much lower 
than the •68 billion that was mentioned by Pira
. If we take a new look at Pira, it basically 

said that the United States has a much str
onger private information industry. Furthermore, 
Pira™s number included IT software, hardware, HollywoodŠyou name it, they added 

everything up. But that begs the questionŠand this is really the key questionŠof to what extent this difference is due 
to differences in pricing policy, that is, to the difference between an open access model and a closed a
ccess model. The assumption was that there 
would be a more vibrant information sector
 if PSI were more readily available. 
It is actually possible to argue the othe
r way around. Because the United States 
has a much stronger private information industr
y, there is more of a mature demand for 
PSI. And there may another factor: that 
Americans are just better at exploiting 
information services, whether in the privat
e or public sector. Or there may be no 
relationship whatsoever. Honestly, I do not know, and there been no research in this specific area. Gerhard Wagner from Austria is
 probably one of the few who has done in-depth empirical research making comparis
ons between countries. He has found some 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PUBLIC SECTOR INFORAMTION: WHY BOTHER? 
27differences between countries in Eastern Euro
pe, for instance. Thus, at the least we can say that there does not seem to be one single model for research. 
Before 2000 (i.e., before the first generation of studies), few people were aware of the value of PSI. In many countries it was lo
cked inside the government. So the really 
nice added value of the whole PSI debate is that it has opened up PSI resources. Currently, in what we can refer to as the second generation of studies, the focus is on the 
private sector. The basic argument is that 
if you simply open up PSI, you will generate a lot of money. However, what is lacking in
 the second generation of studies, with their exclusive focus on commercial reuse, is the br
oader societal value of PSI. I have been arguing this from the very start to the Eur
opean Commission. Unfortunately, it is a tough 
sell because the hard (albeit modest) figures
 are in the commercial reuse area and the 
much bigger (yet softer) numbers 
in the societal use area are quite difficult to measure.  
The current obsession with making money out
 of PSI is rather shortsighted and probably even damaging. What you see in practi
ce, for instance, is that private sector reusers are now being squeezed from both si
des. The public sector is doing some 
interesting things, such as giving away its information freely, and the private sector has its own goods that it makes available freely, su
ch as open source software. So the market 
for private sector resusers of PSI may be 
getting smaller. This does not mean, however, 
that PSI is not relevant at all; we are just l
ooking in the wrong places for value. It also means that we must change the way we measure value. 
Up to now we have been trying to add all the individual revenues from all these 
firms, and even when you add everything up, you still arrive at disappointingly low 
numbers. I suggest that we change the pers
pective and look at the cost of not giving it 
away to the civil society. Although this may appear strange at first sight, it is already 
common practice in other economic domains. A 
prime example here is in environmental 
economics. There is no directive on the reuse 
of water, but if you would calculate what the cost is of not having clean
 water or not having clean air, you would arrive at massive 
numbers. This is how they managed to get 
the Clean Air Act passed in the United States. 
Thus if we talk about the economic valu
e of PSI, we should focus not only on the financial valueŠwhich is the narrow economic point of viewŠbut also on the broader 
economic value. I will mention some basic methods of how to do this, which are again 

derived from environmental economics.  
First, do not look just at the use value, but also include the non-use value. This is the value of keeping options openŠfor instance, of not having a database licensed exclusively to a publisher. Second, when looking at the use value of PSI, also consider the indirect value. In the Netherlands we have the website http://www.buienradar.nl, which, translated, means 
ﬁshower radar.nl.ﬂ It gives low-resolution but near-real-time images of shower clouds 
moving over the Netherlands. We have lots of 
showers in the Netherlands. We also have 

many cyclists. Cycling in the rain is no fun. 
Therefore it is nice to know where the clouds are heading, so you know that you will not get wet when you cycle home. The website is 

a massive success. It has millions of hits each day, and this information is free. The 

website has the informationŠthe low-quali
ty radar imagesŠfree from the National 
Meteorological Office. The other commercial weather bureaus did not care about this The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                                SOCIOECONIMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
28information because the images were of such
 low quality. Buienradar.nl, however, put the 
information free on the Internet and generate
d income from advertisements. The revenues 
from advertisements are a direct economi
c proxy, but the broader economic impacts are 
much bigger. You may measure these impacts,
 for instance, by asking people what is it worth to them that they do not get wet when ri
ding home on their bicycles. It is not really 
quite that simple. You have to be rather specific in describing what the services are that 
may be derived from a particular piece of PSI
, but there is already a lot of experience with estimating this kind of hedonistic pr
icing. As a first attempt, I would guess the overall benefits of making PSI
 freely available to society are around the original Pira figures for Europe, i.e., •60-•70 billion. So why bother? Actually, this is exactly wh
at I said one and a half years ago, here in Paris: (1) Government is a major producer
 of information, and (2) there is a lot of 
money involved in the commercial
 exploitation of information.  
It appears that there is a huge (potential) pot of gold, which is currently the second-generation view. However, it is importa
nt to keep in mind that (1) and (2) are 
separate things. Public sector information is important in it
s own right. If you think it is important, then use taxpayers™ money to produc
e it, and do not mix it up with private use. 

If you want a dynamic private European inform
ation industry, then you will need to take various steps, such as doing something about competition policies. But this has nothing to 

do with PSI, per se.  How then does one determine the overall
 total economic valu
e of PSIŠincluding its wider societal value? This depends, real
ly, upon the view of the citizen. If citizens 
think it is important, then the government
 should spend tax money on it. I want to 
emphasize that we should also take this wide
r (and important) societ
al value into account; 
only then will we be able to arrive at some hard numbers, following the methods in 
studying environmental economics as an exam
ple. One should not, however, focus too much on the value of commercial reuse. That is not the huge pot of gold after all, and to focus exclusively on it may even work against getting the most economic value out of 
PSI.  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 29 7. Measuring the Economic Impact of the PSI Directive  in the Context of the 2008 Review1  Chris Corbin ePSIplus, United Kingdom 
  This presentation will cover the period from July 1, 2005, when the European 
Union™s (EU) directive on the re-u
se of public sector information2 came into force within 
member states, until the time of the EU™s review in 2008. The ePSI
plus project is a 
thematic network. Its purpose is to suppor
t the directive by helping potential users understand the opportunities associated with PSI use and reuse. The network is planned 
to be operational for 30 months, from September 2006 through the end of February 2009, 

with a relatively minimal total budget of •950,000, 
and it will cover the 33 countries of the European Union and the European Free Trade Area. The project is concerned with all 
aspects of PSI, even those that are excluded fr
om the directive, and it is intended to serve 
every type of stakeholder. Under the rules of the EU eContentplus Program for thematic 
networks, participation of the network partners is voluntary. The audience includes more than 50 million public servants in Europe, employed at several million public sector 

bodies, plus an unknown number of
 potential private sector reusers; these numbers are 
constantly changing as the public and private sectors are reconfigured. The project™s strategy is to gather evidence and monitor the value chain, beginning with the PSI directive and then obs
erving how that transfers into government 
policy within a country, how this policy is actually interpreted by the PSI holder, and then how the policy is interpreted by the re
user, either commercial or noncommercial. 
There clearly is a gap between the policy make
r and the PSI holder, and attention must be 
given to improving the way that
 policy makers actually monito
r the effectiveness of their 
policies. This is difficult, however, because
 of the large and diverse number of policy 
makers in Europe. A second gap arises from the resistance factor that favors protectionist 

policies and practices; it is impor
tant to quantify the results of this resistance. There is a 
general perception that regulators are underfunded, but this has to be quantified in order to justify more funds. Yet another issue is th
at in Europe, where so much commerce takes 
place across borders, it will be important in m
onitoring PSI reuse to look at single market 
areas rather than individual countries.  Defining ﬁreuseﬂ is quite a large topic, and one of the challenges of this topic is that most reuse of PSI starts with sma
ll companies that have only one or a few 
employees. Another difficulty is monitoring le
gal cases in which a particular reuse is 
challenged. Legal issues are not easy to understand and can vary based on the EU member state, but an analysis of them gene
rally shows that member
 states are not doing particularly well in implementing even the basi
c parts of the directive, the main goal of 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/48/40064809.pdf 
2 Commission of the European Communities. 2003. 
Directive 2003/9 8/EC of Parliament and Council on 
the re-use of public sector information.
 Found at 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/
psi/docs/pdfs/directive/psi_directive_en.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
30which is simplification. It is remarkable how
, because of the normal human tendency of 
making things complex, that goal has been lost as one goes down the value chain. 
So is the ePSI
plus thematic network working? In answering that question, it is 
important to keep in mind several facts. Firs
t, there are various constraints involved in any network, such as ePSI
plus, where participation is voluntary. Second, any project that operates across Europe is quite challenging because it faces a multilingual and 
multicultural environment. Third, the markets ar
e all at different stages of development, 
each with a huge range of PSI stakeholders and competition. The public sector is 
competing with the private sector, and priv
ate sector entities are competing with each 
other. Business strategy and information are 
generally considered proprietary by the PSI holders.  Furthermore, there is a la
ck of measurement tools, especially for economic 
modeling and understanding data apart from th
e macro level. One key issue is: When the 

pendulum swings from high char
ges for obtaining PSI to being free of charge, how is the public task maintained and how much mone
y is involved? If the pendulum suddenly 
swings, how many companies that have relied 
on the current model are likely to go out of business? And how is the new model charte
d over time? While it ha
s been possible to analyze the legal issues, it is more difficult 
to analyze the economic and social effects. 
Since this information comes from the people 
involved in the PSI-related activities, it has 
been critical to develop better relationships with those in the field.  
The project is also looking at trends in order to identify good practices and to determine what can be replicated across memb
er states. For example, if a country has a 

complaints procedure that is dedicated to re
use, how does it compare 
with a country that does not have one? What is the effect of ha
ving a complaints procedure, and does it result 
in a measurable difference between the countries
? Since the project is 
only at its midlife, 
determining the effect of any activity is 
not easy. The number of PSI stakeholders 
becoming interested in these topics is definite
ly growing, however, and it is clear that the presence of the directive has forced the pace of the debate.  
So what has been the impact of the PSI directive? The understanding of and 
expertise with PSI is low, and that is the real issue. People understand basics, but what is still lacking is a real understanding of the comp
lexity of PSI in terms of how it relates to 
governance, how governments change, and how th
at affects PSI activities. There is no 
straightforward answer, either in the European context or the global context. Part of the problem is that there are few among the EU 
member states who actually see PSI as an 
economic factor, even though a chief focus of
 the Lisbon Treaty is to develop the knowledge economy. Unfortunately, policy makers
 often do not think outside of their own country, and they do not see why they should be thinking beyond it. Finally, there remains a huge challenge in
 addressing the educational needs about PSI and disentangling what people say from what they believe. People can remember 
what the situation was like pre-2003, before the PSI directive 
was finalized, but that is not all that helpful. As the ePSI
plus project holds more meetings and the attendance 
grows, each meeting needs to move forward 
on what the issues are today and to stop 
harping on what went on in the past. Nevertheless, the network process is slowly working, and that is a hopeful sign for more success in the future. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 318. Different PSI Access Policies and Their Impact1  Frederika Welle Donker Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands  I work for the GeoPortal Network Project in the Netherlands. In the Netherlands, 
there is a large research program called Ruimte
 voor Geo-Informatie (RGI), or the Space 
for Geo Information Program, and the governme
nt has spent about •20 million on it over a five-year period. The GeoPortal Network (G
PN) Project is one of the activities under the RGI Program. The objective of the proj
ect is to set up one-stop shop for all geo information. The GPN Project is run by a cons
ortium of 14 partners from both the public 
and private sectors. My research is to identi
fy the current legal and financial barriers to access and to develop a model for transparent ac
cess. The goal of this model, called the 
Backx model, is to develop a system in which different data can be combined without 

running into various types of barriers. This
 can be a problem because quite often one 
organization will comply but not the other. Th
e model should be suitable for all types of 
reusers, whether from the private sector, th
e public sector, or the end users themselves. 
There are three levels of accessibility in the Backx model. First, information has 
to be known. If no one knows about the information, if they cannot find it, if they cannot 

recognize it, then it is of no use at all. Second, once someone knows it is there, they have 
to be allowed to get it. It has to be affo
rdable. ThirdŠand this is the responsibility of 
whoever creates the dataŠthe quality of the data has to be good enough. The data must 
be clear, manageable, and us
able. The GeoPortal Network Project is not going to examine 
the quality of the data, but instead it will 
focus on where the data can be found and how 
they can be used. What is geo information (GI)? It is all info
rmation that refers to a specific location 
on Earth. We are concerned with GI in the public sector domain. In the Netherlands, 

public-sector geo information is available for reuse under certain conditions. There are two regimes used for dissemination: the ma
rginal-costs regime 
and the cost-recovery 
regime. The type of regime used depends on 
the type of government agency and what its 
financial base is. How is geo information different from othe
r types of information? It is not based 
on text. It is not like digitizing legislation and making it av
ailable through a PDF file. While that takes time, it is relatively easy. 
Geo information typically is based on very 
specific data sets, which can be very expensive to collect and maintain. They are also 
subject to intellectual property rights as well as to national security and privacy laws, so before GI is made available for use or reuse,
 the data sets may have to be prepared for 

public dissemination. That is one of the reas
ons why reuse is often covered by licenses. The licenses are not only to protect intellect
ual property rights but also to comply with 
security and privacy laws. The licenses also
 allow cost recovery. Nonetheless, geo information has unlimited potential a
pplications for the private sector. 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/36/40066090.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                       SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
 32 European Union directives related to GI include the PSI directive on the re-use of public sector information and the INSPIRE directive.
2 What is the difference? They 
overlap to a certain extent, 
but the PSI directive focuses on reuse of public sector information, while the INSPIRE directive focu
ses on sharing GI with the public sector. INSPIRE stipulates which standards to use for exchanging and sharing data, but neither of these directives regulates market activities. Although both stipul
ate a preference for a marginal-costs pricing regime, EU member 
states are still allowed to use the cost-
recovery regime. 
The Dutch legislation governing the use and reuse of geo information is the Wet 
openbaarheid van bestuur, which is generally equivalent to the American Freedom of 
Information Act. There is also contract law that
 comes into play in some situations. In the 
Netherlands public sector organizations are excluded from fair trade legislation, but that 
is currently under review. There is protection-of-privacy legislation as well, which states that if there is any information that can be tr
aced directly back to a person, then it is not allowed for reuse. Finally, there is specific legislation such as
 the Cadastre Act, discussed in more detail below. 
Up until the mid-1990s, public sector organi
zations could set their own conditions 
and prices for marketing PSI. They could ma
rket it themselves, or they could give it 
away, but the latter was not a common approach. The private sector complained 
vociferously about unfair trading practices. This resulted in a report3 that made a number 
of sweeping recommendations. One recommenda
tion was that public sector organizations should not engage in market activity in co
mpetition with the private sector. The Cohen 
report listed a number of exceptions havi
ng to do with core tasks, however. One exception was that while public sector organizations should not be allowed to add value to their own information with the goal of 
making the information more attractive for 
reselling it; they should be permitted to add value 
if this is required in
 order to fulfill their 
essential mission.  
Another recommendation in the report was 
that the marketing activities of several 
public sector organizations should be reviewed. For example, the National Meteorology 
Office and the Cadastre were reviewed. 
The result was that a number of these 
organizations were privatized outright, while others, like the Met Office, had to give up their commercial arms. If they were going to se
ll their data for reus
e, they had to do it through an intermediary, in order to create a le
vel playing field with a full-cost recovery regime.  
The report also published guidelines for national public sector bodies that are not covered by their own specific legislation. The guidelines stated that if a public sector organization were to engage in economic activities because the private sector would not 

or could not, then all costs must be passed on in the charges. Basi
cally, a public sector 
body was not allowed to give its data away free, because if it did, it would be competing 

unfairly with the private sector. So, if there were to be competition, it would be on a level 
                                                 2 Commission of the European Communities. 2007. 
Directive 2007/2/EC of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 14 March 2007 establishing an Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the European 
Community
. Found at http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/ 
3Markt en Overheid 
 (Market Functioning, Deregulation and Quality of Legislation). 1998. ‚Eindrapport™ 
van de MDW-werkgroep (commissie Cohen). Ministerie van Economische Zaken: Den Haag.  
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PSI ACCESS POLICIES 
AND THEIR IMPACT  
  33 playing field, and the public sector body was not allowed to use cross-subsidies or tax advantages. Unfortunately, these guidelines do not apply to lower levels of government, such 
as municipalities, provinces, or water board
s. They only apply to the national public sector, even though most of the original compla
ints from the private 
sector did not apply to the national public sector, but rather to the lower levels because they were the ones 

setting their own charges and license conditions.  So what is happening now? The public se
ctor is not supposed to be producing value-added products, except those entities specifically mandated to do so. This is a very 
elastic concept, however, and there are no clear boundaries. The national Cadastre, which 
is covered by its own legislation, is an exception, as it is producing value-added products in direct competition with the private sector. Otherwise, more and more public sector data 

sets are becoming available for reuse thanks to
 the PSI directive, although there is still great variety in licensing conditions. I did a quick overview about two years ago, and the licenses of the 20 or so public sector bodies that I looked at ranged from a license that 
was just one or two paragraphs to a license that was extremely complex. Also, to 

negotiate a license can demand anything from 
a click-through license to actually having 
to go through many weeks of negotiations. The re
sulting situation is 
not transparent, and it can be very time consuming.  
Among the more attractive data sets
 are the Authentic Registries.4 The private 
sector really would like to have these data because they can be used for value adding. The Authentic Registries are still restricted fo
r reuse, and they are not made public. The 
concept behind the Authentic Registries is that governments should acquire information 
only once and should reuse it many times, wh
ich implies that there should be only one registry for the entire population. There is only one registry for cars, for example, and 

only one Cadastral registry. All other public sector bodies are to reuse that same registry. 
If they see any mistakes they 
are supposed to report them 
to the responsible body so they can be fixed. The goal is for the registries to be of very high quality. The registries are 
very valuable for the private sector. Private 
companies would especially like to have the property value register, which allows one to
 see how much houses are worth. But the 
Authentic Registeries are not ava
ilable for use, let alone reuse.2 Prices of PSI are coming down. It is 
a major trend. Some of them are coming 
down because the organizations have decided 
to make their PSI available for only the 
cost of dissemination, but many of them are coming down because the prices were too 
                                                 4 An authentic register is defined in the Netherlands™
 Streamlining Key Data Programme as ‚a high quality 
database accompanied by explicit guarantees ensuring for 
its quality assurance that, 
in view of the entirety 
of statutoryduties, contains essential and/or frequently
-used data pertaining to persons, institutions, issues, 
activities or occurrences and which is designated by law 
as the sole officially recognised register of the 
relevant data to be used by all government agencies and, if possible, by private organisations throughout 
the entire country, unless important reasons such as the protection of privacy explicitly preclude the use of 
the register™. Duivenbode, H van & M de Vries. 2003, 
Upstream! A chronicle of the Streamlining Key Data 
Programme. The Hague. 
5 At the time of the presentation, legislation related to the Authentic Registries was not finalised. Since then 
the legislation process has moved forward. It now look
s as though reuse of the Authentic Registries will be 
allowed (i.e., not restricted due to 
proprietary concerns, or security or privacy legislation). The pricing 
regime has not been finalised yet, however. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                       SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
 34 high and the organizations did not sell any data sets. For example, there is a data set 
which records all the geographic heights in
 the Netherlands. You may laugh because our 
highest mountain is only 100 mete
rs, but it is actually quite important for the lower-lying areas to see how much below sea level they 
are, or for use in the three-dimensional 
imaging of buildings. The price used to 
be •1 million for a set covering the entire 

country. I think they sold one. Now the price has been reduced to •200,000, and about 20 have been sold. This shows that loweri
ng prices actually can increase revenue. The problem now is that if you are giving free data away to the public sector, this may be deemed to be economic activity. The positive side is we get the stimulation of the 

knowledge economy and more value-added pr
oducts, which also means more taxes 
flowing back to the government, because 
if we are going to get more companies 
producing value-added products there is going to be more revenue flowing back to the 
government in the form of sales taxes, value added taxes, company taxes, and income 

taxes from the new employees. Ultimately, th
e government will get a better return on 
investment, but it is a long-term strategy and 
most governments only look ahead as far as 
the next election and don't look beyond that point. 
Another positive effect of this activity is the encouragement of citizen 
involvement. Citizens now have better access 
to information and are better informed. 

This gets us back to the issue of how much it is worth: How much does it cost if you do 
not have the information? There is no such
 thing as a free lunch. If you do not expend the resources, the ability to sustai
n the quality of data is threatened. The Dutch Cadastre is an example. It used to be funded out of ge
neral revenue, but during the 1990s the budget was cut many times. It almost ceased to ex
ist because it was not getting enough money to 
maintain a Cadastre register. 
As part of the Cohen report the Dutch Cadastre was reviewed, reorganized, and turned into what the English would call a Trading Fund. It is doing very well now, and it does not want to go back to the former situation in which it was depending on an annual 

budget and hoping that it would have enough money to survive. Another downside of making the PSI availabl
e at low cost or no cost is the threat 
to the private sector companies that may ha
ve already set up similar data sets. If the 
public sector is going to make these data sets 
available free of charge, then it will be seen as an unfair trading practice, and the privat
e sector will have unrecoverable costs.  
I have to make some mention of the Creative Commons.
5 Creative Commons is a nonprofit organization founded in the United States using a ﬁsome-rights-reservedﬂ 
approach, in contrast to the ﬁall-rights-reservedﬂ approach of the copyright law. Creative Commons has developed a number of standard
 licenses and simplified mechanisms for 
using them. If you want to select a license
, you do it online and answer a few questions. The information to which a Creative Comm
ons license can be applied can be any copyrighted work, as long as it is in digital format. It can
 be a document, a photograph, a 
map, or any other copyrighted work. Th
ere are six Creative Commons licenses: 
Attribution, Attribution Share Alike, Attribution No Derivatives, Attribution Non-Commercial, Attribution Non-Commercial
 Share Alike, and Attribution Non-                                                 6 http://creativecommons.org/ 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PSI ACCESS POLICIES 
AND THEIR IMPACT  
  35 Commercial No Derivatives. The licenses ar
e valid for the whole duration of copyright. Each license appears in three versions because not everyone is a lawyer. Each Creative 
Commons license first appears in a layman's 
version, which uses a symbol and a few very 
short lines that can be easily understood. It is all on one page. After the layman™s version 
is a legal version. In the Netherlands the Creative Commons license has been upheld by the court, so it is tested as legally binding. In addition to the layman
™s and legal versions, there is also a machine readable version, wh
ich is very useful if you want to make 
information findable to those using a search
 engine online. This makes it possible to 
restrict a search, for example, to all the information that can be used for commercial 
purposes. The search will retrieve every Cr
eative Commons licensed product in that 
category.  
One case study is of the New Map of the Netherlands, which is managed by an 
organization called the Department of H
ousing and Special Planning. The data set 
contains all planning information as a GIS 
file. It used to be available through an intermediary, and the intermediary sold 20 sets
 in 20 months' time. For that data set this 
is not cost effective. Instead, the department decided to make the set downloadable with 
the Creative Commons ﬁattribution onlyﬂ li
cense and to see what would happen. The 
result is there are now about 200 downloads per month. However, the department still has 
to pay license fees to the Cadastre for the use of the topographic map as an underground 
layer. This is a case of one agency paying money to another government agency, which is 

very inefficient. The other case study is of the National Roads Dataset managed by the Department 
of Public Works. This consists of information 
that is collected in co
llaboration with other public sector bodies, and it contains a great deal of other data having to do with roads, such as maintenance data. It has many attri
butes, but it is not the data concerning the roads that people want. What they usually want is the collection of various attributes, such as street numbering, that would cost a lot 
of money if they were to be purchased as a 
separate file from another or
ganization. The private sector sets up similar data sets, and 
Dr. Fornefeld already mentioned Tele Atlas and Navteq. The Department of Public 
Works wants to make the National Roads Datase
t available, and it is already available to 
use freely now. The department intends to make it available for reuse beginning next 

year. This has resulted in questions in
 parliament and threats of litigation.
3 It is a mess. 
But what is happening in the meantime? We have organizations like Google Earth 
getting the data from whoever has it, in th
e private sector or the public sector. Google Earth provides free reference data and allows mash-ups. Even public sector organizations 
in the Netherlands are considering using Google Earth rather than the data from the 
Cadastre because the Cadastre charges for th
e data, while Google Earth does not, or at                                                  7Since then, the National Roads Dataset has been withdrawn from viewing by the Department of Public 
Works. The complaints by organizations selling the str
eet numbering file attributes in question were not 
upheld. However, the complaints by Falkplan Andes, a cartography company, about unfair trading practices 
were upheld. Falkplan Andes claimed that making the National Roads Dataset available for free would 
spoil the market for commercial cartographers. Because 
these private firms had alre
ady invested in similar 
datasets, their investments could not be recouped any longer. It is not known if the Department of Public 
Works will make the dataset available in the next co
uple of years or what will happen to the copies 
supplied under the Freedom of Information Act before the dataset was withdrawn.  
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                       SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
 36 least the price is negotiable. The public just
 wants free services. If the members of the 
public cannot get free information from the government, they will try to get it from 
somewhere else. 
In conclusion, the accessibility is impr
oving, but the municipalities also need to 
comply with the Freedom of Information 
Act. There is still 
too much emphasis on 
protecting intellectual property rights. There are still no consistent and transparent licenses, although the government agencies ar
e trying to work on that. Transparency of cost is needed too, as is some legal clarific
ation about what is an economic activity under 
the law. There are some court cases pending, 
and until they are resolved, there will be no 
clarity. Here are my recommendations: Simplif
y current licenses and guarantee the funding. If an agency is going to make GI av
ailable free of charge, it should be funded from the current budget. At this time such 
information cannot be funded from sales alone 
so, yes, perhaps we should involve the private sector.  Within the GeoPortal Consortium we are 
working with both the public and private sectors, and the private sector re
ally enjoys it. If they can get something out of it like free 
data, they will help you develop services. 
For the Authentic Registries, the current 
legislation is insufficient. The public sector 
activity will be overtaken by services such as 
Google Earth™s, and in five years™ time the opportunity will be lost. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 379. The Price of Everything but the Value of Nothing1  Antoinette Graves Office of Fair Trading, United Kingdom  Oscar Wilde defined a cynic as someone
 who knows the price of everything but the value of nothing, which is apt for understanding PSI and ultimately what is being 
done to promote PSI access and reuse policies. Policy makers wish to maximize the value 
of PSI to the economy as a whole, but when
 public sector bodies charge for PSI, those costs can actually inhibit others from addi
ng value. The same is true with licensing 
restrictions even if they are put in place to protect the bodies 
that want to exploit the data 
and set their own prices. When the Office of Fair Trading (OFT
) carried out its study on public sector information, the purpose was to examine whether the market was working well for end 

consumers, defined more broadly than just ci
tizens or taxpayers. To answer whether the 
market was working well, the intention was to look beyond competition for competition™s 

sake and, in particular, to look further up the supply chain to determine whether the 
market was working well between public 
sector bodies and businesses and among the 
public sector bodies themselves, and then to 
make suggestions that 
took into account the size and the potential size of the market.  
At the risk of sounding like a character in Alice in Wonderland, the answer of how 
to measure the value of PSI is that it all 
depends on what you want to know. To begin, OFT needed an estimate of the current value 
and size of the market. It was then necessary 
to determine the current income to PSI holders
 as well as the value to the businesses that 
are using and reusing the information, but
 without double counting. To determine the 
former, OFT had access to some reasonably 
reliable figures, but for the latter new economic modeling had to be done.  
Not surprisingly, OFT concluded that public sector information is valuable and 
vitally important for businesses. There were a 
lot of products that just could not be made, 
or that could not be made in the form th
at they were, without access to and reuse of 
public sector information. When problems aros
e it was often due to public sector bodies that were in some way adding value themselv
es. In addition to gathering the information 
at the upstream level, these bodies were doi
ng something downstream that gave them an 
incentive to restrict access to the upstream 
level. Thus it was important to identify the 
monopoly element in order to begin solving some of the problems. For example, it was 

determined that marginal-cost pricing is not
 necessarily the answer. While public sector 
bodies may use differential pricing and recover 
more of their costs on certain products or users than on others, they may still restrict 
what is available. Moreover, when value is 
added, if a marginal price is char
ged, it is undercutting the competition. 
The maximum that should be charged for the monopoly (or upstream) would be 
full cost recoveryŠplus, in the United Kingdom, the required rate of return to the Treasury. At the same time, if the public sect
or is doing something with the PSI that the 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/34/40066135.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                              SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
38private sector could also do if it had access to the upstream information, then that 
qualifies as a downstream activ
ity and the minimum amount ch
arged should be full cost recovery, because anything less would be underc
utting competition. It is not necessarily 
possible to ban public sector bodies from the 
downstream market altogether and, in some 
cases, there could be some genuine economies 
of scale or scope because of vertically integrated public sector bodies that have the capabilities to perform downstream 
activities. The main concern is to ensure a 
level playing field so that competition can occur, and if the private sector can make downstream products more cheaply or meet 
consumer demands in other ways, then the pub
lic sector body should consider pulling out of the market. 
One implication of these considerations is
 that public sector bodies should make 
their information available at th
e earliest point that it is useful to businesses. The public entities should not complicate 
things by bundling their information with other data and 
then not allowing the private sector access to the background data. While it may be 
necessary to have aggregated and anonymous provision of personal data at the first stage, 

when it is still upstream data, the data should 
be made available on the same basis as to 
the entities™ own downstream operationsŠtha
t is, for the same pricing and licensing 
terms. 
In terms of assessing the value of PSI, ther
e are improvements that could lead to a 
doubling in the value of PSI to around a billion pounds per year. How is this possible? 
Whereas previous studies have looked at the gross value added by PSI to the economyŠa 
top-down approachŠthe tendency was for these st
udies to overestimate the real value of 
PSI to the economy because they were not looking at any possible substitutes. For 

example, the Pira study in 2000 used the tur
nover of public sector bodies, and that figure included non-PSI-related income, government 
grants, and so on. Other studies, such as 
the Ordnance Survey commissioned in 1999, also used this top-down approach. The contribution of Ordnance Survey data to Great Britain was estimated to be between 
79 billion and 136 billion, representing about 12 to 20 percent of the gross value added to the entire economy during 1996. Roger Timm
 and Partners conducted a top-down study 
for the British Geological Survey (BGS), a
ssessing its value at 8 percent of GDP, or 34 billion to 61 billion. These numbers clearly ove
rstate the significance of these organizations, because to conclude that t
ogether they underpin over 25 percent of the economic activity in the United Kingdom is ju
st not plausible. It would not take many 
more studies before the conclusion would be 
that PSI contributed 100 percent or more of 
the economic activity in the United Kingdom. 
Thus, the top-down approach ignores the counterfactual, because it ignores wh
at happens in the absence of PSI. 
It is better to look at the value of PSI today in terms of net economic value by 
estimating the willingness to pay for PSI mi
nus the cost of producing and supplying itŠthat is, a bottom-up approach. To that end, 
OFT looked at the consumer detriment, the 
types of detriment that could occur, and 
the likelihood of them occurring for any given group of PSI holders, as well as the potential magnitude of each negative factor. The 
types of detriment included: unduly high pric
ing; restriction of downstream competition, 
including refusal to supply or discrimination; and failure to exploit PSI. The income of 
PSI holders was examined by asking how 
much they earned directly from their 
information activity, excluding government grants
, and, especially, if other public sector The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRICE OF EVERYTHING BUT THE VALUE OF NOTHING 
 39bodies were customers. The resulting calculati
on indicated that the net value of public sector information in the United Kingdo
m is about 590 million pounds per year. The 
costs of the three types of detriments were estimated to be 
20 million from high pricing, 
140 million from restriction of
 downstream competition, and 
360 million from failure 
to exploit PSI. Thus OFT suggests that the net value of public sector information in the 
United Kingdom could be in
creased to approximately 
1.1 billion pounds by resolving all of the problems already identified.  
The reactions to the OFT study were interesting. Clearly, the bottom-up approach 
is more accurate, not least because the possibili
ty of alternative produc
ts and services is considered. As a result, some of the public
 sector bodies approached OFT immediately and asked for help with their pricing policies to make sure 
that they were not unfairly competing or restricting competition. Th
e British government accepted many of the 
study™s recommendations, except the recommenda
tion for a splitting in accounting terms 
of the upstream and downstream, i.e., the 
monopolistic and non-monopolistic elements. 
The Treasury has commissioned Cambridge Univer
sity to do a cost-benefit analysis of 
whether to split the accounts and to look at 
different pricing models. That additional report is expected soon. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 40 10.  Enhancing Access to Government Information:  Economic Theory as It Applies to Statistics Canada1  Kirsti Nilsen University of Western Ontario, Canada 
 This presentation summarizes a study I did for Statistics Canada, that country™s 
national statistical agency. The goals of this study were to complete an authoritative view 
and analysis of current economic theory, to 
review the literature on the economic theory 
of information, and to identify elements of the 
literature relevant to Statistics Canada's 

dissemination and management of the producti
on of statistics. My focus was on several issues: the impact of information on general 
economic efficiency; the economic rationale 
for, and advantages of, public sector supply as opposed to private sector supply of information; economic theory with respect
 to pricing; the economic rationale for 
government intervention in the statistical info
rmation market; and the appropriate level of 

production of official statistics. I was also tasked to summarize and review Statistics Canada's production and dissemination program 
in light of current economic theory and 
to identify areas where I thought that the agency's production program could be 
improved.  
In reviewing the literature, I first focused on economics broadly and then looked 
in more depth at the economics of informati
on. While there is an abundance of theoretical 
literature on the economics of information, there 
is very little on the economics of public 
sector information and almost nothing on the econo
mics of official statistical information.  
It is worth noting that theoretical 
economists do not focus on the financial 
situation of individual organizations, so if an agency like Statistics Canada is efficient 
and claims to be making money and covering 
its costs, it is not their concern. These 
theorists work at a broader level and are concerned with the economic and social welfare 
of society as a whole. They look not only at economic efficiency but
 also at the larger questions, What is the social benefit? What is the social welfare?  
The belief among economists is that economic
 efficiency is achieved when goods and services that are produced actua
lly exchange hands, avoiding wasteful overproduction and fulfilling consumer wants, de
sires, or preferences. Conversely, it is 
economically inefficient if agencies or or
ganizations produce information that does not 
exchange hands and if there are desires that the consumers have that could be satisfied by 
PSI producers but that are not being fulfilled by them. 
Theoretical economists also consider external
ities, or spillovers, in their analyses. They care about positive externalities, while remaining awar
e of the butterfly effect, which refers to the way that a very small bit of information can have large downstream 

impact. Furthermore, they argue that cost re
covery through such mechanisms as user fees 
is never welfare enhancing. This conviction is repeated over and over in the literature. Economists believe instead that taxation has 
distributive benefits across society (cf., Joseph Stiglitz). 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/32/40066153.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT INFORMATION 
41According to economists, public goods are goods that can be consumed by many 
without detracting from the benefits enjoye
d by others. Public goods are nonrivalrous and nonexcludable. That is, their use by some consumers does not a
ffect their availability to other consumers and no one can be excluded 
from using them. The classic example of a 
pure public good is the lighthouse, whose benefi
ts are available to anyone and everyone. Public goods can also be produced by the private sector (which is counterintuitive to most people), with the classic example being th
e newspaper. While produced by the private 
sector, the information in a newspaper is non
rivalrous and nonexcludable. No newspaper publisher can keep me from passing on to othe
rs the information I read this morning. 
However, the private sector does not in general produce enough of these goods for which there is no market or sufficient revenue, and 
very often these are the goods with social benefits. It is this situation that underlies the justification for the public sector supply of public goods.  Some public goods can be made rivalrous 
and excludable, with education being a classic example. While information is almost always nonrivalrous, it may be made 
excludable by pricing, copyright, or failure to provide access electronically or in print.  Pricing of nonrivalrous public goods, such as information, is never economically 
efficient because some people will be prev
ented from enjoying th
e benefit of the good 
even though their consumption of the good would have little or no marginal cost to the 
producer. Pricing implies that informa
tion is a commodity, but information™s 
characteristics make such a categorization 
problematicŠinformation™s content is easily 
shared, resistant to appropriation, and difficult to measure. Attempting to value 
information is challenging, because once info
rmation is disseminated, it can be spread 
around and have immense and often unanticipat
ed downstream effects. For all of these reasons, information is difficult to cost and to price.  
Moreover, wider dissemination of inform
ation does not increase the costs to the 
producer. This situation makes possible the 
monopolistic provision of information goods 
by those who can take full advantage of the eco
nomies of scale. (cf., Carl Shapiro and 
Hal Varian). Economists recognize that pr
ivate sector monopolists underproduce and 
overprice their goods and that public sector information producers are usually 
monopolists. Economists also argue that prici
ng above the marginal cost of dissemination 
is inefficient because it results in a deadwei
ght loss and eliminates the consumer surplus. 

Consumer surplus can be thought of as mone
y left over because a good cost less than expected: If a person has set aside $50 to buy a shirt, and the shirt is actually bought on sale for $25, the consumer surplus is $25. C
onsumer surplus is economically efficient 
because consumers will generally take that $25 
and do something else with it that is good 
for the economy. They may buy another item or 
invest the money. This consumer surplus 
is lost when prices are set above marginal 
cost. Furthermore, such pricing means that 
some items will be produced and not sold, whic
h is economically inefficient, or else units 
that have benefits greater th
an their cost will not be pur
chased. Economists agree that 
there is no net social benefit to charging above marginal cost. 
When the public sector does impose user fees for information, it claims that they 
are based on marginal cost or on cost rec
overy pricing. The question is, What is being included in the marginal cost? Some of th
e literature indicates there is a long-term 
marginal cost and a short-term marginal cost, 
but what is the difference? It appears that The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 42                                                     SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
 long-term marginal cost is another way of saying full cost, 
or cost-recovery pricing. But the problem remains: How are the costs dete
rmined? Do you include the lights? The air 
conditioning? The price, then, 
is always a political decisionŠand arbitrary. According to economists, there is no way to price in
formation in an objective manner. 
So why does the public sector want to impos
e fees? The basic answer is that it is 
to recover costs and generate revenue. Beginning in 1984-1985, the Canadian government imposed cost recovery and reve
nue generation on government agencies, and 
while this has been the operational model ev
er since, various agencies are now moving 
away from it (which is why Statistics
 Canada wanted this study done).  The justification for cost recovery is
 often based on the so-called benefit principle: Those who benefit from a good shoul
d pay for it. However, it is very difficult to determine the benefits of information. In
formation flows. It moves away from the 
initial buyer. So, what is the benefit? 
Who benefits? How do you apply the benefit 
principle? The assignment of benefit, like 
the assignment of costs, is an arbitrary 
exercise.  Some countries impose copyrights on 
PSI. This, too, must certainly have 
unanticipated downstream consequences. For example, what happens to countries, such 
as Canada, that impose Crown copyright on thei
r information when they trade with other 
countries, such as the United States, that do not? Are Canadian businesses on a level 
playing field with American businesses in our
 competitive trade market? No. To be sure, 
the main argument for retaining 
copyright is that it ensures the integrity and authority of 
the information. Elizabeth Judge, who is a legal 
scholar in Canada, thinks that as a means 
of ensuring PSI integrity and authority, copyright is very much a blunt instrument. In 
Canada, for instance, the mora
l rights provisions of the Copyright Act are sufficient to ensure PSI integrity and authority, and it is not necessary to impose Crown copyright. The copyright acts in many countries in 
the European Union include moral rights 
provisions. Of course, the real reason that some countries reta
in copyright is to generate revenue on the initial information and on a
ny value added to it. Imposing copyright 
allows PSI providers to benefit from addi
ng value to their own information or from 
licensing others who wish to add value. Economists have concluded that Crown 
copyright has social costs and a negative economic impact.  
Stiglitz, Orszag, and Orszag (2000) argued that if a government role is warranted 
in any activity, then seeking to generate revenue means that an agency is not fulfilling its 
mission. And if no government role is warranted
, the activity should be undertaken by the private sector. Thus it is a proper government ro
le to provide public data and information 
to support basic research and to improve th
e efficiency with which the services of government are provided. 
However, Stiglitz, Orszag and Orszag also argued that PSI providers should exercise caution in adding specialized value to public data and information beyond a 
basic level. If there is a need for specialization, then it probably should not be done by the 
public sector, and the cutoff should come at 
the point when the marginal costs become 
high. Governments should leave high marginal
 cost activities to the private sector. Furthermore, PSI providers should only provi
de a service online when a private service The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENHANCING ACCESS TO GOVERNMENT INFORMATION 
43would not be more efficient, taking into
 account privacy, security, and consumer 
protection.  In the digital economy, private markets may produce substantial income 
inequality and excessive investment because of 
attempts to become th
e best in a specific field, which leads to the markets becoming ine
fficient from a social perspective. Because 
of its high fixed costs and its low marginal co
sts, the production of information is always 

at risk of having limited competition. To avoid this, competition must be encouraged, 

which will lead to lower prices, which in tu
rn benefits the entire society. Otherwise, 
given the high fixed costs and low marginal costs, it is likely that monopolies will 

develop.  Stiglitz, Orszag and Orszag conclude that the theoretical un
derpinnings of the privateŒversus-public situation shifts as the economy moves to
ward a digital one. Although it may seem to be inconsistent with
 the laissez-faire approach to economic 
efficiency, this movement toward a digita
l economy implies an expansion of public 
goods and suggests a larger public role in the digital economy. 
What are the implications for PSI providers
, such as Statistics
 Canada, of moving to free dissemination? Statistics Canada 
is an entrepreneurial agency whose budget benefits from the sale of its data. I understand that there is a ground shift going on, with 
the agency considering a move towards free 
(or less restricted) dissemination. While one 
can predict that the agency™s sales and licensing 
revenues will decrease, it is also true that 
usage and reuse will increase. Increased usage would have positive externalities in terms 

of information dissemination and the uses to which people will put the data, and it will 

also have a positive economic impact for the 
country as a whole, ultimately leading to 
increased tax revenues that are generated by the use and reuse of PSI. At the same time, the agency's transacti
on and opportunity costs will decrease. A great deal of money and time is currently
 spent determining prices, negotiating and 
administering licenses, and monitoring where sales revenues are coming from, who is 

paying, and who has not paid. Furthermore, 
much time and money is
 spent negotiating with other government departments over cost
 recovery charges for information, which 
generates a great deal of wa
sted transaction costs and produces no new revenues for the government as a whole. That money could be
 put to other uses. I conclude that the decreases in transaction and opportunity cost will more than compensate for the revenue 
decrease; meanwhile, there will be a positive economic impact for the country from 

increased use of the data and the tax revenue increases resulting from private sector 
reuse. Overall this outcome w
ill result in increased economic 
efficiency and a greater net social benefit.  REFERENCES 
Judge, E. F. 2005. Crown copyright and copyright reform in Canada. In 
In the 
Public Interest: The Future of Canadian Copyright Law, edited by M. Geist. Toronto: Irwin Law. Pp. 550-594. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 44                                                     SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
 Shapiro, C., and H. Varian. 1999. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the 
Network Economy. Boston: Harvard Business School Press. Stiglitz, J. E. 1994. 
Whither Socialism. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Stiglitz, J. E., P. R. Orszag, and J. M. Orszag. 2000. 
The Role of Government in a Digital Age. Washington, DC: Computer 
and Communications Industry Association.  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4511. Assessing the Impact of Public Sector Geographic Information
1  Max Craglia Institute for Environment and Sustainability, JRC, Italy  The Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe (INSPIRE) is a directive of 
the European Parliament and the Council 
(EC/2007/2) that is based on the various infrastructures for spatial information set up 
and operated by the EU member states. The 
purpose of the INSPIRE directive is to support environmental policy making and, in 
particular, to support the formulation, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of 
environmental policies across the European Community and to overcome major barriers 
that affect the availability and accessibility 
of pertinent spatial data. The key components 
of the INSPIRE directive, as is true of  any Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI), include: 
metadata (the documentation of what informa
tion resources exist, who has responsibility for them, and how they can be accessed); techni
cal specifications for the interoperability 
of spatial datasets and spatial services; network services to allow the discovery, view, 

download, transformation, and linkage of datase
ts and services; policies for sharing data and services; and complementary measur
es for monitoring and reporting on the implementation of the directive. The INSPIRE directive covers 34 data themes necessary 

to support environmental policy and includes 
geographic, administrative, social, and 
environmental information.
2 The directive came into force on May 15, 2007, and member 
states have until May 2009 to transpose the 
directive into nationa
l legislation, with 
implementation taking place over a 10-year period.  
There is a significant degree of synergy between the INSPIRE directive and the PSI directives, as the geographic and environmental in
formation of the INSPIRE 
directive represents a significant portion of the total economic
 value of PSI, and the data themes of INSPIRE are primarily related to 
issues in the public sector. There are also 
various differences between the two. For example, the PSI directive defines the rules for 

exploiting PSI once it has been made availabl
e, but it allows the EU member states the 
freedom to define what information they ma
ke available as well as when and how. By 
contrast, the INSPIRE directive is more prescriptive, and it defines clearly what 

information must be made available within a 
certain timeframe, in what format it must 
appear, and how it should be documented a
nd made accessible. The INSPIRE directive 
therefore addresses three of the main issues surrounding 
PSI: discovery, availability, and use. From this perspective, the implementa
tion of the INSPIRE directive promises to 
improve significantly the availability of PSI. 
The INSPIRE and PSI directives share an 
interest in assessing the impacts of 
making information more widely available a
nd used. In January 2006 the Joint Research Centre (JRC) of the European Commission orga
nized a workshop to review best practices in the assessment of SDIs, 
to compare methodologies and findings and to see what 
lessons could be learned from similar large-
scale infrastructures. Among the key findings 
of that workshop was that when a case has to be made to obtain funding for an SDI, the 
                                                 1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/32/25/40359068.pdf 
2 See http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46                                            SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
case is generally based on assumptions of co
sts and benefits that have little evidence supporting them. For this reason, the workshop conc
luded that there is an urgent need to undertake longitudinal studies of SDIs, paying particular attention to sub-national and regional SDIs and to application-driven approaches in which it is possible to identify 
stakeholders, user communities, and potential benefits (see Craglia and Nowak 2006
3). As a follow-up to that workshop, the JRC commissioned the Centre of Land Policy and 
Valuations of the Universitat Politècnica de Catalonia to perform a study of the 
socioeconomic impact of SDI in Catalonia.
 The one-year study, which was concluded in December 2007, found that if the cost of 
topographic data production is excluded, the 
initial investment of •1.5 million over th
e period 2002-2006 was recovered in less than 
one year. The main categories of cost rela
te to the creation of metadata; setting up 
Internet services for discovery, view, and download; and preparation of the data for 
publication. Almost 80 percent of the costs we
re for human resources. The main benefits 
took the form of increased internal efficiency for public administrations (time saved in 
internal queries by technical staff, time saved in attending queries made by the public, 
and time saved in internal processes), effectiv
eness benefits (time saved by the public and 
by companies in dealing with public administra
tion), and wider social benefits. One such social benefit was a narrowing of the digital divide for populations living in small 
communities, as in many cases these populatio
ns began to receive the same level of 
service that they would have received if they were living in larger towns and cities. Examples of such improved service included 
being able to contact governmental bodies 
at any time of the day or night a
nd obtaining building permits faster. 
The Catalonia study was important because for the first time it provided real 
evidence for both investment costs and measured
 benefits. It also allowed testing of the 
methodology proposed by the JRC, and it offere
d lessons learned for use in further studies. One such study is now in progress in the Regione Lombardia of Italy in collaboration with the JRC. It will be completed in 2009, paving the way for a wider 

deployment of the methodology across Europe
. The full Catalonia study, which is also 
relevant for the wider assessm
ent of PSI, is available at http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reports/Study_reports/catalonia_impact_study_report.pdf. 
                                                 3 http://www.ec-gis.org/sdi//ws/
costbenefit2006/reports/repor
t_sdi_crossbenefit%20.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 4712. Assessing the Economic and Social Benefits of 
NOAA Data Online1  Rodney Weiher NOAA, United States  Let me start with a brief description 
of the mission and organization of the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra
tion (NOAA) in order to better explain our role in PSI. NOAA™s mission is
 two-fold. First, we seek
 to understand and predict changes in the Earth's environment, includi
ng weather, climate, oceans and the marine 
environment, and coastal resources. 
NOAA also manages the nation™s offshore 
commercial fisheries and works with the states
 as a partner in managing coastal marine 
resources. In that sense, NOAA is a two-sided agencyŠscientific and regulatory. There are five major operating units in
 NOAA. The National Weather Service, 
with which many people are familiar, issues basic forecast guidance in the United States 
and provides the observational infrastructure for atmospheric and weather information. It 
issues severe weather watches and warnings, wh
ich it is required to do by law, and it plays a major role in providing hydrological 
services, such as flood forecasts, to the country. The National Environmental Satellite Data and Information Service (NESDIS) is 
the part of NOAA that operates the meteorological
 satellites, which feed into the National Weather Service™s forecasts. NESDIS ensures that all of the atmospheric, climate, and 
ocean observation data is archived and available to the public. 
The National Ocean Service is heavily involved in ocean and coastal mapping and 
charting as well as geodesy, and it provides services to the mari
time industry, such as 
tides and current information. It also produces
 scientific and social science information 
for use in coastal management in partne
rship with states and local agencies. 
The National Marine Fishery Service mana
ges the commercial fisheries of the 
United States, including legislatively protected marine species, and collects scientific and social science data used in analysis aime
d at improving management decisions in that 
area. Finally, there is a strong research com
ponent to NOAA with the Office of Ocean and Atmospheric Research, and it 
is this office that provides much of applied research to 
NOAA in support of the mission goals outlined above. 
NOAA is a major producer and user of di
gital networks. Observational data is intrinsic to the agency™s mission, and it plays 
a major role in virtually every one of its activities, from foundational research to operational forecasts and warnings and 

regulatory decisions. NOAA operates more than ninety operational and research 

observing systems, which are associated with 
more than one hundred real-time and near-
real-time information systems. These systems and the forecasts derived from them inform 

decisions that are important in various ar
eas throughout the economy, and they include 
satellite, in-situ, buoy, ship, and aircraft obs
ervations; weather forecasts; tide and ocean                                                  1 Based on a presentation found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/12/31/40066192.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                             SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
48currents information; climate predictions; spat
ial temporal references such as nautical 
charts, GPS augmentations, and marine populat
ions; and other scientific and social science information. So NOAA is in the information business and is arguably the biggest 
user and producer of operational scientific data in the federal government. 
Regarding its policy towards the access and reuse of PSI, NOAA follows OMB Circular A-130, which is the guidance for the executive branch agencies in the federal government. As Nancy Weiss has describe
d, Circular A-130 states that the open, efficient, and free exchange of federal government information is essential. 
Consequently, NOAA sets user fees at a level sufficient
 to recover the cost of dissemination but no higher, and, in particular
, it does not charge prices to recover the capital costs. Thus, although there are some ex
ceptions in such areas as national security, open access to data is the agency™s policy. 
What is the economic rationale for this pol
icy? Kirsti Nilsen has already reviewed 
the professional literature. Basically, the underlying idea is that the information that 
NOAA generates has strong public good characteristics. First, it is difficult to exclude 

users, which makes it difficult to charge for 
the data in order to recoup the cost of the capital. Also, the marginal cost of producing ad
ditional information is essentially zero, so 
to charge for it would be non-optimal because
 it would exclude many users who value the 
data.  While NOAA provides the capital infrastr
uctureŠsatellites, 
observing stations, distribution systems, and the likeŠthe agency™s
 policy calls generally for private industry to add value by generating and providing forecasts and other information for their 

customers, as appropriate. There is a whole body 
of literature that attempts to define ﬁas 
appropriate,ﬂ but the bottom line is that
 NOAA operates the infrastructure, and the 
private sector does the value-added part of it. Of course, while public goods theory provides a rationale for publicly supplied information, it does not say how much publicly
 supplied information should be produced. 
So, consequently, NOAA has to make cost-ben
efit calculations in order to decide how much to produce. NOAA managers compare the 
net benefits of a particular system or 
data collection activity with other data systems and, ultimately, with other public 
investments, such as health or highways. 
The emphasis is on net benefitsŠthe total 
lifetime system benefits less costŠrather than simple cost-benefit ratios, which can often 

be misleading as a guide to public investment
s. Cost-benefit analysis is essentially a social accounting structure, and it gives us an
 indication of whether the costs of a project 
are justified in terms of 
its benefits to society.  
Moreover, recent advances in technology 
and the economics of observing systems 
make it necessary to carry out a case-by-cas
e examination of wh
ether the public goods argument is in fact still va
lid and justifies government f
unding. For instance, with the advent of the Internet and other technological advances, the costs of disseminating 
observations have come down dramatically, so, 
with the exception of the big satellites, it 
makes sense to reexamine the public goods 
argument for many of the new observing 
systems. 
On the question of how to measure the be
nefits of NOAA™s data, or even PSI in 
general, it is important to note that raw data
, in and of themselves, do not provide value. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL BENEFITS OF NOAA DATA ONLINE 
49The data are input to a process that produces information that itself does have economic 
value. The benefits are thus derived from th
e resulting final product, and the value of the data is an imbedded good in that final product.
 An economist, thinking of the data from 
the point of view of a production function, will measure the marginal value of the data input in terms of the improvement it make
s in the final outputŠsay a forecastŠand the value of that improvement to the forecast. 
NOAA™s products and services are used in both the public and the private sector. Much of the data goes directly to the private sector, where they lead both to productivity gains and to the creation of new products, services, and other business lines. It has led, for example, to better weather forecasts and a
dvances in GPS, which in turn have led to efficiency gains and spawned a number of value-added industries in the United States. 
Furthermore, much of the data that NOAA 
collects is deemed essential for meeting 
NOAA™s mission and legislative mandates, such
 as the protection of life and property. Thus NOAA data both help the agency meet 
important public mandates and also improve 
economic performance in the private sector, 
supporting applications in such areas as maritime commerce, energy, and transporta
tion. In this way, PSI products affect economic decisions, and the way in which 
these decisions improve economic outcomes 
offers a measure of the value of the information. 
According to the value of information th
eory in economics, information products 
and services have value if they affect decisions and change consequences. The value of that information is the increase in the expected
 benefits or the reduction in cost resulting from the information being available and bei
ng used versus not being available. For the information to have value, it must be use
d, and the value is determined by how much it 
improves decisions versus the situation wh
ere the information was not available.  
There are several ways that the value of in
formation theory has been used to value 
NOAA products and services. The first has been in modeling decisions made with and 
without the information and then asking wh
at the expected consequences of those decisions are. One of the ways this approach has been used has been to estimate the 
benefits of seasonal data and forecasts in th
e agriculture sector. For example, a model can 
be made of how a farm would 
operate with the data that ar
e presently available versus 
operations with an improved set of data. A 
second approach is to use self-assessment 
surveys to estimate what people would be willing to pay for information, which can lead 
to estimates of what economists call ﬁconsumer
 surplus,ﬂ a measure of the benefits to 
society. A third approach is to use data from an ﬁexperimentﬂŠlooking at actual events 
and trying to estimate what the prior and the 
subsequent values of having the information 
were in that particular event. This was done, for example, in estimating the value of 
installing the NEXRAD system, the next-generat
ion weather radars that the United States developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Weather-related fatalities and injuries were 
examined for the periods before and af
ter NEXRAD was introduced, and a difference was found: a reduction in fatalities and injuries of about 40 percent.  In another case, NOAA had a major initia
tive to develop coastal and ocean observing systems, and a study
2 was done in 1977 to estimate the economic benefits of 
                                                 2 National Research Council. 
The Ocean Observing System - Users, Benfits, and Priorities, Committee on 
the Global Ocean Observing System
. Ocean Studies Board. Commission 
on Geosciences, Environment, 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                             SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
50these information systems. The benefits 
were estimated at more than $700 million 
annually, based on calculations of the value of information for a group of coastal and 
ocean-related industriesŠoil and gas, fishing, recreation, tourism, and two or three other 
large sectors.  
There was also a series of studies done at NOAA on the benefits of real-time 
oceanographic data, i.e., tides and currents for different ports in the United States. In the Houston-Galveston Bay portŠa large port in the Gulf of Mexico, used mainly for oil and 
gas importsŠthe benefits of such data ar
e about $15 million a year annually. Compared 
to a $700 million benefit that is not a lot, but 
this is a much smaller system serving one 
location. If the benefits are added up across all the ports in the United States, a fairly good-sized number emerges. 
As a final example of the value of NOAA data and information, consider an 
estimate of the value of daily weather forecas
ts in the United States. These benefits are 
called non-market use benefits; they do not ha
ve a market per se because forecasts are 
freely available on TVs, radio, newspapers, and the Internet. Thus the benefits cannot be 
measured by multiplying prices times the quantities sold because the goods are not 

exchanged in a market. Instead, by using 
state-of-the-art survey techniques and econometrics, it was estimated that there 
is a willingness to pay of about $103.64 per household for the approximately 110 million households in the United States, which 

leads to an estimated total of $11.4 billion 
in annual value (including $3 billion in a typical hurricane season alone). Because of this large value, the NOAA real-time weather 
data supplies a rapidly growing private weather service industry with sales, at last 
estimate, of well over $700 million annually, bu
t this number is probably much larger 
now. In the United States and Europe, there is a growing weather derivatives financial industry, due primarily to the fact
 that the risk models have gotten so much better, and the 
industry uses the publicly supplied data to settle those derivatives. Essentially, utilities are hedging their bets on what the temperat
ures will be over the next three months in 

order to improve fuel bu
ying and other decisions. In summary, NOAA is a major producer and 
user of PSI in the United States, and NOAA™s data is used throughout the economy. NOAA practices an open and free 
exchange of data and uses economic analysis
, including calculating the benefits and costs of new and improved data in observing systems, to decide on the agency™s investments 

and also to determine the appropr
iate public and private roles. 
                                                                                                                                                 and Resources. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. 1997. 
http://fermat.nap.edu/openbook.php?isbn=0309056950 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5113. Exploring the Impacts of Enhanced Access to Publicly Funded Research
1  John Houghton Victoria University, Australia  In late 2006 Colin Steele, Peter Sheehan, and I produced a report for the Australian Department of Education, Scie
nce and Training (DEST) on the costs of research communication, emergi
ng opportunities, and benefits.2 The aims of the project 
were to explore and, where possible, to quantify the costs associated with research 
communication, focusing mainly on scientific pu
blishing but also, to a lesser extent, on scientific data. The study also explored th
e potential benefits of enhanced access to 
research findings and tried to compare th
e costs and benefits of alternative access 
systems. The project was funded by the Au
stralian government as a part of the government™s consideration of open access policy 
and legislation, but it was also aimed at 
the funding agencies, research councils, and universities as a way of both providing input to their deliberations about access policies and offering a guide to the budgetary 

implications of alternative access models.  
To explore the costs of interest, we developed an activity cost model that was based on an extensive review of the literature on the activ
ities of research and the production of research findings. We adopted 
a systems perspective that was based on 
previous research by Donald King and colleagues in the United States.3 The cost model 
included all the activities related to res
earch, publishing and dissemination in higher 
education, and it covered databases as well as journals and books. Due to a lack of comparable data, all other pr
ivate and public sector resear
ch activities were excluded. Most of the costs associated with research communicat
ion are related to timeŠ
the time involved in reading, research, writing, 
peer review, and other tasks. To convert 
time to dollars, we used a model for full cost 
recovery that included salaries and overhead costs common in universities. In fact, it was based on the model for full cost recovery for non-laboratory-based contract research that is imposed on unive
rsities in Australia by the national competition policy.  
One crucial aspect is the level at which costing is done. Research communication 
is multidimensional, so it is useful to take a 
matrix approach to costing that identifies the 
activities, actors, objects, functions, and, to a lesser extent, the applications with the aim 
of being able to break down the value chain and reassemble it along any of these 
dimensions. For example, activity costs can be 
reassembled as the cost of objects, such as 
the cost of producing a journal article; the cost for actors, 
such as the costs experienced                                                  1 Based on a presentation available at http
://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/11/20/40067323.pdf 
2 Houghton, J. W., C. Steele,
 and P. J. Sheehan. 2006. 
Research Communication Costs in Australia: 
Emerging Opportunities and Benefits.
 Canberra: Department of Education, Science and Training. Found at 
http://dspace.anu.edu.au/handle/1885/44485 
3 See, for example, Tenopir,
 C. and D.W. King. 2000. 
Towards Electronic Journals: Realities for 
Scientists, Librarians and Publishers. 
Washington, DC: Special 
Libraries Association. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
52by universities or publishers in producing the article; and the cost of various functions, such as peer review of the article, quality control, and certification.  Costing the various activities involved in research communication, we found that reading is a major activity and that in Aust
ralian universities during 2005 the time spent 
on reading alone may have cost approxi
mately A$5.8 billion. Reading by those 
researchers who were actively publishing in 2005 (i.e., reading in order to write) cost around A$3 billion. We estimated that wri
ting scholarly, independent, peer-reviewed 
publications cost approximately A$640 m
illion during 2005, and peer review and the 
editorial activities of academics cost appr
oximately A$170 million. In sum, the estimated 
system-wide costs of the activities associ
ated with core scholarly communication 
activities in Australian higher education 
came to approximately A$4 billion, or 30 
percent of the total expenditure for higher education. Having adopted a matrix approach,
4 we could then examine the activity costs in 
various ways. For example, summing the co
sts for objects suggested that, in 2005,  producing a journal article in an Australian university cost, on average, A$21,000, excluding the research and reading time involved. By summi
ng the costs for all actors, we calculated that writing all those journal 
articles counted in the Higher Education Research Data Collection cost the Australian National University approximately A$50 
million in 2005. 
In the second part of the study, we explored the potential benefits of enhanced access to research findings. Again, the analysis
 was based on an extensive review of the 
literature. It has been suggested that the mo
st immediate benefits of enhanced access are 
probably felt within research itself, and these potential benefits might include increased 
speed of access resulting in a speeding up of
 the research and discovery process, a decrease in the amount of redundant research 
and a reduction in the investigation of blind alleys, and an increase in the efficiency 
of research and development. Wider access 
would also enable greater participation from poorer institutions and developing countries, 

provide more opportunities for interdisciplinar
y research and inter-sectoral collaboration, and allow researchers to study their fields more broadly, which could potentially lead to 
increased opportunities for commercialization.  
                                                 4 The following list of the various costs included in this actor/object matrix analysis may be helpful: 
 Reading: academic staff 
$5.8 billion, published staff 
$3 billion pa. 
 Writing (HERDC publications only)
$636 million pa. 
 Peer review(scaled to HERDC)
$132 million pa. 
 Editorial activities (scaled to published staff)
$36 million pa. 
 Editorial board activities (scaled to published staff)
$3.8 million pa. 
 Preparing grant app
lications(ARC & NHMRC)
$110 million pa. 
 Reviewing grant applications(ARC & NHMRC)
$26 million pa. 
 Publisher costs(scaled to HERDC)
$164 million pa. 
 Library acquisition costs (CAUL)
$199 million pa. 
 Library non-acquisition costs (CAUL)
$321 million pa. 
 Cost per download (sample of CAUL subscriptions)$3.51 (mean). 
 ICT infrastructure(estimated total expenditure)
$1billion pa. 
 Sum of core activities 
$4 billion (
30% of HE expenditure). 
  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSING ECONOMIC/SOCIAL BENEFITS  
  
53 Providing doctors, nurses, teachers, stude
nts, and small firms with a wider access 
to research findings may also lead to improvements in the quality of service and 
productivity in those areas of the economy, and 
it is also possible that the emergence of 
new industries could be encouraged by the availability of open-access content (e.g., 
weather derivatives based on access to meteor
ological data). For the wider community, 
potential benefits include such things as encouraging the development of informed 
citizens and informed consumers, who will be
 better able to make good decisions about 
the use of services like health and educa
tion and who will make better consumption 
choices. Ultimately, having informed citizen
s and informed consumers should increase 
the overall economic welfare of the country.  
With such a wide range of potential benef
its, the task of quantifying the impact of 
enhanced access is enormous, and there is no single definitive approach to the problem. Ideally, all the possible costs and benefits of all the possible alternative models for access would be accounted for, but that was beyond the scope of the project and may well be 
practically impossible. In order to gain a preliminary sense of th
e overall effect of enhanced access, we 
chose to take a two-pronged approach. First, we explored some impact scenarios and case 
studies and then hypothesized about the possible effects of these scenarios on returns on R&D. Second, we modified a simple Solow-Swan
5 model and used it for our 
calculations.  
There is a vast literature in economics that focuses on estimating the rate of return 
on R&D, and the returns quoted in that literatu
re vary from time to time, place to place, 
and between fields of research. Nevertheless, we found certain patterns from that 

literature spanning a period of 20 to 25 years: Generally speaking, it is a characteristic finding that the rate of return is high, and it is typically in the range of 30 to 60 percent a year, sometimes higher.  
The standard, neoclassical approach to estimating the rate of return on R&D 
makes some key simplifying assumptions:  
 It assumes that all R&D generates know
ledge that is useful in economic or 
social terms (i.e., the efficiency of R&D);  
 It assumes that all knowledge is equally accessible to all entities that could 
make productive use of it (i.e., th
e accessibility of knowledge); and  It assumes that all types of knowledge 
are equally substitutable across uses (i.e., the substitutability of knowledge).  
The substitutability assumption is clearly not realistic, however, as a great deal of 
research is application specific, and much work has been done to address that fact. Much less work has been done to address the other two, equally unrealistic assumptions, and this is where we focused our efforts. Basically, we introduced accessibility and efficiency 
                                                 5 Solow, Robert. 
A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics.  
Febuary 1956; Swan, Trevor. 2002. 
Economic Growth.
 The Economic Record. vol. 78. issue 243. pages 
375-80. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
54into the standard model as negative or friction 
variables, and we then looked at the effect 
on returns to R&D of reducing the friction 
by increasing accessibility and efficiency. 
There are a number of assumptions and cav
eats here. First, we assumed that the 
increase in accessibility and efficiency would be the same. Second, we assumed that a 
move to open access would have no net eff
ect on the rates of accumulation or 
obsolescence of the stock of knowledgeŠthe key word here being net. Third, we 
assumed that the information to whic
h access was provided would indeed be 
discoverable. We explored rates of return on R&D in the range of 25 to 75 percent, and we looked at increases in accessibility and efficiency in the range of 1 to 10 percent. For each category of R&D expenditure, we produced
 a table. Based on the review of the literature, we assumed a very conservative 25 pe
rcent social return on public sector R&D, and we suggested that a 5 percent increase in accessibility and efficiency would be plausible. Rates of return vary considerably, 
and the further one gets from the aggregate, the larger the range of uncertainty become
s. Nevertheless, to give an example:  
 With government R&D funding in Au
stralia at about A$6.5 billion in 
2005 and a 25 percent return on R&D, a 5 percent increase in accessibility 

and efficiency would be worth around A$166 million a year;  
 With higher education R&D at around A$4.3 billion, a 5 percent increase 
in accessibility and efficiency would be worth around A$110 million a 
year; and   With the Research Council's competitive grants funding to higher 

education at around A$830 million, a 5 percent increase would be worth 

around A$20 million a year.  
These are recurring annual ga
ins from one year's R&D expenditure. Thus, if the 
change to enhanced access is a permanent one, they may be converted to growth rate 

effects. It is possible to express some of these co
sts and impacts as benefit-cost ratios. For example, focusing on a limited range of cost
s, it is possible to compare the estimated 
incremental cost of open-access institutional 
repositories in higher education with the 
potential incremental benefits from enhan
ced access to higher education research, 

assuming that everything else remains the same. Again, there are a number of 

assumptions about the rates 
of increase of R&D expenditure, discount rates, risk premiums, and so on. Nevertheless, we estimated
 that over 20 years a national system of 
institutional repositories costing A$10 m
illion a year would cost around A$130 million in 
net present value, whereas enhanced access to
 higher education research would be worth around A$4.8 billion in increased returns to R&D (in net present value); the resulting benefit-cost ratio would be 37. Similarly, 
enhanced access to the Research Council™s 
competitive grants funding of higher educati
on research, with benefits of around A$925 million, resulted in a calculated be
nefit-cost ratio of just over 7. So what was learned from the study? Clearl
y, this is just one way to estimate the potential overall impacts of enhanced access to publicly funded research findings, and it 

has limitations and weaknesses. Perhaps its
 strength is its simplicity, bypassing the The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASSESSING ECONOMIC/SOCIAL BENEFITS  
  
55 complexity of calculating the impact of 
each possible change. Ideally, it would be supplemented by detailed studies of how the impacts work in particular areas, that is, by 
more work on actual scenarios and developing those scenarios into detailed studies that 
would support the macroeconomic estimates.  
The main critique of this so
rt of traditional approach from the point of view of 
new growth and evolutionary economics is that
 it does not take account all of the ways in which research makes contributions. Consequent
ly, the impact estimates from this study 
may be viewed as being on the conserva
tive side, which was the intention.  It is debatable whether this approach could be adopted to calculations outside R&D, as it depends on having estimates 
of returns to R&D spending. However, differences between scientific data and public sector information, such as meteorological 
or geological observation, are often quite small. They ar
e simply another form of 
scientific observation. Consequently, it may 
be possible to apply the rates of return applicable to observational sciences to various forms of public sector information and to 
produce preliminary estimates of retu
rns to public sector information.  
       The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 56DISCUSSION BY WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT: I would like to follow up. I do not think we should leave the impression 
that the U.S. federal government is monolithic in
 its policy and that everything is free and rosy. 
What I mean is that OMB Circular A-130 act
ually puts an upper bound for pricing at the incremental
1 cost of the information management system. So it actually can exceed the marginal
2 cost and often does. There is a lot of data and information sold at mu
ch more than the marginal cost 
of fulfilling the user request or the dissemination. 
So not everything is free online, and there is quite a bit of information that is sold. Even at 
NOAA, the National Climatic Data Center, for exam
ple, which has all the retrospective archived 
climate data, charges fairly high fees for accessing t
hose data. In fact, it funds about 30 percent of 
its annual operations through those sales, although I think the money actually goes to the treasury. Until recently, Landsat images were $500 each, which was quite expensive. Even though it 
was substantially less than the French SPOT image,
 it was still a lot for an individual scene. So there is a large variance in the pricing of PSI in the federal government, even if the information is 
in the public domain. 
I also should point out there is one exception to the public 
domain exclusion for federal 
government information from the Copyright Act, and 
that is in the National Institute of Standards and Technology. The Standard Reference Data Ce
nter has a legislative exemption from the 
exclusion and can copyright its standard reference data publications, and that may be the only 
exception to that in the federal government. I su
ppose that if someone were to not honor the 
copyright, they would not be sued by NIST, but nonetheless it does have a copyright in those publications. So I just wanted to clarify that it is a very big system, and 
all the agencies really operate individually. There is an overall policy, and I think marginal cost pricing is the preferred option, 
but it can go up to incremental costs. 
PARTICIPANT: I have one question, or actually a thought, after hearing these presentations. I was quite attracted to this me
thodology that I, in my mind, called deprivation 
method, in which you go to people and ask them, 
If we take oxygen away from you, how much 
would you pay to get it back? We h
ear this being applied to public sector information. I was just 
wondering, before I heard the last presentation by John Houghton, that since we are counting on information products or services that we already 
have, if we were to take those away, how much 
would we pay for getting them back? However, fo
r the externalities and the innovation component, 
can you really go to end users and ask them how 
much they would pay for products which they do 
not have yet? 
                                                 1 In incremental cost pricing, ﬁThe pri
ce to secondary users is set so that re
venues cover the cost to provide this 
incremental use, including recompiling the data, perhaps main
taining a computer site for downloading, purchasing CD-
ROM blanks, recording the data, shipping to the user, and customer support, but not including the costs for the core 
service.ﬂ National Res
earch Council. 1997. 
Bits of Power: Issues in Global Access to Scientific Data
, National 
Academy Press,
 pp. 125-126. 
2 In marginal cost pricing, ﬁThe cost to secondary users is 
set at the marginal cost of a specific unit sent to the user, 
including the cost of the CD-ROM blanks and postage and shi
pping. This price is lower than
 the incremental cost price, 
as long as the cost of output per unit declin
es when volume increas
es.ﬂ Id. at p. 126. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPLORING THE IMPACTS OF ENHANCED ACCESS 
  57PARTICIPANT: One thing I noticed in the liter
ature is the assumpti
on that one of the things that is asked is: How much
?ﬂ ﬁWhat is your time worth?ﬂ Most
 people will say that they are willing to spend a great deal more for informa
tion than they would, in fact, spend. Once you ask 
them to actually spend it, then their backs go 
up. They will say one thing, but they do not follow through if the price is, in fact, what they would say it should be. So you cannot really rely on their willingness to pay. The other alternative, then, 
is to say, ﬁHow much time are you saving?ﬂ which 
is considered to be more effective th
an asking what they are willing to pay. 
PARTICIPANT: I would just add that if you 
are a public agency like NOAA that typically does not charge, the big problem is 
that it does not really know who the users are and what the user needs are. If you do not know who the users are and how they use the data, you do not know much 
about the marginal benefits. So I think one of th
e advantages of having free and open access is that there is no way that an economist can tell an agen
cy what the market is going to be for something. 
Just making the data as widely available as you 
can, I think, is the way to maximize the benefits 
rather than sitting there trying to say, ﬁWhat w
ould someone be willing to pay for this product?ﬂ 
when the agency really does not have a good sense of how people use it. I totally agree that when you go out and ask people what they would be willing to pay, you will get numbers that are 
probably very inflated. A final comment from a professional point of
 view: I do not think the data withdrawal approach is a good one because I just think that th
ere are ex post facto questions, and there are huge 
substitution possibilities among sources 
of data. I think it is much bett
er to try to estimate what the marginal benefit is of additional data or 
new data, if you can get some handle on that. 
PARTICIPANT: Yes, on the NOAA data, you were focusing primarily on the economic 
kinds of uses, but I understand that a lot of the NOAA data are used in classrooms, that there is 
significant educational reuse of data that translates into not just th
e actual use but also the training 
of new scientists and that kind of thing. The other one being basic researchŠthe use of the data for climate research and analysis, whic
h obviously also has major benefits. 
PARTICIPANT: Yes, I should have made it 
clear that I was mainly talking about 
operational data, but you are absolutely right about the research value of the data. 
I was fascinated by John Houghton's presentation
 because of what we have been grappling 
with at NOAA. You think you have a big problem when you are trying to determine what the value 
of a better weather forecast is. The big problem we 
have is the value of the R&D, the research that NOAA is doing, and the last presentation gave me 
a few ideas about how to pursue this. There are a lot of uses for the data besides just the operational. 
PARTICIPANT: Well, I have heard many inte
resting comments today. What has been lacking in general are some more
 views from industry about how 
they see the whole thing. I think it is a bit absent today. This is important when list
ening to the presentation of Robbin te Velde, who gave the impression that Dutch public sector bodies were left on their own to do whatever they thought was good for them. They were not told by the government what should be done. They 
could charge or not, depending on their own wishes. We are told that there will be some resistance 

for change, so it seems that th
is is only a supply issue. I would be really interested to hear much more about companies and what are they doing to 
fight when systems do not work well, because one of th
e things that is lacking, at least in Europe, is 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                                                SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
58solid complaints. The European Court of Justice 
has not received a single case related to public sector information. I think that it is importa
nt to look at the judicial perspective. I also was very much interested by the co
mment of our Google 
colleague, who reported today about their work with the U.S. government to 
see how they can work together in order to get good information for reuse. That brings me to the NOAA. Sometimes it se
ems to me that you are working in a very 
competitive model with private companies, but no
t competing directly with them. They are your 
users. You work together. You build a better world together. 
I would be interested to know whether the private companies in the EU would tell me that 
this is the way they look to the work with Europe
an Met offices and whether this is the view that 
European Met offices have about work with the users. The question is, what works betterŠi.e., how can we work together, private and public, not working against public sector policy, but working together with public sector policy? 
PARTICIPANT: Recalling what Dr. Fornefeld presented this morning about the value 
change of the PSI data and about how data has to be combined together so that services can be 
provided, I think we come back to this once again because the economic models that Ms. Nilsen 
presented say that the product has to be sold for the marginal costs. That is right, but it does not 
take into account the investment
s that are needed. When you sell a product at the marginal cost, 
you do not take into account the investme
nt required to produce these goods. In the case of information, the marginal cost
 is nearly zero because it is very easy to 
distribute information over the Internet. So we can 
state that the bulk of the cost of information, 
from our discussion today, is investment cost. That
 is why you cannot sell information, because if 
you want to price information in its marginal co
st, it makes no economic sense to sell information.  
But, as you remember from this morning, to provide services based on this information does 
have marginal cost. There is also a business 
opportunity to sell your services along with the information. It makes no sense for anybody to sell in
formation priced at marginal cost because it 
has no marginal cost, but it does
 make sense to sell services. 
In the public sector debate, we speak about public sector information holders who sell 
information to reusers under certain licensing terms, 
and this is considered all right because we see it as acceptable to sell information to the people 
who are going to provide services. When we look 
at this value chain, we say information should not be sold, but the service should be sold. However, we must remember that there is no such thing 
as a free lunch. The information producer should realize some return of the profits as well. The 
producer needs to cover the investment costs of 
producing the information. I have very seldom s
een a business model base
d on the notion that the information will be provided free to a service provider, but a certain percentage of the profit of the 

service provider will come back to
 the data producer. This would be
 an integration into a new value chain. There would be an agreement of cooperati
on between the data producer and the service provider, and the data would not be permitted to 
be sold by the service provider. The only thing 
that is sold is the service, but a part of the profit derived from selling th
e service would come back 
to the data producer. The licensing could be easier because it is an
 agreement between the 
data producer and the 
service provider. That is not how it is todayŠthe price of the information and the licensing 
depends on the business model of the service provider. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXPLORING THE IMPACTS OF ENHANCED ACCESS 
  59For example, perhaps a local government could 
provide cartographic information to a small 
company that wants to provide services based 
on this cartographical information. The small 
company has to explain its business model to the 
local government, so th
at the local government 
could set the price. They might ask how many user
s do you intend to have, or at what rate would you want to price your service, and then the local government woul
d set a price. This is very difficult for innovating companies 
because they do not know their market. They do not know the 
price or the benefits they have to make of it, and they have to first pay for the information before 
they can go into business. This way no innovation can work, and it is really an inhibition to innovation by small companies that are not
 able to prepay for the information. 
PARTICIPANT: My company has a very positiv
e working relationship with many different 
public agencies when it comes to the sharing 
and dissemination of data
. That is not really something that is controversial or problematic. 
But industry is interested, as more technology and 
services develop, in being able to provide comple
x datasets not only to other companies or other 
customers but also to users in or
der to unleash the kind of creativity leading to new applications or innovations. So what industry would like to ensureŠat least what my company is looking forŠis 
that the usually positive initial contact between government a
nd industry continues to be positive. In a previous life I worked for an industry associ
ation that handled PSI questions, and I saw there at 
least two examples of very negati
ve cases that will probably end up in court when the PSI Directive has been implemented in Sweden, and we will see if they end up in the European Court of Justice. 

It is clearly a risk that this initially very pos
itive contact becomes harsher or more problematic 

when the depth of access requested by private companies and industries increases. I hope, of 
course, that this will not be the case. I think that there is most de
finitely a demand side in private 
industry to complement the supply side in the gove
rnment as in the discussion we are having here 
today. PARTICIPANT: I know others are quite rightly saying, ﬁWhere are the complaints? Where 
are the cases that people bring?ﬂ I think what we all have 
to acknowledge is that it is extraordinarily difficult for the private sector to take
 on the public sector in a court of law. It is a big step, especially if you are a small company. I think also 
there is the question of time, or timeliness. If a company has an idea that it wants to
 develop but in order to develop it, it has to go to court, then the idea is dead be
fore it emerges into the real world. 
I have a special relationship with one particular trading fund, and that has caused us, as a business, more grief than I would have thought possibl
e. I think one of the reasons for that is that public sector bodies, understandably, do not like being attacked. If you were to attack a supermarket, for example, on fair and reasonable gr
ounds, if it is a well-run business you are likely to get a sensible, moderate respon
se. That is not necessary true of state-run organizations that do not feel that they are able to defend themselves 
in the same way. So in dealing with a state-run 
organization, you have to really believe that the relationship has gone to a point of no return before you take action. There are two other points I would like to ma
ke. The first is that obviously you have to go through the national process before you can then get to the broader EU level. That can be quite telling. Once you get as far as the EU, then I 
think the situation becomes a great deal more 
interesting. The EU institutions have got a different slant on some of these issues. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                                                SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
60Secondly, I think the competition authorities in 
various EU countries may have a great deal 
of ability to unlock some of these problems for all 
of us. It only takes one or two decisions and all 
of a sudden the whole of Europe will have to take an interest in this issue. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 61PART THREE 14. Measuring the Social and Economic Costs and Benefits of Public Sector Information Online: A Review of the Literature and Future 
Directions  Paul F. Uhlir, Raed M. 
Sharif, and Tilman Merz 
 The second day of the workshop was devoted to a discussion of the issues by all of the participants, first in two breakout sessions and then in a combined, plenary format. 
The two breakout sessions were preceded by a presentation entitled Measuring the Social and Economic Costs and Benefits of Public Sector Information (PSI) Online: A Review 
of the Literature and Future Directions, which was prepared by Paul F. Uhlir, Raed M. Sharif, and Tilman Merz.
1 The topics covered by this presentation included: (1) the 
benefits of access to and reuse of PSI; (2) government polic
ies; (3) a review of the literature about measuring the PSI reuse ma
rket and linking outcomes to access regimes; 
(4) a critique and challenges of current m
easurement approaches; (5) suggestions for 
future directions; and (6) questions for further discussion. First, access to and reuse of PSI in the 
online environment has direct and indirect 
economic and social benefits. By devel
oping new markets online, the information 
industries help enhance the efficiencies of other industries, and, consequently, individuals are empowered as economic actors. Moreover, 
performance within the public sector is 
improved, and innovative research projects 
are fostered. Making PSI available online benefits society through improved political transparency, enhanced educational and research opportunities, and the support of personal decision-making capabilities. 
Second, different governments vary markedly in their policies and approaches to 
dealing with PSI online. In the United States, access to government information is 
established by a number of laws, includi
ng the 1995 Paperwork Reduction Act, the Sunshine in Government Act, and the Freedom
 of Information Act. (See the summary of 
the presentation by Nancy Weiss.) In th
e European Union, many countries and 
government institutions use a cost recovery 
model and limit the reuse of PSI by applying 
intellectual property protections. At the same time, there is an emphasis on producing 
higher-quality and less restricted informa
tion, following the 2003 PSI Directive. There are also various hybrid models adopted in the EU and other countries.  
In determining PSI policy, the best appr
oach is clear: (1) equal treatment and 
competition; (2) minimizing the transac
tion costs necessary to obtain PSI; (3) 
transparency of access conditions and data ch
aracteristics through the availability of good 
metadata; and (4) accountability. Beyond that, PSI policy is
 governed by a variety of complex interrelations that reflect the scope of public sector activity in information 

provision, information quality, access and disc
overability, and pricing. Which policy is 
best under these various conditions is less clear and may be context-dependent.  
                                                 1 Found at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/23/42/40170933.ppt 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
62Third, in analyzing open access and cost 
recovery policies, there have already been a number of studies that have resulted 
in assessments and empirical measurements. 
The resulting literature review
, which is not comprehensive, is summarized in Table 1. 
 TABLE 1 Assessments of PSI Activities 
in Chronological Order, 2008-1998  
 Study Title Author(s) and year Models of Public Sector Information 
Provision via Trading Funds
2 David Newbery, Lionel Bently, and Rufus Pollock. 2008.   EcoGeo Project3 Stéphane Roche, et al. 2007.  Fair Use in the U.S. Economy: 
Economic Contribution of Industries 
Relying on Fair Use4  Thomas Rogers and Andrew Szamosszegi. 2007.
 The Power of Information: An 
Independent Review5  Ed Mayo and Tom Steinberg. 2007. 
 The Socio-Economic Impact of the 
Spatial Data Infrastructure of 
Catalonia6  Pilar Garcia Almirall, Montse Moix Bergadà, and
Pau Queraltó Ros. Edited by Max Craglia. 2007; published 2008. Benefits of the New GPS Civil Signal: 
The L2C Study7  Irving Leveson. 2006. The Commercial Use of Public 
Information (CUPI)
8  Office of Fair Trading, United Kingdom. 2006.  
Developing Geographic Information 
Infrastructures: The Role of 
Information Policies
9   Bastiaan Van Loenen. 2006.  Economic Impact of Open Source 
Software on Innovation and the Rishab Aiyer Ghosh, et al. 2006.                                                    2 Found at http://www.opsi.gov.uk/advice/
poi/models-psi-via-trading-funds.pdf 
3 Web site: http://ecogeo.scg.ulaval.ca 
4 Found at http://www.ccianet.org/artmana
ger/uploads/1/FairUseStudy-Sep12.pdf 
5 Found at http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/media/cab
inetoffice/strategy/assets/power_information.pdf 
6 Found at http://inspire.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reports
/Study_reports/catalonia_impact_study_report.pdf 
7 Found at http://www.insidegnss.com/auto/0706%20Benefits.pdf 
8 Found at http://www.opsi.gov.uk/advice/poi/oft-cupi.pdf 
9 Found at http://repository.tudelft.nl/file/107024/088301 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEASURING THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC COSTS OF PSI ONLINE 
63Study Title Author(s) and year Competitiveness of the Information 
and Communication Technologies 
(ICT) Sector in the EU
10  MEPSIR, Measuring European Public Sector Information Resources
11  Makx Dekkers, Femke Polman, Robbin te Velde, 
and Marc de Vries. 2006. Economic Value of the Nova Scotia 
Ocean Sector
12 Michael Gardner, Robert Fraser, Mike Milloy, and James Frost. 2005. 
 Estimating Economic Benefits from 
NOAA PORTS® Information: A Case 
Study of Tampa Bay13   Hauke Kite-Powell. 2005.  Estimating the Economic Benefits of 
Regional Ocean Observing Systems
14 Hauke Kite-Powell, Charles Colgan, et al. 2004. The Value of Snow and Snow Information Services
15 Richard Adams, Laurie Houston, and Rodney 
Weiher. 2004.  The Economic Benefit of the BGS 
(British Geological Survey)
16   Roger Tym and Partners. 2003. 
 Borders in Cyberspace: Conflicting 
Public Sector Information Policies and 
Their Economic Impacts
17   Peter Weiss. 2002. 
Economic Framework for 
Meteorological Service Provision  Don Gunasekera. 2002.  Economic Value of Current and 
Improved Weather Forecasts in the 
U.S. Household Sector18   Jeffrey Lazo and Lauraine Chestnut. 2002.                                                                                                                                                   10 Found at http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/ict/policy/doc/2006-11-20-flossimpact.pdf 
11 Found at http://www.epsiplus.net/reports/mepsir_
measuring_european_public
_sector_resources_report 
12 Found at http://www.mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/pande/ecn/ns/e/ns-e.pdf 
13 Found at 
http://tidesandcurrents.noaa.gov/
publications/Estimated_Economic_Benefits_from_NOAA_PORTS_report.pdf.
 14 Found at http://www.nopp.org/nopp/pr
oject-reports/repor
ts/04powell.pdf. 
15 Found at http://www.economics.noaa.gov/bib
liography/econ-value-s
now-final-report.doc 
16 Found at http://www.bgs.ac.uk/downloads/start.cfm?id=380 
17 Found at http://www.epsiplus.ne
t/reports/borders_in_cyberspace 
18 Exec. summary: http://ftp.wmo.int/pages//prog/amp/pwsp/docum
ents/JeffLazo_Household_Value_Study_ExecSumm.pdf
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
64Study Title Author(s) and year Canadian Geospatial Data Policy Study19  Garry Sears. 2001.   Environmental Data (various studies) 
 U.S. National Academy of Sciences. 2001. 
Prosperity Effects of Different Pricing 
Models for PSI  Dutch Ministry of the Interior. 2001. Economic Effects of Open Access 
Policies for Spatial Data 
 Dutch Federal Geographic Data Committee. 
2000.  Economic Framework for the 
Provision of Meteorological Services 
 John Zillman and John Freebairn. 2000. 
Commercial Exploitation of Europe™s 
Public Sector Information
20  Pira International Ltd., Univ
ersity of East Anglia, and KnowledgeView Ltd. 2000. The Economic Contribution of 
Ordnance Survey GB [Great Britain]21  OXERA, Oxford Economic Research Associates 
Ltd. 1999. The Dissemination of Spatial Data: A 
North American-European 
Comparative Study on the Impact of 
Government Information Policy 
Xavier Lopez. 1998.   Table 2 provides an overview of the data collection and measurement techniques 
used in these studies.                                                  19 Executive  summary: 
http://www.geoc
onnections.org/programsCo
mmittees/proCom_policy/ke
yDocs/KPMG/KPMG_E.pdf 
20 Exec. summary: http://www.ekt.g
r/cordis/news/eu/2001/01-01-19econtent/econtent_study2.pdf 
21 Found at http://www.ordnan
cesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite/aboutus
/reports/oxera/oxera.pdf 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEASURING THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC COSTS OF PSI ONLINE 
65 TABLE 2 Data Collection and Measurement 
Techniques Used in Assessments of PSI Activities 
 Data Sources  Data Collection 
Methods Techniques   Methodological Approaches Primary sources
:  Industry, government,  
end users  Secondary sources:  Mainly government data 
(e.g., GDP, household income, 
employment, 
payroll, and exports) and industry reports Desk research  Web survey   Online questionnaires  Interviews  
 Review of relevant documents, literature 
and international trends In-depth case studies  
 Focus groups  Delphi technique or expert opinion Estimate of overall PSI 
market size based on 
estimates of respondents 
 Estimate of overall PSI 
market size based on 
turnover  Self-reporting 
 International 
comparisons 
  Social surplus approach 
(difference between the willingness to pay for 
PSI minus the cost of 
supplying it)   Application of Bayesian decision theory   Projection, scenario analysis, expert opinion, and team consensus 
approaches   General equilibrium 
model Market based 
approaches  Normative or 
prescriptive decision-making 
models  Descriptive behavioral response methods 
 Contingent valuation method  Conjoint analysis  Economy-wide 
analysis  It should be noted that most of these studies did not explain in detail why a certain technique or approach was used. Collectivel
y, the conclusion was that the economic and 
equity arguments concerning access to a
nd reuse of PSI are complex and deserve 

considerably more analysis and policy atten
tion. Thus specific estimates should be looked 
at with caution. Fourth, in extending this critique to identify ongoing challenges in measuring PSI in the 
online environment, current methodological 
approaches have several weakness. The scope of these studies is limited, for exampl
e, and more country, regional, and global 
scale studies, as well as more comparative anal
yses at the country and regional levels, are The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
66needed. There are also few longitudinal stud
ies, which are needed in order to make 
comparisons across countries or over time. Fu
rthermore, the existing studies have often 
used top-down approaches to determine th
e values of PSI products, overestimating the 
true value of PSI to the economy by ignoring th
e substitutes available in the absence of PSI. In effect, this methodology can only demons
trate the ﬁvalue that can be linked with 
PSIﬂ rather than the value of PSI itself (Office of Fair Trading, United Kingdom, 2006  at
 http://www.oft.gov.uk/shared_oft/reports/consumer_protection/oft861.pdf).
  Further academic and empirical research is
 needed to supply what is lacking in these existing studiesŠin particular, a multidisciplinary or multidimensional approach 
and a focus on individual reuse of PSI. Future studies should also work on improving 
reliability by addressing the lack of strong theoretical foundations and robust data 

collection. For example, the longstanding difficult
y of securing the quality data needed to separate PSI-dependent sectors from the 
rest of the information economy (e.g., in 
national accounts and industrial or product classifications) remains a problem, 
complicated even more by the heterogeneity 
of PSI. Consequently, the economic value of 
PSI is hard to measure via shares of GDP, as
 substitutes for PSI-derived products lead to 
an overestimation of such contributions. 
Fifth, in suggesting future directions, one worthy goal could be to develop a manual for data collection a
nd analysis of PSI policies. This manual could involve 
statisticians (e.g., EUROSTAT), national accountants (e.g., from the government finance 
ministries), and other PSI experts. A si
milar model was used successfully in 1999 by 
OECD in cooperation with EUROSTAT to produce a manual on data collection and 
analysis in the environmenta
l goods and services industry.  Other possible goals include creating a digital repository of PSI-related content 
and promoting and facilitating academic-focused research that is informed by well-
established theories and methodologies. Invol
ving young scholars and scientists in this process is essential. Such research also needs to pay special attention to more individual uses of PSI.  Finally, the authors proposed several questions as essential for ongoing discussion: 1. What are the commonalities and differe
nces among the various analytical 
methods identified and presented? 
2. What are the most effective metrics or i
ndicators for the assessment of particular 
kinds of information and policies? What 
approaches and metric
s or indicators can be used to effectively measure the netw
ork effects of the use of PSI online? 
3. What are the main strengths and weakne
sses of these approaches, including such factors as their accuracy, co
mprehensiveness, relevance,
 validity, and reliability? 
4. What still needs to be learned about applying these methods to the evaluation of 
public information policies in the online environment? 
5. What theoretical frameworks, models, and 
best practices used in assessing other information products or services can be a
pplied to the assessme
nt of the policies of access to and reuse of digital PSI? 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MEASURING THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC COSTS OF PSI ONLINE 
676. What future directions might be pursued for the better study and measurement of 
access to and reuse of PSI online? 
7. What other questions or issues should be raised in this context? 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 6915. Summary of the First Breakout Session 
Juan Carlos de Martin, Rapporteur 
 The discussion in this breakout session focused on three main questions: 
1. What are the main strengths and wea
knesses of the methodologies used so 
far? 
2. Are there theoretical frameworks emerging th
at could be useful to assess the    management of PSI? 
3. What are some new directions
 that could be taken?  
To begin with the main strengths an
d weaknesses of existing methodologies, it 
was noted that no methodology seems clearly su
perior, or general enough to be singled out as superior. More research and testing of various met
hodologies is needed. It may 
turn out that PSI is such a diverse field that there is no single assessment methodology 
that will be relevant to all PSI categories 
and contexts and that instead a variety of methodologies may be needed, depending on th
e type, size, and importance of PSI.  
What are the theoretical frameworks? Fort
unately, PSI does not start in a vacuum 
because there are a number of 
related subjects that could 
be drawn from, such as open-
access models in scientific publishing. An in
teresting body of research and data already 
exists on this topic, as described in Professor Houghton™s presentation as well as in various reports by experts and research funding agencies across the globe. This is a topic that is very similar to PSI a
nd, indeed, could be viewed as a subset of PSI. In looking for 
theoretical frameworks to use with PSI,
 one can examine this and other related 
methodologies to see if there are useful le
ssons that can be learned and applied.  A related topic that emerged in the 
breakout session is open source and free software. This is a well-established subject ar
ea, and there are very interesting assessment 
reports, such as the one funded by the European Commission on the assessment of free 

software, from which one might draw some insi
ghts that can be used in the assessment of 
PSI effects. Finally, some specific areas of PSI, such as meteorological data and geographic 
information, already have a body of assessmen
t experience, and we can look at the way 
that those sectors have been assessed to see 
if the approaches can be generalized, at least to some extent, for other types of public sector information.  
Several participants brought up the role of the public sector, which had already been touched upon earlier. What is the role of 
public sector, and what kind of information 
should the public sector produce or not produce? Should its role, for example, include value-added services? This may be too comp
lex a question to hope for an answer that will apply equally to all countries. 
Even if one considers just the countries in the European Union, many of them 
differ in their approaches to this subject. This variety of approaches may hold a richness 

that can be taken advantage of, with different best practices emerging in different 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
70countries. After a few years of studying this heterogeneous way of approaching these problems, we may be able to understand mo
re about such fundamental questions.  
The third question concerned the identifica
tion of practical actions that could be taken. The overview presentation that started the breakout session made three specific 
suggestions: an OECD public sector information manual,
 an online repository of assessment methods, and the identification of so
me areas of further 
academic research.  
The idea for an OECD PSI manual was inspired by a 1999 OECD publication, 
The Environmental Goods & Services IndustryŠManual for Data Collection and Analysis. Such a manual could be used to assess the implementation of the upcoming 
OECD PSI principles. One question that was raised in the discussion concerned the audience for this manual: Who is it for? There 
are the practitioners, of course, the experts such as those at this workshop, and even if only the practitioners we
re interested in the manual, the effort of creating it would proba
bly be worthwhile nonetheless. Fortunately, the audience will probably be larger than that. The PSI producer and reuser community 

also could be interested, and the "accountants"Šmeaning whoever in the public sector 
will have to try to quantify the impact of 
PSI reuseŠwould be part of the audience as 
well. Another question was: What should be the functions of a manual like that? There 
are at least three main functions. First, there s
hould be an effort to clarify the extent and kinds of public sector information that are avai
lable. Of course, some of this information 
is already available in reports and research
 papers. Nevertheless, a shared, consensus taxonomy of public sector information would 
be worthwhile content to include in a manual like this. Second, it would be useful
 to have a collection of compatible 
assessment practices. The assessment practices
 in use today across Europe are widely different, and a manual like this could offer 
guidelines for performing certain evaluation 
processes in a more homogeneous way. The thir
d function of a manual of this sort would 
be to involve more bodies th
an is the case today, including national or supranational statistical bodies.  Another point that participants in this breakout session discussed was: Who are 
the stakeholders for a manual like this, and how could the OECD involve them? During 

the course of the discussion a very preliminary list of potential stakeholders was compiled. These included not only the PSI holde
rs and those organizations at the center of the discussion in this workshop but also non-governmental organizations or 
associations that need public sector information for their activiti
es. Another group would be libraries interested in public sector information along with
 scientific, technical, and medical publishers. Other sectors and communities, such as the health, meteorological, 

and geographical information sectors, are important for at least two reasons. First, they 
already have considerable experience in evaluation methods, and, second, in some cases 
there is no unified approach to PSI, so focusing on the sectoral bodies is the only way to address such relevant communities.  
The second main point of discussion on th
e third question concerned a possible PSI repository. ﬁRepositoryﬂ is now a fashionable concept because of the open-access movement and the development of many open institutional repositories. But why a 

repository? Exactly what kind of reposito
ry? That was the starting point for the 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMAYR OF THE FIRST BREAKOUT SESSION 
71discussion, but the idea of a repository quickly shifted to the concept of an online portal or platform. It was noted fi
rst that a repository
 suggests something rather passive. Of 
course, this does not necessarily imply some
thing negative, as a repository contains information that is a crucial building block 
for other activities. The breakout group spent some time discussing the simple case of
 a passive repository and what kind of information might go into that. The information need not be limited to just research 
results concerning assessments of PSI, for ex
ample. A collection of best practices would be useful because they are relevant for governments; other releva
nt information might 
include users™ case studies and principles. But perhaps the user community may want 

something less passive and more
 proactiveŠa platform that encourages the creation of 
content. This might include a wiki, a di
scussion forum, a mailing list, and so on.  
A potential starting point described earlier in this workshop is the existing ePSIplus Web site and repository. Although it is a wonderful repository, it is, by design EU-specific. Furthermore, there is some que
stion of the long-term existence of this 
repository because it is linked to a project 
with a three-year duration. Just as paper 
information can be preserved for centuries, 
any repository would need to be designed 
with information preservation ensured over the long term.  
 
More generally, there is an issue of language that is important for some countries 
and less so for others but which needs to be 
considered if one is designing a platform 
with a global reach. There also is the question of involving specific established communities, such as the geographic information community, in a general purpose PSI 

portal.  Session participants emphasized the valu
e of such a repository for developing countries. Such a repository could serve as a t
ool to help PSI managers and policy makers 
in less economically developed countries unde
rstand the value of PSI and learn about current practices in its management and us
e. Many experts on PSI in the developing world would appreciate having such an online resource. The final major area of discussion concerned academic research. In the overview 
presentation at the beginning of the breakout session, there was a list of specific topics that academic research might address, incl
uding individual users of PSI and the social effects; network effects and network externalities, both positive and negative; the role of automated knowledge extraction and 
reuse; pilot projects to test different approaches; and promoting the involvement of young scientists.  
In addition to this core list of potential topics, there is the question of how to encourage this type of research. If research funding agencies and foundations were to include PSI assessment within their research topics, this could be an effective way of 

encouraging research in this arena. Anothe
r approach would be to hold open workshops and conferences, bringing together people from diffe
rent disciplines in the traditional 
academic way but focused on this new challengi
ng topic. An online journal could also be 
useful. Since this is a relatively new, multidis
ciplinary topic, articles about it are spread 
across many different journals. One could do a f
easibility study to see if there is a case 
for a specific PSI journal. And finally, awards or scholarships for thes
es and dissertations in this area could be a way to involve young scholars and scientists in this new and The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
72difficult research topic. Perhaps the manual 
itself could be undertaken as an academic 
initiative and involve young scholars and scientists in its planning and development.  
  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 73   16. Summary of the Second Breakout Session 
 Tilman Merz, Rapporteur 
 This group had a very creative and spirited discussion, but it was not exactly structured according to the questions given in the outline. 
To begin with, there was some discussion about 
questionnaires and how they could be designed to make sure that th
ey are comparable. In the past, 
the OECD has issued model questionnaires, whic
h could also be an option for the future.  A number of comments centered on the value ch
ains of public sector information use and 
reuse. To understand where value is created and where the obstacles a
nd costs lie, we need to have a clear understanding of the different value chains, and throughout the discussion, ideas for further studies came up.  After the OECD policy principles are issued 
at the OECD Ministerial Conference in June 
2008, there will be reviews of the principles and whether they are being applied. The OECD also 
will address the issue of whether its members ar
e addressing the right questions about PSI and 
access to PSI. These topics formed the broad subject matter of the discussion.  
Some participants said that policy makers n
eed hard facts for making informed decisions. 
They need to be able to compare data and me
thodologies across countries and possibly also focus research on top PSI sectors, but there is a difficulty in that the PSI sectors deemed most important 
may differ from country to country.  
It was suggested that comparisons be made 
between country-sector combinations, perhaps 
starting with those sectors that are most often cited, such as
 meteorological and geospatial 
information. In doing so, different political and in
stitutional contexts will ha
ve to be taken into account. The idea was raised of using different regions within the same c
ountry to conduct studies because quite often this will provide institutional contexts that are more similar. Even this may not 
always work, however. In Eastern Europe, for example, there are frequently differences in how PSI 
policy works between the capital and the more rural areas.  
The OECD PSI principles that are forthcomi
ng will seek to promote broad dissemination of 
PSI at the lowest cost possible. It will be important in the 
future to review not only the implementation of these principles but also the 
costs that public sector bodies may accrue from 
applying these principles and also any obstacles that arise when attempting to apply them.  
Another area of discussion was how to define PSI products. Definitions are needed in order 
to better structure studies and also to compar
e studies. There also needs to be a consensus on exactly what PSI products are. Some discussants 
noted it might be better to take a functional 
approach than to take an approach based on defining PSI products. This is an area, therefore, where further research may be justified.  
The breakout group discussed the online repository of PSI-related information at some 
length. Such a repository could contain surveys or questionnaires and their results (including those of the OECD), contacts for further research, best practices in PSI policy, licenses available for PSI in different countries, and even a listing of different types of PSI. The repository would need to be well organized and structured. The ePSIplus Network collects a great deal of information on PSI, and it 
is already connected to 
many other studies. Thus 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74                                                                   SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTRS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS 
the repository could build on this model. Many of the participants thought that
 it could be valuable to share more information and approaches
 to measuring impacts of PSI policy.  
Another topic of discussion was data collection. One obstacle to data collection is that countries have different national accounting practices, which ma
kes analysis of PSI market development very difficult. Some kind of international cooperation therefore might be needed in 
this area. While at a national level, PSI sector
s and PSI products may be isolated, international 
industry and product classifications usually do not allow such separation and generally lump 
several different content or service industries together with PSI-based ones. The difficulties of obtaining data on the use and reuse of PSI (or PSI market development 
more generally) were discussed as well. The academics and sometimes even the private-sector 

bodies that conduct surveys on PSI use generally do not have the authority to demand the 
submission of data. For example, the OFT indicated th
at it is sometimes in a 
better position to elicit 
responses from government bodies. Th
erefore, it may be useful to involve government competition 

bodies in this process, because in certain cases they may have better access to data.  
The need for a theoretical model of expected
 benefits was highlighted as well. The e-government economic programs were mentioned as one potentially useful example. There may be 

some parallels between them and PSI use in terms 
of the theoretical model 
of expected benefits; PSI research may thus benefit from examining these models. 
Another area of discussion was how best to learn about the issues that users and reusers of 
PSI are facing. Participants raised a number of
 ideas, including suggestions for data collection methods, such as how to get in touch with us
ers and reusers and how to group respondents. One suggested approach is to announce new PSI research that is relevant for reusers so that reusing businesses could be identified. Publicly funded libraries can be used for disseminating PSI to 
citizens and for research on the users and reusers of such informa
tion. Publicly funded libraries are often used as a cost-effective way for disseminati
ng government data, especially in North America 
and Scandinavia.  The mapping of the value chain of PSI cam
e up a number of times. The suggestion was 
made that the value chain could be modeled in te
rms of activities or busin
ess processes, attaching 
costs to the value chain. The underlying idea is to make studies more comparable by linking them 
to value chains.  Participants also suggested a number of id
eas for further studies on PSI, including the transition costs of switching PSI policy regimes 
(e.g., the cost-benefit analysis of moving away 
from the U.K. trading fund model that was intr
oduced in the 1980s), the substitution of PSI by private-sector-generated data, examining licensing cost
s in different areas of PSI, and the extent of network externalities of online PSI.  Finally, participants thought it mi
ght be interesting to look at other subject areas in order to learn from comparable situations. For instance,
 one might examine value generation from free 
online access in terms of the parallels it has with the economic impacts of the liberalization of 

telecoms. 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 75PART FOUR 17. General Discussion of Results from the Breakout Sessions and Possible Next Steps   Paul F. Uhlir, Rapporteur  The two sessions resulted in quite simila
r conclusions, although there were also a few differences. Some of the participants in
 Session A were not fully convinced that a repository of PSI research and methods is ju
stified at this point, for instance, whereas 
those in Session B discussed what the contents of such a repository should be. The Session A group identified more funding sour
ces for academic research than just the 
European Commission.  
The participants in Session B highlighted the fact that PSI research has failed to 
map the value chain. This is an interesting point and is something that the OECD 
Working Party on Information Economy has exam
ined in a number of areas in digital 
content.  One issue that came up less than might have been expected was the international 
dimension of PSI and related data collection. International harmoniza
tion or international cooperation are issue areas that academic re
search might be able to address.  
When discussing research, one should not consider only academic research 
because there are other kinds of research commissioned by governments. There can be 

competitive studies that governments launch 
in this area, and governments are doing 
internal studies as well. Fo
r instance, general accounting offices or PSI offices could study the procedures and the organization of the administration of PSI.  
Many governments are doing research
 on PSI, and governments are very 
important for academic research. The questi
on is: Where should the funding for academic 
research studies come from, and who will commission them?  
One of the great benefits of creating 
an open digital repository of PSI-related 
content would be its value for developing countries in which little or even no discussion, implementation, or experience exists in the ar
ea of PSI. Such a repository could become a 
credible resource for these countries to use, and it would provide them the opportunity to 
learn from the experiences of other countries
, thus saving the time and effort needed to 
initiate such research from the beginning.  Another point about repositories is that it is importan
t not to replicate what is already there. The European Commission and the ePSI
plus project already have many 
resources online. A repository could link to 
those resources and fill in the gaps without 
replicating them.  
The participants in Session A also discussed an online journal in connection with the repository. These two activit
ies could be quite helpful and related. A repository is a place to make available materials such as 
questionnaires, results, or benchmarking of 

publicly funded PSI studies. It can be more difficult to in
clude results of academic 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS      
 76research, however, because research published in proprietary subscription journals may 
be prohibited from being deposited in public
ly accessible repositories. Any repository is 
compromised if research that needs to be disseminated quickly and broadly cannot be 
disseminated openly.  
It is not desirable to disseminate research li
nked to PSI in a journal that is expensive to 
readers or that takes a long time from when
 an article is submitted to the time it is 
published. These considerations were taken in
to account when the International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure Research was 
launched. It is an online journal published by the European Commission that is
 free and is available at 
http://ijsdir.jrc.ec.europa.eu.  It uses the Creative Commons licensing so th
at authors retain their full rights, and 
it is listed in the directory of
 open access journals, which adds to its visibility. As soon as 
an author submits an article, it is publishe
d on the web in a review session. This means 
that one™s research is disseminated immedi
ately, even before it goes through the peer-review process. Therefore, if an author 
is looking for an online academic outlet to 
disseminate research in this area, the Internat
ional Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure 
Research is a potential vehicle, and it is 
one way in which the European Commission is 
supporting this type of activity. An online PSI journal could emulate this model.  
One issue requiring further clarification is
 that there were somewhat different 
ideas between breakout groups A and B about what an online repository is. Group B talked about repositories in the context of exchanging information about surveys and questionnaires. The subject came up in the cont
ext of surveying businesses. To that end, the Office of Fair Trade reported that it 
had very good success with surveying PSI 
holders and businesses who were using PSI information. However, the discussion 
focused more broadly on exchanging informati
on about surveys, what the reasons are for doing this, and what the big questions are that one is trying to address. Only after reaching consensus on those issues would it make sense to try to work out ways to 

develop a common survey questionnaire or to add questions to existing surveys. Group A considered this focus on surveys as just one function within an active 
repository platform. The discus
sion in that group noted that it is important to emphasize 
the main goal here: to maximize and optimize the economic and social values of PSI. The 

repository, the manual, and the research
 are means to supporting that end.  
There are countries that are now applying policies that are not in good agreement 
with the PSI principles being developed by the OECD. Principles ar
e fine, but they may 
be forgotten or ignored even before they are adopted. They will be useless if they are not taken one step further.  In order to maximize the economic and 
social values of any PSI repository, representatives of the member states or of the organizati
ons involved will need to be consulted by repository managers on how to
 mobilize all stakehol
der communities. The 
autonomy that these representatives have in
 deciding their agenda may be limited. Then 
the repository managers will need to contact 
businesses, which are crucial in changing 
mindsets and which may also be able to 
do part of the work. Success will not happen overnight, but these repositories are the place
s in which information may be put together 
and good practices shared.  The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GENERAL DISCUSSION 
77Furthermore, a repository may be the be
st way to support the micro-entity, the 
individual, or the very small business. Must 
they go through a steep learning curve, or is it possible to find ways to help them move 
forward quickly? It is possible that many who 
have tried to reuse PSI for business or otherwise have found that it is not so easy and have become disenchanted. In such cases the opportunities are lost, so it is important to 
give reusers of PSI some help.  
Enhancing the functionality of an online repository is another possible goal. The 
idea here would be to create an open knowledge environment in which one could take the 

OECD principles and organize an interactive discussion relating to each principle about 
how best to promote it, how to measure it, a
nd what body of work exists that is relevant to it. It would then be possible to create a community around the discussion of those 

principles in order to diffuse and impl
ement them, whether that discussion goes on 
among practitioners within the government, th
e various interest groups in the user 
community, academics, or others. Such 
ongoing discussions would help solve the problem of the principles being forgotten or ignored because in these discussions the 

principles become living recommendations 
or organizing principles around which the body of knowledge is created. Of course, just talking about the principles frustrates the people at the demand-supply interface even furt
her because they view that as theoretical 
rather than action oriented.  
Yet another way to look at the issue is to think of a repository as a means of 
supporting policy makers. For example, the ePSI
plus project has a number of objectives 
related to policy implementation.  
The question then arises: How do you disseminate and implement policies 
through educational practices and professional development to such a huge number of 
people? Legislation alone does not help. Politicians may give speech
es in support of a 
law, they may even ratify it to show that they
 support it, but then they may do absolutely 
nothing afterwards, committing no resources to
 its implementation. It is therefore 

necessary to come in below the polit
ical level to help implement it.  
The European Union provides an example 
of having a lawŠthe PSI Directive that 
the region is trying to implementŠthat is
 not coming along as expected. There is a 
framework defined in a directiv
e, so why is that not working as well as it is intended? 
What is the real issue? One can promote the 
directive or the policies, but there is still 

inertia to overcome.  
One of the issues that came up in the 
Group A discussions is how politicians can be convinced to put resources into these activities, bearing in mind th
at the politicians are only there for a short interval of time and th
ey are looking for votes. If there are no votes in this, why should politicians decide to put anything into it? One way to convince them 
is to use multifaceted information channels. Promotion of online discussions on a 

repository in various forms may be a way to 
increase political interest in the topic.  
One workshop participant thought that there is a great deal of frustration about the 
pace of change of PSI policy and practice in Eu
rope. This frustration is what triggers the 
interest in alternative data sets in the privat
e sector. Like any market
, if access to data is 
blocked it encourages the creation of new i
ndustries and services to circumvent that blockage. This then raises an interes
ting economic question: Is the pre-existing 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.                                               SOCIOECONOMIC EFFECTS OF PSI ON DIGITAL NETWORKS      
 78information asset in the public sector slowly
 degrading in value? In some cases the 
substitute private-sector data sets are 
now being used by the public sector, and the government is not even using its own data.  
Another workshop participant, however, expressed the view that the situation is not as bad in the EU as the previous participant suggested. Much has occurred in various 
parts of Europe in recent years. For example, Slovenia, 
which 20 years ago was under a very different regime, today has a commissi
oner for information who is looking into 
public information policy issues, such as data
 protection, access to information, and reuse of information. Many things are happening 
in various EU member states, and even 
though much more ought to happen, it is not accu
rate to give the impression that the 
situation with regard to PSI policy and practice is not improving.  
To take another example, just recently Sweden adopted new PSI legislation, 
which would not have happened before the EU directive. Indeed, there are several 
exclusive deals in other countries between government entities
 and the private sector for providing PSI-related services. How can the 
PSI practitioners and policy makers in 
Europe build on these developments? Or, to 
frame the question differently, how can they 
build on the successes so that 
they may get much more econo
mic and social value from 
PSI based on evidence 
and solid policies?  
This is one reason why it is important
 to focus on what would happen if the government were to withdraw th
e public sector information that is now competing with 
the private sector information. Does one look at what extra benefits the PSI adds, or does one look at what the remainder is if you 
take it away? A good argument to put to 
politicians is to say, ﬁThese are the sort of things that 
would happen, and these are the sort of costs if you did not have the PSI in question.ﬂ One can take that a step further and point out to the public sector organizations that are not making their data
 available or not making them available at the right price or 
form that in the long term they are cutting 
their own throats because in many cases the 
private sector will 
find other ways to competeŠnot always as good, but in some cases 
better. So public sector bodies ought to take a longer-term view. Give
n that the technology may 
have moved on and many of 
other factors may have changed from when they
 were first set up to do PSI activities that 
were considered public tasks at the time, is it still necessary for them to be engaged in 

these activities? Or would it be better if thos
e functions were left to the private sector, 
either as some sort of universal 
service obligation or otherwise?  
The classic example is the mapping of remote areas, a task in which the private 
sector has traditionally had little interest. Th
is may be handled in two ways. Either the 
government can be tasked with doing th
e mapping, funded by the taxpayer, or the 
mapping can be privatized, but either way ther
e has to be a universal service obligation. 
The private-sector entity would not normally be
 attracted to performing this type of task 
without a government contract.  
With regard to the role of the private 
sector in PSI activities in Europe, it is 
difficult to prove the value of something th
at does not yet fully exist. One industry association based in the United Kingdom has been collec
ting case studies from its 
members. They tend to be quite small scale,
 but in some cases a big business has been 
built on PSI licensing terms that would no l
onger be permitted in the United Kingdom 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GENERAL DISCUSSION 
79and in the European Union more generally. To 
look at the value of such activities and to 
analyze the benefits of the product being offered is an expensive and complex task. To 
get such case studies, an investment must be
 made, and there is not yet a large number of 
them to show to policy-makers.  
On the broader question of what the mark
et is going to do, at least some sectors 
within PSI should be quite dynamic. Already th
ere is very substantial user demand which 
is expected to grow as devices get more mobile. For instance, as people demand more 
information of all types, starting with ge
ospatial and weather data, there will be 

substantial growth, which is why some of the 
giants in the information sector are entering 
those markets. The market will bring thes
e PSI-based products and services into the mainstream. The link to user-generated c
ontent is yet another factor. The OECD principles and related policy activities regardin
g PSI need to be communicated as well as possible to these stakeholders.  
Another consideration in the three areas 
of follow-up activities that have been identified hereŠthe manual, the repository, 
and academic or other kinds of researchŠis 
how to promote or contribute to these activities and who the important stakeholders are that should be contacted. One suggestion was that the online repository or platform could 
include a network of import
ant contacts. Perhaps ePSI
plus is better placed than OECD to 
do this in Europe in the near term. Before the ePSI
plus project is completed, the 
European Commission may be willing to 
issue a solicitation for the funding of a repository at some European research instit
ution that would also include information 
from outside Europe. The ePSI
plus repository could be added into this new repository, 
thus preserving the data, providing a start-up base, and avoiding wasteful duplication of effort. To be comprehensive and global, this
 new repository may require an interlinked 
network of Web sites.  The EU Committee on Consumer and Compe
tition Policy is another group that could provide an appropriate forum. There is 
a genuine need to get more research done in 
this area and to convince the academics and others doing research that this is an 

interesting topic to pursue. There are many issues hereŠsocietal, information processing, 
government structures, and othersŠthat need
 to be examined. It would be good to 

encourage more research, especially by young people.  A recognition or an award scheme could 
be useful in this regard. There are awards given in the area of e-government in Europe and elsewhere in the world already. 
Perhaps one with several categories could be established in this area to encourage people 
to do research on PSI. Many researchers have been working hard and getting good results, but they have not received much recognition for their efforts.  
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  81Appendixes    
 
 
 
 
 
 The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   83 APPENDIX A Meeting Agenda The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: 
Toward a Better Understanding of 
Different Access and Reuse Policies  Organized by: 
U.S. National Committee for CODATA 
Board on International Scient
ific Organizations, U.S. Na
tional Academy of Sciences 
in collaboration with the Organisation for Economic Co
-operation and Development
  Place: OECD Headquarters Conference Centre Room 13 2 rue André-Pascal, Paris 75016, France 
Dates: 4-5 February 2008  Agenda Day one:       9:00  Registration 
  Session One: Introduction and opening presentations
  
Chair: Daniela Battisti, Agency for Inward Investments and Business Development, Italy, 

Chair WPIE  10:00 Welcoming remarks and introductions 

 Graham Vickery, 

OECD 
 10:20  Workshop objectives and structure Paul Uhlir, United States National 
Academies 

 10:30 The social and economic goals and  
values of PSI online: EU government perspective  
 Jim Wretham, OPSI, 

United Kingdom  
10:50 The social and economic goals and values of PSI online: 
U.S. government perspective 

 Nancy Weiss, Institute 

of Museum and 

Library Services, The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.       
  APPENDIXES 
84United States 
 11:10 The value to industry of
 PSI: The business sector perspective Dr. Martin Fornefeld 
MICUS Management 

Consulting, Germany 

 11:30 Achieving fair and open
 access to PSI for maximum 
returns 

 Michael Nicholson, 
PSI Alliance, 

United Kingdom 
11:50 Open Discussion Moderator: 
Javier Hernandez-Ros, EC  

12:15 Lunch         Session Two: Different approaches for evaluating th
e direct and indirect economic and non-economic benefits and costs of PSI access and reuse policies in the online 

environment 

 
Chair: Antti Eskola, Ministry of Employment and the Economy, Finland 
   13:50 Public Sector Information: Why bother? 
Measuring European Public Sector Information 

Resources  
 Robbin te Velde, Dialogic, 
Netherlands 14:10 Measuring the Economic Impact of the PSI 
Directive in the Context of the 2008 Review   Chris Corbin, ePSIplus, United Kingdom  
14:30 Different PSI Access Policies and their Impact 
 Frederika Welle Donker, Delft University of 
Technology, Netherlands   14:50 The Price of Everything but the Value of 
Nothing  Antoinette Graves, OFT, United Kingdom  

 15:10 Enhancing Access to Government Information: 
Economic Theory as It Applies to Statistics 

Canada 
 Kirsti Nilsen, University of 

Western Ontario, Canada  15:30 Assessing the Impact of Public Sector 
Geographic Information 
Max Craglia, Institute for 
Environment and 

Sustainability, JRC, Italy 
 15:50  Coffee break  16:40 Assessing the Economic and Social
 Effects of Rodney F. Weiher 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16:40 Assessing the Economic and Social Effects of 
NOAA Data Online  Rodney F. Weiher 
NOAA Chief Economist, 

United States 

 17:00 Exploring the Impacts 
of Enhanced Access to Publicly Funded Research 
 John Houghton, Victoria 
University, Australia 17:20  General discussion 
  Day two: Morning
   Session Three: Measuring the economic and social costs and benefits of the PSI: 
Evaluation of the existing approaches and suggestions for future work 

Parallel sessions (a) and (b) 
 Presenters: Paul F. Uhlir and Raed Sharif 
Rapporteurs: Juan Carlos De Martin and Tilman Merz 
 To facilitate discussion and to 
advance the analytical agenda, the workshop will be divided 
into two parallel sessions, with government re
presentatives and PSI supply-side experts in group (a) and industry representatives and users in group (b). 9:00-
12:15  Each session will comprise:  

* An overview on different approaches for evaluating the direct and indirect economic and social benefits and costs of access and reuse policies for PSI in 

the online environment. This will draw
 on the published literature, the OECD 
study and on recent analytical work.  

* A 90-minute panel discussion addr
essing questions including:  1- What are the commonalities and di
fferences among the analytical 
methods presented in session 2?  
2- What are their main strengths and weaknesses, e.g. their accuracy, 

comprehensiveness, relevance,
 validity and reliability?  
3- What are the most effective metrics/
indicators to assess particular kinds of information/policies? Are there 
approaches and metrics/indicators 

that effectively measure the network 
effects of the use of PSI online?  
4- What still needs to be known about the application of these methods to 
the evaluation of public information po
licies in the online environment?  
5- What theoretical frameworks, models 
and best practices in other areas can be applied to assess different policies of access to and reuse of 
digital PSI? 6- What are some future directions 
and recommendations for the better 
study and measurement of access to and reuse of PSI online? 
 Following the break, the main points from the panel discussions will be 

summarized by the rapporteurs (Juan Carlos de Martin and Tilman 
Merz), followed by discussion. This
 will be designed to identify 
activities that could enhance understanding of the economic value and 
effects of different approaches to 
access to and reuse of online digital PSI. The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.       
  APPENDIXES 
869:00-9:10 Session chair introduction  (a) Eivind Lorentzen, Ministry of Trade and Industry, 
Norway (b) Jean-Jacques Sahel, Direct
or, Government and Regulatory 
Affairs, Skype-Europe   9:10-9:30 Presentation  
9:30-11:00 Panel discussion   
11:00-11:20 Coffee break  
11:20-12:15 General discussion and proposals for future work    12:15-13:45 Lunch   
 Session Four: Plenary discussion: Wrap-up, conclusions and future work
 Chair: Daniela Battisti 13:50-14:10 Rapporteur presentation Session three (a) 
Juan Carlos de Martin, Turin Polytechnic, Italy 14:10-14:30 Rapporteur presentation Session three (b) 
Tilman Merz, consultant 
14:30-15:50 Discussion: What do we know and what next?  15:50-16:00 Concluding remarks  Graham Vickery, OECD 
  Paul Uhlir, United States 
The National Academies 
 End of meeting    
 
   The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   87 APPENDIX B Biographical Summaries of Workshop Chairs,  Presenters, and Rapporteurs  Daniela G. Battisti (Ph.D., 1994) is a director of the Inwa
rd Investments Unit within the National 
Agency for Inward Investments and Business 
Development. Since 2004, when she joined the 
agency, she has successfully launched new projects
 and managed complex horizontal projects that 
involve different layers (central and local) of the public administration. Between 2001 and 2004 
she was Coordinator of the Research and Study and member of the Board of Technical Advisors in 
the cabinet of the Minister for Innovation and Technologies. In 1999 she joined the Italian Presidency of the Council of Ministers. Before that she was involved in numerous R&D projects in 
the field of ICT. She is chair of the WPIE (W
orking Party on the Information Economy). She is 
also a member of the Global Adviso
ry Board for the London Business School.  Christopher E.H. Corbin is currently an analyst with
in the European Union eContentplus funded ePSIplus Thematic Network, where he has several respons
ibilities, including: the thematic area of the impact of the EU Directive on public sector in
formation with respect to financial charges made 

by public sector information hol
ders, coordinating Member Stat
e national meetings, providing 
regular news content to the ePSI
plus Web site, and maintaining the ePSI
plus
 scorecard which ranks EU member states™ implemen
tation of the directive.   
Juan Carlos De Martin is currently serving as associate pr
ofessor of information engineering at 
the Politecnico di Torino, Italy. Dr. De Martin
's research activities are focused on multimedia 
processing and transmission. He spent two years (
1993-1995) as visiting scholar at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and two years (1996-1998) in Dallas as a me
mber of the technical staff at Texas Instruments as well as an adjunc
t professor at the University of Texas (1999). Between 1998 and 2005 he served as a principal researcher at the National Research Council (CNR) of Italy in Torino, where he led the multimedia communications research group. Dr. De 

Martin is also active in exploring the interaction between digital technologies and society. In this regard, in 2006 he founded the NEXA Center for Internet and Society of the Politecnico di Torino; he is also the coordinator of COMMUNIA, the 
European thematic network on the digital public 
domain funded by the European Commission (2007-2010)
. He is the author or co-author of more 
than ninety international scientific publications as
 well as an expert evalua
tor of research programs 
for, among others, the Italian Mi
nistry of Industry. Dr. De Martin is a member of IEEE. 

 
Antti Eskola
 is currently serving as a commercial couns
elor at the Innovation Department of the 
Finnish Ministry of Employment and the Econom
y. His responsibilities include information-
society-related innovation policy issues, including the promotion 
of commercial reuse of public sector information. Mr. Eskola has been active 
in the OECD Working Party on the Information 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.       
  APPENDIXES 
88Economy drafting work on the Recommendation of
 the OECD Council for enhanced access and more effective use of public sector information. 
 
Martin Fornefeld is the chief executive officer of 
MICUS Management Consulting at its 
Düsseldorf, Germany, location. After his three-year
 assistant position at the Technical University 
of Clausthal with foreign studies in Berkeley, Ca
lifornia. and Asia, he held a management position 
at Siemens Nixdorf Informations systeme AG. Subse
quently he was director with joint proxy of an international consultancy firm for 
nine years and finally partner of the firm before he established 
MICUS Management Consulting jointly with Jutt
a Lautenschlager in 2000. Dr. Fornefeld is chairman of the IWG-Network, an 
association of companies and or
ganizations created to increase the economic impact of the reuse of PSI in Germa
ny. Dr. Fornefeld™s expertise lies in the areas of strategy consulting, market studie
s, and public-private business models/partnerships, which he 
developed substantially in recent years, particularly in the area 
of public sector information and 
broadband development in Europe. He earned his P
h.D. in engineering from the University of 
Clausthal in Germany. 

 
Antoinette Graves led the U.K. Office of Fair Trading™
s market study on the Commercial Use of 
Public Information, which was released in D
ecember 2006. She participated in the OECD™s Working Party on the Information ecEonomy, pr
esented to the European Commission-funded 

ePSIplus conferences, and continued to take an interest
 in public sector information until she left 
the OFT in December 2008 to take up a post as a 
senior policy advisor at the United Kingdom™s 
Intellectual Property Office. 
 
Javier Hernández-Ros
 is head of the, Access to Information Unit, DG Information Society and 
Media, at the European Commissi
on. Trained as a civil engineer at the Universidad Politécnica in 
Madrid, he has a masters degree in business admi
nistration from the Instituto de Empresa. After 
seven years working for engineering companies in
 Spain, he joined the European Commission in 
1986 and was involved in technology transfer and innovation policies, where he set up the European network of innovation relay centres and the Innovating Regions in Europe network. Since June 2002 he has been head of the Access 
to Information Unit (formerly, Digital Libraries 
and Public Sector Information). He is currently 
coordinating the EU Digital libraries initiative and 
promoting legal initiatives to support the developm
ent of the digital content industry, notably the directive for reuse of public sector information. He
 was also responsible for the e-Content and the Safer Internet programme
s for the period 2002-2005. John Houghton is a professorial fellow at Victoria University's Centre for Strategic Economic 
Studies (CSES) and director of the centre's
 Information Technologies and the Information 
Economy Program. He has had a number of years 
experience in information technology policy, 
more general industry policy, and related economic
 research. He has published and spoken widely on information technology, industry, and science a
nd technology policy issues. His research is at the interface of theory and practice with a strong focus on th
e policy application of economic and 
social theory and of leading-edge research in various relevant fields. Consequently, his contribution 
tends to be in bringing knowledge and research methods to bear on policy issues in an effort to raise the level of policy debate 
and improve policy outcomes. He ha
s co-authored several chapters 
in the past years of the OECD publications 
Information Technology Outlook and Communications Outlook. He also publishes annual updates on the Australian ICT industry sponsored by the The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES 
89Australian Computing Society. In 1998, John wa
s awarded a National Australia Day Council, Australia Day Medal for his contribution to industry policy development. 
Eivind Lorentzen
 works for the Department of Research
 and Innovation, Norwegian Ministry of Trade and Industry. Tilman Merz
 is a German-Canadian management cons
ultant with Roland Berger Strategy Consultants in London. He holds an M.P.A. from the London School of Economics and Political 
Science and an economics degree from the Univer
sity of St. Gallen, Switzerland. Prior to and during his postgraduate studies, Tilman worked for the Latin America division of the German 
Development Bank KfW, the Information Econo
my Group at the OECD (ICCP), focusing on broadband Internet and public sector information 
policy, as well as for the U.K. Department for 
International Development (DFID) on issues 
of legislative strengthening. Tilman™s academic 
interests revolve around developmental and enviro
nmental policy with special emphasis on Latin 
America. In consulting, Tilman focuses on infrastr
ucture, telecoms, the public sector as well as 
corporate restructuring. 
 
Michael J. L. Nicholson, B.Sc. F.R.I.C.S., is chairman of th
e Locus Association (an association of private sector PSI reusers in the United Kingdom) and deputy chairman of the PSI Alliance (the 

equivalent of Locus for the EU). He is founder and chief executive officer of Intelligent Addressing Limited, the company managing the largest and pr
obably most successful of the local government 
integrated address data management projects
 in Europe. His previous business, Property Intelligence PLC, was sold to the Cost
ar Group of Bethesda, Maryland, in 2003.  
Kirsti Nilsen
 is an independent researcher and writer. Until her retirement she was a faculty 
member for a number of years in the Faculty of In
formation and Media Studies
 at the University of 
Western Ontario, and has also taught as an adjunct and visiting professor at other universities in North America and Scandinavia. She is particularly
 interested in the area of information policy, 
focusing on public sector information a
nd trade policy. She is the author of The Impact of Information Policy (Ablex, 2001), and co-author of Constraining Public Libraries: The World 
Trade Organization™s General Agreement on Trade in Services 
(Scarecrow Press, 2006). A review of the literature on the economics of information pr
epared under contract for Statistics Canada in 2007 is the basis for the presentation included in this publication. Kirsti Nilsen has also published a book chapter on e-government and another on intern
ational trade policy, along with articles and conference proceedings both on vari
ous aspects of information polic
y and in her other areas of 
interest. She is currently convener of the International Trade Treaties Working Group of the 
Canadian Library Association, and a past president of the Canadian Association for Information 
Science. A graduate of Emerson College and Si
mmons College in Boston, she received her Ph.D. from the University of Toronto.  

 
Jean-Jacques Sahel is director of government and regul
atory affairs for Europe at Skype. Previously Mr. Sahel was deputy di
rector of services industries in U.K. Trade and Investment 
(UKTI), the British Government™s external trade promotion arm. There he led the initiative to 

promote overseas the United Kingdom™s strength in fina
ncial services. Before that, he held senior posts at the Department of Trade and Industry, 
among them head of global communications policy. 
Jean-Jacques served UK interests in many teleco
ms and IT negotiations and forums during his 
years in public service. These included the OECD, 
where he was a vice chair of the anti-spam task 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.       
  APPENDIXES 
90force and chairman of the Working Party on 
the Information Economy (2005-2007); the ITU; the 
United Nation™s World Summit on the Information Soci
ety; and the WTO. He is the current U.K. 
signatory of the 2006 UN ITU treaties.   
Raed M. Sharif is a Ph.D. candidate in information 
science and technology and an adjunct professor at the School of Inform
ation Studies at Syracuse University. Raed™s research focuses on access to and reuse of public sector information 
and its impact on scientific and socioeconomic 
development. He worked for over two years (2005-2007)
 as a research associate with the Office of International Scientific and 
Technical Information Programs (ISTIP) at the U.S. National 
Academies and with the U.S. National Committee on CODATA, where he was involved in 

designing, launching, and evaluating science and technology policy projects and activities. He is a member of the CODATA task group on Preservati
on of and Access to Scientific and Technical Data in Developing Countries and a steering committee member at the InterAcademy Panel on 
International Issues (IAP) Program on Digital 
Knowledge Resources and Infrastructure in Developing Countries. Raed is also
 active in promoting the involvement of young scientists in the 
science and technology policy-making 
processes. To that end he is currently chairing the Young 
Scientists Forum at the U.N. Global Alliance for ICT and Development (GAID) Community of 

Expertise on Enhancing Access to and Application of Scientific Data in Developing Countries  
(e-SDDC). Before starting his doctoral studies, Raed worked for five years as a business 
development manager at Birzeit University in Pale
stine. He also worked as a consultant for the UNESCO, UNDP, EU, and USAID on 
ICT-related projects and their impact on the Palestinian 
people and economy. Raed received his bachelors 
degree in economics and political science in 
1999 and his M.B.A. in 2002 from Birzeit University in Palestine.  

 
Robbin te Velde is senior researcher at Dialogic Innovation & Interaction, a small research firm in 
the Netherlands. He has extensive knowledge in the field of STI policy with a strong focus on IT. He has also worked at technical universities and research consultancies where he conducted many 
international comparative studies on ICT-related 
matters on behalf of national and supranational 
public institutes (covering Europe, North America, Asia, and the 
Middle East). His background is in administrative sciences, specializing in inte
rnational relations and economics, and in the 

philosophy of science. He has written a large number 
of scientific articles in a wide range of areas such as international politics, philosophy, knowledge management, business administration, 
technology policy, and information management. 

 
Paul F. Uhlir, J.D., is director of the Board on Research Data and Information, including the U.S. 
National Committee for CODATA, at the U.S. Na
tional Academies in Wa
shington, D.C. His area of emphasis is issues at the 
interface of science, technology, and law, with a primary focus on 
digital information policy and management. Prior to
 that, he worked in the following capacities at 
the National Academies: director of the Offi
ce of International Scie
ntific and Technical Information Programs, 1999-2008; associate exec
utive director of the Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications, 1991-1999; 
and senior staff officer at the Space Studies Board, 1985-1991, where he managed projects on so
lar system exploration and environmental 
remote sensing programs for NASA. Before joini
ng the National Academies, he worked on remote 
sensing law and intergovernmental cooperation in me
teorological satellite programs at the general 
counsel™s office of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in the Department of 
Commerce. He has published and l
ectured widely and has been involved in numerous consulting 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES 
91and pro bono activities. He holds a B.A in history from the Univer
sity of Oregon and a J.D. and M.A. in international relations from the University of San Diego.  
 
Graham Vickery is head of the Information Economy 
Group in the Information, Computer and 
Communications Policy Division of OECD in Paris. As head
 of the Information Economy Group 
and programme director for OECD informati
on technology, he oversees digital content and industry programmes covering e-business, info
rmation economy, intangibles and intellectual 
capital, new technologies, industrial performance, manufacturing 
flexibility, work organization, and industry globalization. He is the author of numerous OECD pub
lications and articles and has presented papers at many international conf
erences on the information economy, technology 
strategies, sector developments, and government policies.  

 
Rodney Weiher is the chief economist of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
(NOAA) in Washington, D.C., where he develops and leads a series of peer-reviewed studies and analyses of the economic dimensions of NOAA™s 
programs, products, and services. These studies 
include cost-benefit analyses of
 major earth observing systems, quantitative estimates of the 
economic benefits of weather, climate, ocean 
and other forecasts, and valuation of non-market 

environmental assets. He also advises senior 
NOAA management on economic issues of relevance 
to the agency and serves on various interagency and international economic forums. Weiher 
previously served as a career senior executive
 to the White House™s Office of Management and 

Budget in the areas of energy, environment, and natural 
resources, as well as serving in senior positions dealing with energy issues in the privat
e sector. He holds a Ph.D. in economics from the 
University of Virginia. In the fall of 2008 he retired from federal service and now consults on a 

variety of economic issues.  

 
Nancy E. Weiss serves as general counsel of the Institute of Museum and Library Services 
(IMLS), a U.S. government agency that advances
 museum, library, and in
formation services, and 
provides financial assistance to the nation™s 122,000 libraries and 17,500 museums. In this capacity 
she provides expert advice on the legal aspects of cultural activity and information policy-making, 

public/private partnerships, and federal financial assistance, and helps ensure that key policy documents recognize the important ro
le that libraries and museums play in economic development, 
the creation, dissemination, and pr
eservation of knowledge, and the design and management of the 
technological infrastructure for the 21st century. Prior to joining IMLS, Nancy served as deputy general counsel of the National Endowment for the Humanities, where 
she also provided counsel to the U.S. Arts and Artifacts Indemnity Program and represented the agency on the National 

Archives and Records Administration Trust Fund
 Board. Nancy earlier practiced litigation and 
media law at Williams and Connolly in Washington 
D.C., held a legal research fellowship in New 
Delhi, India, and completed a federal judicial 
clerkship with the Hon. William W. Schwarzer (N.D. 
California and director of the Federal Judicial Center). Nancy graduated with honors from the 
University of Michigan Law School, and Phi Beta Kappa with a degree in economics from the 
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania.  
 
Frederika M. Welle Donker, M.Sc., works for the OTB Research Institute for Housing, Urban 
and Mobility Studies, Geo Information and Land 
Development Section at Delft University of 
Technology in The Netherlands. After graduating in electronics engineering at North Sydney 

College of TAFE in Australia, she worked as a technical officer at the Commonwealth Scientific & 
The Socioeconomic Effects of Public Sector Information on Digital Networks: Toward a Better Understanding of Different Access and Reuse Policies: ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.       
  APPENDIXES 
92Industrial Research Organisation and at the University of Sydney. She completed her M.Sc. with 
the Faculty of Technology, Policy & Management 
of Delft University of Technology in 2001. She then worked for three years as a research assist
ant at the Erasmus Medical Centre (Faculty of 
Medicine, Erasmus University) in Rotterdam. Sin
ce 2005 Frederika has been a researcher at the OTB Research Institute for Housing, Urban and Mobility Studies at Delft University of Technology. Between 2005 and 2008 she has focused 
on geo portals and the accessibility of geo information, including legal aspects of accessibility
 and economic aspects such as pricing models. 
In 2009 she will begin a Ph.D. st
udy titled Impact of the European Union Framework on the Free 

Flow of Geo Information and Geo Services. Her 
other research interests are policy development 
with respect to the role of the pub
lic sector in the geo information 
market and reuse of public sector 
information to develop value added products and 
services and Web 2.0 applications in Europe, 
Australia, the United States, and Canada. 
 
Jim Wretham is head of information policy at the
 Office of Public Sector Information in the 
United Kingdom. He has been involved in copyright
 and information issues for the best part of 

twenty years. Initially he led a team that ma
naged the licensing of Crown and Parliamentary copyright in Her Majesty's Statione
ry Office. Following the privatization of the trading functions of HMSO in 1996, he transferred to the Cabinet Office as the head of licensing. Since then his role has taken on a much wider information remit, b
ecoming head of information policy in 2001. In that 
role Jim was one of the lead officials for the Un
ited Kingdom in the negotiation of the European Directive on the Re-use of Public Sector Information. He also play
ed a leading role in the drafting of the U.K. regulations that implemented the directiv
e. As a member of the Office of Public Sector 
Information, he joined the 
National Archives in 2006.  