DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12720Biometric Recognition: Challenges and Opportunities182 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-14207-6 | DOI 10.17226/12720Joseph N. Pato and Lynette I. Millett, Editors; Whither Biometrics Committee;Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Research CouncilBiometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Joseph N. Pato and Lynette I. Millett, 
Editors
Whither Biometrics Committee
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (Award No. N00174-03-C-0074) and by the Central Intelligence Agency 
and the Department of Homeland Security with assistance from the National Sci
-ence Foundation (Award No. IIS-0344584). Any opinions expressed in this mate
-rial are those of the authors and do not necessarily re˜ect the views of the agencies 
and organizations that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-14207-6
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-14207-5
Copies of this report are available from
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20055
800/624-6242
202/334-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2010 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˚t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˚c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˚c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˚c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.or
gBiometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vWHITHER BIOMETRICS COMMITTEE
JOSEPH N. PATO, Hewlett-Packard Company, 
Chair
BOB BLAKLEY, Gartner
JEANETTE BLOMBERG, IBM Almaden Research Center
JOSEPH P. CAMPBELL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln 
Laboratory
GEORGE T. DUNCAN, Carnegie Mellon University
GEORGE R. FISHER, Prudential-Wachovia (retired)
STEVEN P. GOLDBERG,
1 Georgetown University Law Center
PETER T. HIGGINS, Higgins & Associates, International
PETER B. IMREY, Cleveland Clinic and Case Western Reserve 
University
ANIL K. JAIN, Michigan State University
GORDON LEVIN, The Walt Disney World Company
LAWRENCE D. NADEL, Noblis
JAMES L. WAYMAN, San Jose State University
Staff
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˚cer
1 
Steven P. Goldberg died on August 26, 2010.
 Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Oracle Corporation, 
Chair
 PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE, Hewlett-Packard Company 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University 
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
JOHN E. KELLY III, IBM
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University 
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study 
DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 
WILLIAM H. PRESS, University of Texas, Austin 
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Labs 
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research 
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc. 
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Silver Lake
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc. 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˚cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
EMILY ANN MEYER, Program Of˚cer 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˚cer 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
ENITA A. WILLIAMS, Associate Program Of˚cer
For more information on CSTB, see its website at
 http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, National Research 
Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call 
(202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
In a variety of government and private domains biometric recognition 
is being promoted as a technology that can help identify terrorists, pro
-vide better control of access to physical facilities and ˚nancial accounts, 
and increase the ef˚ciency of access to services and their utilization. Bio
-metric recognition has been applied to identi˚cation of criminals, patient 
tracking in medical informatics, and the personalization of social services, 
among other things. In spite of substantial effort, however, there remain 
unresolved questions about the effectiveness and management of systems 
for biometric recognition, as well as the appropriateness and societal 
impact of their use. Moreover, the general public has been exposed to 
biometrics largely as high-technology gadgets in spy thrillers or as fear-
instilling instruments of state or corporate surveillance in speculative 
˚ction.
Now, at the beginning of the second decade of the twenty-˚rst cen
-tury, biometric technologies appear poised for broader use. Increased 
concerns about national security and the tracking of individuals as they 
cross borders have caused passports, visas, and border-crossing records 
to be linked to biometric data. A focus on ˚ghting insurgencies and ter
-rorism has led to the military deployment of biometric tools to enable 
recognition of individuals as friend or foe. Commercially, ˚nger-imaging 
sensors, whose cost and physical size have been reduced, now appear on 
many laptop personal computers, handheld devices, mobile phones, and 
other consumer devices.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 PREFACE
In 2001 the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) 
of the National Research Council (NRC) formed a committee whose 2003 
report 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
, consid
-ered several authentication technologies, one of which was biometrics. 
After the publication of that report, the CSTB held several discussions 
with various federal agencies interested in biometrics. Jonathon Phil
-lips (then at the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)), 
Gary Strong (then at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)), and 
Andrew Kirby (of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)) actively partici
-pated in the discussions and helped to move them forward. The discus
-sions resulted in agreement to undertake this comprehensive assessment 
of biometrics (see Appendix C for the project™s original statement of task). 
Funding for the project was obtained from DARPA and from the CIA 
and the DHS with assistance from the National Science Foundation. The 
Whither Biometrics Committee was formed to conduct the study.
The Whither Biometrics Committee consisted of 13 members
1 from 
industry and academia who are experts in different aspects of distrib
-uted systems, computer security, biometrics (of various ˜avors), systems 
engineering, human factors, the law, and statistics, as well as in com
-puter science and engineering (see Appendix A for committee and staff 
biographies).
Early in the study the committee organized a public workshop. 
Held on March 15 and 16, 2005, in Washington, D.C., the workshop 
was a
ttended by members of industry, government, and academia and 
reported on by the committee in 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, 
Policy, and Cultural Dimensions of Biometric Systems
.2 In the course of the 
study, inputs were gathered on the challenges, capabilities, and require
-ments of biometric systems as well as related policy and social questions. 
This report draws on what was learned at the workshop and in subse
-quent brie˚ngs to the committee.
The report makes two main points. First, developers and analysts of 
biometric recognition systems must bear in mind that such systems are 
complex and need to be addressed as such. Second, biometric recognition 
is an inherently probabilistic endeavor. The automated recognition of indi
-viduals offered by biometric systems must be tempered by an awareness 
of the uncertainty associated with that recognition. Uncertainty arises in 
numerous ways in biometric systems, including from poor or incomplete 
1 
Delores Etter was originally a member of the committee but resigned when she was ap
-pointed Assistant Secretary of Research, Development, and Acquisition for the U.S. Navy.
2 
National Research Council, 
Summary of a Workshop on the Technology, Policy, and Cultural 
Dimensions of Biometric Systems,
 Kristen Batch, Lynette I. Millett, and Joseph N. Pato, eds., 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C. (2006).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ix
understanding of the distinctiveness and stability of the traits measured 
by biometric systems; the dif˚culty of characterizing the probability that 
an imposter will attack the system; and even the attitudes of the subjects 
using the systemsŠsubjects who may have become conditioned by ˚c
-tional depictions to expect, or even fear, that recognition will be perfect. 
Consequently, even when the technology and the system it is embedded 
in are behaving as designed, there is inevitable uncertainty and risk of 
error. The probabilistic nature of biometric systems also means that the 
measured characteristics of the population of intended users (those the 
system is designed to recognize) matter and affect design and implemen
-tation choices.
This report elaborates on these themes in detail and is aimed at a 
broad audience, including policy makers, developers, and researchers. 
For policy makers, it seeks to provide a comprehensive assessment of bio
-metric recognition that examines current capabilities, future possibilities, 
and the role of government in technology and system development. For 
developers and researchers, the report™s goals are to articulate challenges 
posed by understanding and developing biometric recognition systems 
and to point out opportunities for research. Building on CSTB™s work 
on authentication technologies and privacy, it explores the technical and 
policy challenges associated with the development, evaluation, and use 
of biometric technologies and systems that incorporate them.
The committee members brought different and complementary per
-spectives to their efforts as they deliberated and solicited input from 
a number of other experts. The committee held six plenary meetings, 
including the workshop. It thanks the many individuals who contributed, 
including the project sponsors that enabled this activity. The committee 
also conducted three site visits, one to the Boston Police Department™s 
Identi˚cation Center, one to the U.S. Naval Academy, and another to 
Walt Disney World. The committee thanks those who came and briefed 
the committee at those meetings and site visits: Andrew Kirby, Joseph 
Kielman, John Atkins, Martin Herman, Duane Blackburn, Jean-Christophe 
Fondeur, James Matey, Sharath Pankanti, Jonathon Phillips, David Scott, 
George Doddington, Michele Freadman, Patrick Grother, Austin Hicklin, 
Nell Sedransk, Tora Bikson, David Kaye, Lisa Nelson, Peter Swire, Joseph 
Atick, Rick Lazarick, Tony Mans˚eld, Marek Rejman-Greene, Valorie 
Valencia, Cynthia Musselman, William Casey, Patty Cogswell, Neal 
Latta, K.A. Taipale, John Woodward, Jim Dempsey, Ari Schwartz, Michael 
Cherry, Mike Labonge, Richard Nawrot, Diane Ley, John Schmitt, Michael 
Wong, Vance Bjorn, Betty LaCrois, Ken Fong, Joseph Dahlbeck, Dennis 
Treece, and Lynne Hare. It appreciates briefers™ willingness to answer the 
questions they were asked and is grateful for their insights. Additional 
information was garnered from reviewing the published literature and 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
obtaining informal input at various conferences and other meetings. Input 
was also derived from committee members during the course of their 
professional activities outside the committee™s work.
It is with great sadness that we mourn the passing of our colleague 
and fellow committee member Steven Goldberg, who died just prior to 
this report™s publication. He was a valued member of our study team. 
His insights on science and the law and his collegial and constructive 
approach to interdisciplinary work are greatly missed.
 We thank the sponsors who enabled this project, the reviewers whose 
constructive criticism improved the report, and the editor Liz Fikre for 
her help in re˚ning the ˚nal draft of the report. The committee is grateful 
to the CSTB staff members whose work has made this report possible. 
The committee thanks Jon Eisenberg for his extensive helpful feedback 
throughout the process, Margaret Huynh for impeccable coordination of 
logistics, Kristen Batch for her work in assisting with our earlier work
-shop report, and Ted Schmitt, who helped structure early drafts of the 
˚nal report. Finally, we thank Lynette Millett, Senior Program Of˚cer, 
who has ably guided this project as study director from its inception and 
was essential to completing our work.
Joseph N. Pato, 
Chair
Whither Biometrics Committee 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˚dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Michael F. Angelo, Net IQ,
Ming Hsieh, Cogent Systems, Inc.,
Stephen Kent, BBN Technologies,
Sara Kiesler, Carnegie Mellon University,
Herbert Levinson, Transportation Consultant,
Steven Lipner, Microsoft Corporation,
Helen Nissenbaum, New York University,
Louise Ryan, Harvard School of Public Health,
Michael Saks, Arizona State University, and
Valorie Valencia, Authenti-Corp.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclu
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
sions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˚nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Robert F. 
Sproull of Oracle Corporation. Appointed by the National Research 
Council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent 
examination of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional 
procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. 
Responsibility for the ˚nal content of this report rests entirely with the 
authoring committee and the institution.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
SUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS 
 15
 The Systems Perspective, 19
 Motivations for Using Biometric Systems, 20
 Human Identity and Biometrics, 22
  
The Fundamental Dogma of Biometrics, 23
 Basic Operational Concepts, 24
  
Sample Operational Process, 25
  
Measures of Operational Ef˚cacy, 26
  
Variability and Uncertainty, 27
  
Within- and Between-Person Variability, 28
  
Stability and Distinctiveness at Global Scale, 30
  
Biometric Modalities, 31
  
Comparison of Modalities, 34
  
Multibiometrics, 35
 Coping with the Probabilistic Nature of Biometric Systems, 36
 Additional Implications for Open-Set Identi˚cation Systems, 45
 Security and Threat Modeling, 47
 On Report Scope and Boundaries, 52
2 ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 53
 Basic Biometric System Operations, 54
  
Enrollment Operations, 54
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
v CONTENTS
  
Capture and Matching Operations, 58
 Operational Context, 59
  
User Context, 60
  
Application Context, 62
  
Technology Context, 64
  
Performance Context, 65
 Interoperability, 66
  
Sensor Interoperability, 66
  
Human Interface Interoperability, 68
 System Life-Cycle Issues, 68
 Test and Evaluation, 70
  
Usability Evaluations, 73
  
Test and Evaluation Standards, 73
  
Performance Assessment and Evaluation, 74
3 LESSONS FROM OTHER LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS
 76
 Manufacturing Systems, 77
 Medical Screening Systems, 81
4 CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 85
 Interaction Between Biometric Systems and Individuals, 86
  
Motivating Participation by Individuals, 86
  
Facilitating Individual Participation, 87
 Societal Impact, 89
  
Universality and Potential Disenfranchisement, 89
  
Privacy as a Cultural Consideration, 90
  
Individuality and Identity, 93
 Legal Issues, 95
  
Reliability, 96
  
Privacy in a Legal Context and Potential Implications
     
for Biometrics, 100
 Data Policies, 111
  
Information-Sharing Issues, 112
  
Protection of Biometric Data, 114
 Summary, 115
5  
RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF
 116
 BIOMETRICS
  Technology and Engineering Research Opportunities, 117
  
Human Factors and Affordance, 118
  
Distinctiveness and Stability of Underlying Phenomena, 119
  
Modality-Related Research, 121
  
Information Security Research, 122
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS
 xv  
Testing and Evaluation Research, 123
  
Systems-Level Statistical Engineering Research, 129
  
Research on Scale, 130
  
Social Science Research Opportunities, 132
 Public Policy Considerations and Research Opportunities, 135
 Realizing a Well-Designed Biometric System, 137
 Concluding Remarks, 138
APPENDIXES
A Biosketches of Committee Members and Staff
 141
B Watch-List Operational Performance and List Size
 150
C Statement of Task
 154
D Testing and Evaluation Examples
 155
E The Biometrics Standards Landscape
 159
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary
Biometrics is the automated recognition of individuals based on their 
behavioral and biological characteristics. It is a tool for establishing con˚
-dence that one is dealing with individuals who are already known (or not 
known)Šand consequently that they belong to a group with certain rights 
(or to a group to be denied certain privileges). It relies on the presumption 
that individuals are physically and behaviorally distinctive in a number of 
ways. Figure S.1 illustrates the basic operations of a recognition process.
Biometric systems are used increasingly to recognize individuals and 
regulate access to physical spaces, information, services, and to other 
rights or bene˚ts, including the ability to cross international borders. 
The motivations for using biometrics are diverse and often overlap. They 
include improving the convenience and ef˚ciency of routine access trans
-actions, reducing fraud, and enhancing public safety and national security. 
Questions persist, however, about the effectiveness of biometric systems 
as security or surveillance mechanisms, their usability and manageabil
-ity, appropriateness in widely varying contexts, social impacts, effects on 
privacy, and legal and policy implications.
The following are the principal conclusions of this study:
Ł Human recognition systems are inherently probabilistic, and hence 
inherently fallible. The chance of error can be made small but not elimi
-nated. System designers and operators should anticipate and plan for the 
occurrence of errors, even if errors are expected to be infrequent.
Ł The scienti˚c basis of biometricsŠfrom understanding the dis
-tributions of biometric traits within given populations to how humans 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
interact with biometric systemsŠneeds strengthening particularly as 
biometric technologies and systems are deployed in systems of national 
importance.
Ł Biometric systems incorporate complex de˚nitional, technologi
-cal, and operational choices, which are themselves embedded in larger 
technological and social contexts. Thus, systems-level considerations are 
critical to the success of biometric systems. Analyses of biometric systems™ 
performance, effectiveness, trustworthiness, and suitability should take a 
broad systems perspective.
Ł Biometric systems should be designed and evaluated relative to 
their speci˚c intended purposes and contexts rather than generically. 
Their effectiveness depends as much on the social context as it does on the 
underlying technology, operational environment, systems engineering, 
and testing regimes.
Ł The ˚eld of biometrics would bene˚t from more rigorous and 
comprehensive approaches to systems development, evaluation, and 
interpretation. Presumptions and burdens of proof arising from biometric 
CompareReferencesReferenceDatabaseMatchNonmatchActionCaptureSampleMatchActionSubjectpresentsbiometriccharacteristicSensorCaptureMatcherActionFigure 1-1vector, editableFIGURE S.1
 Sample operation of a general biometric system. The two basic op
-erations performed by a general biometric system are the capture and storage 
of enrollment (reference) biometric samples and the capture of new biometric 
samples and their comparison with corresponding reference samples (matching). 
This ˚gure depicts the operation of a generic biometric system although some 
systems will differ in their particulars. The primary components for the purposes 
of this discussion are ﬁcapture,ﬂ where the sensor collects biometric data from 
the subject to be recognized; the ﬁreference database,ﬂ where previously enrolled 
subjects™ biometric data are held; the ﬁmatcher,ﬂ which compares presented data 
to reference data in order to make a recognition decision; and ﬁaction,ﬂ where the 
system recognition decision is revealed and actions are undertaken based on that 
decision.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3recognition should be based on solid, peer-reviewed studies of the perfor
-mance of biometric recognition mechanisms.
FUNDAMENTALS OF BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION 
AND HUMAN INDIVIDUAL DISTINCTIVENESS
Biometric recognition systems are inherently probabilistic, and their 
performance needs to be assessed within the context of this fundamen
-tal and critical characteristic. Biometric recognition involves matching, 
within a tolerance of approximation, of observed biometric traits against 
previously collected data for a subject. Approximate matching is required 
due to the variations in biological attributes and behaviors both within 
and between persons.
1 Consequently, in contrast to the largely binary 
results associated with most information technology systems, biometric 
systems provide probabilistic results.
There are numerous sources of uncertainty and variation in biometric 
systems, including the following:
Ł Variation within persons. 
Biometric characteristics and the informa
-tion captured by biometric systems may be affected by changes in age, 
environment, disease, stress, occupational factors, training and prompt
-ing, intentional alterations, sociocultural aspects of the situation in which 
the presentation occurs, changes in human interface with the system, and 
so on. As a result, each interaction of the individual with the system (at 
enrollment, identi˚cation, and so on) will be associated with different bio
-metric information. Individuals attempting to thwart recognition for one 
reason or another also contribute to the inherent uncertainty in biometric 
systems.
Ł Sensors.
 Sensor age and calibration, how well the interface at any 
given time mitigates extraneous factors, and the sensitivity of sensor per
-formance to variation in the ambient environment (such as light levels) 
all can play a role.
Ł Feature extraction and matching algorithms.
 Biometric characteristics 
cannot be directly compared but require stable and distinctive ﬁfeaturesﬂ 
to ˚rst be extracted from sensor outputs. Differences in feature extraction 
algorithms affect performance, with effects sometimes aggravated by 
requirements for achieving interoperability among proprietary systems. 
Differences between matching algorithms and comparison scoring mecha
-1 
For example, each ˚nger of each person will generate a different ˚ngerprint image every 
time it is observed due to presentation angle, pressure, dirt, moisture, different sensors, and 
so on. Thus each person can produce a large number of different impressions from a single 
˚ngerŠmany of which will be close enough that good algorithms can match them to the 
correct ˚nger source.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
nisms, and how these interact with the preceding sources of variability of 
information acquired and features extracted, also contribute to variation 
in performance of different systems.
Ł Data integrity. 
Information may be degraded through legitimate 
data manipulation or transformation or degraded and/or corrupted 
owing to security breaches, mismanagement, inappropriate compression, 
or some other means. It may also be inappropriately applied to a context 
other than the one for which it was originally created, owing to mission 
creep (for example, using the data collected in a domain purely for the 
sake of convenience in a domain that demands high data integrity) or 
inappropriate re-use of information (for instance, captured biometric 
information might be incorrectly assumed to be of greater ˚delity when 
transferred to a system where higher ˚delity is the norm).
Many gaps exist in our understanding of the nature and extent of 
distinctiveness and stability of biometric traits across individuals and 
groups. No biometric characteristic is known to be entirely stable and 
distinctive across all groups. Biometric traits have fundamental statisti
-cal properties, distinctiveness, and differing degrees of stability under 
natural physiological conditions and environmental challenges, many 
aspects of which are not well understood, especially at large scales. Com
-plicating matters, the underlying biological properties and distribution of 
biometric traits in a population are generally observed only through ˚lters 
interposed by measurement processes and instruments and subsequent 
biometric feature extraction.
Thus, the development of a science of human individual distinctive
-ness is essential to effective and appropriate use of biometric recognition. 
Better understanding of biometric traits in human beings could be gained 
by carefully designed data collection and analysis. The biological under
-pinnings of physical distinctiveness and the stability of many biometric 
characteristics under natural physiological conditions and environmental 
challenges require further justi˚cation from basic biological and empirical 
studies. Importantly, the underlying distinctiveness of a biometric trait 
cannot be assessed apart from an understanding of the stability, accuracy, 
and inherent variability of a given measure.
Another fundamental characteristic of biometric recognition is that 
it requires decision making under uncertainty by both the automated 
recognition system and the human interpreters of its results. A biometric 
match represents not certain recognition but a probability of correct recog
-nition, while a nonmatch represents a probability rather than a de˚nitive 
conclusion that an individual is not known to the system. That is, some 
fraction of results from even the best-designed biometric system will be 
incorrect or indeterminate: both false matches and false nonmatches will 
occur. Moreover, assessing the validity of the match results, even given 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5this inherent uncertainty, requires knowledge of the population of users 
who are presenting to the systemŠspeci˚cally, what proportions of those 
users should and should not match. Even very small probabilities of mis
-recognitionsŠthe failure to recognize an enrolled individual or the recog
-nition of one individual as anotherŠcan become operationally signi˚cant 
when an application is scaled to handle millions of recognition attempts. 
Thus, well-articulated processes for veri˚cation, mitigation of undesired 
outcomes, and remediation (for misrecognitions) are needed, and pre
-sumptions and burdens of proof should be designed conservatively, with 
due attention to the system™s inevitable uncertainties.
Principle:
 Users and developers of biometric systems should recognize 
and take into account the limitations and constraints of biometric sys
-temsŠespecially the probabilistic nature of the underlying science, the 
current limits of knowledge regarding human individual distinctiveness, 
and the numerous sources of uncertainty in biometric systems.
BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS AND TRUSTWORTHINESS
Systems that perform biometric recognition exist within a constel
-lation of other authentication and identi˚cation technologies and offer 
some distinct capabilities and challenges. Authentication technologies are 
typically based on one of three things: something the individual knows, 
such as a password; something the individual has, such as a physical 
key or secure token; and something the individual is or does.
2 Biometric 
technologies employ the last of these. Unlike password- or token-based 
systems, biometric systems can function without active input, user coop
-eration, or knowledge that the recognition is taking place.
Biometric systems, therefore, are not a general replacement for other 
authentication technologies, although combining biometric approaches 
with other methods can augment security in those applications where 
user cooperation can be inferred.
One important difference between biometric and other authentication 
technologies, such as tokens or passwords, is that these other technologies 
place trust in cooperative users, allowing them to produce what they pos
-sess or demonstrate what they know (through dependence on the user™s 
safekeeping of a card or password). But these other forms of authentica
-tion do not protect against the sharing or transfer of the token or secret, 
2 
Federal Information Processing Standards 48, ﬁGuidelines on Evaluation of Techniques 
for Automated Personal Identi˚cation,ﬂ was published in 1977 and was one of the ˚rst such 
treatments of authentication.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
whereas biometric traits are tied to an individual
3Šspeci˚cally something 
an individual is or does.
4 Unintended disclosure of biometric data, how
-ever, may lead to more serious consequences or to consequences that are 
more dif˚cult to remediate than the loss of a token or exposure of a pass
-word. Another important difference is that because they are probabilistic, 
biometric systems are particularly vulnerable to deliberate attempts to 
undermine con˚dence in their reliability, and discussions of probabilistic 
uncertainty can easily be twisted into a suggestion that biometric systems 
are unreliable.
Security challenges for biometric systems can be seen as stemming 
from two different views of such systems: (1) the use of biometric systems 
as a security mechanism to protect information systems or other resources 
and (2) vulnerabilities of the biometric system itself. First, it is necessary 
to determine if a biometric system is an appropriate component for the 
application at hand at all. One needs to specify the problem to be solved 
by a particular biometric system in order to adequately assess its effective
-ness and deal with the consequences of deployment.
5 Conducting a threat 
analysis and developing threat models for the system that incorporates 
analysis of feasibility of threats against the resource being protected and 
against the system doing the protecting is an important component of 
understanding the problem. Decisions about whether and how to incor
-porate biometric approaches should consider their appropriateness and 
proportionality given the problem to be solved and the merits and risks 
of biometrics relative to other solutions
6 and need to be considered by the 
broader information security community as well as within the biometrics 
community.
Second, biometric systems (and not merely the resources they are 
protecting) are themselves vulnerable to attacks aimed at undermining 
their integrity and reliability. For password- or token-based systems, a 
breach can usually be remediated by issuing a new password or token. 
3 
While it is possible to copy or mimic some biometric traits, it is generally more dif˚cult 
to produce such a trait and present it to a supervised sensor than to share a password or 
token. If the system is unsupervised, an attacker may not need to spoof the trait physically; 
he might have a copy of the bit string or the reference, which would make such an attack 
no more dif˚cult than compromising other forms of recognition.
4 
More precisely, biometric authentication is a binary hypothesis test where the hypothesis 
is that the biometric sample input matchesŠto a degree of certaintyŠthe claimed biometric 
reference enrollment. The overall system then uses the matching results to accept or reject 
this hypothesis.
5 
See National Research Council, 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
 (2003) and 
IDsŠNot That Easy
 (2002) for discussions of the need to understand the problem 
that a system is trying to solve in order to evaluate the system™s effectiveness.
6 
For example, the problem of managing members™ access to a local health club merits 
different kinds of analysis than does handling customs and immigration at a major inter
-national airport.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7However, it is generally not possible to replace a biometric trait that has 
been compromised. This is complicated by the fact that the same biomet
-ric trait can be used by different systems, and weaknesses in one system 
could lead to the compromise of the biometric trait for use in another 
system. Furthermore, such traits are not secretŠwe expose them in the 
course of everyday life. For example, we leave ˚ngerprints on many sur
-faces we touch, faces can be photographed, and voices can be recorded. 
However, it is as dif˚cult for an impostor to grow a set of ˚ngerprints 
matching those stolen as it is for the person they were stolen from to 
grow a new and different set. It is, accordingly, essential to validate that a 
trait presented to gain recognition truly belongs to the subject and is not 
being synthesized by an imposter. This often requires a human opera
-tor to observe the subject™s presentation of the traitŠwhich signi˚cantly 
constrains remote or distributed applications of biometrics. Automated 
veri˚cation that a living person is presenting what could conceivably be 
a synthesized artifact might be suf˚cient in some applications but would 
not substitute for human supervision where high degrees of con˚dence 
are required.
It is important to manage the trustworthiness of the entire process 
rather than focusing on evaluation of the proffered biometric character
-istic. Systems using biometric recognition are typically designed with 
alternative procedures for use when a sensor fails or an individual lacks 
the biometric trait. Adversaries may attempt to force the system into fail
-ure modes to evade or accomplish recognition, implying that secondary 
screening procedures should be just as robustly designed as the main pro
-cedure. One potential way to improve recognition would be to use multi
-ple biometric modalities and other demographic data to narrow the search 
space. This approach might have other advantages, such as e
xpanding 
population coverage beyond that afforded by a single biometric and 
reducing vulnerability to spoo˚ng attacks. It might have disadvantages, 
as well, including increasing the complexity and cost of the system. There 
are also issues related to the architecture and operation of multibiometrics 
systems as well as questions of how best to model such systems and then 
use the model to drive operational aspects. Understanding any statistical 
dependencies is critical when using multibiometrics.
TESTING, DESIGN, AND DEPLOYMENT
Although traditional biometrics testing tends to focus on the match 
performance for a test data set, experience from many domains suggests 
that process and quality control should be analyzed for the complete 
system life cycle. Methods used successfully for the study and improve
-ment of systems in other ˚elds such as manufacturing and medicine 
(for example, controlled observation and experimentation on operational 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
systems guided by scienti˚c principles and statistical design and monitor
-ing) should be used in developing, maintaining, assessing, and improv
-ing biometric systems. One especially important lesson is that testing 
methods and results should be suf˚ciently open to allow independent 
assessment.
Although laboratory evaluations of biometric systems are highly 
useful for development and comparison, their results often do not reli
-ably predict ˚eld performance. Operational testing and blind challenges 
of operational systems tend to give more accurate and usable results 
than developmental performance evaluations and operational testing in 
circumscribed and controlled environments. Although the international 
standards community has made progress in developing a coherent set of 
best practices for technology and scenario testing, guidelines for opera
-tional testing are still under development.
7 Designing a system and tests 
that can cope with ongoing data collection, particularly at scale, is a chal
-lenge making it dif˚cult for a potential user of biometrics to determine 
how well a vendor™s technology might operate in that user™s applications 
or to measure improvements in the system™s performance.
Principle:
 Efforts to determine best practices for testing and evaluating 
existing and new biometric systems should be sustained and expanded. 
Careful consideration should be given to making the testing process open, 
allowing assessment of results and quality measures by outside parties 
when appropriate. The evaluation of a system™s effectiveness needs to 
take into account the purpose for which the system was developed and 
how well ˚eld conditions were matched.
It is essential to take a broad systems view when assessing the perfor
-mance of biometric systems. Both enthusiasm for biometric recognition 
and concerns about it tend to focus narrowly on behavioral and biological 
characteristics, human interactions with biometric sensors, or how infor
-mation collected will be used. Yet the effective use of biometrics involves 
more than simply engineering a system to provide these basic capabilities. 
Achieving automated recognition involves the proper functioning of a 
broader system with many elements, including the human sources of data, 
human operators of the system, the collection environment(s), biometric 
sensors, the quality of the system™s various technological components, the 
human-sensor-environment interaction, biometric reference information 
databases and the quality and integrity of the data therein, the system™s 
security and availability, the system™s communications network(s), and 
the system™s failure-handling and error-recovery processes.
7 
As of this writing, ISO/IEC Standard 19795-6 for operational testing is under develop
-ment by ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9Successful deployments have good project management and de˚ni
-tion of goals, alignment of biometric capabilities with the underlying 
need and operational environment, and a thorough threat and risk analy
-sis. Failure is often rooted in a lack of clarity about the problem being 
addressed, lack of a viable business case, inappropriate application of bio
-metrics where other technologies would work better, inappropriate choice 
of biometric technologies, insensitivity to user perceptions and usability 
requirements, inadequate support processes and infrastructure, and/or 
poor understanding of population issues among those to be recognized. 
User behavior, attitudes, and system usability contribute to misrecogni
-tions, and how incorrect or indeterminate results are handled contributes 
to whether a system™s goals are met.
The probabilistic nature of biometric systems makes them especially 
sensitive to how well exception mechanisms are implemented. In particu
-lar, the inevitable false matches, false nonmatches, and failures to enroll 
are likely to stress other portions of the system that have been put in place 
to compensate when such errors occur. Field error rates are likely to be 
higher than laboratory testing suggests, poor exception processes can 
negate bene˚ts, and extrapolation of functions in one context to another 
context may be inappropriate.
Biometric systems should be designed to anticipate the development 
and adoption of new advances and standards, modularizing components 
that are likely to become obsolete, such as biometric sensors and matcher 
systems, so that they can be easily replaced. A life-cycle approach such as 
this requires understanding and taking into account the capabilities and 
limitations of biometric technologies and devices. Some of the factors 
that may compromise later use if systems are not backwards-compatible 
include degradation of data through transformations due to system inter
-connection or changes in technology and reuse of data in unanticipated 
applications. Exception policies, data quality threshold settings, and the 
consequences of false matches and false nonmatches may need adjust
-ment over the life of a deployment, and provisions for such adjustments 
should be included in the system design. Training and outreach materials 
for a nonscienti˚c audience are needed, along with strategies for dissemi
-nation to system operators. A life-cycle-oriented approach should also be 
˜exible enough to manage the unexpected reactions of users, operators, 
or other stakeholders.
Principle:
 Best practices are needed for the design and development of 
biometric systems and the processes for their operation. To scale ef˚
-ciently to mass applications, these best practices should include require
-ments for system usability, initial and sustained technical accuracy and 
system performance, appropriate exception handling, and consistency of 
adjudication at the system level. Best practices should allow for incorpo
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
ration of scienti˚c advances and be auditable throughout the life of the 
system.
System requirements can range widely depending on the user con
-text, the application context, and the technology context. Issues related to 
the user context include motivations for using the system, users™ aware
-ness of their interactions with a system, and training and habituation 
to its use. Issues related to the application context include whether the 
system is supervised by human staff, whether it is being used to verify a 
positive recognition claim or a negative one, whether the population to 
be recognized is an open or closed group, and whether testing the claim 
requires one comparison or many. Issues related to the technology context 
include whether the environment (say, the lighting) is controlled, whether 
the system is covert or overt, passive or active (requiring interaction with 
the subject), how quickly users need to be processed, and the error rates 
required (based, for instance, on the consequence of errors). The issues 
related to these contexts should affect the system design, development, 
and deployment. In particular, the wide variety of options for a biometric 
system encompassed above make clear that the incorporation of biomet
-rics in a system in and of itself says very little about the requirements or 
usage expectations of that system.
Principle:
 Requirements have critical implications for the design and 
development of human recognition systems and whether and how bio
-metric technologies are appropriately employed. Requirements for sys
-tems can vary widely, and assessment and evaluation of the effectiveness 
of a given system need to take into account the problem and context it 
was intended to address.
SOCIAL, CULTURAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
Although biometric systems can be bene˚cial, the potentially lifelong 
association of biometric traits with an individual, their potential use for 
remote detection, and their connection with identity records may raise 
social, cultural, and legal concerns. When used in contexts where indi
-viduals are claiming enrollment or entitlement to a bene˚t, biometric 
systems could disenfranchise people who are unable to participate for 
physical, social, or cultural reasons. For these reasons, the use of biomet
-ricsŠespecially in applications driven by public policy, where the affected 
population may have little alternative to participationŠmerits careful 
oversight and public discussion to anticipate and minimize detrimental 
societal and individual effects and to avoid violating privacy and due 
process rights.
Social, cultural, and legal issues can affect a system™s acceptance by 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11
users, its performance, or the decisions on whether to use it in the ˚rst 
placeŠso it is best to consider these explicitly in system design. Clearly, 
the behavior of those being enrolled and recognized can in˜uence the 
accuracy and effectiveness of virtually any biometric system, and user 
behavior can be affected by the social, cultural, or legal context. Likewise, 
the acceptability of a biometric system depends on the social and cultural 
values of the participant populations. A careful analysis and articulation 
of these issues and their trade-offs can improve both acceptability and 
effectiveness. Moreover, the bene˚ts arising from using a biometric sys
-tem may ˜ow to particular individuals or groups, sometimes only at the 
expense of othersŠfor example, a building™s owner might be more secure 
but at the cost of time and inconvenience to those who wish to enter the 
buildingŠmaking calculating these trade-offs more dif˚cult.
Fundamental to most social issues surrounding biometric recognition 
is the tight link between an individual™s biometric traits and data record, 
which can have positive and negative consequences. These consequences 
can affect the disposition of a target population toward a particular appli
-cation. The potential for disenfranchisement means that some could be 
excluded from the bene˚ts of positive claim systems, including access to 
buildings and information or quali˚cation for jobs or insurance. Policies 
and interfaces to handle error conditions such as failure to enroll or be 
recognized should be designed to gracefully avoid violating the dignity, 
privacy, or due process rights of the participants. In addition, the potential 
for abuse of power is a cause for concern. Many fear misuse of identi˚
-cation technology by authorities (from data compromise, mission creep, 
or use of a biometric for other than speci˚ed purposes). To be effective, 
biometric deployments need to take these fears seriously.
Some biometric systems are designed to recognize and track individu
-als without their knowledge. Covert identi˚cation has not been widely 
deployed, but its potential use raises deep concerns. Although the bio
-metrics industry has at times dismissed such concerns, biometric systems 
could win broader acceptance if more attention were paid to the target 
community™s cultural values.
Biometric recognition raises important legal issues of remediation, 
authority, and reliability, and, of course, privacy. The standard assump
-tions of the technologists who design new techniques, capabilities, and 
systems are very different from those embedded in the legal system. Legal 
precedent on the use of biometric technology is growing, with some key 
cases going back decades,
8 and other more recent cases
9 having raised 
serious questions about the admissibility of biometric evidence in court.
8 
Cases include 
U.S. 
v. Dionisio
 (U.S. Supreme Court, 1973) and 
Perkey
 v. Department of Mo
-tor Vehicles
 (California Supreme Court, 1986).
9 
Such as 
Maryland
 v. Rose
 (Maryland Circuit Court, 2007).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Remediation is one way of dealing with fraudulent use of biometrics 
(such as identity fraud or altering biometric reference data). Remediation 
also deals with individuals denied their due rights or access because of 
an incorrect match or nonmatch. Policy and law should not only address 
the perpetrators of fraud but also induce system owners to minimize 
misuse of biometric samples and to maximize appropriate monitoring of 
biometric sample presentation at enrollment and participation.
The reliability of biometric recognition is clouded by the presump
-tion of near-infallibility promoted by popular culture. Such presump
-tions could make contesting improper identi˚cations excessively dif˚cult. 
Conversely, if all evidence must be up to the standards implied by certain 
popular culture phenomena, unreasonable dif˚culties could be faced in 
cases lacking suf˚cient resources or evidence to meet those standards.
The courts have sometimes taken the view that an individual™s expec
-tation of privacy is related to the ubiquity of a technical means, which 
implies that the legal status of challenges to biometric technologies could 
be affected by the commonality of their use.
Principle:
 Social, legal, and cultural factors can affect the acceptance and 
effectiveness of biometric systems and should be taken into account in 
system design, development, and deployment. Notions of proof related 
to biometric recognition should be based on solid, peer-reviewed studies 
of system accuracy under many conditions and for many persons re˜ect
-ing real-world sources of error and uncertainty in those mechanisms. 
Pending scienti˚c consensus on the reliability of biometric recognition 
mechanisms, a reasonable level of uncertainty should be acknowledged 
for biometric recognition. There may be a need for legislation to protect 
against the theft or fraudulent use of biometric systems and data.
ELEMENTS OF A NATIONAL RESEARCH 
AND PUBLIC POLICY AGENDA
Given the concerns about homeland security, con˚dentiality of propri
-etary information, and fraud in general, biometric recognition is becoming 
a routine method of recognizing individuals. If there is a pressing public 
policy need for which biometric systems are the most appropriate solu
-tion, understanding the science and technology issues is critical. As the 
preceding discussions should make clear, many questions remain.
The committee believes that more research into performance and 
robustness is needed. The lack of well-de˚ned operational best practices 
based on solid science may allow governments and private organizations 
to issue overly vague or unrealistic mandates for biometric programs 
leading to poorly targeted oversight, delayed and troubled programs, 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 13
excessive costs due to under- or overspeci˚cation of requirements, and 
failed deployments.
In short, the scienti˚c basis of biometrics should be strengthened. 
Basic research should be done on the stability and distinctiveness of bio
-metric traits; the control of environmental noise when acquiring samples; 
the correlation of biometric traits with private information, including 
medical conditions; and the demographic variability of biometric traits. 
Many ˚elds of inquiry are relevant, even integral, to deepening the sci
-ence of biometric recognition, including sensor design, signal processing, 
pattern recognition, human factors, statistics and biostatistics, computer 
systems design, information security, operations research, economics, 
politics, applied psychology, sociology, education, and the law.
Biometric systems perform well in many existing applications, but 
biometric capabilities and limitations are not yet well understood in very 
large scale applications involving tens of millions of users. Questions 
remain about whether today™s biometric systems are suf˚ciently robust, 
able to handle errors when the consequences are severe. Although ˚n
-gerprinting technology has been applied on a large scale for decades in 
law enforcement, human experts are available in this application to help 
process noisy or dif˚cult samples. Even so, there have been a few high-
pro˚le misidenti˚cations with serious rami˚cations. It remains to be seen 
if fully automatic biometric systems can meet performance requirements 
as the number and scale of deployments increase.
As mentioned above, a scienti˚c basis is needed for the distinctive
-ness and stability of various biometric traits under a variety of collection 
processes and environments and across a wide population over decades. 
How accurately can a biometric trait be measured in a realistic operating 
environment? The individuality of biometric traits, their long- and short-
term physiological and pathological variability, and their relationship to 
the providing population™s genetic makeup, health, and other private 
attributes all merit research attention, which will require extensive data 
collection. The privacy protections to be afforded participants in such 
data collection need to be clearly outlined.
Improvements to biometric sensors and to the quality of the data 
acquired are crucial to minimizing recognition errors. Sensors should be 
made usable by a wider range of individuals in more environments and 
should be able to capture more faithfully (that is, with higher resolutions 
and with lower noise) underlying biometric traits of more than one kind 
in adverse situations and at a distance. Because many applications involve 
large numbers of sensors, attention should be paid to the development 
of low-cost but high-quality sensors. Additional areas meriting attention 
include representation and storage improvements and match-algorithm 
improvements.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Understanding how users interact with systems also merits further 
attention. The characteristics of the subject population, their attitudes and 
level of cooperation, the deployment environment, and procedures for 
measuring performance can all affect the system. Consequently, observa
-tion and experimentation in operational systems are required to under
-stand how well biometric applications satisfy their requirements. Because 
of the challenges inherent in closely observing individuals, with or with
-out their cooperation, human factors are critical to the design of processes 
for monitoring subjects and operators when assessing the effectiveness of 
a biometric system.
Another area where research is required is in the systems™ view of 
biometric recognition, encompassing social, legal, and cultural aspects. 
Related are social implications of biometric recognition on a large scale. 
Research is needed, too, on the distinctive information security problems 
of biometric systems, such as defense against attacks by individuals using 
fake or previously captured biometric samples and the concealment of 
biometric traits, and on the protection of biometric reference databases. 
Decision analysis and threat modeling are other critical areas requiring 
research advances.
The U.S. government has created or funded several interdisciplin
-ary, academically based research programs that provide a foundation for 
future work. Research support should aim for greater involvement of 
scientists and practitioners from relevant disciplines in biometric research, 
and studies should be published in the open, peer-reviewed scienti˚c 
literature, with their stringently deidenti˚ed biometric samples made 
widely available to other researchers. A clearinghouse would facilitate 
efforts toward identifying standards implementation and interoperability 
issues, characterizing common elements of successful implementations, 
cataloging lessons learned, and maintaining data as input for testing 
product robustness and system performance.
Principle:
 As biometric recognition is deployed in systems of national 
importance, additional research is needed at virtually all levels of the 
system (including sensors, data management, human factors, and testing). 
The research should look at a range of questions from the distinctiveness 
of biometric traits to optimal ways of evaluating and maintaining large 
systems over many years.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
1Introduction and 
Fundamental Concepts
From a very young age, most humans recognize each other easily. A 
familiar voice, face, or manner of moving helps to identify members of 
the familyŠa mother, father, or other caregiverŠand can give us comfort, 
comradeship, and safety. When we ˚nd ourselves among strangers, when 
we fail to recognize the individuals around us, we are more prone to cau
-tion and concern about our safety.
This human faculty of recognizing others is not foolproof. We can 
be misled by similarities in appearance or manners of dressŠa mimic 
may convince us we are listening to a well-known celebrity, and casual 
acquaintances may be incapable of detecting differences between identi
-cal twins. Nonetheless, although this mechanism can sometimes lead to 
error, it remains a way for members of small communities to identify one 
another.
As we seek to recognize individuals as members of larger communi
-ties, however, or to recognize them at a scale and speed that could dull 
our perceptions, we need to ˚nd ways to automate such recognition. 
Biometrics is the automated recognition of individuals based on their 
behavioral and biological characteristics.
11 ﬁBiometricsﬂ today carries two meanings, both in wide use. (See Box 1.1 and Box 1.2.) The 
subject of the current reportŠthe automatic recognition of individuals based on biological 
and behavioral traitsŠis one meaning, apparently dating from the early 1980s. However, in 
biology, agriculture, medicine, public health, demography, actuarial science, and ˚elds re
-lated to these, biometrics, biometry, and biostatistics refer almost synonymously to statistical 
and mathematical methods for analyzing data in the biological sciences. The two usages of 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
BOX 1.1
 History of the FieldŠTwo Biometrics
ﬁBiometricsﬂ has two meanings, both in wide use. The subject of this reportŠthe 
automatic recognition of individuals based on biological and behavioral traitsŠis 
one meaning, which apparently dates from the early 1980s. In biology, agriculture, 
medicine, public health, demography, actuarial science, and ˜elds related to these, 
ﬁbiometrics,ﬂ ﬁbiometry,ﬂ and ﬁbiostatisticsﬂ refer almost synonymously to statistical 
and mathematical methods for analyzing data in the biological sciences. This usage 
stems from the de˜nition of biometry, proffered by the founder of the then-new 
journal Biometrika
 in its 1901 debut issue: ﬁthe application to biology of the modern 
methods of statistics.ﬂ The writer was the British geneticist Francis Galton, who made 
important contributions to ˜ngerprinting as a tool for identi˜cation of criminals, to 
face recognition, and to the central statistical concepts of regression analysis, cor
-relation analysis, and goodness of ˜t.
Thus, the two meanings of ﬁbiometricsﬂ overlap both in subject matterŠhuman 
biological characteristicsŠand in historical lineage. Stigler (2000) notes that others 
had preceded the 
Biometrika
 founders in combining derivatives of the Greek 
í (bios) and µ
 (metron) to have speci˜c meanings.
1 These earlier usages do not 
survive.
Johns Hopkins University opened its Department of Biometry and Vital Statistics 
(since renamed the Department of Biostatistics) in 1918. Graduate degree programs, 
divisions, and service courses with names incorporating ﬁbiostatistics,ﬂ ﬁbiometrics,ﬂ 
or ﬁbiometryﬂ have proliferated in academic departments of health science since the 
1950s. The American Statistical Association™s 24 subject-matter sections began with 
the Biometrics Section in 1938, which in 1945 started the journal 
Biometrics Bulletin
, renamed 
Biometrics
 in 1947. In 1950 
Biometrics
 was transferred to the Biometric 
Society (now the International Biometric Society), founded in 1947 at Woods Hole, 
Massachusetts. The journal promotes ﬁstatistical and mathematical theory and meth
-ods in the biosciences through . . .  application to new and ongoing subject-matter 
challenges.ﬂ Concerned that 
Biometrics
 was overly associated with medicine and 
epidemiology, in 1996 the Society and the American Statistical Association jointly 
founded the 
Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics
 (
JABES
). The latter, along with other journals such as 
Statistics in Medicine 
and Biostatistics
, have taken over the original mission of 
Biometrika
, now more oriented to theoreti
-cal statistics.
Automated human recognition began with semiautomated speaker recognition 
systems in the 1940s. Semiautomated and fully automated ˜ngerprint, handwriting, 
and facial recognition systems emerged in the 1960s as digital computers became 
more widespread and capable. Fully automated systems based on hand geometry 
and ˜ngerprinting were ˜rst deployed commercially in the 1970s, almost immediately 
leading to concerns over spoo˜ng and privacy. Larger pilot projects for banking 
and government applications became popular in the 1980s. By the 1990s, the fully 
automated systems for both government and commercial applications used many 
different technologies, including iris and face recognition.
Clearly both meanings of biometrics are well-established and appropriate and 
will persist for some time. However, in distinguishing our topic from biometrics in its 
biostatistical sense, one must note the curiosity that two ˜elds so linked in Galton™s 
work should a century later have few points of contact. Galton wished to reveal the 
human manifestations of his cousin Charles Darwin™s theories by classifying and 
quantifying personal characteristics. He collected 8,000 ˜ngerprint sets, published 
three books on ˜ngerprinting in four years,
2 and proposed the Galton ˜ngerprint 
classi˜cation system extended in India by Azizul Haque for Edward Henry, Inspec
-tor General of Police, in Bengal. It was documented in Henry™s book 
Classi˜cation 
and Uses of Finger Prints
. Scotland Yard adopted this classi˜cation scheme in 1901 
and still uses it.
But not all of Galton™s legacy is positive. He believed that physical appearances 
could indicate criminal propensity and coined the term ﬁeugenics,ﬂ which was later 
used to horri˜c ends by the Third Reich. Many note that governments have not al
-ways used biologically derived data on humans for positive ends.
Galton™s work was for understanding biological data. And yet biostatisticians, who 
have addressed many challenges in the fast-moving biosciences, have been little 
involved in biometric recognition research. And while very sophisticated statistical 
methods are used for the signal analysis and pattern recognition aspects of biomet
-ric technology, the systems and population sampling issues that affect performance 
in practice may not be fully appreciated. That ˜elds once related are now separate 
may re˚ect that biometric recognition is scienti˜cally less basic than other areas of 
interest, or that funding for open research is lacking, or even that most universities 
have no ongoing research in biometric recognition. A historical separation between 
scienti˜cally based empirical methods developed speci˜cally in a forensic context 
and similar methods more widely vetted in the open scienti˜c community has been 
noted in other contexts and may also play a role here.
3,41 S.M.
 Stigler,
 The problematic unity of biometrics, Biometrics
 56: 653-658 (2000).Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 17
BOX 1.1
 History of the FieldŠTwo Biometrics
ﬁBiometricsﬂ has two meanings, both in wide use. The subject of this reportŠthe 
automatic recognition of individuals based on biological and behavioral traitsŠis 
one meaning, which apparently dates from the early 1980s. In biology, agriculture, 
medicine, public health, demography, actuarial science, and ˜elds related to these, 
ﬁbiometrics,ﬂ ﬁbiometry,ﬂ and ﬁbiostatisticsﬂ refer almost synonymously to statistical 
and mathematical methods for analyzing data in the biological sciences. This usage 
stems from the de˜nition of biometry, proffered by the founder of the then-new 
journal Biometrika
 in its 1901 debut issue: ﬁthe application to biology of the modern 
methods of statistics.ﬂ The writer was the British geneticist Francis Galton, who made 
important contributions to ˜ngerprinting as a tool for identi˜cation of criminals, to 
face recognition, and to the central statistical concepts of regression analysis, cor
-relation analysis, and goodness of ˜t.
Thus, the two meanings of ﬁbiometricsﬂ overlap both in subject matterŠhuman 
biological characteristicsŠand in historical lineage. Stigler (2000) notes that others 
had preceded the 
Biometrika
 founders in combining derivatives of the Greek 
í (bios) and µ
 (metron) to have speci˜c meanings.
1 These earlier usages do not 
survive.
Johns Hopkins University opened its Department of Biometry and Vital Statistics 
(since renamed the Department of Biostatistics) in 1918. Graduate degree programs, 
divisions, and service courses with names incorporating ﬁbiostatistics,ﬂ ﬁbiometrics,ﬂ 
or ﬁbiometryﬂ have proliferated in academic departments of health science since the 
1950s. The American Statistical Association™s 24 subject-matter sections began with 
the Biometrics Section in 1938, which in 1945 started the journal 
Biometrics Bulletin
, renamed 
Biometrics
 in 1947. In 1950 
Biometrics
 was transferred to the Biometric 
Society (now the International Biometric Society), founded in 1947 at Woods Hole, 
Massachusetts. The journal promotes ﬁstatistical and mathematical theory and meth
-ods in the biosciences through . . .  application to new and ongoing subject-matter 
challenges.ﬂ Concerned that 
Biometrics
 was overly associated with medicine and 
epidemiology, in 1996 the Society and the American Statistical Association jointly 
founded the 
Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics
 (
JABES
). The latter, along with other journals such as 
Statistics in Medicine 
and Biostatistics
, have taken over the original mission of 
Biometrika
, now more oriented to theoreti
-cal statistics.
Automated human recognition began with semiautomated speaker recognition 
systems in the 1940s. Semiautomated and fully automated ˜ngerprint, handwriting, 
and facial recognition systems emerged in the 1960s as digital computers became 
more widespread and capable. Fully automated systems based on hand geometry 
and ˜ngerprinting were ˜rst deployed commercially in the 1970s, almost immediately 
leading to concerns over spoo˜ng and privacy. Larger pilot projects for banking 
and government applications became popular in the 1980s. By the 1990s, the fully 
automated systems for both government and commercial applications used many 
different technologies, including iris and face recognition.
Clearly both meanings of biometrics are well-established and appropriate and 
will persist for some time. However, in distinguishing our topic from biometrics in its 
biostatistical sense, one must note the curiosity that two ˜elds so linked in Galton™s 
work should a century later have few points of contact. Galton wished to reveal the 
human manifestations of his cousin Charles Darwin™s theories by classifying and 
quantifying personal characteristics. He collected 8,000 ˜ngerprint sets, published 
three books on ˜ngerprinting in four years,
2 and proposed the Galton ˜ngerprint 
classi˜cation system extended in India by Azizul Haque for Edward Henry, Inspec
-tor General of Police, in Bengal. It was documented in Henry™s book 
Classi˜cation 
and Uses of Finger Prints
. Scotland Yard adopted this classi˜cation scheme in 1901 
and still uses it.
But not all of Galton™s legacy is positive. He believed that physical appearances 
could indicate criminal propensity and coined the term ﬁeugenics,ﬂ which was later 
used to horri˜c ends by the Third Reich. Many note that governments have not al
-ways used biologically derived data on humans for positive ends.
Galton™s work was for understanding biological data. And yet biostatisticians, who 
have addressed many challenges in the fast-moving biosciences, have been little 
involved in biometric recognition research. And while very sophisticated statistical 
methods are used for the signal analysis and pattern recognition aspects of biomet
-ric technology, the systems and population sampling issues that affect performance 
in practice may not be fully appreciated. That ˜elds once related are now separate 
may re˚ect that biometric recognition is scienti˜cally less basic than other areas of 
interest, or that funding for open research is lacking, or even that most universities 
have no ongoing research in biometric recognition. A historical separation between 
scienti˜cally based empirical methods developed speci˜cally in a forensic context 
and similar methods more widely vetted in the open scienti˜c community has been 
noted in other contexts and may also play a role here.
3,42 F.
 Galton, Fingerprints 
(1892); Decipherment of Blurred Finger Prints
 (1893); and Fingerprint 
Directories
 (1895). All were published by Macmillan in London.3 National
 Research
 Council, The Polygraph and Lie Detection 
(2003). Washington,
 D.C.: The National Academies Press, and National Research
 Council, Strengthening Forensic Science in the 
United States: A Path Forward 
(2009), Washington,
 D.C.: The National Academies Press.4 For
 more on the history of the ˜eld and related topics, see F.
 Galton, On Personal Description
, Dublin, Ireland: Medical Press and Circular
 (1888), and S.J. Gould, The Mis-measure of Man
, New York:
 Norton (1981).Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Many traits that lend themselves to automated recognition have been 
studied, including the face, voice, ˚ngerprint, and iris. A key characteristic 
of our de˚nition of biometrics is the use of ﬁautomatic,ﬂ which implies, 
at least here, that digital computers have been used.
2 Computers, in turn, 
require instructions for executing pattern recognition algorithms on trait 
samples received from sensors. Because biometric systems use sensed 
traits to recognize individuals, privacy, legal, and sociological factors are 
ﬁbiometricsﬂ overlap both in subject matterŠhuman biological characteristicsŠand in his
-torical lineage. This report™s de˚nition of biometrics is consistent with ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 37 
Standing Document 2, ﬁHarmonized Biometric Vocabulary, version 10,ﬂ August 20, 2008.
2 
Early biometric systems using analog computers and contemporary biometric systems us
-ing optical comparisons are examples of nondigital processing of biometric characteristics. 
BOX 1.2
 A Further Note on the Definition of Biometrics
The committee de˜nes biometrics as the automated recognition of individu
-als based on their behavioral and biological characteristics. This de˜nition is 
consistent with that adopted by the U.S. government™s Biometric Consortium in 
1995. ﬁRecognitionﬂ does not connote absolute certainty. The biometric systems 
that the committee considers always recognize with some level of error.
This report is concerned only with the recognition of human individuals, 
although the above de˜nition could include automated systems for the rec
-ognition of animals. The de˜nition used here avoids the perennial philosophi
-cal debate over the differences between ﬁpersonsﬂ and ﬁbodies.ﬂ
1 For human 
biometrics, an individual can only be a ﬁbodyﬂ. In essence, when applied to 
humans, biometric systems are automated methods for recognizing bodies 
using their biological and behavioral characteristics. The word ﬁindividualﬂ in 
the de˜nition also limits biometrics to recognizing single bodies, not group 
characteristics (either normal or pathological). Biometrics as de˜ned in this 
report is therefore not the tool of a demographer or a medical diagnostician 
nor is biometrics as de˜ned here applicable to deception detection or analysis 
of human intent.
The use of the conjunction ﬁandﬂ in the phrase ﬁbiological and behavioral 
characteristicsﬂ acknowledges that biometrics is about recognizing individuals 
from observations that draw on biology and behaviors. The characteristics ob
-servable by a sensing apparatus will depend on current and, to the extent that 
the body records them, previous activities (for example, scars, illness afteref
-fects, physical symptoms of drug use, and so on).
1 R.
 Martin and J. Barresi, Personal Identity
, Malden, Mass.: Blackwell Publishing (2003); L.R. Baker,
 Persons and Bodies: A Constitution View
, Cambridge, England: Cambridge Uni-versity Press (2000).Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 19
involved in all applications. Biometrics in this sense sits at the intersection 
of biological, behavioral, social, legal, statistical, mathematical, and com
-puter sciences as well as sensor physics and philosophy. It is no wonder 
that this complex set of technologies called biometrics has fascinated the 
government and the public for decades.
The FBI™s Integrated Automatic Fingerprint Identi˚cation System 
(IAFIS) and smaller local, state, and regional criminal ˚ngerprinting sys
-tems have been a tremendous success, leading to the arrest and conviction 
of thousands of criminals and keeping known criminals from positions of 
trust in, say, teaching. Biometrics-based access control systems have been 
in continuous, successful use for three decades at the University of Geor
-gia and have been used tens of thousands of times daily for more than 10 
years at San Francisco International Airport and Walt Disney World.
There are challenges, however. For nearly 50 years, the promise of bio
-metrics has outpaced the application of the technology. Many have been 
attracted to the ˚eld, only to leave as companies go bankrupt. In 1981, a 
writer in the 
New York Times
 noted that ﬁwhile long on ideas, the business 
has been short on pro˚ts.ﬂ
3 The statement continues to be true nearly 
three decades later. Technology advances promised that biometrics could 
solve a plethora of problems, including the enhancement of security, and 
led to growth in availability of commercial biometric systems. While 
some of these systems can be effective for the problem they are designed 
to solve, they often have unforeseen operational limitations. Government 
attempts to apply biometrics to border crossing, driver licenses, and social 
services have met with both success and failure. The reason for failure and 
the limitations of systems are varied and mostly ill understood. Indeed, 
systematic examinations that provide lessons learned from failed systems 
would undoubtedly be of value, but such an undertaking was beyond 
the scope of this report. Even a cursory look at such systems shows that 
multiple factors affect whether a biometric system achieves its goals. The 
next section, on the systems perspective, makes this point.
THE SYSTEMS PERSPECTIVE
One underpinning of this report is a systems perspective. No biomet
-ric technology, whether aimed at increasing security, improving through
-put, lowering cost, improving convenience, or the like, can in and of itself 
achieve an application goal. Even the simplest, most automated, accurate, 
and isolated biometric application is embedded in a larger system. That 
system may involve other technologies, environmental factors, appeal 
policies shaped by security, business, and political considerations, or 
3 
A. Pollack, Technology: Recognizing the real you, 
New York Times
, September 9, 1981.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
idiosyncratic appeal mechanisms, which in turn can reinforce or vitiate 
the performance of any biometric system.
Complex systems have numerous sources of uncertainty and vari
-ability. Consider a ˚ngerprint scanner embedded in a system aimed at 
protecting access to a laptop computer. In this comparatively simple case, 
the ability to achieve the ˚ngerprint scan™s security objective depends 
not only on the biometric technology, but also on the robustness of the 
computing hardware to mechanical failures and on multiple decisions by 
manufacturer and employer about when and how the biometric technol
-ogy can be bypassed, which all together contribute to the systems context 
for the biometric technology.
Most biometric implementations are far more complex. Typically, the 
biometric component is embedded in a larger system that includes envi
-ronmental and other operational factors that may affect performance of 
the biometric component; adjudication mechanisms, usually at multiple 
levels, for contested decisions; a policy context that in˜uences param
-eters (for example, acceptable combinations of cost, throughput, and false 
match rate) under which the core biometric technology operates; and pro
-tections against direct threats to either bypass or compromise the integrity 
of the core or of the adjudication mechanisms. Moreover, the effectiveness 
of such implementations relies on a data management system that ensures 
the enrolled biometric is linked from the outset to the nonphysical aspects 
of the enrolling individual™s information (such as name and allowed 
privileges). The rest of this report should be read keeping in mind that 
biometric systems and technologies must be understood and examined 
within a systems context.
MOTIVATIONS FOR USING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
A primary motivation for using biometrics is to easily and repeat
-edly recognize an individual so as to enable an automated action based 
on that recognition.
4 The reasons for wanting to automatically recognize 
individuals can vary a great deal; they include reducing error rates and 
improving accuracy, reducing fraud and opportunities for circumven
-tion, reducing costs, improving scalability, increasing physical safety, and 
improving convenience. Often some combination of these will apply. For 
example, almost all bene˚t and entitlement programs that have utilized 
4 
Note that here we are using ﬁrecognitionﬂ colloquiallyŠthe biometrics community often 
uses this term as part of the sample processing task; it uses ﬁveri˚cationﬂ to mean that a 
sample matches a reference for a claimed identity and ﬁidenti˚cationﬂ to mean the search
-ing of a biometric database for a matching reference and the return of information about 
that individual.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 21
biometrics have done so to reduce costs and fraud rates, but at the same 
time convenience may have been improved as well. See Box 1.3 for more 
on the variety of biometric applications.
Historically, personal identi˚cation numbers (PINs), passwords, 
names, social security numbers, and tokens (cards, keys, passports, and 
other physical objects) have been used to recognize an individual or to 
verify that a person is known to a system and may access its services or 
bene˚ts. For example, access to an automatic teller machine (ATM) is 
generally controlled by requiring presentation of an ATM card and its cor
-responding PIN. Sometimes, however, recognition can lead to the denial 
of a bene˚t. This could happen if an individual tries to make a duplicate 
claim for a bene˚t or if an individual on a watch list tries to enter a con
-trolled environment.
But re˜ection shows that authorizing or restricting someone because 
he or she knows a password or possesses a token is just a proxy for verify
-ing that person™s presence. A password can be shared indiscriminately or 
a physical token can be given away or lost. Thus, while a system can be 
BOX 1.3
 The Variety of Biometric Applications
Biometric technology is put to use because it can link a ﬁpersonﬂ to his or 
her claims of recognition and authorization within a particular application. 
Moreover, automating the recognition process based on biological and be
-havioral traits can make it more economical and ef˜cient. Other motivations 
for automating the mechanisms for recognizing individuals using biometric 
systems vary depending on the application and the context in which the system 
is deployed; they include reducing error rates and improving accuracy; reduc
-ing fraud and circumvention; reducing costs; improving security and safety; 
improving convenience; and improving scalability and practicability. Numerous 
applications employ biometrics for one or more of these reasons, including 
border control and criminal justice (such as prisoner handling and process), 
regulatory compliance applications (such as monitoring who has access to 
certain records or other types of audits), determining who should be entitled 
to physical or logical access to resources, and bene˜ts and entitlement man
-agement. The scope and scale of applications can vary a great dealŠbiometric 
systems that permit access might be used to protect resources as disparate as a 
nuclear power plant or a local gym. Even though at some level of abstraction the 
same motivation exists, the systems are likely to be very different and to merit 
different sorts of analysis, testing, and evaluation (see Chapter 2 for more on 
how application parameters can vary). The upshot of this wide variety of reasons 
for using biometric systems is that much more information is needed to assess 
the appropriateness of a given system for a given purpose beyond the fact that 
it employs biometric technology.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
con˚dent that the right password or token has been presented for access 
to a sensitive service, it cannot be sure that the item has been presented 
by the correct individual. Proxy mechanisms are even more problematic 
for exclusion systems such as watch lists, as there is little or no motiva
-tion for the subject to present the correct information or token if doing 
so would have adverse consequences. Biometrics offers the prospect of 
closely linking recognition to a given individual.
HUMAN IDENTITY AND BIOMETRICS
Essential to the above de˚nition of biometrics is that, unlike the de˚
-nition sometimes used in the biometrics technical community, it does not 
necessarily link biometrics to human identity, human identi˚cation, or 
human identity veri˚cation. Rather, it measures similarity, not identity. 
Speci˚cally, a biometric system compares encountered biological/behav
-ioral characteristics to one or more previously recorded references. Mea
-sures found to be suitably similar are considered to have come from the 
same individual, allowing the individual to be recognized as someone 
previously known to the system. A biometric system establishes a proba
-bilistic assessment of a match indicating that a subject at hand is the same 
subject from whom the reference was stored.
If an individual is recognized, then previously granted authorizations 
can once again be granted. If we consider this record of attributes to con
-stitute a personal ﬁidentity,ﬂ as de˚ned in the NRC report on authentica
-tion,
5 then biometric characteristics can be said to point to this identity 
record. However, the mere fact that attributes are associated with a bio
-metric reference provides no guarantee that the attributes are correct and 
apply to the individual who provided the biometric reference.
Further, as there is no requirement that the identity record contain 
a name or other social identi˚er, biometric approaches can be used in 
anonymous applications. More concisely, such approaches can allow for 
anonymous identi˚cation or for veri˚cation of an anonymous identity. 
This has important positive implications for the use of biometrics in 
privacy-sensitive applications. However, if the same biometric measure 
is used as a pointer to multiple identity records for the same individual 
across different systems, the possibility of linking these records (and 
hence the various social identities of the same person) raises privacy con
-cerns. See Box 1.4 for a note on privacy.
5 
National Research Council, 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2003).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 23
BOX 1.4
 A Note on Privacy
Privacy is an important consideration in biometric systems. The report 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy
,1 focused on the in
-tersection of privacy and authentication systems, including biometrics. Much 
of that analysis remains relevant to current biometric systems, and this report 
does not have much to add on privacy other than exploring some of the social 
and cultural implications of biometric systems (see Chapter 4). This reliance on 
an earlier report does not suggest that privacy is unimportant. Rather, the com
-mittee believes that no system can be effective without considerable attention 
to the social and cultural context within which it is embedded. The 2003 NRC 
report just referred to and its 2002 predecessor, which examined nationwide 
identity systems,
2 should be viewed as companions to this report.
1 National Research
 Council, Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
-vacy
. Washington,
 D.C.: The National Academies Press (2003).2 National Research
 Council, IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About Nationwide Identity 
Systems
. Washington,
 D.C.: The National Academies Press (2002).The Fundamental Dogma of Biometrics
The ˚nding that an encountered biometric characteristic is similar 
to a stored reference does not guarantee an inference of individualiza
-tionŠthat is, that a single individual can be unerringly selected out of a 
group of all known individuals (or, conversely, that no such individual is 
known). The inference that similarity leads to individualization rests on a 
theory that one might call the fundamental dogma of biometrics:
An individual is more similar to him- or herself over time than to any
-one else at any time.
This is clearly false in general; many singular attributes are shared by 
large numbers of individuals, and many attributes change signi˚cantly 
over an individual™s lifetime. Further, it will never be possible to prove 
(or falsify) this assertion precisely as stated because ﬁanyone elseﬂ will 
include all persons known or unknown, and we cannot possibly prove 
the assertion for those who are unknown.
6 In practice, however, we can 
relate similarity to individualization in situations where:
6 
The committee is aware of the Duhem/Quine and Popperian objections to provability in 
general of scienti˚c theories.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
An individual is more likely similar to him- or herself over time than 
to anyone else likely to be encountered.
This condition, if met, allows us to individualize through similarity, 
but with only a limited degree of con˚dence, based on knowledge of 
probabilities of encounters with particular biometric attributes. The goal 
in the development and applications of biometric systems is to ˚nd char
-acteristics that are stable and distinctive given the likelihood of encoun
-ters. If they can be found, then the above conditions are satis˚ed and we 
have a chance of making biometrics workŠto an acceptable degree of 
certaintyŠto achieve individualization.
A better fundamental understanding of the distinctiveness of human 
individuals would help in converting the fundamental dogma of biomet
-rics into grounded scienti˚c principles. Such an understanding would 
incorporate learning from biometric technologies and systems, popula
-tion statistics, forensic science, statistical techniques, systems analysis, 
algorithm development, process metrics, and a variety of methodologi
-cal approaches. However, the distinctiveness of biometric characteristics 
used in biometric systems is not well understood at scales approaching 
the entire human population, which hampers predicting the behavior of 
very large scale biometric systems.
The development of a science of human individual distinctiveness is 
essential to the effective and appropriate use of biometrics as a means of 
human recognition and encompasses a range of ˚elds. This report focuses 
on the biometric technologies themselves and on the behavioral and bio
-logical phenomena on which they are based. These phenomena have 
fundamental statistical properties, distinctiveness, and varying stabilities 
under natural physiological conditions and environmental challenges, 
many aspects of which are not well understood.
BASIC OPERATIONAL CONCEPTS
In this section, the committee outlines some of the concepts under
-lying the typical operation of biometric systems in order to provide a 
framework for understanding the analysis and discussion in the rest of 
the report.
7 Two concepts are discussed: sources of (1) variability and 
7 
There have been several comprehensive examinations of biometrics technologies and 
systems over the years. See, for example, J.L. Wayman, A.K. Jain, D. Maltoni, and D. Maio, 
eds., 
Biometric Systems: Technology, Design, and Performance E
valuation
, London: Springer 
(2005); J. Woodward, Jr., N. Orlans, and P. Higgins, 
Biometrics: Identity Assurance in the 
Inform
ation Age
, New York: McGraw-Hill/Osborne Media (2002); and A.K. Jain, R. Bolle, 
and S.
 Pankanti, eds., 
Biometrics: Personal Identi˜cation in a Networked Society
, Norwell, Mass.: 
Kluwer Academic Press (1999). The National Science and Technology Council also recently 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 25
(2) uncertainty in biometric systems and modalities, including multibio
-metric approaches.
Sample Operational Process
The operational process typical for a biometric system is given in Fig
-ure 1.1. The main components of the system for the purposes of this dis
-cussion are the capture (whereby the sensor collects biometric data from 
the subject to be recognized), the reference database (where previously 
enrolled subjects™ biometric data are held), the matcher (which compares 
presented data to reference data in order to make a recognition decision), 
and the action (whereby the system recognition decision is revealed and 
actions are undertaken based on that decision.
8This diagram presents a very simpli˚ed view of the overall system. 
The operational ef˚cacy of a biometric system depends not only on its 
technical componentsŠthe biometric sample capture devices (sensors) 
and the mathematical algorithms that create and compare referencesŠbut 
also on the end-to-end application design, the environment in which the 
biometric sensor operates, and any conditions that impact the behavior of 
the data subjects, that is, persons with the potential to be sensed.
For example, the con˚guration of the database used to store refer
-ences against which presented data will be compared affects system per
-formance. At a coarse level, whether the database is networked or local 
is a primary factor in performance. Networked databases need secure 
communication, availability, and remote access privileges, and they also 
raise more privacy challenges than do local databases. Local databases, 
by contrast, may mean replicating the reference database multiple times, 
raising security, consistency, and scalability challenges.
9 In both cases, the 
accuracy and currency of any identi˚cation data associated with reference 
issued reports that elaborate on biometrics systems with an eye to meeting government 
needs. See, for example, ﬁThe National Biometrics Challenge,ﬂ available at http://www.
biometrics.gov/Documents/biochallengedoc.pdf, and ﬁNSTC Policy for Enabling the Devel
-opment, Adoption and Use of Biometric Standards,ﬂ available at http://www.biometrics.
gov/Standards/NSTC_Policy_Bio_Standards.pdf.
8 
The data capture portion of the process has the most impact on accuracy and throughput 
and has perhaps been the least researched portion of the system. The capture process, which 
involves human actions (even in covert applications) in the presence of a sensor, is not well 
understood. While we may understand sensor characteristics quite well, the interaction of 
the subject with the sensors merits further attention. See Chapter 5 for more on research 
opportunities in biometrics.
9 
Both the NRC report 
Who Goes There?
 (2003) and the EC Data Protection Working Party 
discuss the implications of centralized or networked data
 repositories versus local storage 
of data. The
 latter is
 available at http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/docs/
wpdocs/2003/wp80_en.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
characteristics in a biometric system are independent of the likelihood that 
a sample came from the individual who provided the reference. In other 
words, increasing con˚dence in a recognition result does not commensu
-rately increase our con˚dence in the validity of any associated data.
Measures of Operational Ef˜cacy
Key aspects of operational ef˚cacy include recognition error rates; 
speed; cost of acquisition, operation, and maintenance; data security and 
privacy; usability; and user acceptance. Generally, trade-offs must be 
made across all of these measures to achieve the best-performing system 
consistent with operational and budgetary needs. For example, recogni
-tion error rates might be improved by using a better but more time-con
-suming enrollment process; however, the time added to the enrollment 
process could result in queues (with loss of user acceptance) and unac
-ceptable costs.
In this report the committee usually discusses recognition error rates 
in terms of the false match rate (FMR; the probability that the matcher 
recognizes an individual as a different enrolled subject) and the false 
nonmatch rate (FNMR; the probability that the matcher does not recog
-nize a previously enrolled subject). FMR and FNMR refer to errors in the 
matching process and are closely related to the more frequently reported 
false acceptance rate (FAR) and the false rejection rate (FRR). FAR and 
FRR refer to results at a broader system level and include failures aris
-ing from additional factors, such as the inability to acquire a sample. The 
committee uses these terms less frequently as they can sometimes intro
-CompareReferencesReferenceDatabaseMatchNonmatchActionCaptureSampleMatchActionSubjectpresentsbiometriccharacteristicSensorCaptureMatcherActionFigure 1-1vector, editableFIGURE 1.1
 Operation of a biometric system.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 27
duce confusion between the semantics of ﬁacceptanceﬂ and ﬁrejectionﬂ in 
terms of the claimed performance for biometric recognition versus that 
for the overall application. For example, in a positive recognition system, 
a false acceptance occurs when subjects are recognized who should not 
be recognizedŠeither because they are not enrolled in the system or they 
are someone other than the subject being claimed. In this case the sense 
of false acceptance is aligned for both the biometric matching operation 
and the application function. In a system designed to detect and prevent 
multiple enrollments of a single person, sometimes referred to as a nega
-tive recognition system, a false acceptance results when the system fails 
to match the submitted biometric sample to a reference already in the 
database. If the system falsely matches a submitted biometric sample to 
a reference from a different person, the false match results in a denial of 
access to system resources (a false rejection).
Variability and Uncertainty
Variability in the biometric data submitted for comparison to the 
enrolled reference data can affect performance. As mentioned above, the 
matching algorithm plays a role in how this variability is handled. How
-ever, many other factors can in˜uence performance, depending on how 
the speci˚c biometric system is implemented. Generally speaking, bio
-metric applications automatically capture aspects of one or more human 
traits to produce a signal from which an individual can be recognized. 
This signal cannot be assumed to be a completely accurate representation 
of the underlying biometric characteristic. Biometric systems designers 
and experts have accepted for some time that noise in the signal occurs 
haphazardly; while it can never be fully controlled, it can be modeled 
probabilistically.
10
 Also, not all uncertainty about biometric systems is due 
to random noise. Uncertainty pervades a biometric system in a number of 
ways. Several potential sources of uncertainty or variation are discussed 
here and should be kept in mind when reading the rest of this report. 
These sources are listed based on the order of events that take place as an 
individual works with the system to gain recognition.
Ł Depending on the biometric modality, information content pre
-sented by the same subject at different encounters may be affected by 
changes in age, environment, stress, occupational factors, training and 
prompting, intentional alterations, sociocultural aspects of the situation in 
which the presentation occurs, changes in human interface with the bio
-10
 See for example, J.P. Campbell, Jr., 
Testing with the YOHO CD-ROM Voice Veri˜cation 
Corpus, 
The Biometrics Consortium, available at http://www.biometrics.org/REPORTS/
ICASSP95.html.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
metric system, and so on. These factors are important both at the enroll
-ment phase and during regular operation. The next section describes 
within-person and between-person variability in depth.
Ł Sensor operation is another source of variability. Sensor age and 
calibration can be factors, as well as how precisely the system-human 
interface at any given time stabilizes extraneous factors. Sensitivity of 
sensor performance to variation in the ambient environment (such as light 
levels) can play a role.
Ł The above sources may be expected to induce greater variation 
in the information captured by different biometric acquisition systems 
than in the information captured by the same system. Other factors held 
constant, information on a single subject captured from repeated encoun
-ters with the same sensor will vary less than that captured from different 
sensors in the same system, which will vary less than that captured from 
encounters with different systems.
In addition to information capture, performance variation across bio
-metric systems and when interfacing components of different systems 
depends on how the information is used, including the following:
Ł Differences in feature extraction algorithms affect performance, 
with effects sometimes aggravated by the need for proprietary systems 
to be interoperable.
Ł Differences between matching algorithms and comparison scor
-ing mechanisms. How these algorithms and mechanisms interact with 
the preceding sources of variability of information acquired and features 
extracted also contributes to variation in performance of different systems. 
For instance, matching algorithms may differ in their sensitivity to biologi
-cal and behavioral instability of the biometric characteristic over time, as 
well as the characteristic™s susceptibility to intentional modi˚cation.
Ł The potential for individuals attempting to thwart recognition for 
one reason or another is another source of uncertainty that systems should 
be robust against. See below for a more detailed discussion on security for 
biometric systems.
In light of all of this, determining an appropriate action to takeŠwhere 
possible actions include to recognize, to not recognize, or to transition the 
system to a secondary recognition mechanism based on the signal from a 
biometric deviceŠinvolves decision making under uncertainty.
Within- and Between-Person Variability
Variability in the observed values of a biometric trait can refer to 
variation in a given trait observed in the same person or to variation in 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 29
the trait observed in different persons. Effective overall system perfor
-mance requires that within-person variability be smallŠthe smaller the 
betterŠrelative to between-person variability.
Within-Person Variation
Ideally, every time we measure the biometric trait of an individual, 
we should observe the same patterns. In practice, however, the differ
-ent samples produce different patterns, which result in different digital 
representations (references). Such within-person variation, sometimes 
referred to as ﬁintraclass variation,ﬂ typically occurs when an individual 
interacts differently with the sensor (for example, by smiling) or when the 
biometric details of a person (for example, hand shape and geometry or 
iris pigmentation details) change over time. The sensing environment (for 
example, ambient lighting for a face and background noise for a voice) 
can also introduce within-person variation. There are a number of ways to 
reduce or accommodate such variation, including controlled acquisition of 
the data, storage of many references for every user, and systematic updat
-ing of references. Reference updating, although essential to any biometric 
system since it can help account for changes in characteristics over time, 
introduces system vulnerabilities. Some biometric traits are more likely 
to change over time than others. Face, hand, and voice characteristics, 
in particular, can bene˚t from suitably implemented reference update 
mechanisms. Within-person variation can also be caused by behavioral 
changes over time.
Between-Person Variation
Between-person variation, sometimes referred to as ﬁinterclass varia
-tion,ﬂ refers generally to person-to-person variability. Since there is an 
inherent similarity between biometric traits among some individuals 
(faces of identical twins offer the most striking example), between-person 
variation between two individuals may be quite small. Also, a chosen 
digital representation (the features) for a particular biometric trait may not 
very effective in separating the observed patterns of particular subjects. In 
contrast, demographic heterogeneity among enrolled subjects in a biomet
-ric system database may contribute to large between-person variation in 
measurements of a particular biometric trait, although ˜uctuations in the 
sensing environment from which their presentation samples are obtained 
may contribute to large within-person variation as well.
It is the magnitude of within-person variation relative to between-
person variation (observed in the context of a ˚nite range of expression of 
human biometric traits) that determines the overlap between distributions 
of biometric measurements from different individuals and hence limits 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
the number of individuals that can be discriminated and recognized by a 
biometric system with acceptable accuracy. When within-person variation 
is small relative to between-person variation, large biometric systems with 
high accuracy are feasible because the distributions of observed biometric 
data from different individuals are likely to remain widely separated, even 
for large groups. When within-person variation is high relative to between-
person variation, however, the distributions are more likely to impinge on 
each other, limiting the capacity of a recognition system. In other words, 
the number of enrolled subjects cannot be arbitrarily increased for a ˚xed 
set of features and matching algorithms without degrading accuracy. 
When considering the anticipated scale of a biometric system, the relative 
magnitudes of both within-person and between-person variations should 
be kept in mind.
Stability and Distinctiveness at Global Scale
Questions of variation and uncertainty become challenging at scale. 
In particular, no biometric characteristic, including DNA, is known to be 
capable of reliably correct individualization over the size of the world™s 
population. Factors that make unlikely the discovery of a characteristic 
suitably stable and distinctive over such a large population include the 
following:
Ł Indi
viduals without traits. 
Almost any trait that can be noninvasively 
observed will fail to be exhibited by some members of the human popula
-tion, because they are missing the body part that carries the trait, because 
environmental or occupational exposure has eradicated or degraded the 
trait, or because their individual expression of the trait is anomalous in a 
way that confuses biometric systems.
Ł Similar indi
viduals. 
In suf˚ciently small populations it is highly 
likely that almost any chosen trait will be suf˚ciently distinctive to dis
-tinguish individuals. As populations get larger, most traits (and especially 
most traits that can be noninvasively observed) may have too few vari
-ants to guarantee that different individuals are distinguishable from one 
another. The population statistics for most biometric traits are poorly 
understood.
Ł Feature extraction effects. 
Even in cases where a biometric trait is 
distinctive, the process of converting the analog physical property of a 
human to a digital representation that can be compared against the prop
-erties of other individuals involves loss of detailŠthat is, information 
lossŠand introduction of noise, both of which can obscure distinctions 
between individuals.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 31
However, the lack of an entirely stable and distinctive characteristic at 
scale need not stand in the way of effective use of biometrics if the system 
is well designed. Some biometric systems might not have to deal with all 
people at all times but might need only to deal with smaller groups of 
people over shorter periods of time. It may be possible to ˚nd traits that 
are suf˚ciently stable and distinctive to make many types of applications 
practicable.
Implicit in all biometric systems are estimated probabilities of the 
sameness and difference of source of samples and stored references, sepa
-rately for presenters of different types, such as residents and impostors. 
This leads to the explicit use of ratios of probabilities in some biometric rec
-ognition algorithms. Because assessing the likelihood that a sample came 
from any particular reference may involve computing similarity to many 
references through use of ratios of probabilities or other normalization 
techniques, it cannot be strictly said that any form of recognition involves 
comparison of only one sample to one known reference. However, veri
-˚cation of a claim of similarity of a sample with a speci˚c reference may 
appear to those unfamiliar with the algorithmic options to involve only a 
single comparison. This form of veri˚cation is often referred to as ﬁone to 
one.ﬂ Veri˚cation of claims of similarity to an unspeci˚c reference is often 
referred to as a ﬁone-to-manyﬂ application because many comparisons to 
assess similarity over the enrolled individuals are required.
Biometric Modalities
A biometric modality
11
 refers to a system built to recognize a particu
-lar biometric trait. Face, ˚ngerprint, hand geometry, palm print, iris, voice, 
signature, gait, and keystroke dynamics are examples of biometric traits.
12
 In the context of a given system and application, the presentation of a 
user™s biometric feature involves both biological and behavioral aspects. 
Some common biometric modalities described by Jain et al. (2004)
13
 are 
11
 A biometric modality is the combination of a biometric trait, sensor type, and algorithms 
for extracting and processing the digital representations of the trait. When any two of these 
three constituents differ from one system to the next, the systems are said to have different 
modalities. For example, infrared facial recognition and iris recognition are different modali
-ties since the trait and the algorithms differ even if the same camera is used.
12
 DNA could be considered a biometric modality if the technologies for it can be suf˚
-ciently automated. However, this report focuses on those modalities and systems for which 
automated technologies are further along in development and deployment. 
13
 Anil K. Jain, Arun Ross, and Salil Prabhakar, An introduction to biometric recognition, 
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology
, Special Issue on Image- and 
Video-Based Biometrics 14(1) (2004).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
summarized brie˜y here. Many of the issues associated with biometric 
systems (and correspondingly much of the discussion in this report) are 
not modality-speci˚c, although of course the choice of modality has impli
-cations for system design and, potentially, system performance.
Face
Static or video images of a face can be used to facilitate recognition. 
Modern approaches are only indirectly based on the location, shape, and 
spatial relationships of facial landmarks such as eyes, nose, lips, and chin, 
and so on. Signal processing techniques based on localized ˚lter responses 
on the image have largely replaced earlier techniques based on represent
-ing the face as a weighted combination of a set of canonical faces. Recog
-nition can be quite good if canonical poses and simple backgrounds are 
employed, but changes in illumination and angle create challenges. The 
time that elapses between enrollment in a system and when recognition 
is attempted can also be a challenge, because facial appearance changes 
over time.
Fingerprints
FingerprintsŠthe patterns of ridges and valleys on the ﬁfriction ridgeﬂ 
surfaces of ˚ngersŠhave been used in forensic applications for over a 
century. Friction ridges are formed in utero during fetal development, and 
even identical twins do not have the same ˚ngerprints. The recognition 
performance of currently available ˚ngerprint-based recognition systems 
using prints from multiple ˚ngers is quite good. One factor in recognition 
accuracy is whether a single print is used or whether multiple or ten-
prints (one from each ˚nger) are used. Multiple prints provide additional 
information that can be valuable in very large scale systems. Challenges 
include the fact that large-scale ˚ngerprint recognition systems are com
-putationally intensive, particularly when trying to ˚nd a match among 
millions of references.
Hand Geometry
Hand geometry refers to the shape of the human hand, size of the 
palm, and the lengths and widths of the ˚ngers. Advantages to this modal
-ity are that it is comparatively simple and easy to use. However, because 
it is not clear how distinctive hand geometry is in large populations, such 
systems are typically used for veri˚cation rather than identi˚cation. More
-over, because the capture devices need to be at least the size of a hand, 
they are too large for devices like laptop computers.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 33
Palm Print
Palm prints combine some of the features of ˚ngerprints and hand 
geometry. Human palms contain ridges and valleys, like ˚ngerprints, but 
are much larger, necessitating larger image capture or scanning hardware. 
Palm prints, like ˚ngerprints, have particular application in the forensic 
community, as latent palm prints can often be found at crime scenes.
Iris
The iris, the circular colored membrane surrounding the eye™s pupil, 
is complex enough to be useful for recognition. The performance of sys
-tems using this modality is promising. Although early systems required 
signi˚cant user cooperation, more modern systems are increasingly user 
friendly. However, although systems based on the iris have quite good 
FMRs, the FNMRs can be high. Further, the iris is thought to change over 
time, but variability over a lifetime has not been well characterized.
14
Voice
Voice directly combines biological and behavioral characteristics. The 
sound an individual makes when speaking is based on physical aspects 
of the body (mouth, nose, lips, vocal cords, and so on) and can be affected 
by age, emotional state, native language, and medical conditions. The 
quality of the recording device and ambient noise also in˜uence recogni
-tion rates.
Signature
How a person signs his or her name typically changes over time. It 
can also be strongly in˜uenced by context, including physical conditions 
and the emotional state of the signer. Extensive experience has also shown 
that signatures are relatively easy to forge. Nevertheless, signatures have 
been accepted as a method of recognition for a long time.
Gait
Gait, the manner in which a person walks, has potential for human 
recognition at a distance and potentially, over an extended period of 
14
 See Sarah Baker, Kevin W. Bowyer, and Patrick J. Flynn, Empirical evidence for correct 
iris match score degradation with increased time lapse between gallery and probe im
-ages, 
International Conference on Biometrics
, pp. 1170-1179 (2009). Available at http://www.
nd.edu/~kwb/BakerBowyerFlynnICB_2009.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
time. Laboratory gait recognition systems are based on image processing 
to detect the human silhouette and associated spatiotemporal attributes. 
Gait can be affected by several factors, including choice of footwear, the 
walking surface, and clothing. Gait recognition systems are still in the 
development stage.
Keystroke
Keystroke dynamics are a biometric trait that some hypothesize may 
be distinctive to individuals. Indeed, there is a long tradition of recog
-nizing Morse code operators by their ﬁ˚stsﬂŠthe distinctive patterns 
individuals used to create messages. However, keystroke dynamics are 
strongly affected by context, such as the person™s emotional state, his or 
her posture, type of keyboard, and so on.
Comparison of Modalities
Each biometric modality has its pros and cons, some of which were 
mentioned in the descriptions above. Moreover, even if some of the down
-sides could be overcome, a modality itself might have inherent de˚cien
-cies, although very little research into this has been done. Therefore, 
the choice of a biometric trait for a particular application depends on 
issues besides the matching performance. Raphael and Young identi˚ed 
a number of factors that make a physical or a behavioral trait suitable for 
a biometric application.
15
 The following seven factors are taken from an 
article by Jain et al.:
16
Ł Uni
versality. 
Every individual accessing the application should 
possess the trait.
Ł Uniqueness. 
The given trait should be suf˚ciently different across 
members of the population.
Ł Permanence.
17
 The biometric trait of an individual should be suf
-˚ciently invariant over time with respect to a given matching algorithm. 
A trait that changes signi˚cantly is not a useful biometric.
Ł Measurability. 
It should be possible to acquire and digitize the bio
-metric trait using suitable devices that do not unduly inconvenience the 
15
 D.E. Raphael and J.R. Young, 
Automated Personal Identi˜cation
, Palo Alto, Calif.: SRI 
International (1974).
16
 Jain A.K., Bolle R., and Pankanti, S., 
Biometrics: Personal Identi˜cation in Networked Society
, Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publisher (1999).
17
 In this report the committee generally refers to the stability of a trait rather than its 
permanence.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 35
individual. Furthermore, the acquired raw data should be amenable to 
processing to extract representative features.
Ł Performance. 
The recognition accuracy and the resources required to 
achieve that accuracy should meet the requirements of the application.
Ł Acceptability. 
Individuals in the target population that will use 
the application should be willing to present their biometric trait to the 
system.
Ł Circum
vention. 
The ease with which a biometric trait can be imi
-tated using artifactsŠfor example, fake ˚ngers in the case of physical 
traits and mimicry in the case of behavioral traitsŠshould conform to the 
security needs of the application.
Multibiometrics
As the preceding discussions make clear, using a single biometric 
modality may not always provide the performance
18
 needed from a given 
system. One approach to improving performance (error rates but not 
speed) is the use of multibiometrics, which has several meanings:
19
Ł Multisensors. 
Here, a single modality is used, but multiple sensors 
are used to capture the data. For example, a facial recognition system 
might employ multiple cameras to capture different angles on a face.
Ł Multiple algorithms. 
The same capture data are processed using 
different algorithms. For example, a single ˚ngerprint can be processed 
using minutiae and texture. This approach saves on sensor and associated 
hardware costs, but adds computational complexity.
Ł Multiple instances. 
Multiple instances of the same modality are 
used. For example, multiple ˚ngerprints may be matched instead of just 
one, as may the irises of both eyes. Depending on how the capture was 
done, such systems may or may not require additional hardware and 
sensor devices.
Ł Multisamples. 
Multiple samples of the same trait are acquired. For 
example, multiple angles of a face or multiple images of different portions 
of the same ˚ngerprint are captured.
Ł Multimodal. 
Data from different modalities are combined, such as 
face and ˚ngerprint, or iris and voice. Such systems require both hard
-18
 The term ﬁperformance,ﬂ used in the biometrics community generally, refers broadly to 
error rates, processing speed, and data subject throughput. See, for example, http://www.
biometrics.gov/Documents/Glossary.pdf.
19
 A. Ross and A.K. Jain, Multimodal biometrics: An overview. 
Proceedings of 
12
th Eu
-ropean Signal Processing Conference.
 Available online at http://biometrics.cse.msu.edu/
Publications/Multibiometrics/RossJain_MultimodalOverview_EUSIPCO04.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
ware (sensors) and software (algorithms) to capture and process each 
modality being used.
Hybrid systems that combine the above also may prove useful. For 
example, one could use multiple algorithms for each modality of a multi
-modal system. The engineering of multibiometric systems presents chal
-lenges as does their evaluation. There are issues related to the architec
-ture and operation of multibiometrics systems and questions about how 
best to model such systems and then use the model to drive operational 
aspects. Understanding statistical dependencies is also important when 
using multibiometrics. For example, Are the modalities of hand geometry 
and ˚ngerprints completely independentŠbeyond, say, the trivial corre
-lation between a missing hand and the failure to acquire ˚ngerprints? As 
a large-scale biometric system becomes multimodal, it is that much more 
important to adopt approaches and architectures that support interoper
-ability and implementation of best-of-breed matching components. This 
would mean, for example, including matching software, image segmen
-tation software, and sample quality assessment software as they become 
available.
20
 This approach to interoperability support would also facili
-tate replacing an outdated matcher with a newer, higher performing 
matcher without having to scrap the entire system and start from scratch. 
Likewise, new multibiometric fusion algorithms could be implemented 
without requiring a major system redesign. Finally, new human interface 
issues may come into play if multiple observations are needed of a single 
modality or of multiple modalities.
21
COPING WITH THE PROBABILISTIC 
NATURE OF BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
The probabilistic aspect of biometric systems is often missing from 
popular discussions of the technology. For the purposes of this discus
-sion, the committee will ignore FAR and FRR and consider only the 
20
 For example, this would allow for the implementation of two different 10-print matchers, 
one of which might be better for the rapid processing of high-quality ˚ngerprints and the 
other of which might be better for poor-quality ˚ngerprints but take longer to process.
21
 Historically, multibiometric systems have proved more expensive, time consuming, 
and dif˚cult to implement than single modal systems. These drawbacks are blamed by the 
principals for the nondeployment of the Department of Defense (DOD) Base and Installa
-tion Security System (BISS) in the 1970s (A. Fejfar and J. Myers, 
The Testing of 
3 Automatic 
ID Veri˜cation Techniques for Entry Control
, 2nd International Conference on Crime Counter
-measures, Oxford, England, July 25-29, 1977, and A. Fejfar, 
Combining Techniques to Impro
ve Security in Automatic Access Control
, Carnahan Conference on Crime Countermeasures, 
University of Kentucky, May 17-19, 1978).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 37
sources of error that contribute to the false match rates (FMR) and false 
nonmatch rates (FNMR). In this context, the FMR is the probability that 
the incorrect trait is falsely recognized and the FNMR is the probability 
that a correct trait is falsely not recognized. The probability a correct trait 
is truly recognized is 1 
 FNMR and the probability an incorrect trait is 
truly not recognized is 1 
 FMR. Complicating matters, biometric match 
probabilities are only one part of what we need to help predict the real-
world performance of biometric systems.
22
It seems intuitively obvious that a declared nonmatch in a biometric 
system with both FMRs and FNMRs of 0.1 percent is almost certainly 
correct. Unfortunately, intuition is grossly misleading in this instance, 
and the common misconception can have profound sociological impacts 
(for example, it might lead to the assumption that a suspected criminal 
is guilty if the ˚ngerprints or DNA samples from the suspect ﬁmatchﬂ 
those at the crime scene). Understanding why this natural belief is often 
wrong is one of the keys to understanding how to use biometrics effec
-tively. From the perspective of statistical decision theory, it is not enough 
to focus on error rates. All they provide is the conditional probability of a 
recognition/nonrecognition given that the presenting individual should 
be recognized and the conditional probability of a nonrecognition given 
that the presenting individual should not be recognized.
To illustrate, we will consider ˚rst an access control system. Let us 
assume that we know by experience or experiment the probability that a 
false claim by an impostor will be accepted and the probability that a true 
claim by a legitimate user will be accepted. In an operational environment, 
however, we would like to know the converse: the probability that the 
claimant is an impostor, given that the claim was accepted by the system. 
That is, we wish to know the probability of a false claim given a recogni
-tion by the system. To perform such a probability inversion, it is necessary 
to use Bayes™ theorem. A fundamental characteristic of this theorem is that 
it requires the prior probability of a false claim (impostor) (see Box 1.5). 
That is, some information about the frequency of false claims/impostors 
is needed in order to know the probability that any given recognition by 
the system is in error. The following series of examples illustrates how the 
percentage of ﬁrightﬂ decisions by a biometric system depends upon the 
impostor base rate,
23
 the percentage of ﬁimpostorsﬂ actually encountered 
by the system, not just on the error rates of the technology. The error rates 
22
 In addition, if recognition rates are tunable in a given system (that is, if it is possible 
to adjust certain parameters and make, say, the FMR or FNMR higher or lower), that has 
implications for system architecture.
23
 The ﬁimposter base rateﬂ refers to the probability that a randomly chosen individual 
presenting him- or herself to the biometric system will be an impostor.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
BOX 1.5
 Decision Theory Components Required for Biometric Recognition
A formal decision-theoretic formulation of biometric recognition, whether 
from a classical frequentist or a Bayesian perspective, is beyond the scope of 
this report. However, the ˚avor of such formulations is conveyed by some of 
their components:
Ł State space. 
A mutually exclusive and exhaustive listing of the uncertain 
components relevant to decisions about biometric recognition. This may be as 
simple as whether or not a presenting individual is an authorized user or an 
impostor.
Ł Action space. 
A mutually exclusive and exhaustive listing of the decisions 
to be made or actions to be taken based on the result of the biometric matcher. 
These might simply be to declare a match or a nonmatch (regardless of whether 
this decision is or is not the correct one). Slightly more complex action spaces 
would indicate the level of authorization of a presenting individual or whether 
the presenting individual should be required to have further screening.
Ł Probability function. 
The probability distribution of the comparison score 
for each of the elements (impostor/authorized) in the state space.
Ł Prior distribution. 
The probability of the elements (impostor/authorized) 
of the state space. The prior distribution should accurately re˚ect the prob
-ability of the state of the presenting individual based on all information prior 
to obtaining the comparison score from the biometric device.
Ł Consequences. 
The cost or utility of each (state, action) combination.
Here is a simple formulation of Bayes™ theorem in this context:
P (Impostor | Biometric Match) =
P(Biometric
 Match | 
Impostor
) P(Impostor
)P(Biometric Match
 | 
Impostor
) P(Impostor
) + 
 P(Biometric Match
 | 
Not Impostor
) P(Not Impostor
)In this formulation, 
P(B|A) is the conditional probability of B given A, that is, 
the fraction of instances that B is true among instances when A is true, and 
the prior probability of a false claim is 
P(Impostor
). Also, 
P(Not Impostor
) = 
 1 Œ 
P(Impostor
).(the FMR and FNMR) are independent of the impostor base rate, but all of 
these pieces of information are needed to understand the frequency that a 
given recognition (or nonrecognition) by the system is in error.
To return to the example above, imagine that we have installed a 
rather accurate biometric veri˚cation system to control entry to a college 
dormitory. Suppose that the system has a 0.1 percent FMR and a 0.1 per
-cent FNMR. The system lets an individual into the dorm if it matches the 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 39
individual to a stored biometric referenceŠif the system does not ˚nd a 
match, it does not let the individual in. We would like to know how often 
a nonmatch represents an attempt by a nonresident ﬁimpostorﬂ to get into 
the dorm.
24
 The answer, it turns out, is ﬁit depends.ﬂ
25
First, consider the case where the impostor base rate is 0 percentŠthat 
is, no impostors ever try to get into the dorm. In this case, all of the people 
using the biometric system are residents. Since the system has a 0.1 percent 
FNMR, it will generate a false nonmatch once every 1,000 authentication 
attempts. All of these nonmatches will be errors (because in this case all 
the people using the system are residents). In this case, over time we will 
discover that our con˚dence in a nonmatch is zeroŠbecause nonmatches 
are always false. Table 1.1 contains the calculations for this case. Figure 
1.2 presents the information in Table 1.1.
Now consider a different case: For every 999 times a resident attempts 
entry, one nonresident impostor tries to get into the building. In this case, 
since the system has a 0.1 percent FMR, it will (just as in the preceding 
case) generate one false nonmatch for each 1,000 recognition attempts. 
But since the system also has a 0.1 percent FNMR, it will (with 99.9 per
-cent probability) generate a nonmatch for the one nonresident impostor. 
On the average, therefore, every 1,000 recognition attempts will include 
one impostor (who will generate a correct nonmatch with overwhelming 
probability) and one resident who will generate an incorrect nonmatch. 
There will therefore be two nonmatchesŠ50 percent of them correct and 
50 percent of them incorrectŠin every 1,000 authentication attempts. In 
this case, using the same system as in the preceding case, with the same 
sensor and the same 0.1 percent FNMR, we will observe 50 percent true 
nonmatches and 50 percent false nonmatches. Table 1.2 shows how to 
calculate con˚dence that a nonmatch will be true in this case. Figure 1.3 
presents the information in Table 1.2.
Tables 1.3 and 1.4 calculate con˚dence in the truth of a nonmatch in 
cases where the impostor base rate is 1 percent (that is, where 1 percent 
of the people trying to get into the dorm are nonresident impostors) and 
in cases where the impostor base rate is 50 percent (that is, half the people 
trying to get into the dorm are nonresident impostors). (Figures 1.4 and 
1.5 present calculations of the data in Tables 1.3 and 1.4, respectively.) 
Note that con˚dence in the truth of a nonmatch approaches 99.9 percent 
24
 For the purposes of the discussion, we assume that the imposter is ready and able to 
enter the dorm and in possession of any information or tokens needed to initiate the bio
-metric veri˚cation process.
25
 This discussion and associated examples draw heavily on 
Weight-of-E
vidence for Foren
-sic DNA Pro˜les
 by David J. Balding (New York: Wiley, 2005) and are based primarily on 
material in its Chapter 2, ﬁCrime on an Island,ﬂ and Chapter 3, ﬁAssessing Evidence via 
Likelihood Ratios.ﬂ
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
TABLE 1.1
 Impostor Base Rate of 0%
Proffered 
Identity
Authentication 
Attempts
Biometric Decision
Conclusion
Match
Nonmatch
Authentic
1,000
1,000 × 99.9% 
= 999
1,000 × 0.1% 
= 1
Confidence that a 
nonmatcher is an 
impostor = fraction 
of impostors among 
nonmatches = 0/1 = 0%
Impostor
00 × 0.1% = 0
0 × 99.9% = 0
Total
1,000
999
1Figure 1.2vector, editable1 Fa
lse nonmatch
0.
1%
FN
MR
1,
00
0 Resident
s1 Nonmat
ch
;0 percent 
corr
ec
t1,
00
0 Candidates
50
Rows
0.
1%
 FM
R0 Nonresident impostor
s0 Tr
ue nonmatches
FIGURE 1.2
 Authenticating residents (impostor base rate 0 percent; very low 
nonmatch accuracy).
(the true nonmatch rate of the system) only when at least half the people 
trying to get into the dorm are impostors!
These examples teach two lessons:
1.
 It is impossible to specify accurately the respective fractions of 
a biometric system™s matches and nonmatches that are correct without 
knowing how many individuals who ﬁshouldﬂ match and how many 
individuals who ﬁshould notﬂ match are presenting to the system.
2.
 A biometric technology™s FMR and its FNMR are not accurate mea
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 41
TABLE 1.2
 Impostor Base Rate of 0.1%
Proffered 
Identity
Authentication 
Attempts
Biometric Decision
Conclusion
Match
Nonmatch
Authentic
999
999 × 99.9% 
= 998
999 × 0.1% 
= 1
Confidence that a 
nonmatcher is an impostor 
= fraction of impostors 
among nonmatches = 1/2 
= 50%
Impostor
11 × 0.1% = 0
1 × 99.9% = 1
Total
1,000
998
2Figure 1.3ve
ctor, editable2 Nonmat
ch
;50 percent correc
t1,
000
 Candidates
50
Rows
999
 Resident
s1 Fa
lse nonmatch
0.
1%
FM
R1 Tr
ue nonmatch
1 Nonresident impostor
FN
MR
0.
1%
FIGURE 1.3
 Authenticating residents (impostor base rate 0.1 percent; moderate 
nonmatch accuracy).
sures of how often the system gives the right answer in an operational 
environment and will in many cases greatly overstate the con˚dence we 
should have in the system.
The bad news, therefore, is that even with a very accurate biometric 
system, correctly identifying rare events (an impostor™s attempt to get 
into the dorm, in our ˚rst example) is very hard. The good news, by the 
same token, is that if impostors are very rare, our con˚dence in correctly 
identifying people who are not impostors (that is, determining that we are 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
TABLE 1.3
 Impostor Base Rate of 1.0%
Proffered 
Identity
Authentication 
Attempts
Biometric Decision
Conclusion
Match
Nonmatch
Authentic
990
990 × 99.9% 
= 989
990 × 0.1% = 1
Confidence that a 
nonmatcher is an 
impostor = 10/11 = 91%
Impostor
10
10 × 0.1%= 0
10 × 99.9% = 10
Total
1,000
989
11
Figure 1.4vector, editable11
 Nonmat
ches
;91
 percent 
corr
ec
t1,
000
 Candidates
50
Rows
99
0 Resident
s1 Fa
lse nonmatch
0.
1%
FM
R10
 Nonresident impostor
s10
 Tr
ue nonmatches
0.
1%
FN
MR
FIGURE 1.4
 Authenticating residents (impostor base rate 1 percent; high non
-match accuracy).
not in a rare-event situation) can be very highŠfar higher than 99.9 per
-cent. In our ˚rst example, when the impostor base rate is 0.1 percent, our 
con˚dence in the correctness of a match is almost 100 percent (actually 
99.9999 percent)Šmuch higher than suggested by the FMR and FNMR. 
It is easy to see why this is true. Almost everyone who approaches the 
sensor in the dorm is actually a resident. For residents, all of whom are 
supposed to match, false matches are possible (one resident could claim to 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 43
TABLE 1.4
 Impostor Base Rate of 50%
Proffered 
Identity
Authentication 
Attempts
Biometric Decision
Match
Nonmatch
Conclusion
Authentic
500
500 × 99.9% 
= 499
500 × 0.1% = 1
Confidence that a 
nonmatcher is an 
impostor = 499/500 
= 99.8%
Impostor
500
500 × 0.1% = 1
500×99.9% = 499
Total
1,000
500
500
Figure 1.5ve
ctor, editable0.
1%
 FN
MR
1,
000
 Candidates
50
Rows
50
0 Resident
s1 Fa
lse nonmatch
0.
1%
 FM
R50
0 Nonresident impostor
s499 
Tr
ue
 nonmatches
50
0 Nonmat
ches
99
.8 percent 
corr
ec
tFIGURE 1.5
 Authenticating residents (impostor base rate 50 percent; very high 
nonmatch accuracy).
be another resident and match with that other resident™s reference), but a 
false match never results in a false acceptance, since a false match has the 
same system-level resultŠentrance to the dormŠas correct identi˚cation. 
A false match is possible only when an impostor approaches the sensor 
and is incorrectly matched. But almost no impostors ever approach the 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
door, and (because the technology is very accurate) impostors who do 
approach the door are very rarely incorrectly matched. Table 1.5 provides 
the information for this case, and Figure 1.6 illustrates the case. Note that 
Figure 1.6 depicts only matches, in contrast to Figures 1.2 through 1.5, 
which depict only nonmatches.
TABLE 1.5
 Impostor Base Rate of 0.1%
Proffered 
Identity
Authentication 
Attempts
Biometric Decision
Conclusion
Match
Nonmatch
Authentic
999
999 × 99.9% 
= 998
999 × 0.1% 
= 1
Confidence that a matcher 
is not an impostor = 
fraction of nonimpostors 
among matches = 998/998 
= 100%
Impostor
11 × 0.1% = 0
1 × 99.9% = 1
Total
1,000
998
2Figure 1.6ve
ctor, editable1,
000
 Candidates
50
Rows
999
 Resident
s0.
1%
FM
R1 Nonresident impostor
99
.9
%TMR
0 Fa
lse matche
s99
8 Tr
ue matche
s99
8 Matc
he
s;
 10
0 percent 
corr
ec
tFIGURE 1.6
 Authenticating residents (impostor base rate 0.1 percent; high match 
accuracy).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 45
The overall lesson is that as the impostor base rate declines in a recog
-nition system, we become more con˚dent that a match is correct but less 
con˚dent that a nonmatch is correct. Examples of this phenomenon are 
common and well documented in medicine and public health. People at 
very low risk of a disease, for example, are usually not routinely screened, 
because positive results are much more likely to be a false alarm than lead 
to an early diagnosis. Unless the effects of the base rate on system perfor
-mance are anticipated in the design of a biometric system, false alarms 
may consume large amounts of resources in situations where very few 
impostors exist in the system™s target population. Even more insidiously, 
frequent false alarms could lead screeners to a more lax attitude (the prob
-lem of ﬁcrying wolfﬂ) when confronted with nonmatches. Depending on 
the application, becoming inured to nonmatches could be costly or even 
dangerous.
26
ADDITIONAL IMPLICATIONS FOR OPEN-
SET IDENTIFICATION SYSTEMS
The above discussion concerned an access control application. Large-
scale biometric applications may be used for identi˚cation to prevent 
fraud arising from an individual™s duplicate registration in a bene˚ts 
program or to check an individual™s sample against a ﬁwatch listﬂŠa set 
of enrolled references of persons to be denied bene˚ts (such as passage 
at international borders). This is an example of an open-set identi˚cation 
system, where rather than verifying an individual™s claim to an identity, 
the system determines if the individual is enrolled and may frequently be 
processing individuals who are not enrolled. The implications of Bayes™ 
theorem are more dif˚cult to ascertain in this situation because here 
biometric processing requires comparing a presenting biometric against 
not just a single claimed enrollment sample, but against unprioritized 
enrollment samples of multiple individuals. Here, as above, the chances 
of erroneous matches and erroneous nonmatches still depend on the fre
-quencies with which previously enrolled and unenrolled subjects present 
to the system. Such chances also depend on the length of the watch list 
and on how this length and the distribution of presenters
27
 to the system 
26
 These costs vary with the application. For instance, if Walt Disney World is able to 
prevent most people who do not pay from getting into its theme park, then erroneously 
admitting a few who only pretended to pay may not be all that important. The importance 
of an imposter on an airplane may be much greater. So the assessment of uncertainty has to 
take into account the importance of certainty for different outcomes.
27
 The ratio of presenters who are enrolled subjects on the watch list to presenters who 
are not.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
interrelate. The overall situation is complex and requires detailed analysis, 
but some simple points can be made.
In general, additions to a watch list offer new opportunities for an 
unenrolled presenter to match with the list, and for an enrolled presenter 
to match with the wrong enrollee. If additions to the watch list are made 
in such a way as to leave the presentation distribution unchangedŠfor 
example, by enrolling persons who will not contribute to the presenta
-tion poolŠthen the ratio of true to false matches will decline, necessarily 
reducing con˚dence in a match. Appendix B formalizes this argument, 
incorporating a prior distribution for the unknown proportion of present
-ers who are previously enrolled.
We may draw an important lesson from this simple situation: Increas
-ing list size cannot be expected to improve all aspects of system perfor
-mance. Indeed, in an identi˚cation system with a stable presentation 
distribution, as list length increases we should become less con˚dent that 
a match is correct.
A comment from the Department of Justice Of˚ce of the Inspector 
General™s report on the May˚eld mistake
28
 exempli˚es this point: ﬁThe 
enormous size of the FBI IAFIS [Integrated Automated Fingerprint Iden
-ti˚cation System] database and the power of the IAFIS program can ˚nd a 
confusingly similar candidate print. The May˚eld case indicates the need 
for particular care in conducting latent ˚ngerprint examinations involving 
IAFIS candidates because of the elevated danger in encountering a close 
nonmatch.ﬂ
29
But this is not the end of the story, because in some circumstances 
changes in watch-list length may be expected to alter the presentation 
distribution. The literature distinguishes between open-set identi˚cation 
systems, in which presenters are presumed to include some persons not 
previously enrolled, and closed-set identi˚cation systems, in which pre
-sentations are restricted to prior enrollees. Closed-set identi˚cation sys
-tems meet the stable presentation distribution criterion de jure, so that the 
baseline performance response still automatically applies to the expanded 
list. But the actual effect of list expansion on system performance, when 
the presentation distribution in an open-set identi˚cation system may 
change, will depend on the net impact of modi˚ed per-presenter error 
rates and the associated rebalancing of the presentation distribution. In 
other words, the fact that the list has expanded may affect who is part 
28
 Brandon May˚eld, an Oregon attorney, was arrested by the FBI in connection with the 
Madrid train bombings of 2004 after a ˚ngerprint on a bag of detonators was mistakenly 
identi˚ed as belonging to May˚eld.
29
 See http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/special/s0601/PDF_list.htm; http://www.usdoj.gov/
oig/special/s0601/exec.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 47
of the pool of presenters. This rebalancing may occur without individu
-als changing their behavior simply because of the altered relationship 
between the length of the watch list and the size of the presenting popu
-lation. But it may also occur as a result of intentional behavior change 
by new enrollees, who may stop or reduce their presentations to the 
system as a response to enrollment. Clearly, increasing watch list size 
without very careful thought may decrease the probability that an appar
-ent matching presenter is actually on the list.
That lengthening a watch list may reduce con˚dence in a match 
speaks against the promiscuous searching of large databases for individu
-als with low probability of being on the list, and it tells us that we must be 
extremely careful when we increase ﬁinteroperabilityﬂ between databases 
without control over whether increasing the size of the list has an impact 
on the probability that the search subject is on the list. Our response to the 
apparent detection of a person on a list should be tempered by the size of 
the list that was searched. These lessons contradict common practice.
The designers of a biometric system face a challenge: to design an 
effective system, they must have an idea of the base rate of detection tar
-gets in the population that will be served by the system. But the base rate 
of targets in a real-world system may be hard to estimate, and once the 
system is deployed the base rate may change because of the reaction of 
the system™s potential detection targets, who in many cases will not want 
to be detected by the system. To avoid detection, potential targets may 
avoid the system entirely, or they may do things to confuse the system or 
force it into failure or backup modes in order to escape detection. For all 
these reasons, it is very dif˚cult for the designers of the biometric system 
to estimate the detection target base rate accurately. Furthermore, no 
amount of laboratory testing can help to determine the base rate. Threat 
modeling can assist in developing estimates of imposter base rates and is 
discussed in the next section.
SECURITY AND THREAT MODELING
Security considerations are critical to the design of any recognition 
system, and biometric systems are no exception. When biometric systems 
are used as part of authentication applications, a security failure can lead 
to granting inappropriate access or to denying access to a legitimate user. 
When biometric systems are used in conjunction with a watch list applica
-tion, a security failure can allow a target of investigation to pass unnoticed 
or cause an innocent bystander to be subjected to inconvenience, expense, 
damaged reputation, or the like. In seeking to understand the security of 
biometric systems, two security-relevant processes are of interest: (1) the 
determination that an observed trait belongs to a living human who is 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
present and is acting intentionally and (2) the proper matching (or non
-matching) of the observed trait to the reference data maintained in the 
system.
Conventional security analysis of component design and system 
integration involves developing a threat model and analyzing potential 
vulnerabilitiesŠthat is, where one might attack the system. As described 
above, any assessment of the effectiveness of a biometric system (includ
-ing security) requires some sense of the impostor base rate. To estimate 
the impostor base rate, one should develop a threat model appropriate to 
the setting.
30
 Biometric systems are often deployed in contexts meant to 
provide some form of security, and any system aimed at security requires 
a well-considered threat model.
31
 Before deploying any such system, 
especially on a large scale, it is important to have a realistic threat model 
that articulates expected attacks on the system along with what sorts of 
resources attackers are likely to be able to apply. Of course, a thorough 
security analysis, however, is not a guarantee that a system is safe from 
attack or misuse. Threat modeling is dif˚cult. Results often depend on the 
security expertise of the individuals doing the modeling, but the absence 
of such analysis often leads to weak systems.
As in all systems, it is important to consider the potential for a mali
-cious actor to subvert proper operation of the system. Examples of such 
subversion include modi˚cations to sensors, causing fraudulent data to 
be introduced; attacks on the computing systems at the client or match
-ing engine, causing improper operation; attacks on communication paths 
between clients and the matching engine; or attacks on the database that 
alter the biometric or nonbiometric data associated with a sample.
A key element of threat modeling in this context is an understand
-ing of the motivations and capabilities of three classes of users: clients, 
imposters, and identity concealers. Clients are those who should be rec
-ognized by the biometric system. Impostors are those who should not be 
recognized but will attempt to be recognized anyway. Identity concealers 
are those who should be recognized but are attempting to evade recogni
-tion. Important in understanding motivation is to envision oneself as the 
30
 For one discussion of threat models, see Microsoft Corporation, ﬁThreat Modelingﬂ 
available at http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/security/aa570411.aspx. See also Chapter 4 
in NRC, 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
 (2003).
31
 The need to consider threat models in a full system context is not new nor is it unique 
to biometrics. In his 1997 essay ﬁWhy Cryptography Is Harder Than It Looks,ﬂ available at 
http://www.schneier.com/essay-037.html, Bruce Schneier addresses the need for clearly 
understanding threats from a broad perspective as part of integrating cryptographic compo
-nents in a system. Schneier™s book 
Secrets and Lies: Digital Security in a Networked World 
(New 
York: Wiley, 2000) also examined threat modeling and risk assessment. Both are accessible 
starting points for understanding the need for threat modeling.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 49
impostor or identity concealer.
32
 Some of the subversive population may 
be motivated by malice toward the host (call the malice-driven subversive 
data subject an attacker), others may be driven by curiosity or a desire to 
save or gain money or time, and still others may present essentially by 
accident. This mix would presumably depend on characteristics of the 
application domain:
Ł The value to the subversive subject of the asset claimedŠcontrast 
admission to a theme park and physical access to a restricted research 
laboratory.
Ł The value to the holder of the asset to which an attacker claims 
accessŠsay, attackers intent on vandalism.
Ł The ready accessibility of the biometric device.
Ł How subversive subjects feel about their claim being denied or 
about detection, apprehension, and punishment.
A threat model should try to answer the following questions:
Ł What are the various types of subversive data subjects?
Ł Is it the system or the data subject who initiates interaction with 
the biometric system?
Ł Is auxiliary informationŠfor example, a photo ID or passwordŠ
required in addition to the biometric input?
Ł Are there individuals who are exempt from the biometric screen
-ingŠfor example, children under ten or amputees?
Ł Are there human screening mechanisms, formal or informal, in 
addition to the automated biometric screeningŠfor example, a human 
attendant who is trained to watch for unusual behavior?
Ł How can an attack tree
33
 help to specify attack modes available to 
a well-informed subversive subject?
Ł Which mechanisms can be put in place to prevent or discourage 
repeated attempts by subversive subjects?
Here are some further considerations in evaluating possible actions 
to be taken:
32
 This is often referred to as a ﬁred teamﬂ approachŠsee, for example, the description of 
the Information Design Assurance Red Team at Sandia National Laboratories, at http://
idart.sandia.gov/.
33
 For a brief discussion of attack trees, see G. McGraw, ﬁRisk Analysis: Attack Trees and 
Other Tricks,ﬂ August 1, 2002. Available at http://www.drdobbs.com/184414879.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Ł Will the acceptance of a false claim seriously impact the host orga
-nization™s mission or damage an important protected resource?
Ł Have all intangibles (for example, reputation, biometric system 
disruption) been considered?
Ł How would compromise of the systemŠfor example, acceptance 
of a false claim for admission to a secure facilityŠdamage privacy, release 
or degrade the integrity of proprietary information, or limit the availabil
-ity of services?
In summary, as discussed at length above, FMRs and FNMRs in them
-selves are insuf˚cient to describe or assess the operational performance 
of a biometric system and may be seriously misleading. It is necessary to 
also anticipate the fraction of reported matches that are likely to be true 
matches and the fraction of reported nonmatches that are likely to be true 
nonmatches. The analysis above shows that these will vary greatly with 
the base rate of impostors presenting to the system. The base rate should 
be estimated using one or more reasonable threat models. Biometric sys
-tem design should then incorporate this information, as well as the costs 
and/or utilities of actions resulting from true and false matches and 
nonmatches.
All information systems are potentially vulnerable, but the design of 
biometric systems calls for special considerations:
Ł Probabilistic recognition. 
This fundamental property of biometric 
systems means that risk analysis must recognize that there is a probabil
-ity of making incorrect recognitions (positive or negative). If an attacker 
can gain access to a large-scale biometric database, then he or she has the 
opportunity to search for someone who is a biometric doppelgangerŠ
someone for whom there is a close enough match given the target false 
match rate for the system.
34
Ł Exposure of biometric traits. 
This can occur either through direct 
observation or through access to biometric databases. It allows an attacker 
to create fraudulent copies of those traits to be used in an attempt to mis
-lead a biometric sensor.
35
34
 See the discussion on biometric risk equations in T.E. Boult and R. Woodworth, Privacy 
and security enhancements in biometrics, 
Ad
vances in Biometrics: Sensors, Algorithms and 
Systems
, N.K. Ratha and V. Govindaraju, eds., New York: Springer (2007). 
35
 For an example of how a ˚ngerprint image can be transferred to a gelatinous material 
and then used to mislead a ˚nger-imaging sensor, see T. Matsumoto, H. Matsumoto, K. 
Yamada, and S. Hoshino, Impact of arti˚cial ﬁgummyﬂ ˚ngers on ˚ngerprint systems, 
Opti
-cal Security and Counterfeit Deterrence Techniques IV:
 4677 (2002). For a discussion on improve
-ments to techniques for reconstituting ˚ngerprint images from processed template data, see 
J. Feng and A.K. Jain, FM model-based ˚ngerprint reconstruction from minutiae template, 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
 51
Ł Concealment of biometric traits. 
In some applications, such as those 
intended to prevent multiple enrollments or to identify persons on watch 
lists, an attacker can avoid detection by concealing biometric traits through 
relatively simple actions.
36
These considerations show the importance of how a sample is pre
-sented. Since biometric data must be thought of as public information, 
a system must take appropriate precautions to verify that the sample 
presented belongs to the individual presenting the sample and that the 
individual is voluntarily presenting himself or herself for identi˚cation. 
In some cases, this may mean supervised recognition; in others it may 
mean that a technical mechanism is employed to validate the sensor and 
that the sensor can differentiate genuine samples from fraudulent synthe
-sized samples. In the latter case, an appropriate sensor takes the place of 
a human observer of the presentation ceremony.
In response to growing concerns over identity theft and fraud, some 
advocates suggest that legislation be enacted to prohibit the selling or 
sharing of an individual™s biometric data.
37
 By making it illegal to traf˚c 
in biometric data and by requiring encryption for the storage of biometric 
data in authentication systems, the hope is that the chance of inappropri
-ate data disclosure will be reduced signi˚cantly, preserving the utility of 
biometric authentication for widespread use. However, the encryption of 
data does not guarantee that the underlying data will not be exposed. Fur
-thermore, covert observation of many biometric traits is possible, making 
acquisition of these data hard to avoid. Accordingly, the more ubiquitous 
biometric systems become, the more important it is that each system using 
biometrics perform a threat analysis that presumes public knowledge of 
a subject™s biometric traits. Those systems should then deploy measures 
to verify that the presentation ceremony is commensurate with the risk 
of impersonation.
38
 Furthermore, in high-assurance and high-criticality 
in 
Ad
vances in Biometrics
, Massimo Tistarelli and Mark S. Nixon, eds., Third International 
Conference, Alghers, Italy (2009).
36
 Sometimes identity is concealed using more radical techniques. Recently it was reported 
that a Chinese national had had her ˚ngerprints surgically transferred from one hand to 
another to avoid recognition by Japanese border control. Available at http://mdn.mainichi.
jp/mdnnews/news/20091207p2a00m0na010000c.html. The Interpol ˚ngerprint depart
-ment provides a historical perspective on ˚ngerprint alteration at http://www.interpol.
int/Public/Forensic/˚ngerprints/research/altered˚ngerprints.pdf.
37
 P. Swire, ﬁLessons for biometrics from SSNs and identity fraud,ﬂ presentation to the 
committee on March 15, 2005.
38
 Note, for instance, the recent shutdown of the ﬁClearﬂ air traveler program by Veri˚ed 
Identity Pass. The company held personal information, including biometric information, 
on thousands of individuals. At the time of this writing, a court had enjoined the company 
from selling the data.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
applications, biometric recognition should not be the sole authentication 
factor.
ON REPORT SCOPE AND BOUNDARIES
This report explores the strengths and limitations of biometric sys
-tems and their legal, social, and philosophical implications. One core 
aim of the report is to dispel the common misconception that a biometric 
system unambiguously recognizes people by sensing and analyzing their 
biometric characteristics. No biometric technology is infallible; all are 
probabilistic and bring uncertainty to the association of an individual 
with a biometric reference, some of it related to the particular trait being 
scrutinized by the system. Variability in biometric traits also affects the 
probability of correct recognition. In the end, probability theory must be 
well understood and properly applied in order to use biometric systems 
effectively and to know whether they achieve what they promise.
This report does not address whether a biometric system is the best 
way to meet a particular application goal. It does not compare biomet
-ric technologies with potential alternatives for particular applications, 
because such alternatives would have to be evaluated case by case. This 
chapter has reviewed the fundamental properties of biometric systems. 
Chapter 2 will offer a framework for considering the requirements of 
an application from the engineering standpoint. Chapter 3 outlines les
-sons learned from other types of systems. Chapter 4 examines the social, 
cultural, and legal issues related to biometric systems. Finally, Chapter 5 
summarizes the research challenges and open questions identi˚ed in the 
earlier chapters.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53
2Engineering Biometric Systems
The preceding chapter described many of the fundamental concepts 
that underlie biometric systems. Of equal importance is the engineering 
of these systems. Moreover, while design, engineering and development 
of component parts of the systems are important, it is the development 
of a biometric system as a whole that is most critical to successful system 
deployment. The scope of a biometric system is broad and includes not 
only basic operations such as enrollment or matching but also user train
-ing and the adjudication process for dealing with contested results and 
exception handling in general. A holistic view that accounts for human 
interaction, and not simply the combination of sensors and matchers, is 
needed. Biometric systems are best considered in their deployment con
-text, including all their particularities such as function, environment, and 
user population.
A systems engineering view is especially important when the systems 
are to be used on a large scale, such as for border control or social service 
entitlement, when all the best practices associated with system design and 
management are called for. While the evolution of sensor devices, match
-ing technologies, and human factors can dominate the attention of system 
designers, the ultimate success of the overall system generally relies on 
attention to conventional system development issues. These include:
Ł A clear understanding of the system™s functional objectives, includ
-ing the user population and environmental constraints of the system™s 
deployment context.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Ł A model for accommodating the evolution of technology over 
time.
Ł An understanding of the effectiveness of the system through fre
-quent or continuous operational testing.
Ł A model for validating the ˚nancial value of the system over 
time.
Ł A strong understanding of the human interactions with the system 
and how they change with time.
Ł A holistic security model that addresses the application security 
context and provides a cogent analysis of the potential for fraudulent 
presentation of biometric samples.
Successful biometric applications require top-down conceptualiza
-tion, with clear delineation of purpose within a systems context. Tech
-nology-driven implementations could inadvertently target a secondary 
rather than a primary objective and fail to anticipate mission-critical 
aspects of the context in which this human-centric technology is applied, 
including sources of challenges to the system. This chapter starts with an 
overview of biometric system operations. It then turns to the application 
requirements of biometric systems, including application parameters that 
can affect system performance. A brief discussion of test and evaluation 
concludes the chapter.
BASIC BIOMETRIC SYSTEM OPERATIONS
The operations performed by a generic biometric system are the cap
-ture and storage of enrollment (reference) biometric samples and the cap
-ture of new biometric samples and their comparison with corresponding 
reference samples. Figure 2.1 depicts the operation of a generic biometric 
system and is a more detailed version of the sample operational diagram 
from Chapter 1, although some systems will differ in their particulars.
Enrollment Operations
Enrollment of a new subject into a biometric system is achieved by 
performing the functions denoted in the upper processes A, B, C, and E of 
Figure 2.1. The samples are analyzed to ensure their quality is consistent 
with the matching algorithms to be used later for comparison with opera
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 55
tionally obtained samples.
1 The data samples are then processed to form 
references that are stored for future comparison in a database or on trans
-portable media such as a smart card.
2 Depending on the requirements of 
1 
However, quality assessment algorithms for biometric enrollment are not universally 
available and may need to be speci˚c to the proprietary feature extraction and comparison 
algorithms used later in the process. In some applications, such as use of facial recognition 
with images stored by passport issuance agencies on electronic passports, there will be no 
knowledge during the enrollment process of what algorithms might be used later to com
-pare the stored image. This is true for visas as well.
2 
In other applications, such as facial recognition biometrics with images stored on pass
-ports, processing of the reference sample is deferred until the matching process is initiated.
Processi
ntoReferenceFormatNewSubject?ReferenceDatabaseyesEnrollmentAddReferenceCaptureSampleProcessi
ntoReferenceFormatCompareReferencesReferenceDatabasematchMatchingNonmatchActionCaptureSamplePresentBiometricPresentBiometricABCDEnoFABCEDFDuplicateActionMatchActionFigure 2-1vector, editableFIGURE 2.1
 Idealized operations of a generic biometric system.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
the system, functions D and F might also be performed against previously 
stored references to detect attempts at duplicate enrollment. Ensuring 
that the reference format generated by function C conforms to pertinent 
standards such as those issued by ANSI or ISO
3 would aid data interoper
-ability between systems or within an evolving system over time.
If sample quality is inadequate to create a reference likely to be cor
-rectly matched in future comparisons, the biometric characteristic might 
be resampled until adequate quality is obtained. However, the ability to 
resample to control quality of the enrollment sample will depend upon 
both system function and policy. If adequate quality is unattainable, then 
policy will dictate either that the best of the samples captured is retained 
or that the subject is declared a ﬁfailure to enroll.ﬂ In the latter case, a 
fallback approach might be established for the individual. For example, 
in an employee access control system, the particular employee might be 
allowed entry with only a card and a PIN (two-factor authentication) or 
by requiring that a security guard verify the individual™s facial photo. For 
enrollment in a watch list system, however, system management would 
have to balance the impact on future accuracy of retaining poor-quality 
references against having no reference for a person of interest. Such bal
-ancing has been a major challenge for systems used in forensic, military, 
and intelligence applications.
Enrollment of a subject also properly links the digital representation of 
the biometric reference with identity attributes established for use in this 
application.
4 Biometric traits acquired at later times are then recognized 
by comparing with the enrolling reference.
5 Hence, the quality and rep
-resentativeness of the enrolling reference are crucial to later success, and 
variation in these can contribute to errors in the recognition process.
Most of the factors that affect the quality and representativeness of 
the enrollment reference involve the interaction of the subject with the 
collection device or irregularities in or absence of the biometric trait in 
3 
See the Registry of U.S. Government Recommended Biometric Standards (Version 1.0, 
approved June 5, 2008) for a catalog of suitable standards for interoperability of U.S. fed
-eral biometric applications. Available at http://www.biometrics.gov/standards/Standards
 Registry.pdf.
4 
In the general case, no assumptions are made about the presumed ﬁtrue identityﬂ of the 
enrolling subject. The process of enrolling the subject™s biometric data allows for subsequent 
retrieval of identity attributes. The legitimacy of the subject™s association with those attri
-butes, however, must be established by means outside the biometric enrollment process. 
See FIPS PUB 201-1 for an example of a process for verifying identity claims. Available at 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/˚ps/˚ps201-1/FIPS-201-1-chng1.pdf. 
5 
Some systems may update enrolled references over time as a side effect of matching ac
-tions to minimize the drift of a biometric trait. In general, controls comparable to those ap
-plied at initial enrollment should be in place to minimize the opportunity to inject fraudulent 
data into the biometric database.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 57
the subject, with some involving the device itself. Generally, the opera
-tional conditions under which both references and subsequent biometric 
samples are collected for a criminal justice system (such as booking a 
crime suspect) allow more control of quality than other types of systems. 
For image-based biometric modalities these may include the stability and 
positioning relative to a desired standard during imaging, the presence 
of distracting or camou˜aging appurtenances, calibration and cleanliness 
of the sensing device, the image review process and criteria for certify
-ing successful enrollment, and, indirectly, factors that affect the ability to 
control these. Such indirect but important factors may include the degree 
to which the acquisition of these biometric references is supervised and 
the staf˚ng levels, throughput goals and pressure to achieve them, aspects 
of the environment that can affect sensor and human performance, the 
degree to which the subject is aware of and cooperative with the acquisi
-tion, and the ef˚ciency of handling special exceptions, such as subjects 
who are physically or mentally challenged in their ability to present the 
required biometric or whose references are repeatedly rejected.
For some systems the reference representation is too large or compli
-cated for ef˚cient storage and high-throughput computer processing. An 
alternative is to extract mathematical abstractions known as ﬁfeaturesﬂ 
(or models of those features) from the reference samples and store only 
those, discarding the reference samples. Another alternative is to store 
reference samples using some standard compression technique (such 
as JPEG), not processing the sample to produce features until they are 
needed for comparison. In principle the choice of biometric features, the 
degree of independent information and hence distinctiveness conveyed 
by each additional feature, and the balance between feature multiplicity 
and storage ef˚ciency can have major effects on recognition error rates. 
This is borne out by the large performance differences exhibited in tests 
that compare products using the same biometric trait.
6Storage of the reference, whether in the form of samples, features, or 
models, completes the enrollment process. Subsequently, samples pro
-vided by the enrollee and others claiming or claimed to be the enrollee 
will be compared against the reference. In some cases, for example, in 
the case of a law enforcement database and an enrollee who is the object 
of a security or law enforcement search, the reference may be added to a 
watch list containing many millions of samples that might ultimately be 
checked.
6 
For example, the NIST Minutiae Interoperability Exchange Test. See http://˚ngerprint.
nist.gov/minex/.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Capture and Matching Operations
The processes A, B, C, D, E, and F in Figure 2.1 are carried out to 
capture one or more biometric samples and compare them against the 
reference(s). When possible, a sample to be used for comparison against 
a stored reference is analyzed to ensure adequate quality consistent with 
the feature extraction and matching algorithms used.
 7 When the user is 
cooperative and the sample quality is inadequate, acquisition attempts 
may be repeated up to a permitted maximum number of times until a 
suitable sample is obtained. If adequate quality is not attained, depending 
on policy, either the best sample is used or ﬁfailure to acquireﬂ is declared 
and a fallback procedure invoked, as noted earlier. Acceptable samples are 
converted to a format suitable for comparing against the stored references, 
generally following the same methods used to create the corresponding 
references.
If veri˚cation is the desired operation, the reference for the identity 
claimed is retrieved from the database (perhaps triggered by the user 
presenting a PIN or a proximity card), a comparison is made, and a 
comparison score is assigned. If this score exceeds a threshold, a match is 
declared. Otherwise a nonmatch is declared or possibly, for an interme
-diate window of scores, an indeterminate result is declared and a coop
-erative subject may be asked to resubmit the same biometric sample, an 
alternative biometric sample, or take additional action, such as contacting 
a security guard to execute a manual fallback procedure. If the desired 
operation is identi˚cation, then the sample features are compared against 
a portion or all of the reference database. In this case, one or more matches 
are indicated if the comparison score exceeds a predetermined threshold 
value. The top scoring match exceeding a threshold may be indicated, or 
all matches may be adjudicated by a human examiner.
This discussion has outlined the structure of a process that cannot 
be expected to work perfectly, deterministically providing the ﬁrightﬂ 
answers, because it has inherent opportunities for error and uncertainty. 
It should be noted that the accuracy associated with declaring a match 
or nonmatch at a given score threshold is probabilistic and associated 
with metrics such as the false match rate (FMR) and false nonmatch rate 
(FNMR). So it is important to think carefully not only about what thresh
-7 
Adequate sample quality is a somewhat vague characterization of what is needed. In this 
context we are concerned with the utility of the sample in the biometric system. This utility 
can be maximized when a clearly expressed trait is captured with high ˚delity. If the data 
subject™s traits are poorly expressed owing to, for example, highly abraded ˚nger friction 
ridges, then repeated attempts to capture a sample useful for comparison are unlikely to 
succeed.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 59
olds are appropriate but also about all the various ways uncertainties can 
enter the system, as described in Chapter 1.
OPERATIONAL CONTEXT
Many factors affect the success or failure of a biometric system in 
its implementation. Table 2.1 illustrates the common parameters of the 
data subject, application, and technology contexts that affect both system 
design decisions and operational performance. Some parameter labels in 
Table 2.1 are shortened to ˚t and are then elaborated on below. Parameter 
intensities are directionally ordered left to right by increasing dif˚culty of 
implementation. For example, biometric systems of which participating 
subjects are aware and for which they are cooperatively motivated are 
easier to implement successfully than systems in which sample acqui
-sition is surreptitious and subjects are hostile to the purpose. This list 
is incomplete but intended to spur the thinking of prospective system 
implementers. Each row is discussed below, grouped by user, application, 
technology, and performance contexts.
For any given class of applications or, more precisely, for any target 
deployment, one can begin an analysis of where on this table the demands 
TABLE 2.1
 Parameters That Affect System Design Decisions and 
System Effectiveness
Parameter
Degree or Intensity from High to Low
User context
 Data subject awareness
Very
Not very
 Data subject motivated
Very
Not very
 Data subject well-
trained
Very
Not very
 Data subject habituated
Very
Not very
 Who benefits?
Both
User/consumer
Owner/agency
Application context
 Application supervised
Very
Not very
 Application type
Positive claim
Negative claim
 Application type
Verification
One to few matching
Identification
 Data interoperability
Closed
Supposed to be closed
Open
Technology context
 Environment controlled
Very
Not very
 Passive versus active
Active
Passive w/cooperation
Passive
 Covert versus overt
Overt
Covert
Performance context
 Throughput 
requirements
Low
Medium
High
 Sensitivity to error rate 
requirements
Low
Medium
High
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
of the application lie. For example, consider a system to allow entrance to 
a gym, where data subject awareness and motivation would be high, the 
training of data subjects would be medium to low, the system probably 
requires active cooperation, the environment is controlled, and through
-put is probably not a signi˚cant consideration. By contrast, a border 
control system using biometrics will be faced with users who are not 
well trained and perhaps not well motivated but will nonetheless have 
high throughput and stringent error rate requirements and so on. Clearly, 
stating that a system is a biometric system or uses ﬁbiometricsﬂ does not 
provide much information about what the system is for or how dif˚cult 
it is to successfully implement. Moreover, the parameters listed here are 
limited to factors that arise in day-to-day operations. There are broader 
system requirements (such as security, availability, and so on) that will 
also vary a great deal depending on the application and will also bear on 
the design, development, and, ultimately, operation of the system.
User Context
Data Subject Awareness
Does the data subject know that a biometric sample is being collected? 
Watch-list applications may use references gathered under different cir
-cumstances and from other systems, so even if the data subject is aware 
that a biometric characteristic is being collected, he or she might not know 
that the data are being collected for the purpose of biometric recognition. 
For example, a police station might take a mug shot photo when booking 
a suspect. Although the subject would be very aware that a photo was 
being taken, he or she might not know that the photo would later become 
part of a facial recognition watch list in an airport.
Data Subject Moti
vation
Does the data subject want to present the feature to the system in a 
way that is repeatable? Some subjectsŠsuch as in a typical physical or 
logical access control application where the subject is enrolled in the sys
-tem, has valid rights, and wants access privilegesŠare motivated because 
matching is needed to perform a job function or to access to an entitle
-ment, a privilege, or money. Other data subjects, such as prisoners, may 
be very unmotivated to interact with the system. This lack of motivation 
could be due to the adverse outcomes of a correct match or the desire to 
deliberately attempt to deceive the system by faulty interaction. Motiva
-tion and cooperation are closely aligned but not identical. A data subject 
can be cooperating with a system but still not be motivated to use it. In 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 61
other cases, such as use of facial images on passports, the data subject 
may be motivated to present an image deemed ﬁattractiveﬂ rather than 
one that is truly representative and repeatable.
Data Subject Training
Has the subject been instructed in the proper use of the system? Is 
there an opportunity in the enrollment process to provide feedback on 
correct or incorrect feature presentation? Many applications may not give 
data subjects a chance to have human interaction with system staff dur
-ing enrollment or subsequent uses. Is there an opportunity to inform the 
subject before exposure to the system? Different system types may require 
more training than others for correct usage. A more general question is, 
What kind of training or operational cues or feedback to subjects will 
improve system usability and performance?
Data Subject Habituation
How often does the subject use the system? Does the subject use the 
system and get feedback on a regular basis for a long time (for example, 
long enough to develop muscle memory if any is required)?
 8 Some sys
-tems that require active participation offer more assistance than others, 
guiding subjects to intuitively perform the functions necessary to give 
high-quality biometric measures. Infrequent usage, long gaps between 
uses, or poor ergonomic design can lead to poor positioning, which affects 
system accuracy and thereby throughput (see the discussion of tec
hnology 
context below).
Who Bene˜ts?
Who receives the bene˚ts of implementing a biometric recognition 
system in a particular application scenario? If the system is used in place 
of an existing system (for example, replacing veri˚cation using a driver™s 
license), then both the deployer of the system and the data subjects may 
expect to obtain the same bene˚ts as from the existing system. A system 
meant to offer convenience to users and save time for its deployers may 
also save time for the users and may be more convenient for the deploy
-ers. Both parties gain each other™s intended bene˚ts. In other situations 
8 
A NIST study on the effects of habituation on ˚ngerprint quality found that habituation in 
the absence of feedback failed to affect the quality of ˚ngerprint collection. Habituation with 
feedback did lead to improved ˚ngerprint quality over time from a cooperative population. 
Available at http://zing.ncsl.nist.gov/biousa/docs/WP302_Theofanos.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
the bene˚ts may be one-sided, especially where the biometric system is 
employed as an additional layer in an existing system. Take the example 
of adding a biometric system as a third factor to an existing card-plus-PIN 
physical access control system. A subject must spend additional time at a 
portal and faces an increased chance of being denied access because of the 
additional challenge and appears, moreover, to gain no direct bene˚t. The 
deployer of the system, however, substantially increases its con˚dence 
that the person entering is in fact the authorized user, with all other things 
being equal. So the need for security on the part of the system deployer 
is transferred to increased burden on the user. Even in a replacement 
implementation, this situation could exist. In a prison application, the use 
of a biometric system in lieu of an alternative system of prisoner identi
-˚cation offers no particular bene˚ts from a prisoner perspective, and the 
prisoner is probably not interested in being veri˚ed as him or herself; 
however, the operators of the prison have a very high interest in proper 
prisoner identi˚cation relative to many other factors such as convenience 
and speed. Accuracy is the main bene˚t sought, but the data subject may 
have limited stake in this and little motivation to cooperate.
Application Context
Super
vision
Is the system staffed? Is there someone present in the immediate 
vicinity who could give instructions or advice, help with questions, or 
solve problems with system usage, or is the system unstaffed? There 
may be a middle ground where there are persons nearby who can help 
but who are not immediately accessible or who have limited knowledge 
about the system and can help only to a certain degree. A system also may 
be self-service, with no opportunity for assistance other than, perhaps, a 
phone call.
Positi
ve 
vs. Negati
ve Claim Systems
Systems whose purpose is to verify a claim that a data subject is 
known to the system are considered ﬁpositive claimﬂ systems. These sys
-tems often require a claim by the data subject to a speci˚c reference and by 
extension to the corresponding enrollment record. However, alternative 
examples of positive claim systems, needing the unspeci˚c claim ﬁI am 
enrolled,ﬂ have existed since the early 1990s. These systems were previ
-ously called ﬁPINless veri˚cationﬂ systems. Their function is to verify 
the claim without returning any information on which enrollment record 
(ﬁwhoﬂ) the data subject corresponds to. Negative claim systems verify 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 63
the claim that a data subject is not enrolled in the system. Examples of 
such systems include systems to detect fraudulent multiple enrollments 
in social service entitlement programs or driver™s license registration sys
-tems. Note that some systems could be viewed and used as both positive 
and negative claim systems, but generally not simultaneously. A driver™s 
license or an identi˚cation card system could verify a negative claim at the 
time of enrollment and then verify a positive claim later when the iden
-ti˚cation card is used to assert an identity. Some systems, such as watch 
lists, might on the surface appear to be ambiguous with regard to negative 
or positive claimŠwith the nature of the claim depending on whether 
the point of view is that of the data subject or the system administrators. 
However, such systems are nearly always classi˚ed from the point of view 
of the data subject, because his or her viewpoint will determine the nature 
of system vulnerabilities.
Veri˜cation 
vs. Identi˜cation Systems
Veri˚cation systems are used to check an individual™s claim to be a 
subject enrolled in the system. These systems perform a so-called one-to-
one type of match, usually by the data subject providing a name, number, 
token, or password that points to or unlocks the subject™s enrollment ref
-erence.
9 Identi˚cation systems generally scan all references in a database 
to see if there is a match to the sample presented. Typically, veri˚cation 
systems are positive claim systems;
10
 identi˚cation systems can be either 
positive or negative claim systems; however, due to the nature of those 
applications (see discussion of positive vs. negative claim systems above) 
most negative-claim systems (to verify that a subject is not already in the 
system) are for identi˚cation. A middle-ground situation exists where cer
-tain members of a user group can choose to be enrolled together (linked). 
Subsequent system uses by any of the members will cause the system to 
do comparisons only within that user group, also known as one-to-few 
matching.
9 
A one-to-one relationship in a veri˚cation comparison isn™t always strictly true. In a 
veri˚cation system one or more candidate samples may be compared against a collection of 
references that were previously provided by the nominated subject or may be compared to 
a larger ﬁcohortﬂ set of references from many individuals.
10
 Negative-claim veri˚cation systems are theoretically possible, even if rare or nonexis
-tent in practice. An example would be a system to verify that an individual is not a known 
terrorist.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Closed 
vs. Open Systems
These categories
 distinguish systems that are entirely self-contained 
with regard to biometric data (ﬁclosedﬂ systems) from those that must 
interoperate with other systems (ﬁopenﬂ).
11
 Entirely self-contained sys
-tems use enrollment data obtained from the system and do not send any 
biometric data outside the system. The Disney system for passholders 
described in Appendix D is such an example. Many systems, however, 
must receive enrollment data from another system or must pass on col
-lected biometric data. For example, face recognition systems currently 
being used in immigration control at a number of airports worldwide 
use enrollment images stored on e-passports. Those images are placed 
on the passports by passport issuance agencies and are generally based 
on photographs submitted by the passport applicant. Consequently, the 
immigration control agency does not directly control the enrollment pro
-cess. Closed systems do not require adherence to published standards and 
can adopt processes, software, and hardware solutions optimized for their 
own application. Open systems must rely on standards usually written 
for a general class of application and not optimized for any application in 
particular. Adherence to such standards allows unrelated systems to use 
each other™s data, but it may result in a loss of matching accuracy for all 
systems involved.
Technology Context
Control of En
vironment
This refers to control of environmental factors that can affect the 
system or data subject performance. It may be possible to have an envi
-ronment that is only partially controlledŠthat is, where the relevant 
factors are controlled so that the technology performs as desired. Dif
-ferent technologies are sensitive to different environmental factors. For 
example, many optical scanning type systems for face, ˚nger, and iris 
are sensitive to both the visible and infrared spectral areas, so sunlight 
is an important factor. Silicon-based ˚nger-scanning sensors are not very 
sensitive to sunlight but are susceptible to static discharge, which makes 
relative humidity a more important consideration. Other factors affecting 
the data subject and/or the technology can include temperature, ambient 
noise level, ambient lighting level and uniformity, geographic location, 
electromagnetic ˚eld noise level, and so on.
11
 James L. Wayman, Technical testing and evaluation of biometric identi˚cation devices. In 
Jain et al., eds. 
Biometrics: Personal Identi˜cation in Networked Society
, Boston, Mass.: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers (1998).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 65
Passi
ve 
vs. Acti
ve Technologies
Passive technologies do not require the data subject to undergo a con
-trolled interaction with the system although they may require cooperation 
from a data subject whether the subject is knowingly or unknowingly 
providing that cooperation, such as looking in a particular direction. Most 
facial and iris recognition technologies are considered passive but require 
a certain amount of cooperation by users, since at present they must look 
in a particular direction to be scanned successfully. On the other hand, 
gait recognition might be considered completely passive. Voice recogni
-tion applications could also be considered passive if they are based on 
regular conversational speech without subject interaction. Active tech
-nologies are those that require direct human interaction such as speaking 
a particular phrase or positioning a ˚nger, hand, or head in the correct 
location. Some technologies might be considered semipassive, active in 
that a subject must position a feature in a certain orientation but passive 
in that there is no need to actually contact any surface and orientation 
need not be at all precise.
Co
vert 
vs. O
vert Technologies
Covert technologies are those that are designed to be used without the 
user™s knowledge. Overt technologies actively involve the user.
Performance Context
Throughput Requirements
Throughput refers to how quickly data subjects can be successfully 
processed by the system. This includes both successful and unsuccessful 
attempts at recognition. How long will a cooperative subject be allowed to 
present a feature before a timeout is called? How many retries will a user 
be allowed? Most applications have some degree of throughput required 
before the system becomes economically or procedurally prohibitive, and 
all applications should include the time required to process both correct 
and false matches that lead to application exception processing, since 
these cases tend to take more time and manual intervention than applica
-tion acceptances.
Error Rate Requirements
Error rates, technically more properly referred to as error proportions, 
measure the frequencies of errors relative to the number of adjudications 
that could produce errors of the corresponding type. This term receives 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
by far the most public attention and is likely also the most misused term. 
There are multiple components that contribute to system inaccuracies, 
and only a few are technology dependent. These are typically contribu
-tions from signal noise and background noise, but typically the largest 
components are the human interaction and environmental components. 
Error rates have direct impact on throughput, since false rejections take 
signi˚cantly longer to process than acceptances (whether true or false). 
Applications that require high throughput should aim for low false rejec
-tions; however, care must be taken in the application™s security analysis 
to balance low false rejections with the potential for an increase in false 
acceptances.
INTEROPERABILITY
Interoperability is a factor to consider when designing almost any 
kind of system. It must of course be considered when discussing data 
exchange between systems but must also be considered for evolving sys
-tems that retain and reuse data collected over time. In other words, even 
closed systems might have to interoperate with multiple generations and 
instantiations of themselves as they change over time. Interoperability 
also plays a role at the subsystem level, when systems are composed 
of vendor software or hardware. In the biometric system context, such 
components may include ˚ngerprint matcher components, segmentation 
software, and minutiae detectors.
In general, standards help to promote interoperability. However, there 
are times when the use of a standard format in preference to a proprietary 
format can be detrimental and potentially limit functionality or ˜ex
-ibility.
12
 For biometric systems, sensor interoperability, discussed below, 
poses some speci˚c challenges.
Sensor Interoperability
Sensor interoperability refers to the compatibility between an enrolled 
biometric reference and a test sample, acquired using different sensors. In 
some systems, it is assumed that the two samples to be compared were 
12
 For example, the NIST Minutiae Interoperability Exchange Test 2004 compared the per
-formance of proprietary systems against the performance of template data in standard for
-mat generated and matched by different vendors. In these tests the use of standards-based 
formats for single-˚nger matches was inferior to proprietary systems. Changing the system 
to use two-˚nger matching adequately compensated for the reduced accuracy but remained 
inferior to proprietary two-˚nger operation. Of course, the operational issues encountered 
when switching from collection of one ˚ngerprint to two ˚ngerprints may militate against 
the use of the latter two-˚ngerprint method to improve accuracy.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 67
acquired using the same sensorŠor at least the same type and vintage of 
sensor. However, improvements in sensor technology and reduction in 
sensor costs means that enrollment and test samples are often obtained 
using different sensor types. This may also happen if a sensor manufac
-turer goes out of business and support is no longer available for a line of 
sensors. In a large, distributed system such as the FBI™s Integrated Auto
-mated Fingerprint Identi˚cation System (IAFIS), remote sites use a variety 
of end-point systems and may collect samples using a variety of certi˚ed 
sensors. In short, it is possible in almost any biometric system that test 
samples will not be collected using the same sensor as used in enrollment. 
(In criminal justice systems, there is no known change in error rates when 
each booking site selects whichever certi˚ed scanning system it wants.) It 
has been observed that the matching performance drops when the refer
-ence and test samples for ˚ngerprint, iris, and voice are acquired using 
different sensors rather than the same.
13
There are several reasons for this degradation in matching perfor
-mance: (1) change in the sensor resolution and its operating behavior; 
(2) change in the sensor technology; (3) change in the user interface, and 
(4) changes in operational environment that have an impact on sensor 
performance. In the ˚rst case, while the underlying sensing technology 
remains the sameŠin, for example, an optical total internal re˜ection 
(TIR) ˚ngerprint sensorŠthe image resolution (say from 300 by 300 to 
500 by 500 pixels per inch) and/or the signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 
the sensor may change. In the second case, the two sensors providing 
reference and test samples may be based on completely different tech
-nologies (for example, one may be an optical TIR ˚ngerprint sensor and 
one a capacitive solid state sensor). Of the factors listed, the second is 
more problematic because the change in sensor technology may decrease 
compatibility between enrolled references and test samples. There are 
multiple examples of different sensing technologies for a given modality. 
For example, sensors for ˚ngerprints can be based on optical, capacitive, 
thermal, pressure, ultrasound, or multispectral technologies. Some touch
-less three-dimensional ˚ngerprint sensors are being developed as well. 
Differences in how a user must interact with a sensor may introduce vari
-ations in sample coverage area and distortion. Similarly, two-dimensional 
images for face recognition can be captured in visible color, infrared, and 
thermal, as well as range (depth). Three-dimensional face images that 
13
 See, for example, A. Ross and R. Nadgir, A calibration model for ˚ngerprint sensor 
interoperability, P. Flynn and S. Pankanti, eds., 
Proceedings of SPIE Volume 
62
02, Biometric 
Technology for Human Identi˜cation III 
(2006); Modi et al., Statistical analysis of ˚ngerprint 
sensor interoperability performance, 
Biometrics: Theory, Application, and Systems
 (2009); and 
International Biometric Group, Independent testing of iris recognition technology, 
Report to 
Department of Homeland Security
 (May 2005).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
capture the depth image are also being used for face recognition; these 
so-called range sensors capture a different face modality than the usual 
two-dimensional intensity or texture images captured by charge-coupled 
device (CCD) cameras.
Sensor interoperability is a major concern in large biometric installa
-tions, since it is expensive and time consuming to re-enroll a large number 
of subjects as the technology evolves and access to the subject popula
-tion may become limited. In some cases, re-enrollment may be unavoid
-able and should be viewed as part of upgrading the infrastructure. To 
the extent possible, of course, representations of traits that perform well 
across existing and anticipated technologies are desirable.
Human Interface Interoperability
One aspect of interoperability is the development of standardized 
human interfaces that would allow the data subject to know what to 
expect when interacting with a biometric system and how to control 
the recognition process. Although other technology interfaces such as 
are found in automatic teller machines, automobiles, televisions, and 
self-service gasoline pumps have a level of standardization that allows 
transferring experience gained with one system to other systems, little has 
been done in this area for biometrics, and these mass-market interfaces 
can confuse even experienced users on occasion. More standardized user 
interfaces coupled with broader human factors testing would contribute 
to greater maturity in all biometric applications.
14
SYSTEM LIFE-CYCLE ISSUES
Biometric systems that are large in scale and that are expected to per
-sist and be used for more than a short period of time face the same chal
-lenges as other large-scale technology implementations.
15
 Software and 
14
 For more on usability and biometric systems, see ﬁUsability and Biometrics: Ensur
-ing Successful Biometric Systems,ﬂ available at http://zing.ncsl.nist.gov/biousa/docs
/Usability_and_Biometrics_˚nal2.pdf. In particular, the report notes:
   
In order to improve the usability of biometric systems, it is critical to take a ho
-listic approach that considers the needs of users as well as the entire experience 
users will have with a system, including the hardware, software and instructional 
design of a system. Adopting a user-centric view of the biometric process is not 
only bene˚cial to the end users, but a user-centric view can also help to improve 
the performance and effectiveness of a system.
15
 In the case of biometric systems, scale can refer to the number of sensors in the system, 
the number of comparisons being performed for a given unit time, the number of users 
(administrators and data subjects), the geographic distribution of the system, the potential 
number of data subjects, or any combination of these factors. The point here is that there is 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 69
hardware have limited lifetimes and become obsolete. The maintenance 
and technology refresh requirements of biometric systems can be poorly 
understood and neglected as a result. Most biometric systems have basic 
needs, such as cleaning of the lenses or plates, sensor recalibration when 
the components or the environment changes, software updates to keep 
pace with hardware changes, and so on. Evolution of large-scale systems 
while in use requires careful pretesting to verify the ability to migrate 
from the old technology to the new and have both coexist in the system 
simultaneously. Some system components may change without maintain
-ing backward compatibility. Technologies will change signi˚cantly over 
the expected lifespan of a system, and biometric components may need 
to be updated. In general, biometric systems may be similar to other 
computer-based systems in that useful lifetimes cannot be expected to 
surpass 5 to 7 years without becoming obsolete.
Unlike some computer-based systems, however, biometric systems 
are likely to have a critical hardware component, making upgrades and 
replacements more logistically challenging than, say, pushing software 
updates to a networked information system. For example, consider the 
simple case of a single ˚ngerprint sensor, deployed to provide data secu
-rity (rather than convenience) by controlling access to a laptop computer. 
In normal operation, this application will be limited to repeated private 
interactions between the owner and machine for the machine™s full life. 
However, a sensor can fail from simply wearing out, from physical dam
-age due to rough usage, from a dirty or otherwise inimical environment, 
or from intentional damage by an unauthorized user who obtains control 
of the machine. The ˚ngerprint acquisition and/or ˚ngerprint matching 
software, or the ˚le with the enrolled biometric templateŠa software 
issueŠcan also be corrupted. What happens if the system can no longer 
be used to recognize the user? Is the user simply cut off, or are there 
alternative access options? And how are those alternative access options 
made clear to the user later in the system™s life cycle in a way that does 
not compromise the security that the system was deployed for in the ˚rst 
place?
Quality control, especially in large-scale systems, is critically impor
-tant. When engineering a biometric system, planning how to ensure con
-tinued high-quality performance is key. At the same time, mechanisms 
are needed to detect and accommodate degraded performance, should 
it occur. Related to this are issues of scalability, as mentioned previously. 
a signi˚cant difference between a very localized, small-scale application (such as facilitating 
quick entry for members of a local gym) and much larger systems (such as border control or 
social welfare systems). This section focuses primarily on the technology and engineering 
challenges associated with large-scale biometric systems.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Can performance be maintained as the system scales up either in terms 
of the size of the user population, number of sensors, geographic distri
-bution, size of the search space, or some other dimension? For a given 
system, what characteristics must be monitored and compensated for as 
a system grows? Possible areas of improvement include matcher improve
-ment, collecting more dataŠfor example, 10 ˚ngers instead of 2 or other 
types of multibiometricsŠand so on.
Security is also a life-cycle consideration. As described in Chapter 1, 
security considerations are integral to the design of a biometrics system. 
Risks are not static, and changes in attack methods, potential exposure 
or compromise of biometric data, and the emergence of new vulnerabili
-ties to threats need to be assessed periodically. Consider the example of 
access to a laptop controlled by a ˚ngerprint sensor cited above. In high-
con˚dence systems, sensor replacement, for example, poses a risk because 
a compromised sensor used to replace a legitimate sensor could allow an 
attacker to access the system. A draconian solution to this security prob
-lem would be to automatically monitor sensor performance, letting sensor 
failure or replacement initiate a data overwrite or physical destruction of 
the storage medium or of cryptographic keys used to encrypt storage on 
the machine. However, this approach could be detrimental to the owner 
unless exceptionally stringent backup systems were in place. Alterna
-tively there could be a backup computer activation mechanism and pass
-word authentication for the owner or a computer locksmith. This would 
partially spoil the purpose of the ˚ngerprint device, however, and the 
entrusted locksmith would have to be trustworthy. Furthermore, as with 
computers that are not biometrically protected, stored data lacking suf
-˚cient encryption might be accessed by physical removal of the data stor
-age medium. The idea is not to examine or critique various approaches for 
dealing with such contingencies but to point out that even in this simple 
situation, numerous issues that would arise during the life cycle need 
to be resolved during the system design and engineering phase. Future-
proo˚ng, to the extent possible, and paths to technology refreshment can 
encompass issues such as software and hardware modularityŠincluding 
sensors and matchersŠas well as common interfaces and interoperable 
data formats.
TEST AND EVALUATION
Biometric systems are almost always components of larger systems 
designed to perform a business process. Testing and evaluating these 
larger systems depends on the biometric system, application, concept 
of operations, functional and performance requirements and on many 
deployment-speci˚c factors that must be considered, including confor
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 71
mance to standards. (See Appendix E for a brief overview of the biometrics 
standards landscape.) The factors include the environment, maintenance, 
subject population, subject education, subject cooperation, and policy.
Testing and evaluating of biometric systems can serve multiple pur
-poses, including estimating performance under real-world usage of a 
biometric system; developing or examining metrics related to biometric 
systems; determining conditions that affect performance; supporting sys
-tem procurement; accepting a system at the time of delivery to an opera
-tional site; and letting developers and program managers know about 
opportunities for system improvement. Testing can occur at many levels 
and might involve presenting original samples to a biometric system and 
recording the results, or might involve only presenting a standardized 
database of biometric characteristics to feature extraction and match
-ing algorithms. More generally, testing and evaluation are broad terms. 
Aspects of systems that could be measured include technical performance 
and accuracy, throughput, interoperability, conformance (to standards or 
requirements), reliability, availability, maintainability, security and robust
-ness against vulnerabilities, safety, usability, and public perceptions and 
acceptance. As this chapter describes, work in all of these areas is needed, 
although progress on the ˚rst three is further along than the others. The 
testing and evaluation of particular aspects of systems can be aimed 
at either assessing the performance of a particular system in isolation 
or comparing the performance of similar systems. For examples of test 
and evaluation practice in three real-world examples (the FBI™s IAFIS, 
Disney™s entrance control system, and the U.S. Army™s BAT system), see 
Appendix D.
NIST divides testing of biometric systems into four general categories: 
conformance, scenario, interoperability, and technology testing. In addi
-tion, a full testing and analysis regimen includes operational and usability 
testing.
16
 Conformance testing addresses technical interface and data 
interchange standards. Scenario evaluations use volunteers to model data 
subject interaction with a system in a laboratory environment designed to 
model a target application. These scenario tests include system level test
-ing focused on performance as well as human centered biometric sample 
collection testing. Interoperability testing addresses sensor interoper
-ability and modality-speci˚c templates and matchers. Technology testing 
evaluates feature/model extraction and comparison algorithms using a 
16
 See the NIST National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) Hand
-book 150-25 on Biometric Testing, which is available at http://ts.nist.gov/Standards/
Accreditation/upload/NIST-HB150-25-2009.pdf and http://ts.nist.gov/Standards/
Accreditation/bio-lap.cfm. As of July 2009, laboratory accreditation under NVLAP is avail
-able only for conformance testing and aspects of system testing under scenario testing.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
standardized database of biometric samples; sensors are tested using stan
-dardized test materials. Operational testing looks at an existing system in 
situ. Usability testing evaluates the effectiveness of interaction between 
the users and operators of a biometric system. Evaluation of biometric 
systems includes all of the factors noted above as well as the analysis and 
assessment of technology, scenario, and operational test results and of the 
training process. An evaluation plan generally begins with the purpose, 
application, concept of operations, functional and performance require
-ments, and development of relevant metrics.
The data used in test and evaluation of biometric systems is an impor
-tant piece of the T&E process. Biometric subsystem testing can be con
-ducted using found data that mirrors some aspects of the application or 
conducted on an operationally deployed system (including recording the 
operational data for later evaluation).
17
 Depending on the purpose, there 
are best practices, such as the ISO/IEC 19795 series of standards for con
-ducting tests and evaluations of biometric systems.
18
Testing and evaluation are important throughout a system™s life cycle. 
While it may seem obvious to test typical deployment use of a biometric 
system, other phases of system use merit evaluation as well. Some bio
-metric systems require a training phaseŠone where biometric samples 
are presented to the system and models are built to be used during rec
-ognition. This phase might be evaluated with a properly designed test. 
Another type of evaluation is a core technology evaluation to compare 
various matching algorithms on a common task using common data. Yet 
another example is to predict real-world performance by evaluating per
-formance in a laboratory scenario.
Regardless of which aspects of the system or system life cycle are 
under scrutiny, the testing discussed in this report is considerably more 
sophisticated than brute force tests aimed at quickly stressing a system or 
device to the point of failure. The evaluation approaches discussed here 
are intended to scienti˚cally evaluate the performance of presumably 
properly working devices in various dimensions. At the same time, as 
17
 ﬁFound dataﬂ is a term that applies to data collected for some other purpose by someone 
who is willing to make the data available for testing. Use of ﬁfoundﬂ biometric data is gener
-ally problematic because of Institutional Review Board concerns over limiting data use to 
the application for which it was collected. Nonetheless, there are several ﬁfoundﬂ databases 
available for testing.
18 Work along these lines includes efforts undertaken by the British government since 1999, 
NIST Speaker Recognition Evaluation since 1994, and ISO/IEC JTC1 SC37 since 2002. There 
is also NIST™s emerging National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) for 
biometrics (see the NIST NVLAP Draft Handbook 150-25), which establishes a mechanism 
for biometric testing laboratories that can be certi˚ed for different types of product tests; 
however, the methods for different products and applications had not yet been speci˚ed at 
the time of this writing.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 73
will be seen in the brief descriptions of the biometric system tests below, 
abstracting to general principles for evaluating a biometric system and 
developing appropriate operational tests and evaluative techniques based 
on those principles can be a challenge. Even with signi˚cant testing, great 
caution is warranted in generalizing from one system to another or extrap
-olating behavior of a system across environments or user populations.
Usability Evaluations
Biometric system evaluations have historically been centered on 
error rate and throughput estimations, and they have tended to neglect 
usability considerations and acceptance testing. However, for all systems, 
even covert, both measured error rates and throughput are dependent 
on human interaction with the system. For example, the NIST testing 
taxonomy mentioned previously emphasizes algorithm testing in techni
-cal tests and does not signi˚cantly focus on human interaction. NIST‚s 
recently initiated assessment of human interactions with the biometric 
system offers a real opportunity to enhance biometric system testing.
19 
The 
NIST efforts focus on the user as data subject, that is, on the individual 
who is presenting a sample to the system for recognition. This could be 
broadened to include system operators and system administrators, and, 
in some cases, systems owners as users.
20
Test and Evaluation Standards
Biometric testing standards have evolved to address various forms 
of testing. Biometric performance testing and reporting of international 
standards, published as the ISO/IEC 19795 series of standards, evaluate 
biometric systems in terms of error rates and throughput rates.
21
 Met
-rics for the various error rates in biometric enrollment, veri˚cation, and 
identi˚cation are speci˚ed. Recommendations are given for evaluating 
performance through planning the evaluation; collection of enrollment, 
19
 Results of the NIST usability tests are publicly available on the biometrics and usability 
website at http://zing.ncsl.nist.gov/biousa/.
20
 A recent workshop hosted by the NRC Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board examined the broader issue of usability, security, and privacy. See National Research 
Council, 
Toward Better Usability, Security, and Pri
vacy of Information Technology: Report of a 
Workshop,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010).
21
 The introduction to the standard notes that ﬁtechnical performance testing seeks to 
determine error and throughput rates, with the goal of understanding and predicting the 
real-world error and throughput performance of biometric systems. The error rates include 
both false positive and false negative decisions, as well as failure-to-enroll and failure-to-
acquire rates across the test population.ﬂ It should be noted that these standards do not ˚t 
the AFIS/ABIS system benchmarking and acceptance testing that governments perform.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
veri˚cation, or identi˚cation transaction data; analysis of error rates; and 
reporting and presentation of results. The principles apply to a wide range 
of biometric modalities, applications, and test purposes and to both of˜ine 
and online testing methodologies. These principles are aimed at (1) avoid
-ing bias due to inappropriate data collection or analytic procedures; (2) 
providing better estimates of ˚eld performance for the expended effort; 
and (3) clarifying the extent to which test results are applicable.
22
Performance Assessment and Evaluation
PerformanceŠwhich goes beyond whether the system returns ade
-quate recognition results for a given applicationŠcan be a critical feature 
of biometric systems, particularly at scale. In this sense, performance 
encompasses not just error rates but also throughput, reliability, and other 
features crucial to system success. For example, systems that are engi
-neered so that performance can be dynamically monitored during testing 
and deployment should offer system administrators performance data 
throughout the operational life cycle. Similarly, the system development 
and testing communities would have an opportunity to work on ways to 
tune the operation of a biometric system to maintain performance met
-rics at acceptable levels in the face of a changing load and environment. 
The performance of systems depends on the performance and interrela
-tionships of their components (including the data subjects and human 
operators). Component performance is best measured and understood by 
studies that limit the number of factors involved through experimenta
-tion or tightly constrained observation that adequately model the target 
application.
Modeling, including simulation, also may be useful, but it must 
be grounded in observation. Even when the performance of a system 
depends in a simple manner on the performance of its components oper
-ating independently, only holistic study of the system can con˚rm that 
dependence. An understanding of performance and realistic planning 
for improvement require both analytical studies of individual system 
components and holistic studies of full system operation. Consequently, 
performance statistics cannot be accurately predicted for systems orders of 
magnitude larger than those previously studied or that have very different 
hardware/software/user interfaces.
Characteristics that limit system performance or opportunities to 
improve it may reside with individual components or with the manner in 
which they interact within the system. However, improving the perfor
-22
 Several organizations and institutions perform biometric testing, and there are several 
periodic large-scale tests in which many biometric vendors participate.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENGINEERING BIOMETRIC SYSTEMS
 75
mance of one component sometimes degrades the performance of a larger 
system in which it resides.
23
 There is no way to de˚nitively determine 
the impact of component changes on system-level performance until the 
components have been inserted and the system is tested. System perfor
-mance may depend critically on factors such as the current performance 
levels of other components, whether the performance characteristics of 
some components depend upon the outputs of other components, the 
nature and quality of system input material, and the characteristics of the 
environment in which the system operates.
23
 Upgrading a face image detector in a facial recognition system is one example of how 
improving performance of a component can degrade the system. If the system can ˚nd more 
faces in more poses, then the number of off-angle and partial faces sent into the comparison 
process increases. This suboptimal data situation can lead to poor performance. Moving 
from lossy to loss-less compression is another example where a local improvement can 
degrade overall system effectiveness. See, for example, NIST, Effect of image size and com
-pression on one-to-one ˚ngerprint matching, NISTIR 7201 (February 2005), and J. Daugman 
and C. Downing, Effect of severe image compression on iris recognition performance, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Information Forensics and Security
 3:1 (2008).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
3Lessons from Other Large-Scale Systems
The many large-scale biometric systems in use today are deployed 
in a broad range of systems and social contexts. The successes and fail
-ures of these biometric systems offer insights into what can be learned 
from careful consideration of the larger system context, as well as purely 
technological or component-level aspects, during planning. Common 
characteristics of successful deployments include good project manage
-ment and de˚nition of goals, alignment of biometric capabilities with the 
underlying need and operational environment, and a thorough threat and 
risk analysis of the system under consideration. Common contributors to 
failures include the following:
Ł Inappropriate technology choices,
Ł Lack of sensitivity to user perceptions and requirements,
Ł Presumption of a problem that does not exist,
Ł Inadequate surrounding support processes and infrastructure,
Ł Inappropriate application of biometrics where other technologies 
would better solve the problem,
Ł Lack of a viable business case, and
Ł Poor understanding of population issues, such as variability among 
those to be authenticated or identi˚ed.
Many of these factors apply in any technology deployment, biometrics-
related or not.
While much can be learned from studying biometrics systems, it 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS FROM OTHER LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS
 77
seems appropriate, given their scale and scope, to consider whether the 
biometrics community can learn lessons from large-scale systems that 
have been deployed in other domains. This chapter explores some of 
the technical/engineering and societal lessons learned from large-scale 
systems in manufacturing and medical screening and diagnosis. In each 
case, the discussion points out useful analogies to biometric systems and 
applications.
MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS
Manufacturing systems convert initial materials into ˚nished prod
-ucts that must meet quality speci˚cations. Each step in the conversion may 
consist of a complex process sensitive to multiple characteristics of the 
input materials and processing conditions. Each step also represents an 
economic investment; modi˚cations to the process that can achieve equal 
or higher quality at lower cost are every company™s goal. Production-line 
systems have been studied systematically since before World War II from 
the perspectives of industrial engineering, statistics, experimental design, 
operations research, and quality control. Insights gained from the study 
of such systems have been generalized to better understand and improve 
the performance of systems for product development and other industrial 
processes and to facilitate improvements in corporate management.
A simple example, used in a 2005 brie˚ng to the study committee by 
Lynne Hare of Kraft, Incorporated, is the development of a new sensor 
for a manufacturing production line. The process begins with identifying 
the business need for the sensor and proceeds through its implementation 
and then deployment in the production line. The stages include explicit 
translation of the business need into the scienti˚c requirements for the 
sensor, fabrication of a prototype sensor, preliminary (static) testing, for
-mal static and dynamic testing, pilot installation and testing, and produc
-tion line implementation and validation. The process never ends, because 
revalidation is scheduled at periodic intervals. At each stage of testing 
and data collection, the information obtained may send the development 
process back to an earlier stage to correct any observed de˚ciencies and 
improve robustness of the sensor to varying conditions.
This example can be interpreted directly or as analogy. Directly, it 
gives a model for developing and implementing devices required by any 
biometric system to sense biometric traits, for example, ˚ngerprint scan
-ners, iris scanners, and audio recorders. There is also an analogy between 
development and validation of a sensor and the development and imple
-mentation of a biometric system. In this analogy, the multiple levels of 
testingŠpreliminary static, formal static and dynamic, and production 
line testingŠare counterparts to technology, scenario, and operational 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
evaluations of a biometric modality. Motivations for these three levels of 
testing in the sensor development environment can be informative for the 
development and testing of an entire biometric system.
Additionally, a biometric system may be considered as a produc
-tion line, the inputs as individuals presenting for recognition, and the 
output as a series of decisions that will achieve a high quality, re˜ected 
in low values of the false match rate and false nonmatch rate, and in a 
ratio appropriate for the system™s intended purpose(s). When a biometric 
system is looked at in this way, it can be seen that the methods of indus
-trial engineering and statistical quality control can be applied to achieve 
system quality.
At least three fundamental insights into managing industrial pro
-cesses are also relevant to biometrics. The discussion below paraphrases 
selected core concepts from the work of Deming, Shewhart, Box, and their 
many successors.
1One insight is that careful articulation of requirements, preferably 
in measurable terms and derived from an end product or process, is 
exceptionally important to the successful development and implementa
-tion of component parts. In the case of a production line, for example, a 
requirement might be for the sensor to respond reliably and repeatedly 
only to stimuli in the desired range and measure stimuli accurately, under 
conditions in the production environment. The range of stimuli, sensor 
sensitivity and resolution, and resistance to environmental disturbances 
must be accurately speci˚ed during the design process in order for the 
sensor to properly identify defective units, which is its ultimate purpose. 
By analogy, biometric system design should be driven by clear objectives 
for the recognition task in the context of the broader application rather 
than merely by the existence of an attractive technology.
A second insight is that a scienti˚c approach is invaluable to under
-standing systems, particularly the interrelatedness of system components. 
The hallmark of the scienti˚c approach is exploration through both theory 
and data. The performance of complex systems can be often improved by 
identifying and correcting bottlenecks or other localized problems whose 
negative effects may not have been fully perceived and articulated. Such 
problems and other aspects of interrelatedness and individual compo
-nent performance can be identi˚ed by planned data collection guided 
by careful theorizing about the system. Such data may be collected by 
observation, as exempli˚ed by the use of statistical control charts in a 
1 
George E.P. Box and Owen L. Davies, 
The Design and Analysis of Industrial Experiments, 
Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd (1954); Walter A. Shewhart, 
Economic Control of Quality of Manu
-factured Product
, Milwaukee, Wisc.: Quality Press (1980); W. Edwards Deming, 
Out of the 
Crisis
, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press (1986).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS FROM OTHER LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS
 79
production line, or by direct experimentation on the system itself. In such 
experimentation, system inputs or conditions are systematically modi˚ed 
to learn their effects on the functioning of the system and the quality of its 
output. Such experiments can be carried out from time to time or can be 
built into the system itself. Evolutionary operation (EVOP), an example of 
the latter, refers to the regular alteration of baseline system parameters by 
small amounts during production runs. The changes made are too small 
to disrupt system operation, and the system is run with these changes in 
place just long enough to assess the effects on product quality and other 
aspects of performance. Changes that most improve performance may 
then be retained, and the process continued from new baseline values of 
parameters. Iterations of such experimentation gradually nudge the sys
-tem toward optimal parameter values by exploring nonlinear regions of 
the ﬁresponse surfaceﬂ that relates performance to different combinations 
of parameter values.
A third insight, stressed in statistical quality control and one of the 
four pillars of Deming™s ﬁsystem of profound knowledge,ﬂ
2 is the impor
-tance of understanding background variation in system performance and 
identifying separable contributors to it. The ˚rst and foremost meaning of 
ﬁunderstandingﬂ in this context is recognition that systems exhibit natu
-ral variability due to random in˜uences, and that inordinate reaction to 
such short-run variability is often wasteful and of little bene˚t. Although 
dramatic but relatively brief slumps and streaks are a major source of dis
-cussion by sports analysts and some stock traders, basing major decisions 
on such brief events rarely leads to prosperity for a baseball team or an 
investor. A deeper level of understanding develops from the awareness 
that random variation in output typically comes from multiple sources 
that persist even as its momentary in˜uences ˜uctuate. In technical par
-lance, these sources and the measures of their strength are often referred 
to as components of variation (or variance), and in industry parlance as 
ﬁthe voice of the process.ﬂ In a manufacturing process they might include 
variability in raw material batches, calibration drift of instruments guid
-ing system processes, problems with machinery maintenance, and human 
error. Reducing the variation from such common sources can improve 
product quality over the long run. Some variation arises, however, from 
ﬁspecialﬂ sources that would not be expected to recur and against which 
changes to the system can do little to protect. Thus, identi˚cation and 
reduction of the largest components of variance from common sources is 
generally accepted as critical to quality improvement in industrial pro
-duction systems. Some version of Deming-Shewhart plan-do-study-act 
2 
See W.E. Deming, 
The New Economics for Industry, Go
vernment, Education
, Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press (2000).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
(PDSA) cycles is generally used to bring a scienti˚c approach to bear on 
this task.
The insights sketched above apply to biometric recognition systems 
no less than to any other systems. But since they provide an approach 
rather than a prescription for learning about and improving systems, their 
implications will vary greatly according to context. Moreover, for many 
operational biometric systems the ﬁground truthﬂŠthat is, the ﬁcorrectﬂ 
answer in terms of system objectivesŠis indeterminate for many trans
-actions. The approach described above is invaluable in developing such 
systems. The emphasis on examination of process variables in an opera
-tional mode is potentially very helpful. Its potential bene˚ts are even 
greater if challenge experiments can be superimposed on the operational 
system. There is substantial precedent for such challenge experiments 
in other contexts, including evaluations of Internal Revenue Service tax 
assistance and Transportation Security Administration airport passenger 
and baggage screening.
So, independent of the particular biometric modality and its applica
-tion, the following lessons can be drawn from the experience and meth
-odologies that have evolved in industrial production:
Ł System objectives must be clari˚ed at the outset if the system is to 
be designed ef˚ciently and if the ability to evaluate system performance 
is to be preserved. In particular, the often-interrelated but distinct goals 
of improving convenience, controlling access, detecting threats, lowering 
costs, tracking and managing employees, and deterrence must be distin
-guished and prioritized in system planning.
Ł The operational environment, including the range within which 
environmental characteristics and characteristics of the populations pre
-senting to the system will vary, should be anticipated as much as possible 
in systems development. This includes consideration of operation under 
routine conditions; under unusual conditions unconnected to any speci˚c 
threat; under realistic threat scenarios for attempts to defeat the system 
at the individual level; and under realistic threat scenarios for penetrat
-ing, degrading performance, or shutting down operations at the system 
level.
Ł To the extent that systems are mission-critical, large-scale, and 
addressed to national security, controlled observation at the operational 
level, including ongoing challenge experimentation, is essential. In rou
-tine operation, many errors are likely to occur in which an individual 
making a true recognition claim is at ˚rst erroneously restricted but the 
mistake is later discovered and corrected, at which point these errors 
become visible and available for analysis. However, when an individual 
gains unauthorized access because, for example, a false claim of identity 
goes undetected, the error may remain undiscovered for a long time. 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS FROM OTHER LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS
 81
Challenge experiments, which observe and compile system responses to 
inputs representing (1) typical experience, (2) variations in conditions, (3) 
dif˚cult presentations requiring adjudication or systems adaptation, and 
(4) attack modes, are the best way to identify the potential for such errors 
and ways to prevent them. Erroneous rejections of true recognition claims 
and erroneous acceptances of false claims should be documented and 
subject to rigorous fault analysis, just as would take place in the case of 
an investigation into a transportation crash. Such analysis should include 
comparison with a sample of correct recognitions used as controls in order 
to distinguish factors predisposing to errors from those predisposing to 
correct decisions.
Ł Studies of system behavior, including those attempting to discover 
and reduce the largest contributors to system error and the most variable 
components of intermediate products that contribute to recognition deci
-sions, may be as revealing and helpful for biometric systems as they have 
been for systems involving other repeatable processes.
MEDICAL SCREENING SYSTEMS
Medical screening systems collect diagnostic information, generally 
in a staged sequence, in an attempt to locate individuals with an unde
-tected disease that can be more effectively treated early in its course. The 
input to such a system is data from a population of individuals, some 
with disease but most without. Results of the stages generally are clas
-si˚ed as positive or negative, and only individuals who test positive at 
each stage are labeled by the system as having the disease. Consider the 
following simpli˚ed (and not necessarily medically realistic) view of a 
prostate cancer screening system. Screening is initiated by a digital rectal 
examination. The patient with a normal exam is not screened further. 
Abnormal palpation results, however, are followed by a prostate-speci˚c 
antigen (PSA) test. Patients with a PSA level below a certain point are not 
screened further. When the PSA level is at or above this point, the prostate 
is biopsied. When the pathologist ˚nds the biopsy to be negative for can
-cer, the patient is so informed. When the pathologist ˚nds it to be positive 
for cancer, the diagnosis is considered to be established, and the patient is 
referred for consideration of treatment alternatives. The alternatives, and 
indeed the importance of any treatment, may vary depending on age of 
the patient, stage of the cancer, and rate of progression, which may often 
be determined by a watch-and-wait period.
3Each component test of this progression will detect some prostate 
3 
The point here is that the disposition of a medical screening result may vary as a function 
of patient factors, and what happens after that is, nonetheless, appropriately viewed as a 
system output. Similarly, the disposition of a biometric recognition (or lack of recognition) 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
cancers and miss others, its false negatives. Some men without prostate 
cancer, perhaps with another disease such as benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(BPH), will be classi˚ed positive at one or more steps. The proportion of 
cancers detected is known technically as ﬁsensitivityﬂ and the proportion 
of prostate cancer-free individuals classi˚ed as negative is known as the 
ﬁspeci˚city.ﬂ The complementary proportionsŠthat is, the proportion of 
prostate cancers missed and the proportion of men without cancer who 
are identi˚ed as positivesŠare called the false negative and false positive 
rates. These are analogous to the false match and false nonmatch rates 
in a biometric recognition application. Note that each component of the 
screening system will have its own values of these numerical character
-istics describing the performance of that component and that another set 
of values characterizes the performance of the screening system overall. 
In practice, the true values are generally unknown, but hypothesized or 
estimated values coupled with well-established mathematical relation
-ships can provide useful guidance for screening policies.
Screening systems have been extensively studied in a medical context. 
Their general characteristics are well understood, but their speci˚c per
-formance levels may be unclear. The following lessons are among those 
that have been learned:
Ł Individual components in general usage are rarely as sensitive and 
speci˚c as the components when they were under development because 
tests are usually developed and evaluated by researchers exceptionally 
skilled in their use on subjects whose states of health or disease are well 
known.
Ł The value of each component to the screening system is determined 
not just by its individual properties but by the information it contributes 
in addition to the contribution of the other components. For instance, con
-˚rming the result of a test by repetition is less valuable than con˚rming it 
by a different test that screens for a different disease marker.
Ł Limitations of individual components can vitiate the effective
-ness of other components. For instance, in the system described above, a 
pathologist who cannot detect true prostate cancer renders the accuracy 
of earlier components in the sequence virtually irrelevant.
Ł Effectiveness of a system is highly population-speci˚c, even when 
the system™s overall sensitivity and speci˚city are exceptionally high. This 
is easily seen by considering a screening system implemented in a popula
-tion from which the disease in question is absent. No matter how high the 
might vary according to situational and subject factors; because the consequences of the 
system™s results affect system output, they are important in evaluating a biometric system.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LESSONS FROM OTHER LARGE-SCALE SYSTEMS
 83
sensitivities and speci˚cities of the system components and of the system 
as a whole, all positives will be false positives and the screening system 
will provide no health bene˚t.
Ł In view of the preceding item, the performance of a system is best 
represented by its population-speci˚c predictive valuesŠthat is, the pro
-portion of screen-positive individuals who truly have the disease (positive 
predictive value) and screen-negative individuals who truly do not have 
the disease (negative predictive value). Alternatively, the ratios of screen-
positives with the disease to screen-positives without the disease and the 
ratios of screen-negatives without the disease to screen-negatives with 
it, may also be used to represent performance. These measures combine 
information on the accuracy of the testing (sensitivity and speci˚city) with 
information on the composition of the population, since both are critical 
to determining whether screening is informative.
Ł The ability of a system to detect disease and the importance of 
detection may vary by characteristics of the disease and the patients in 
whom the disease occurs. For instance, screening is more likely to detect 
slowly progressing (indolent) than rapidly progressing (aggressive) dis
-ease, because the symptom-free period is longer for the former. But sensi
-tivity is less important in detecting indolent disease, because subsequent 
rounds of screening may detect it before it has progressed much further. 
In the case of prostate cancer, elderly men with the indolent form may be 
more likely to die from something else before the cancer kills them.
These observations are general, and the analogy to biometric systems 
is imperfect. They do, however, have some implications for biometric 
systems:
Ł Laboratory and scenario testing are apt to underestimate ˚eld error 
rates of biometric applications.
Ł Combinations of independent or minimally dependent characteris
-tics and processes generally incorporate more information, and thus offer 
higher potential for improved performance, than combinations of more 
correlated components. Hence, in biometrics systems design, independent 
features, components of multimodal biometrics, and components of deci
-sion-making scores are preferable to combinations of correlated alterna
-tives of comparable cost.
Ł A poor adjudication process, or an ineffective backup process for 
dealing with failures-to-acquire (see Chapter 2) in a biometric system, may 
negate the bene˚ts of good error rates in the basic biometric technology.
Ł Biometric technologies must be calibrated to the environment and 
population in which they will be implemented. For instance, one might 
expect different operational characteristics for biometric border-control 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
systems using identical technology on the Mexican border with Texas 
and the Canadian border with New York, in part because the frequency 
of attempted illegal border crossings in these places is so different.
Ł System performance characteristics may vary by major popula
-tion subgroups and by the types of challenges presented to the system. 
Extrapolation of technological or system performance characteristics 
across settings or challengesŠfor example, from (1) laptop access control 
to auto theft control to border control or (2) from illegal immigrants to 
narcotics smugglers to terroristsŠis unlikely to be reliable.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.85
4Cultural, Social, and Legal 
Considerations
Biometric systems assume and require an intimate relationship 
between people and technologies that collect and record the biological and 
behavioral characteristics of their bodies. It is therefore incumbent upon 
those who conceive, design, and deploy biometric systems to consider the 
cultural, social and legal contexts of these systems. Not attending to these 
considerations and failing to consider social impacts diminishes their 
ef˚cacy and can bring serious unintended consequences.
The key social issue surrounding biometrics is the seemingly irrevoca
-ble link between biometric traits and a persistent information record about 
a person. Unlike most other forms of recognition, biometric techniques 
are ˚rmly tied to our physical bodies. The tight link between personal 
records and biometrics can have both positive and negative consequences 
for individuals and for society at large. Convenience, improved security, 
and fraud reduction are some of the bene˚ts often associated with the use 
of biometrics. Those bene˚ts may ˜ow to particular individuals, corpo
-rations, and societies but are sometimes realized only at the expense of 
others. Who bene˚ts at whose expense and the relative balance between 
bene˚ts and costs can in˜uence the success of biometric deployments.
The ef˚cacy of a biometric system can be affected by the cultural, 
social, and legal considerations that shape the way in which people engage 
and interact with these systems. People™s deliberate choices about whether 
and how to engage and their inadvertent actions both affect system per
-formance. For example, some people may choose not to place their ˚ngers 
on a ˚ngerprint scanner for fear of contracting a disease or may be unable 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
to do so because long ˚ngernails are highly valued by their social group. 
Similarly, some people may avoid having their photographs taken for a 
face recognition system because of concerns over how the images will be 
used; others will avoid this owing to concerns about the absence of cus
-tomary adornments to the face (for example, scarves). In both cases system 
performance may be compromised.
The proportionality of a biometric systemŠthat is, its suitability, 
necessity, and appropriatenessŠin a given context will have a signi˚cant 
effect on the acceptability of that system.
1 The societal impact of such 
systems will vary signi˚cantly depending on their type and purpose. For 
example, the use of iris scanning to control access to a local gym and of 
˚nger imaging to recognize suspected terrorists at international borders 
are likely to differ, both for the individuals being scanned and the broader 
community. The potential impacts on particular social groups and thus 
their receptions by these groups may also vary dramatically due to dif
-ferences in how the group interprets the cultural beliefs, values, and 
speci˚c behaviors. Imposing facial recognition requirements to enter a 
store or workplace may limit the shopping and work options available 
to individuals who consider photographs of faces inappropriate, creating 
barriers to social activities.
This chapter explores such considerations in four areas: biometric 
systems and individual participation, potential impacts on society of bio
-metric systems, legal considerations with respect to biometrics, and data 
collection and use policies.
INTERACTION BETWEEN BIOMETRIC 
SYSTEMS AND INDIVIDUALS
System performance may be degraded if social factors are not ade
-quately taken into consideration. These factors are of two types, those 
that motivate and those that facilitate participant engagement with the 
system.
Motivating Participation by Individuals
As a rule, peoples™ willingness to participate in a system and their 
commitment to it depend on their understanding of its bene˚ts. For exam
-ple, a biometric system that allows convenient access to a worksite might 
be perceived as bene˚cial to individuals by relieving them of the necessity 
1 
European Commission, Article 29. The Data Protection Working Party observes that pro
-portionality has been a signi˚cant criterion in decisions taken by European Data Protection 
Authorities on the processing of biometric data. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/justice
 _home/fsj/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2003/wp80_en.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 87
to carry an ID card. On the other hand, a biometric system that tracks day
-time movement of employees might be perceived as primarily bene˚cial 
to the employer and as undermining the employee™s personal freedom. 
In some instances, ancillary inducement, such as monetary reward, may 
be required to obtain a desired level of participation.
Participation may also be motivated by the possibility of negative 
consequences for nonparticipationŠfor instance restrictions on access to 
locations or services (perhaps entry to the United States), requirements 
to use a much more lengthy process for a routine activity (for example, 
to open a bank account), and even the threat of legal action (for example, 
the requirement to enroll in a biometric system in order to maintain legal 
alien status). Nonparticipation may also subject individuals to social pres
-sure and/or prevent them from joining some collective activities.
Willingness to participate also may be in˜uenced by concern that 
system uses will change over time (often referred to as ﬁmission creepﬂ), 
perhaps becoming less benign. For example, a system initially deployed 
to allow employees easy access to a worksite might also be used later to 
track attendance, hours worked, or even movement at the worksite. Such 
concerns argue for clear documentation of both how the system will be 
used and protections to ensure that it will not be used for other, unac
-knowledged purposes.
More broadly, the social and cultural factors that in˜uence willing
-ness to participate in biometric systems run the gamut from trust in 
government and employers, to views about privacy and physical contact, 
to social involvement vs. isolation. Because the use of biometric systems 
depends on physical connections with individuals and because they are 
used for national security, law enforcement, social services, and so on, a 
host of societal issues should be addressed before they are deployed.
Facilitating Individual Participation
The adoption of biometric systems depends on the ease with which 
people can use them. In systems design it is critical to consider training in 
use of the system, ease of use (for example, are multiple steps, awkward 
actions, or complicated procedures required?), and management of errors 
(for example, how does the system recover from a mistake?). Designing 
usable systems also requires that the designers have some knowledge of 
the human users and operators, the context in which they will use the 
system, and their motivations and expectations.
2 Users of biometric sys
-2 
For more on usability and biometric systems, see ﬁUsability and Biometrics: Ensur
-ing Successful Biometric Systems.ﬂ Available at http://zing.ncsl.nist.gov/biousa/docs/
Usability_and_Biometrics_˚nal2.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
tems might include travelers, people whose ˚rst language is not English, 
employees of a particular company, shoppers, and so on. Contexts of use 
might include empty of˚ce buildings vs. busy airports, indoor vs. open 
air, lone individuals vs. groups, daily vs. semiannual, and so on. Motiva
-tions of operators might range from speeding up the check-in process to 
protecting personal information to preventing terrorism.
Discussions of usability tend to focus on narrow technical consid
-erations such as the adequacy of the instructions for where and how to 
place the hand or ˚nger to successfully engage with a biometric system 
(some of this was discussed brie˜y in the section ﬁOperational Contextﬂ in 
Chapter 2). But broader considerations also affect usability. For example, 
providing a table where users can place their bags, purses, and other 
paraphernalia before interacting with the system may improve usability. 
Interfaces should take into account physical differences among people 
(height, girth, agility). If an interface is dif˚cult for a particular person (tall 
or short, say) to use, then users are implicitly sorted into categories and 
may be treated differently for reasons unrelated to system goals.
Dealing with user diversity also leads to the challenge of providing 
user assistance. The presence of knowledgeable people providing help 
has been shown time and again to ease the pain of learning to use new 
systems and of managing errors. For a biometric system, it is important to 
have ways to mediate a variety of potential problems, ranging from indi
-viduals uncertain how to use the system to individuals who cannot pres
-ent the trait needed (for example, if their ˚ngerprints are hard to image). 
Earlier chapters considered failures to enroll and failures to acquire from 
technical and statistical perspectives, but how such failures are handled 
from the perspective of the user (who has ﬁfailedﬂ in some sense) also has 
an impact on system effectiveness. If they are not handled carefully, some 
users may be less ready to participate, or even disenfranchised altogether; 
see below for the broader societal implications of disenfranchisement.
Expected frequency of use by a given individual is an important con
-sideration in system design, since familiarity comes with repeated use. 
Typically, systems designed for infrequent use should be easy to learn, 
with readily interpreted instructions and help at hand, as usage proce
-dures may not be remembered. On the other hand, people can learn to 
use even the most dif˚cult systems if they have a chance to practice and 
learning is reinforced by frequent use and feedback. Thus, a system to be 
used by vacationers once or twice a year will have different requirements 
than one used daily by employees. While systems used frequently should 
avoid time-consuming operations to accomplish routine tasks such as 
entering a work area or logging on to the computer, they need not mini
-mize initial training.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 89
SOCIETAL IMPACT
The increasing use of biometric systems has broad social rami˚cations 
and one overarching consideration is proportionality. While the technical 
and engineering aspects of a system that contribute to its effectiveness 
are important, it is also useful to examine whether a proposed solution 
is proportional and appropriate to the problem it is aimed at solving.
3 Biometric systems™ close connection to an individual, as described in the 
preceding section, means that even extremely effective technical solutions 
may turn out to be inappropriate due to perceived or actual side effects 
and means that proportionalityŠboth how the system will be perceived 
in its user communities as well as possible side effects, even if the system 
is accurate and robustŠmust be considered when ˚rst examining the 
solution space. The rest of this section explores some of those potential 
side effects, including potential disenfranchisement of nonparticipants, 
privacy issues, and impact of varying cultural perspectives on individual
-ity and identity.
Universality and Potential Disenfranchisement
Where biometric systems are used extensively, some members of the 
community may be deprived of their rights. Some individuals may not 
be able to enroll in a system or be recognized by it as a consequence of 
physical constraints, and still others may have characteristics that are not 
distinctive enough for the system to recognize. There will also be those 
who decline to participate on the basis of religious values, cultural norms, 
or even an aversion to the process. Religious beliefs about the body and 
sectarian jurisdiction over personal characteristics (for example, beards, 
headscarves) or interpersonal contact (for example, taking photographs, 
touching, exposing parts of the body) may make a biometric system an 
unacceptable intrusion. Mandatory or strongly encouraged use of such a 
system may undermine religious authority and create de facto discrimi
-nation against certain groups whose members are not allowed to travel 
freely, take certain jobs, or obtain certain services without violating their 
religious beliefs. Another category of people who may choose not to par
-ticipate are those concerned about misuse or compromise of the system or 
its dataŠand its implications for privacy and personal liberty. Although 
a decision to participate or not may be an individual one, biometric sys
-3 
An example that received some media attention was a proposal to use ˚ngerprint scan
-ners to speed up a school lunch line. For reasons described elsewhere in this chapter, many 
in that community felt that such a use of the technology was disproportionate to the prob
-lem, regardless of its effectiveness.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
tems can inadvertently affect groups whose shared characteristics make 
them less inclined to use the systems, assuming that participation is vol
-untary. Where use is mandatoryŠfor example, in some military applica
-tions such as the U.S. Army™s Biometric Automated Toolkit (BAT) system 
described in Appendix DŠeven more consideration of these issues may 
be needed.
Thus, while disenfranchisement in such cases may seem to affect 
only individuals, broad use of systems that are known to have these con
-sequences can adversely affect the broader community if no appropriate 
relief is put in place. The community, including those not affected directly, 
may come to distrust the systems or the motivations of those deploying 
them. A system deployed in a community in which certain members are 
consistently unable to participate in the de facto methods of recognition 
without signi˚cant inconvenience may acquire an unwelcoming reputa
-tion no matter how benign the purposes for which it is deployed. Similar 
kinds of potential ostracism have been seen when formerly pedestrian-
friendly or bus-friendly communities are transformed to focus on auto
-mobiles; those without driver™s licenses or their own automobiles can 
become effectively disenfranchised in particular geographic locations.
4 Other technologies, such as the telephone and the Internet in the com
-munications arena, have had similar effects.
Privacy as a Cultural Consideration
Biometric systems have the potential to collect and aggregate large 
amounts of information about individuals. Almost no popular discussion 
of biometric technologies and systems takes place without reference to 
privacy concerns, surveillance potential, and concerns about large data
-bases of personal information being put to unknown uses. Privacy issues 
arise in a cultural context and have implications for individuals and soci
-ety even apart from those that arise in legal and regulatory contexts. The 
problems arising from aggregating information records about individuals 
in various information systems and the potential for linking those records 
through a common identi˚er go well beyond biometrics, and the chal
-lenges raised have been addressed extensively elsewhere.
For example, a 2007 NRC report
5 that examined privacy in the digital 
age had a host of citations to other important work in this area. A thorough 
4 
Langdon Winner, Do artifacts have politics? 
Daedalus
 109(1) (1980), and How technology 
reweaves the fabric of society, 
The Chronicle of Higher Education
 39(48) (1993). Donald A. 
MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman, eds., 
The Social Shaping of Technology
, London: Open Univer
-sity Press (1985; 2nd ed., 1999).
5 
See NRC, 
Engaging Pri
vacy and Technology in a Digital Age
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (2007).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 91
treatment of authentication technologies and privacy, with references to a 
host of sources, appears in the NRC report 
Who Goes There? Authentication 
Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
 (2003), which treats the constitutional, statutory, 
and common law protections of privacy and their intersection with mod
-ern authentication technologies, including biometrics. A 2002 NRC report 
from the same project explored large-scale identity systems and potential 
technical and social challenges.
6 Almost all of the issues raised in these 
three NRC reports on technology and identity systems, with or without 
biometric components, also apply to biometric systems.
7 In addition, a 
recent symposium on privacy and the technologies of identity includes 
a series of scholarly papers on the subject. These papers refer to a wide 
range of sources.
8 This chapter does not seek to recapitulate this extensive 
literature, and instead brie˜y examines some ways biometric systems can 
contribute to the privacy challenges inherent in systems storing informa
-tion about individuals.
Record Linkage and Compromise of Anonymity
Information of various kinds about individuals is routinely stored 
in a variety of databases. Linking such informationŠhowever imper
-fectlyŠin order to form pro˚les of individuals is also routinely done for 
purposes ranging from commercial marketing to law enforcement. The 
biometric data stored in information systems have the potential of becom
-ing yet another avenue through which records within a system or across 
systems might be linked. This potential raises several questions: Under 
what circumstances is such linkage possible? If undesirable linkages are 
technically feasible, what technological and/or policy mechanisms would 
impede or prevent them? How could compliance with those mechanisms 
be monitored by those whose data are stored? What criteria should be 
used for deciding whether these mechanisms are needed? Depending on 
the anticipated uses of the personal data, policy and technical mechanisms 
may have to be put in place to prevent their unauthorized linking.
A challenge related to record linkage is the potential for erosion or 
compromise of anonymity. As discussed previously, in contrast to the 
wide choice of passwords available to an individual, there are a fairly lim
-ited number of biometric identi˚ers that a person can present, even when 
all possible combinations (for example, multiple ˚ngers, face recognition 
6 
See NRC, 
IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About Nationwide Identity Systems
, Washington, 
D.C.: The National Academies Press (2002).
7 
See NRC, 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
, Washington D.C.: 
The National Academies Press (2003).
8 
See Katherine Strandburg and Daniela Stan Raicu, eds., 
Pri
vacy and Technologies of Identity: 
A Cross-Disciplinary Con
versation
, pp. 115-188 (2006).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
coupled with hand geometry) are considered. Thus, even a biometric 
system that does not internally link an individual™s biometric data with 
other identifying information may fail to preserve anonymity if it were 
to be linked using biometric data to another system that does connect 
biometric data to identity data. This means that even a well-designed 
biometric system with signi˚cant privacy and security protections may 
still compromise privacy when considered in a larger context. A related 
challenge is secondary use of dataŠthat is, using data in ways other than 
originally speci˚ed or anticipated. The 2003 NRC report 
Who Goes There? 
examined secondary use in an authentication context. The challenge to 
privacy posed by secondary use of data in information systems gener
-ally, and particularly in data-intensive systems even without biometrics, 
is widely known.
Although it may seem that these concerns are speci˚c to individuals, 
privacy considerations can have broad social effects beyond the indi
-vidual,
9 as the discussion above on universality makes clear. Privacy 
breaches, however well-contained, can erode trust not only in the tech
-nological systems but also in the institutions that require their use. The 
potential for abuse of personal information can be suf˚cient to make cer
-tain segments of society reluctant to engage with particular technologies, 
systems, and institutions. Biometric systems carry their own particular 
challenges with respect to privacy in addition to many of those that have 
been identi˚ed for other information systems.
Co
vert Sur
veillance
Some recognition systems may function at a distance, making it possi
-ble to associate actions or data with a person without that person™s explicit 
participation. Such tracking and collection of data has privacy implica
-tions not only for the person involved but for society as a whole. If these 
capabilities were to be broadly deployed, with their existence becoming 
broadly known and concern about their use becoming common, there 
would be potential distrust of the institutions that had deployed the tech
-nology. Even if knowledge of a capability is not widespread, the power 
that ˜ows to those who control it may have unanticipated effects.
To date, widespread use of covert identi˚cation appears to be con
-˚ned to movie plots. Contrary to popular belief, for example, the surveil
-lance cameras used to investigate the 2005 London bombings did not 
perform biometric recognition as described in this report, because the 
cameras produced video searched by humans, not by machine. Nonethe
-less, several programs now pursuing recognition at a distance presage 
9 
See, for instance, Priscilla Regan, 
Legislating Pri
vacy: Technology, Social Values, and Public 
Policy
, University of North Carolina Press Enduring Editions (2009).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 93
such applications. While concerns about choice to participate are often 
dismissed by the biometrics industry, they must be addressed to take into 
account the target community™s cultural values in order to gain accep
-tance and become broadly effective, especially as such systems become 
more pervasive or if covert biometric surveillance systems mature and 
become widely deployed.
Individuality and Identity
Because a biometric system recognizes the body, its applications may 
assume and embed particular Western notions of individuality and per
-sonal identityŠnamely, that the individual acts in self-interest and has 
autonomy over his or her actions. However in some non-Western contexts 
there are different views on the primacy of the individual, and more col
-lectivist views of identity prevail. In these contexts agency and authority 
are not presumed to reside with individuals and autonomous action is not 
assumed. An individual™s identity, in such cases, cannot easily be sepa
-rated from that of the larger group of which the individual is a member. 
This undermines the assumptions of systems (biometric and otherwise) 
whose design expects that the actor is the individual (for example, access
-ing a bank account, doing a job, or making political decisions).
10
Biometric systems are used to recognize individuals, but depending 
on the application and the cultural context, the broader system integrat
-ing biometric technologies may also need to recognize the position of 
individuals within the family, workplace, or community.
11
 That is, an 
understanding of the relational dimensions of individual action whereby 
a person or group acts on behalf of another may be required. For example, 
within a workplace context an assistant may be required to take action on 
behalf another to check in for a ˜ight or post personnel evaluations or in 
a community context a neighbor may be enlisted to pick up prescription 
medication for someone unable to do so.
12
10 There are microexamples of this sort of thing even within Western cultures. For example, 
administrative assistants are often given authority to make decisions and even sign docu
-ments for their bosses when their bosses are not present. Parents may act on behalf of their 
children, and spouses often are able to speak for each other.
11
 Note that a well-designed biometric system will integrate an appropriate notion of 
individual. The Walt Disney World entrance gate application of biometrics described in 
Appendix D creates an af˚nity group for the people entering the park using a set of tickets 
purchased at the same time. This association of the tickets to the group avoids unnecessary 
complication at the admission gate and re˜ects the common social context for ticket use 
without unduly weakening the value of biometric recognition.
12
 These examples are more properly accommodated by features in the broader system 
in which the biometrics components are integrated. The authorization system may allow 
delegation rather than recognize multiple individuals as the same entity.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
Another way the identity of an individual can be con˜ated with that 
of a larger group is when biometric data are used for research. While this 
report urges extensive empirical research (of necessity on large groups of 
individuals) to achieve a stronger empirical foundation for biometric sys
-tems, such research is not without complications. When a group (such as 
an ethnic or racial group) is studied, whether for a medical, say, or a bio
-metric purpose, the associated ˚ndings about that group can raise issues. 
Perhaps the individuals who were studied had not consented to the use 
of their individual data for research and the drawing of generalizations 
about their group, or perhaps consent was obtained but the results of the 
research are not welcomed by the individuals who participated. Another 
complication may arise when the results of a group study are made public 
and have an effect on individuals who are part of that group, whether or 
not they participated in the study. Even though individual enrollees in 
the database have given their consent, does the group qua group have the 
power to withhold consent for conduct of the research itself or publica
-tion of the ˚ndings? These issues apply beyond biometrics research, but 
biometric recognition™s close association to individual bodies and notions 
of identity will inevitably heighten participants™ sensitivity to the issues 
and necessitate that they be addressed with special care.
In addition to the identity issues raised by cultural considerations and 
role-based agency and the challenges of research on socially identi˚able 
groups, biometric technologies explore the boundary between public and 
private information about an individual™s body. The ability of these sys
-tems to categorize, monitor, and scrutinize persons through behavioral or 
biological characteristics raises the issue of the integrity of the 
person
. The 
gathering of biometric data of all kinds (for example, ˚ngerprint images, 
iris scans, brain scans, DNA, face imaging) that is associated with and 
de˚nes the individual raises issues of the ﬁinformatizedﬂ bodyŠa body 
that is represented not by human-observable anatomical and physical fea
-tures but by the digital information about the body housed in databases. 
This has implications for how we ultimately perceive and conceive of the 
individual.
13
13
 For more on this notion, see Irma van der Ploeg, 2007, ﬁGenetics, biometrics and the in
-formatization of the body,ﬂ 
Ann. Ist. Super. Sanità
 43(1): 44-50, and Emilio Mordini and Sonia 
Massar ﬁBody biometrics and identity,ﬂ 
Bioethics
 22(9): 488-498 (2008). The former notes:
   
The digital rendering of bodies allows forms of processing, of scrolling through, of 
datamining peoples™ informational body in a way that resembles a bodily search. 
Beyond mere data privacy issues, integrity of the person, of the body itself is at 
stake here. Legal and ethical measures and protections should therefore perhaps 
be modelled analogous to bodily searches, and physical integrity issues. This issue 
is of particular relevance with regard to a curious aspect of this new body, namely 
that it has become 
(re-)searchable at a distance
. The digitized body can be trans
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 95
Biometric data contribute to new ways of knowing and de˚ning per
-sons as digitized information. This information is gathered during both 
routine and exceptional activities such as medical examinations, perfor
-mance testing in sports, and users™ interactions with biometric systems 
deployed in the various applications described elsewhere in this report. 
For some purposes, the observable physical body becomes less de˚nitive 
and exclusive with respect to connoting who we are and is increasingly 
augmented (or even supplanted) by digital information about us. This 
information may ultimately ˚gure into such decisions as who we date, 
mate, and hire andŠconverselyŠwho dates, mates, and hires us. The 
ability to recognize people by how they look or walk or talk is a human 
skill critical to social order and human survival. Some individuals are 
able to quickly recognize people they have not seen for years. Biometric 
systems that are able to perform these historically human acts of recogni
-tion at high rates of speed and on a massive scale may alter underlying 
assumptions about the uniqueness of these human capabilities and may 
blur previously clear boundaries between the human skills and social 
processes that control access to social spaces and bestow rights and duties, 
and the technological capabilities of biometric systems that recognize 
faces, gaits, and voices.
LEGAL ISSUES
Comprehensive discussion of legal issues associated with biometrics 
is well beyond the scope of this report. However, as with any scienti˚c 
or technical issue, the assumptions made by engineers are very different 
from those made in the legal system. Understanding the broader context, 
including the legal context, within which biometric systems will operate, 
is important to achieving effectiveness. The use of biometrics brings with 
it important legal issues, especially the following: remediation, reliability, 
and, of course, privacy. Legal precedent on the use of biometrics technol
-ogy is growing, with key cases stretching back decades,
14 and some recent 
ported to places far removed, both in time and space, from the person belonging 
to the body concerned. Databases can be remotely accessed through network 
connections; they are built to save information and allow retrieval over extended 
periods of time. A bodily search or examination used to require the presence of 
the person involvedŠa premise so self-evident that to question it would be quite 
ridiculous. Moreover, this requirement rendered the idea of consenting to any 
bodily search at least a practicable possibility. Today, however, these matters are 
not so obvious any more.
14
 Cases include 
U.S. 
v. Dionisio
 (U.S. Supreme Court, 1973) and 
Perkey 
v. Department of 
Motor Vehicles
 (California Supreme Court, 1986).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
cases
15
 have raised serious questions as to the admissibility of biometric 
evidence in courts of law.
Remediation refers to the legal steps taken to deal with the fraudu
-lent use of biometrics, such as identity fraud by altering or concealing 
biometric traits, altering biometric references, or using fake biometric 
samples to impersonate an individual. It also handles circumstances 
where individuals are incorrectly denied their due rights or access due to 
a false nonmatch. While earlier chapters examined the design and engi
-neering implications of systems that should be able to (1) cope reasonably 
with such fraudulent attempts and implement security measures against 
them, and (2) gracefully handle individuals who are erroneously not 
matched through some secondary procedure, no system can be completely 
fraud- or error-proof. Thus, it will be important for policy and law to 
both address the perpetrator of identity fraud and induce system owners 
to create an environment that minimizes the opportunity for misuse of 
biometric samplesŠfor example, by appropriately monitoring biometric 
sample presentation at points of enrollment and participation. It will also 
be important for policies to encourage appropriate and graceful manage
-ment of false nonmatches. Reliability and privacy, and their potential 
intersections with biometric systems, are discussed below.
Reliability
Reliability has a social, as well as a technical, dimension. In the long 
run, biometric applications that make well-publicized or frequent errors 
will lose public support, even though some aspects of popular culture 
(such as police procedural television shows) have promoted the idea that 
forensic information, and in particular biometric data, is nearly infallible. 
Thus reliability, like privacy, is vital to the future of biometrics. Jurors 
relying on ˚ngerprint evidence need assurance that they are convict
-ing the right person. A security agency relying on voice analysis must 
feel con˚dent that the person detained is a terrorist and not an innocent 
bystander. Context is crucial. Information may be reliable enough to begin 
an investigation, yet insuf˚ciently trustworthy to send a person to prison. 
There is no guarantee that addressing reliability challenges alone would 
result in biometric systems becoming broadly accepted or even useful. In 
any particular setting, biometrics may or may not ensure the con˚dence 
needed for the system to be useful.
The reliability of biometric recognition has received considerable 
attention for many years. Numerous scholarly articles discuss whether 
particular forms of biometric evidence, such as DNA or ˚ngerprints, are 
15
 Such as 
Maryland 
v. Rose
 (Maryland Circuit Court, 2007).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 97
admissible in court and whether they should be.
16
 A recent NRC report 
took a broad look at forensics, not just biometric evidence, and concluded 
that ﬁa body of research is required to establish the limits and measures of 
performance and to address the impact of sources of variability and poten
-tial bias.ﬂ
17
 After the misidenti˚cation and arrest of Brandon May˚eld in 
connection with the Madrid train bombings of 2004,
18
 courts appear to 
be taking a cautious approach to biometric recognition, even though the 
error was ultimately attributed to human experts and the Department of 
Justice report does not fault the automated matching portion of the sys
-tem. The reverse perception may set excessively high standards; that is, if 
the assumption is that all evidence must be up to the standards implied 
by certain popular culture phenomena, then cases in which resources 
were not available to meet those standards may face challenges. While 
conclusive studies on the effects of television crime drama on jurors have 
not been published
19
 concerns over potential effects continue to surface 
in legal appeals.
20
Without repeating the extensive studies mentioned above, it is helpful 
to consider how our society handles reliability concerns. A brief discus
-sion of the admissibility of biometric evidence in court will be useful. 
As biometric systems are deployed more broadly and in more contexts, 
a public understanding of the extent to which the data they gather and 
results they produce can be relied upon will be critical. The discussion 
below explores some of the limitations and constraints that such data and 
results might face in a legal context. While biometric reliability is relevant 
16
 See, for example, Julian Adams, Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in the courtroom, 
Journal of Law and Policy
 13:69 (2005); Sandy L. Zabell, Fingerprint evidence, 
Journal of 
Law and Policy
 13:143 (2005). There have been substantive conferences dealing with these 
 
matters, such as the National Science Foundation Workshop on the Biometric Research 
Agenda (2003). The use of biometric evidence in court is a subset of the ˚eld of forensics; it 
concerns ﬁthe application of the natural and physical sciences to the resolution of con˜icts 
within a legal context.ﬂ See David L. Faigman et al., 
Science in the Law: Forensic Science Issues
, West Group Publishing, p. 4 (2002). Also, forensic science ﬁencompasses a broad range of 
disciplines, each with its own distinct practices.ﬂ See National Research Council, 
Strength
-ening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path Forward
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (2009), p. 38.
17
 National Research Council, 
Strengthening Forensic Science in the United States: A Path 
Forward
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2009). Also available at http://
www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=12589.
18
 Available at http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/special/s0601/PDF_list.htm; http://www
.usdoj.gov/oig/special/s0601/exec.pdf.
19
 Tom R. Tyler, Is the CSI effect good science?, 
Yale Law Journal
 (The Pocket Part) (February 
2006). Available at http://www.thepocketpart.org/2006/02/tyler.html.
20
 John Ellement, SJC chief decries in˜uence of ﬁCSI,ﬂ 
The Boston Globe
, December 11, 2009. 
Available at http://www.boston.com/news/local/massachusetts/articles/2009/12/11/
mass_judge_says_theres_no_place_for_csi_in_real_courts/.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
in numerous other settings, from border security to consumer transac
-tions, the jury trial provides a highly visible insight into public views of 
reliability, and these views may well bear on other contexts.
The ˚rst point is that the strong consistency and accuracy sought 
by laboratory researchers and system developers is not always a goal of 
our legal system. While the Constitution provides broad norms binding 
the government, our system of federalism, in which substantial power is 
retained by the states, encourages diversity, even on fundamental issues. 
Even within a state, important decisions are made by local governments, 
individual judges, and juries. Given the changing nature of expert opin
-ion, this sort of ˜exibility may not only be expected, it may also at times 
be welcomed.
Let us suppose that an individual in a given jurisdiction is charged 
with a crime, and the prosecutor seeks to introduce biometric evidence 
that is relevant to the guilt of that individual. Note that this biometric 
evidence may or may not be forensic evidence (for example, latent ˚nger
-prints). It might be a time-stamped log generated by a workplace entry 
biometric system. Or it might be information taken from the individual™s 
PDA that has a ˚ngerprint access mode. Typically, this evidence would 
be presented by an expert, someone who, unlike an ordinary witness, is 
allowed to give her opinion as to what the evidence shows. The pros
-ecutor might, for example, want to use an expert on voice analysis who 
has studied an incriminating phone conversation with a novel biometric 
technique and wants to offer her opinion that the voice on the phone is 
most likely that of the defendant.
In our legal system the judge performs a gatekeeper function: He or 
she decides whether the expert testimony is suf˚ciently reliable to be pre
-sented to the jury. If the judge rules that it is, the expert witness testi˚es 
before the jury and is subject to cross-examination, as well as to rebuttal 
testimony by opposing experts. The jury is free to believe or disbelieve 
any or all of the experts. If the judge rules that the expert testimony is not 
suf˚ciently reliable, she cannot take the stand, and the prosecution™s case 
might collapse.
21
Frye and Daubert Standards
There are legal standards a judge uses in gatekeeping expert tes
-timony. In many states, the judge uses the 
Frye
 standard, which asks 
21
 This gatekeeper role for the judge represents a compromise. In theory, a jury might be 
allowed to hear anyone, and we would rely on cross-examination and opposing witnesses 
to assure accuracy. But our system is a bit more constrained than that. Some juries might 
believe the testimony of an astrologer, but no judge would admit it. On the other hand, our 
system does leave considerable power in the hands of the jury, since a judge™s decision to 
admit expert testimony in no way guarantees that the jury will believe that testimony.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 99
whether the expert opinion is based on a scienti˚c technique that is gener
-ally accepted by the relevant scienti˚c community.
22
 In other states, and 
in the federal system, the judge uses the more recent 
Daubert
 approach, 
which requires that he balance a variety of factors, including whether 
a scienti˚c approach has been tested and subjected to peer review and 
publication; its error rate; and its general acceptance as de˚ned in 
Frye
.23
 Later federal cases have applied the 
Daubert
 approach to all expert opin
-ion, not just to scienti˚c evidence,
24
 and have held that appellate courts 
should reverse trial courts under 
Daubert
 only when they have abused 
their discretion.
25,26
Numerous studies have compared 
Frye and 
Daubert and have reached 
varying conclusions as to which is the higher hurdle in various settings, 
although most would agree that the change from 
Frye to 
Daubert did not 
work a sea change in admissibility decisions.
27 The use of lay juries and 
judges who are not scientists means decisions on the admissibility of evi
-dence will re˜ect social values more than technical expertise. For example, 
despite considerable controversy over its reliability, eyewitness testimony 
is routinely allowed in court; indeed, it is not always possible to introduce 
expert opinion to cast doubt on that testimony.
28 A person may not have 
very good vision or a good memory, but may be allowed to testify before 
a jury about what he or she saw.
Why do we insist on a gatekeeper for technical experts but not for 
eyewitnesses? There is apparently a belief that a jury that has a common-
sense understanding of the abilities of an eyewitness may defer too much 
to a highly credentialed expert. If that expert is articulate and persuasive, 
the usual checks of cross-examination and rival expertise may not be 
adequate. So the judge acts as a gatekeeper, using 
Frye
 or 
Daubert
 to keep 
from the jury theories that lack adequate signs of objective reliability.
Of course, when an expert witness testi˚es and a rival expert is called 
to rebut, the ensuing battle of the experts may not be helpful for the 
jury or for society. In a survey conducted by the Federal Judicial Center, 
judges frequently complained about experts who ﬁabandon objectivity 
22
 Frye 
v. United States,
 54 App. D.C. 46, 47, 293 F. 1013, 1014 (1923).
23
 Daubert 
v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
 509 U.S. 579 (1993).
24
 Kumho Tire Company, Ltd. 
v. Carmichael,
 526 U.S. 137 (1999).
25
 General Electric 
v. Joiner,
 522 U.S. 136 (1997).
26
 For an analysis of which states use 
Frye
, which use the full-blown federal approach of 
Daubert
, 
Kumho
, and 
Joiner
, and which use 
Daubert
 alone, see David Bernstein and Jeffrey 
Jackson, The Daubert trilogy in the states, 
Jurimetrics Journal
 44(351).
27
 David A. Sklansky, 
Evidence: Cases, Commentary, and Problems
 (2003), Aspen Publishers, 
pp. 468-470 (cites numerous studies).
28
 See, for example, 
United States 
v. Smithers,
 212 F. 3rd 306 (6th Circuit 2000).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
and become advocates for the side that hired them.ﬂ
29
 One possible solu
-tion, which has been promoted in the federal system by United States 
Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer, is to have the judge call an expert 
drawn from a list provided by leading scienti˚c organizations.
30
The upshot of this for biometric systems and technologies is that the 
admissibility of biometric evidence will not be consistent throughout 
the country. States may differ on what is reliable, and even judges in a 
given state may sometimes differ. On the other hand, over time, a con
-sensus will emerge in some areas. Polygraph evidence, for example, is 
generally denied admission in court
31
 while DNA evidence is generally 
admitted.
32
Finally, the legal system will likely never render a verdict on bio
-metric evidence as a whole. As one would expect, and hope, each type 
of evidence will be evaluated on its own when a judge exercises his or 
her gatekeeper function and when a jury performs its ultimate decision-
making role. In these legal settings at least, societal attitudes to biometrics 
are much less important than societal attitudes toward speci˚c biometric 
techniques. It is possible that opinions about techniques may change 
dramatically over time. For example, ˚ngerprints are familiar and might 
be generally viewed as trustworthy, but people might be more skeptical 
of voiceprints or another more esoteric technology, no matter what the 
opinion of experts.
Privacy in a Legal Context and Potential Implications for Biometrics
Virtually every discussion of the social implications of biometrics 
begins with privacy, and for good reason. Biometric information is part of 
an individual™s identity (in the colloquial sense of the term), and a loss of 
control over that information can threaten autonomy and liberty.
In thinking about these concerns, context is crucial. There is no one-
size-˚ts-all set of rules to ensure that a biometric system adequately pro
-tects privacy. It will be necessary instead to formulate policies for speci˚c 
situations and to evaluate them as time passes. Nor is there a guarantee of 
success. Biometric technologies do not inevitably threaten privacy: They 
could be neutral in that regard or they could even enhance privacy. The 
outcome depends on the choices our society makes.
29
 Molly Treadwell Johnson et al., ﬁExpert Testimony in Federal Civil Trials: A Preliminary 
Analysis,ﬂ Federal Judicial Center (2000), at 5-6. Available at http://www.fjc.gov/public/
pdf.nsf/lookup/ExpTesti.pdf/$˚le/ExpTesti.pdf.
30
 See 
General Electric 
v. Joiner,
 522 U.S. 136 (1997) at 149 (Breyer, J., concurring).
31
 See, for example, 
State 
v. Porter,
 698 A.2d 739 (Connecticut, 1997).
32
 Julian Adams, Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA in the courtroom, 
Journal of Law and 
Policy
 13:69 (2005).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 101The Public Sector and Pri
vacy Rights
Privacy implicates a variety of constitutional norms in our legal cul
-ture. In the public sector, the government™s failure to safeguard personal 
information can implicate due process, its abuse of information can sti˜e 
free speech, and its failure to have an adequate basis for acquiring infor
-mation can challenge our protections against unreasonable search and 
seizure as well as self-incrimination.
Rather than reiterate the many surveys that have come before, here 
we consider two recent decisions of the Supreme Court that relate to the 
intersection of biometrics and privacy rights. While these cases do not 
directly concern biometrics, some of their potential implications for that 
˚eld are noted.
Hiibel 
v. Sixth Judicial District Court
 Consider ˚rst the Supreme Court™s 
2004 decision in 
Hiibel 
v. Sixth Judicial District Court
.33
 Deputy Sheriff Lee 
Dove of Humboldt County, Nevada, was dispatched to investigate a tele
-phone call reporting that a man in a red and silver GMC truck on Grass 
Valley Road had assaulted a woman. When Dove found the truck, he saw 
a woman sitting in it and a man standing beside it. Dove asked the man 
for identi˚cation, and the man refused. As Dove repeated the request, 
the man became agitated and said he had done nothing wrong, to which 
Dove replied that he wanted to know who the man was and why he was 
there. Eventually, after requesting identi˚cation 11 times and warning 
the man he would be arrested for failure to comply, Dove arrested the 
individual.
The arrested individual, Larry Dudley Hiibel, was charged under 
Nevada law with having obstructed a police of˚cer by failing to identify 
himself. Nevada and some other states make it a crime to fail to identify 
oneself when stopped by a law enforcement of˚cer. Hiibel was convicted 
and ˚ned $250. His appeal, contending the Nevada law violated his 
Fourth and Fifth Amendment rights, ultimately reached the Supreme 
Court. A ˚ve-member majority of the Court af˚rmed Hiibel™s conviction. 
Four Justices dissented. For more detail on the arguments and decisions, 
see Box 4.1.
Biometrics makes the issues in 
Hiibel
 more pressing than ever. Con
-sider police use of facial recognition technology, which has been tried on 
a limited basis in a few jurisdictions.
34
 Let us imagine a full-blown system 
in which of˚cers on patrol have the ability to take digital images and com
-pare them in real time with a variety of databases. Suppose Of˚cer Dove 
33
 542 U.S. 177 (2004).
34
 See, for example, Outsmarting the bad guys, 
Los Angeles Times
, September 29, 2005, 
p. B2.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
had not asked Larry Hiibel a single questionŠthat instead, upon ˚nding 
the GMC truck with a woman inside and a man beside it, Dove, without 
the man™s consent, had taken a digital image and compared it with images 
in a variety of databases. Would Hiibel have suffered an unacceptable 
invasion of privacy?
Much like the question of whether the failure to answer a police of˚
-cer™s questions may be criminalized, this is a question for the legislature. 
Thus states (and the federal government) would have to decide whether 
to authorize their law enforcement of˚cials to use facial recognition tech
-nology in this way.
In states that do allow the technology, adversely affected individuals 
could still go to court and argue that their constitutional rights had been 
violated. The narrowly drawn, ˚ve-to-four decision in 
Hiibel
 does not 
resolve the question. In one sense, the government is in a stronger posi
-tion here. The self-incrimination issue is not present with facial recogni
-tion technology, since a Fifth Amendment claim requires that you be com
-BOX 4.1
 The Legal Arguments in 
Hiibel
Nevada recognized that Of˜cer Dove lacked the probable cause required by the 
Fourth Amendment to arrest Hiibel. It relied on the Supreme Court™s 1968 opinion, 
which held that ﬁreasonable suspicionﬂ was an adequate Fourth Amendment stan
-dard when of˜cers simply stop individuals against their will and pat them down to 
make sure they are not carrying a weapon (
Terry v. Ohio
, 392 U.S. 1 (1968)). Under 
Terry
 and later decisions, a suspicious of˜cer can stop an individual and ask ques
-tions (also 
INS v. Delgado
, 466 U.S. 210 (1984)). The 
Terry
 decision left open what re
-course, if any, a police of˜cer had if the individual refused to answer those questions. 
In a concurring opinion in 
Terry
 (392 U.S., at 34), Justice White wrote as follows: ﬁOf 
course, the person stopped is not obliged to answer, answers may not be compelled, 
and refusal to answer furnishes no basis for arrest, although it may alert the of˜cer 
to the need for continued observation.ﬂ
Hiibel urged the Court to adopt Justice White™s view. The Fourth Amendment™s 
protection of privacy, in Hiibel™s view, should prevent the government from forcing 
him to reveal his identity or answer other questions in the absence of probable cause 
that he had done something wrong. The closely related Fifth Amendment protection 
against self-incrimination should have the same result.
Justice Kennedy™s opinion for the Court rejected Hiibel™s arguments and thus 
Justice White™s assumption in 
Terry
 that when you are stopped by a police of˜cer 
without probable cause you do not have to answer questions. The Court reasoned 
that the state of Nevada had a strong interest in requiring people to identify them
-selves (542 U.S., at 186):
Knowledge of identity may inform an of˜cer that a suspect is wanted for another offense, 
or has a record of violence or mental disorder. On the other hand, knowing identity may 
help clear a suspect and allow the police to concentrate their efforts elsewhere. Identity 
may prove particularly important in cases such as this, where the police are investigating 
what appears to be a domestic assault. Of˜cers called to investigate domestic disputes 
need to know whom they are dealing with in order to assess the situation, the threat to 
their own safety, and possible danger to the potential victim.
Justice Kennedy™s opinion for the Court also rejected Hiibel™s Fifth Amendment 
claim, although it left open the possibility that such a claim might succeed in a dif
-ferent situation. The Court reasoned that Hiibel had never explained how revealing 
his name would incriminate him. ﬁAs best we can tell,ﬂ the Court said, ﬁpetitioner 
refused to identify himself only because he thought his name was none of the 
of˜cer™s businessﬂ (idem, at 190). The Court noted that ﬁa case may arise where there 
is a substantial allegation that furnishing identity at the time of a stop would have 
given the police a link in the chain of evidence needed to convict the individual of 
a separate offenseﬂ (idem, at 191). In such a case, the Court would revisit the Fifth 
Amendment issue.
The four dissenting justices believed that Justice White had been correct in 
Terry: Given the absence of probable cause, the state cannot invade one™s privacy 
by compelling an answer to its questions. One of the dissenters, Justice Stevens, 
emphasized that the Nevada statute imposed a duty to speak on a ﬁspeci˜c class 
of individualsﬂŠnamely, those who had been detained by the police (idem, at 191, 
Stevens, dissenting). Stevens characterized the privacy interest of that group in the 
following terms (idem at 196, Stevens, dissenting):
A person™s identity obviously bears informational and incriminating worth, ‚even if the 
[name] itself is not inculpatory.™ . . . A name can provide the key to a broad array of in
-formation about the person, particularly in the hands of a police of˜cer with access to a 
range of law enforcement databases. And that information, in turn, can be tremendously 
useful in a criminal prosecution. It is therefore quite wrong to suggest that a person™s 
identity provides a link in the chain to incriminating evidence ‚only in unusual circum
-stances.™
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 103pelled to testify. While the Court in 
Hiibel assumed that giving one™s name 
is testimonial, it had previously held that the provision of nontestimonial 
evidence, such as a blood sample or a ˚ngerprint, is not.
35
 However, the 
closely related Fourth Amendment issue remains: Does taking the image 
of an individual who is not subject to arrest without his or her consent and 
comparing it to a database constitute reasonable search and seizure?
Of course, a police of˚cer has always been free to look at any indi
-vidual and compare his likeness with that on wanted posters. But to many 
Americans, and potentially many legislatures, the use of technology to 
help do this makes a difference (see the discussion earlier in this chapter 
of individuals and identity). The possible loss of privacy posed by auto
-mated facial recognition technology may or may not be outweighed by 
possibly better law enforcement.
35
 See 
Schmerber 
v. California
, 384 U.S. 757 (1966).
BOX 4.1
 The Legal Arguments in 
Hiibel
Nevada recognized that Of˜cer Dove lacked the probable cause required by the 
Fourth Amendment to arrest Hiibel. It relied on the Supreme Court™s 1968 opinion, 
which held that ﬁreasonable suspicionﬂ was an adequate Fourth Amendment stan
-dard when of˜cers simply stop individuals against their will and pat them down to 
make sure they are not carrying a weapon (
Terry v. Ohio
, 392 U.S. 1 (1968)). Under 
Terry
 and later decisions, a suspicious of˜cer can stop an individual and ask ques
-tions (also 
INS v. Delgado
, 466 U.S. 210 (1984)). The 
Terry
 decision left open what re
-course, if any, a police of˜cer had if the individual refused to answer those questions. 
In a concurring opinion in 
Terry
 (392 U.S., at 34), Justice White wrote as follows: ﬁOf 
course, the person stopped is not obliged to answer, answers may not be compelled, 
and refusal to answer furnishes no basis for arrest, although it may alert the of˜cer 
to the need for continued observation.ﬂ
Hiibel urged the Court to adopt Justice White™s view. The Fourth Amendment™s 
protection of privacy, in Hiibel™s view, should prevent the government from forcing 
him to reveal his identity or answer other questions in the absence of probable cause 
that he had done something wrong. The closely related Fifth Amendment protection 
against self-incrimination should have the same result.
Justice Kennedy™s opinion for the Court rejected Hiibel™s arguments and thus 
Justice White™s assumption in 
Terry
 that when you are stopped by a police of˜cer 
without probable cause you do not have to answer questions. The Court reasoned 
that the state of Nevada had a strong interest in requiring people to identify them
-selves (542 U.S., at 186):
Knowledge of identity may inform an of˜cer that a suspect is wanted for another offense, 
or has a record of violence or mental disorder. On the other hand, knowing identity may 
help clear a suspect and allow the police to concentrate their efforts elsewhere. Identity 
may prove particularly important in cases such as this, where the police are investigating 
what appears to be a domestic assault. Of˜cers called to investigate domestic disputes 
need to know whom they are dealing with in order to assess the situation, the threat to 
their own safety, and possible danger to the potential victim.
Justice Kennedy™s opinion for the Court also rejected Hiibel™s Fifth Amendment 
claim, although it left open the possibility that such a claim might succeed in a dif
-ferent situation. The Court reasoned that Hiibel had never explained how revealing 
his name would incriminate him. ﬁAs best we can tell,ﬂ the Court said, ﬁpetitioner 
refused to identify himself only because he thought his name was none of the 
of˜cer™s businessﬂ (idem, at 190). The Court noted that ﬁa case may arise where there 
is a substantial allegation that furnishing identity at the time of a stop would have 
given the police a link in the chain of evidence needed to convict the individual of 
a separate offenseﬂ (idem, at 191). In such a case, the Court would revisit the Fifth 
Amendment issue.
The four dissenting justices believed that Justice White had been correct in 
Terry: Given the absence of probable cause, the state cannot invade one™s privacy 
by compelling an answer to its questions. One of the dissenters, Justice Stevens, 
emphasized that the Nevada statute imposed a duty to speak on a ﬁspeci˜c class 
of individualsﬂŠnamely, those who had been detained by the police (idem, at 191, 
Stevens, dissenting). Stevens characterized the privacy interest of that group in the 
following terms (idem at 196, Stevens, dissenting):
A person™s identity obviously bears informational and incriminating worth, ‚even if the 
[name] itself is not inculpatory.™ . . . A name can provide the key to a broad array of in
-formation about the person, particularly in the hands of a police of˜cer with access to a 
range of law enforcement databases. And that information, in turn, can be tremendously 
useful in a criminal prosecution. It is therefore quite wrong to suggest that a person™s 
identity provides a link in the chain to incriminating evidence ‚only in unusual circum
-stances.™
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
The opinions in 
Hiibel
 illuminate the competing considerations. To 
some, Justice Kennedy™s image of police of˚cers who can quickly separate 
those who are dangerous or wanted from those who are at risk or inno
-cent is an attractive picture indeed. Others are more likely to see Justice 
Stevens™s world, where facial recognition databases cast a wide net to 
ensnare people stopped without probable cause.
The reliability of a biometric system, such as the facial recognition 
system hypothesized here, is obviously relevant to this inquiry. No one 
wants to be arrested for a crime he did not commit, and no one wants 
dangerous felons to go free because of devices that malfunction. But 
even a reliable system does not function successfully without additional 
safeguards. Lurking behind Justice Stevens™s image of law enforcement 
databases is a concern that technology makes it easier than ever to invade 
privacy by allowing information gathered for one purpose to be used for 
another.
This, of course, is an important concern for those who fear govern
-ment databases might be improperly used for political purposes. The 
constitutional issue here is typically framed in terms of our First Amend
-ment rights to free speech and assembly. The Supreme Court has often 
found that these rights include the right to remain anonymous in certain 
settings.
36
In 1999 in 
Buckley 
v. American Constitutional Law Foundation
,37
 the 
Court struck down a Colorado requirement that individuals circulating 
ballot initiative petitions must wear a badge bearing their name. The 
Court noted here that ballot initiatives were often very controversial and 
that the requirement deterred participation in the political process, in 
effect saying that in some settings, facial recognition technology could 
compromise free speech by in essence making everyone wear an identi
-˚cation badge.
Of course, we give up some measure of privacy when we appear in 
public. And our remaining privacy interests are not absolute. But judicial 
recognitions of the importance of anonymity give us a way to understand 
36
 In 1958, the Court stuck down an Alabama statute requiring organizations to disclose 
their membership to the state. The plaintiff was the NAACP, which clearly would have been 
threatened by the state™s requirement (see 
NAACP 
v. Alabama
, 357 U.S. 449 (1958)). Since 
then, the Court has invalidated a Los Angeles ordinance requiring any publicly distributed 
handbill to identify its author, as well as a broader ban in Ohio on anonymous campaign 
literature (see 
Talley 
v. California
, 362 U.S. 60 (1960); 
McIntyre 
v. Ohio Elections Commission
, 514 
U.S. 334 (1995)). These results and others like them are hardly surprising, given our political 
history: The Federalist Papers, which built support for the Constitution and which play a 
role in its interpretation to this day, were published under pseudonyms.
37
 525 U.S. 182 (1999).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 105Larry Hiibel™s insistence that he did not identify himself because his name 
was ﬁnone of the of˚cer™s business.ﬂ
38
It bears repeating that there is nothing intrinsic to biometrics that 
automatically aggravates Larry Hiibel™s problem. Police of˚cers relying 
on their own judgment unaided by technology can easily make politi
-cally or racially motivated decisions that improperly invade privacy. In 
some settings, biometric systems could alleviate rather than worsen these 
problems, by relieving the individual law enforcement agent of the rec
-ognition task and assigning it to a common automated system that pre
-sumably performs equally and repeatedly for all agents. Such a system 
would, of course, be subject to all of the usual technological and environ
-mental factors discussed elsewhere in this report that might degrade its 
effectiveness.
In the end, many aspects of the intersection between the 
Hiibel
 deci
-sion and biometrics come down to control over the uses of databases. 
Consider again a facial recognition system employed by an of˚cer on 
patrol. A legislature might understandably want to reap the bene˚ts of 
such a system while eliminating its misuse. Suppose the state curtailed 
the use of the system by saying that images of those under suspicion 
should be compared only to a database of convicted felons. Is there any 
constitutional requirement that this limit be abided by? The Supreme 
Court has not answered this question, although it has suggested that a 
state might violate due process if it does not take reasonable steps to stop 
unwarranted disclosures of data.
The suggestion came in the Court™s decision in 
Whalen 
v. Roe
, 429 
U.S. 589 (1977). A New York statute required that prescriptions for legiti
-mate but addictive drugs be recorded on a computer database to prevent 
abuses such as users obtaining prescriptions from more than one doctor. 
Although the computer system was set up to prevent leaks and pub
-lic disclosure of the identity of patients was made a crime, the system 
was challenged by those who feared that the information could get out, 
stigmatizing patients as addicts in violation of their privacy rights. The 
statute was upheld, with the Court noting that no evidence of informa
-tion falling into the wrong hands had been presented.
39
 In his opinion for 
the Court, Justice Stevens, in an oft-quoted passage (idem at 605-606), left 
open the possibility that some future database might not be constitution
-ally acceptable if it were not adequately protected against improper use:
We are not unaware of the threat to privacy implicit in the accumulation 
of vast amounts of personal information in computerized data banks or 
other massive government ˚les. . . . The right to collect and use such data 
38
 Hiibel 
v. Sixth Judicial District Court
, 542 U.S. 177, 190 (2004).
39
 429 U.S., at 601.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
for public purposes is typically accompanied by a concomitant statutory 
or regulatory duty to avoid unwarranted disclosures. Recognizing that 
in some circumstances that duty arguably has its roots in the Constitu
-tion, nevertheless New York™s statutory scheme . . . evidences a proper 
concern with, and protection of, the individual™s interest in privacy. We 
therefore need not, and do not, decide any question which might be 
presented by the unwarranted disclosure of accumulated private data 
whether intentional or unintentional or by a system that did not contain 
comparable security provisions. We simply hold that this record does not 
establish an invasion of any right or liberty protected by the Fourteenth 
Amendment.
This recognition that the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amend
-ment might protect informational privacy is clearly important. It suggests 
that a government biometric database with inadequate safeguards could 
be successfully challenged by an individual in that database on the ground 
that the government had violated his or her liberty. Moreover, regardless 
of whether a challenge in court would succeed, it is clear that the public 
desires protection from unwarranted disclosures from databases of all 
kinds. Biometric systems will be judged by that standard.
Kyllo 
v. United States
 The other recent Supreme Court decision that casts 
light on privacy and biometrics is 
Kyllo 
v. United States
.40
 Federal Agent 
William Elliott suspected that marijuana was being grown in the home 
of Danny Kyllo, but he lacked the probable cause necessary to obtain a 
search warrant. Accordingly, Agent Elliott sat in a car in the street next 
to Kyllo™s home and used a thermal imager to scan the residence. The 
imager detected infrared radiation coming from Kyllo™s house. The pat
-tern revealed that portions of the house were hotter than the rest of the 
house and the neighboring homes. Agent Elliott concluded that Kyllo 
was using halide lights to grow marijuana. Using this and other informa
-tion, Elliott obtained a warrant for a search. Once inside Kyllo™s home, 
federal agents found more than a hundred marijuana plants. Kyllo, who 
was eventually convicted of manufacturing marijuana, appealed on the 
ground that using a thermal imager without probable cause constituted an 
unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment. The Supreme Court, 
in another 5-4 decision, agreed with Kyllo. See Box 4.2 for an overview of 
the arguments used.
Two main lessons for biometrics emerge from 
Kyllo
. The ˚rst is 
that as a technology advances and becomes widespread, our zone of 
constitutionally guaranteed privacy shrinks. The Court recognizes, more
-over, that our society™s expectations of privacy set the baseline for laws 
40
 533 U.S. 27 (2001).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 107governing searches. In 
California 
v. Ciraolo
, noted in Box 4.2, the Court, in 
upholding aerial surveillance of a fenced backyard, explicitly said that 
ﬁin an age where private and commercial ˜ight in the public airways is 
routine, it is unreasonable to expectﬂ that one™s backyard is private.
41
 In 
Kyllo
 the Court implied that if thermal imagers had been in common use 
its decision would have been different. Thus if the day comes when a bio
-metric device that analyzes voices can function from a hundred feet or so 
and extend its range into a private home, and if use of that device becomes 
widespread, the Fourth Amendment will have little application.
If the ˚rst lesson offers a boost for biometrics, the second lesson does 
the opposite. All nine justices in 
Kyllo
 expressed concern about future 
technologies that impinge on privacy. The majority wanted to step in now; 
the dissent wanted to let the legislatures have the ˚rst crack at controlling 
future developments. On this question, the nine justices on the Supreme 
Court are representative of a wide span of public opinion. The ability 
of the government to use biometrics to, say, track people™s movements 
around their neighborhood or even inside their own homes will raise red 
˜ags for those concerned about privacy and government intrusion. Public 
assent, so crucial, is likely to be lacking unless the application of biometrics 
is highly justi˚able and carefully circumscribed.
Finally, going from protections provided by the Constitution to the 
less lofty ones provided by statute, we ˚nd a series of federal and state 
laws that tend to control certain government databases on a sector-by-
sector basis with varying success. Many of these statutes incorporate the 
Fair Information Practices code developed by the then-Department of 
Health, Education and Welfare in 1973 and incorporated into the federal 
Privacy Act of 1974. The strengths and weaknesses of these statutes have 
been exhaustively analyzed.
42
 As 
Hiibel
, 
Kyllo
, and the other cases men
-tioned above demonstrate, in many sensitive areas an individual has no 
statutory protections and must rely on constitutional arguments.
The Pri
vate Sector and Pri
vacy Rights
In 
Whalen 
v. Roe
, Justice Stevens spoke of the threat to privacy posed 
by ﬁmassive government ˚les.ﬂ
43
 But what about information held in pri
-vate hands? Many Americans are just as concerned or even more so about 
the loss of privacy when personal information is given to their employer 
or demanded in an online private transaction. Suppose a bank gives its 
41
 476 U.S., at 215.
42
 See, for example, Daniel J. Solove, Marc Rotenberg, and Paul M. Schwartz, 
Information 
Pri
vacy Law,
 2nd edition, pp. 523-622, New York: Aspen Publishers (2006).
43
 429 U.S., at 605.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
customers the option of using ˚ngerprints rather than a password to 
access an ATM. The bank may believe it is enhancing privacy because 
a password is easily stolen. But if the bank™s ˚ngerprint database is not 
adequately secured, a purposeful or accidental disclosure of that data 
could lead to identity theft. Suppose an employer conducts a biometric 
scan of its workers to facilitate access to the secure workplace when a 
badge is lost. If the biometric modality chosen happened to also reveal 
information about a worker™s health, that information could be misused 
by the employer, by insurance companies, or others.
Justice Stevens™s reference to ﬁgovernmentﬂ ˚les was not inadvertent. 
The individual freedoms guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution are virtually 
all protections against government overreach. The Bill of Rights protects 
us from government suppression of free speech and religion, government 
establishment of religion, improper searches by government of˚cials, 
deprivations of due process by the government, and so on. Similarly, 
BOX 4.2
 The Legal Arguments in 
Kyllo
Although Justice Scalia™s opinion for the Court emphasized the Constitution™s 
traditional protection for the privacy of the home, he recognized that visual surveil
-lance of the home without probable cause has long been allowed. In addition, his 
opinion for the Court conceded that ﬁit would be foolish to contend that the degree 
of privacy secured to citizens by the Fourth Amendment has been entirely unaf
-fected by the advance of technologyﬂ (533 U.S., at 33-34). For example, the Court had 
permitted aerial surveillance of the backyard of a private house, even though a fence 
shielded the yard from the street (
California v. Ciraolo
, 476 U.S. 207 (1986)).
Why did the Court disallow the use of the evidence adduced by the thermal 
imager? The Court relied on a test that stemmed from the case of 
Katz v. the United 
States 
(389 U.S. 347 (1967)). 
Katz
 upheld a challenge to warrantless eavesdropping by 
an electronic listening device placed on the outside of a telephone booth because 
Katz had justi˜ably relied on the privacy of the booth. The test held that ﬁa Fourth 
Amendment search occurs when the government violates a subjective expectation 
of privacy that society recognizes as reasonableﬂ (idem, at 33).
The Court recognized that the 
Katz
 test had been criticized as circular and un
-predictable (idem, at 34), but it declined to revisit 
Katz
 in the setting of the thermal 
imaging of a private home. The Court also recognized that changing societal expec
-tations of privacy affect Fourth Amendment rights under the 
Katz
 approach. In its 
opinion, the Court twice noted that the search of Kyllo™s home was being set aside 
in part because the thermal imaging device was ﬁnot in general public useﬂ (idem, 
at 34 and 40).
A ˜nal feature of the majority™s opinion was the evident concern that more ad
-vanced technologies could reach into the privacy of the home. The Court said that 
ﬁwhile the technology used in the present case was relatively crude, the rule we 
adopt must take account of more sophisticated systems that are already in use or 
in developmentﬂ (p. 36). The Court then detailed what it had in mind (idem, at 36, 
note 3):
The ability to ﬁseeﬂ through walls and other opaque barriers is a clear, and scienti˜
-cally feasible, goal of law enforcement research and development. The National Law 
Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center, a program within the United States 
Department of Justice, features on its Internet Website projects that include a ﬁRadar-
Based Through-the-Wall Surveillance System,ﬂ ﬁHandheld Ultrasound Through the Wall 
Surveillance,ﬂ and a ﬁRadar Flashlightﬂ that ﬁwill enable law enforcement of˜cers to detect 
individuals through interior building walls.ﬂ
The four dissenting justices believed that Danny Kyllo had no reasonable expecta
-tion of privacy in heat emissions that were being sensed after they had left his house. 
In the dissenters™ view, Agent Elliott™s use of a ﬁfairly primitive thermal imagerﬂ was no 
different than if he had noticed that Kyllo™s house was warmer than a nearby building 
because ﬁsnow melts at different rates across its surfacesﬂ (pp. 41 and 43, Stevens, 
dissenting). But the dissent was not prepared to say that advanced technology should 
always be absolved from Fourth Amendment scrutiny because it is nothing more 
than an enhancement of our senses. On that subject, Justice Stevens™s dissent on p. 
51 took a wait-and-see attitude:
Although the Court is properly and commendably concerned about the threats to privacy 
that may ˚ow from advances in the technology available to the law enforcement profes
-sion, it has unfortunately failed to heed the tried and true counsel of judicial restraint. 
Instead of concentrating on the rather mundane issue that is actually presented by the 
case before it, the Court has endeavored to craft an all-encompassing rule for the future. 
It would be far wiser to give legislators an unimpeded opportunity to grapple with these 
emerging issues rather than to shackle them with prematurely devised constitutional 
constraints. Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 109Articles I, II, and III of the Constitution protect us from oppression by 
dividing government power between the federal and state governments 
and by dividing the federal government™s power among the legislative, 
executive, and judicial branches.
The infringement of privacy by a private entity, including privacy of 
biometric information, can be protected against by legislation. But some 
limitations to this approach should be noted at the outset. While federal 
laws can be drafted that preempt state action, most such laws leave room 
for complementary state regulation, leading to debates over coverage. 
Moreover, when the federal government does not preempt or when it is 
silent, state laws typically differ from state to state, raising problems for 
businesses seeking to comply with the law and for enforcement efforts. 
Finally, only constitutional protections extend to minorities who lose out 
in legislative battles. For example, if the private sector depriving you of a 
BOX 4.2
 The Legal Arguments in 
Kyllo
Although Justice Scalia™s opinion for the Court emphasized the Constitution™s 
traditional protection for the privacy of the home, he recognized that visual surveil
-lance of the home without probable cause has long been allowed. In addition, his 
opinion for the Court conceded that ﬁit would be foolish to contend that the degree 
of privacy secured to citizens by the Fourth Amendment has been entirely unaf
-fected by the advance of technologyﬂ (533 U.S., at 33-34). For example, the Court had 
permitted aerial surveillance of the backyard of a private house, even though a fence 
shielded the yard from the street (
California v. Ciraolo
, 476 U.S. 207 (1986)).
Why did the Court disallow the use of the evidence adduced by the thermal 
imager? The Court relied on a test that stemmed from the case of 
Katz v. the United 
States 
(389 U.S. 347 (1967)). 
Katz
 upheld a challenge to warrantless eavesdropping by 
an electronic listening device placed on the outside of a telephone booth because 
Katz had justi˜ably relied on the privacy of the booth. The test held that ﬁa Fourth 
Amendment search occurs when the government violates a subjective expectation 
of privacy that society recognizes as reasonableﬂ (idem, at 33).
The Court recognized that the 
Katz
 test had been criticized as circular and un
-predictable (idem, at 34), but it declined to revisit 
Katz
 in the setting of the thermal 
imaging of a private home. The Court also recognized that changing societal expec
-tations of privacy affect Fourth Amendment rights under the 
Katz
 approach. In its 
opinion, the Court twice noted that the search of Kyllo™s home was being set aside 
in part because the thermal imaging device was ﬁnot in general public useﬂ (idem, 
at 34 and 40).
A ˜nal feature of the majority™s opinion was the evident concern that more ad
-vanced technologies could reach into the privacy of the home. The Court said that 
ﬁwhile the technology used in the present case was relatively crude, the rule we 
adopt must take account of more sophisticated systems that are already in use or 
in developmentﬂ (p. 36). The Court then detailed what it had in mind (idem, at 36, 
note 3):
The ability to ﬁseeﬂ through walls and other opaque barriers is a clear, and scienti˜
-cally feasible, goal of law enforcement research and development. The National Law 
Enforcement and Corrections Technology Center, a program within the United States 
Department of Justice, features on its Internet Website projects that include a ﬁRadar-
Based Through-the-Wall Surveillance System,ﬂ ﬁHandheld Ultrasound Through the Wall 
Surveillance,ﬂ and a ﬁRadar Flashlightﬂ that ﬁwill enable law enforcement of˜cers to detect 
individuals through interior building walls.ﬂ
The four dissenting justices believed that Danny Kyllo had no reasonable expecta
-tion of privacy in heat emissions that were being sensed after they had left his house. 
In the dissenters™ view, Agent Elliott™s use of a ﬁfairly primitive thermal imagerﬂ was no 
different than if he had noticed that Kyllo™s house was warmer than a nearby building 
because ﬁsnow melts at different rates across its surfacesﬂ (pp. 41 and 43, Stevens, 
dissenting). But the dissent was not prepared to say that advanced technology should 
always be absolved from Fourth Amendment scrutiny because it is nothing more 
than an enhancement of our senses. On that subject, Justice Stevens™s dissent on p. 
51 took a wait-and-see attitude:
Although the Court is properly and commendably concerned about the threats to privacy 
that may ˚ow from advances in the technology available to the law enforcement profes
-sion, it has unfortunately failed to heed the tried and true counsel of judicial restraint. 
Instead of concentrating on the rather mundane issue that is actually presented by the 
case before it, the Court has endeavored to craft an all-encompassing rule for the future. 
It would be far wiser to give legislators an unimpeded opportunity to grapple with these 
emerging issues rather than to shackle them with prematurely devised constitutional 
constraints. Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11
0 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
job is in compliance with all relevant legislation, you have no recourse in 
court even if you believe you have been treated unfairly.
44
Biometric information held by private companies is subject to con
-straints beyond those imposed by legislation. One such constraint might 
be self-regulation, which a company might impose to gain a market edge. 
Another such constraint might be common-law protections. An employee 
or a consumer might enter into a contract with a company that promises 
to protect biometric data and would risk breach of contract if it did not 
do so. Similarly, a company that failed to meet accepted standards in pro
-tecting information might be liable for negligence in a tort suit. However, 
continuing public concern about privacy suggests that market failures 
and the limits of relief achievable with retrospective common law make 
further legislative action likely.
There are many possible ways to regulate biometric technologies and 
systems that might provide needed protections for the public and build 
its con˚dence in the private sector. Some would be relevant to govern
-ment databases as well. In response to the continuing concern over iden
-tity theft and fraud, some jurisdictions are considering enacting laws to 
prohibit the selling and sharing of an individual™s biometric data, absent 
consent or compelling circumstances.
45
Privacy concerns should be attended to when a biometric deployment 
is being implemented. For example, in answering the question of whether 
to store biometric data as processed references or in source samples or 
images, which approach best protects privacy should be considered. The 
same is true of the choice between local or centralized storage of biomet
-ric dataŠa choice that has signi˚cant security and privacy implications. 
Encryption of biometric data is often vital. Perhaps most important, the 
use of biometric systems should be de˚ned and limited at the outset of a 
program, by legislation when appropriate. The temptation to use informa
-tion for new purposes never justi˚ed to the public should be resisted.
In the end, working as hard on privacy as on technical success will 
help assure that biometric programs maintain or even enhance individual 
autonomy as they achieve social goals. Failure to do so will result in 
biometric programs that undermine American values while potentially 
bringing about their own failure due to public resistance.
44
 The NRC report 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
 (2003) found 
that personal information held by the private sector is afforded weaker statutory protec
-tions than information held by the federal or state governments and that much detailed 
personal information in the hands of businesses is available for reuse and resale to private 
third parties or to the government, with little in the way of legal standards or procedural 
protections.
45
 Illinois passed such a law in 2008 (740 ILCS 14/), the Biometric Information Privacy Act. 
Available at http://www.ilga.gov/.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 111
DATA POLICIES
Biometric data are personally identifying information.
46
 Thus bio
-metric systems have the potential to collect not only pattern recognition 
information captured by sensors, but also other information that can be 
associated with the biometric data themselves or with data records already 
contained within the system. Depending on the biometric system, this 
information could include time and location of use, identi˚cation data (for 
example, name or Social Security number, and so on) and, in some cases, 
medical measurements (for example, glucose levels).
47
 Additional data 
may be created when a decision is generated by the system (positive or 
negative recognition) that may be stored or shared with another system. 
Given the increasing volumes and kinds of data associated with a biomet
-ric system, data policies are important to answer a variety of questions 
that arise regarding sharing, storage, integrity, and con˚dentiality of the 
biometric system data.
Biometric systems are often associated with an identity system. Bio
-metric data may be correlated across identity systems to recognize indi
-viduals. The data associated with an individual collected by different 
organizations using the same biometric modality may be similar but 
almost certainly not identical, because the sample acquisition for enroll
-ment will vary (see Chapter 1 for elaboration on sources of uncertainty 
and variation in biometric systems).
An earlier NRC report addressed a set of questions and issues that 
arise particularly in the context of an identity system. For the most part, 
they apply to biometric recognition systems. The questions are reprinted 
for reference.
48
 Ł What is the purpose of the system? Possible purposes of an identity 
system include expediting and/or tracking travel; prospectively moni
-toring individuals™ activities in order to detect suspicious acts; retrospec
-tively identifying perpetrators of crimes.
 Ł What is the scope of the population to whom an ﬁIDﬂ would be is
-sued and, presumably, recorded in the system? How would the identities 
of these individuals be authenticated?
46
 The Data Protection Working Party is the independent European Union advisory body 
on data protection and privacy, established under Article 29 of Directive 95/46/EC. It 
determined that in most cases biometric data are personal data and can in all cases be 
considered as ﬁinformation relating to a natural person.ﬂ Available at http://ec.europa.
eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/docs/wpdocs/2003/wp80_en.pdf.
47
 While biometric data captured by systems using the most common modalities do not 
contain medical information, some emerging technologies capture traits such as heartbeat 
patterns, which directly convey medical data.
48
 NRC, 
IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About Nationwide Identity Systems
. Washington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press, pp. 9-11 (2002).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
 Ł What is the scope of the data that would be gathered about in
-dividuals participating in the system and correlated with their system 
identity? ﬁIdenti˚cation systems,ﬂ despite the name, often do much more 
than just identify individuals; many identity systems use IDs as keys to 
a much larger collection of data. Are these data identity data only (and 
what is meant by identity data)? Or are other data collected, stored, 
and/or analyzed as well? With what con˚dence would the accuracy and 
quality of this data be established and subsequently determined?
 Ł Who would be the user(s) of the system (as opposed to those who 
would participate in the system by having an ID)? If the public sector or 
government will be the primary user, what parts of the government will 
be users, in what contexts, and with what constraints? In what setting(s) 
in the public sphere would such a system be used? Would state and lo
-cal governments have access to the system? Would the private sector be 
allowed to use the system? What entities in the private sector would be 
allowed to use the system? Who could contribute, view, and/or edit data 
in the system?
 Ł What types of use would be allowed? Who would be able to ask for 
an ID, and under what circumstances? Assuming that there are datasets 
associated with an individual™s identity, what types of queries would 
be permitted (e.g., ﬁIs this person allowed to travel?ﬂ ﬁDoes this person 
have a criminal record?ﬂ). Beyond simple queries, would analysis and 
data mining of the information collected be permitted? If so, who would 
be allowed to do such analysis and for what purpose(s)?
 Ł Would participation in and/or identi˚cation by the system be vol
-untary or mandatory? In addition, would participants have to be aware 
of or consent to having their IDs checked (as opposed to, for example, 
being subjected to surreptitious facial recognition)?
 Ł What legal structures protect the system™s integrity as well as the 
data subject™s privacy and due process rights, and which structures de
-termine the liability of the government and relying parties for system 
misuse or failure?
Information-Sharing Issues
With increased use of biometrics, there is legitimate concern about 
how information stored in biometric databases might be shared. Sharing 
can extend the administrative reach of biometric ˚ndings. It could also 
afford valuable facts for management and research studies. However, 
such sharing presents signi˚cant privacy and con˚dentiality challenges. 
Systematic approaches in law, regulation, or technology to resolve the 
tension between the evident demand to share more biometric information 
and the cautions of privacy and technology are lacking. In particular, no 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 113
comprehensive federal policy exists to guide sharing information from 
biometric databases.
49
The sharing of information from biometric databases occurs when 
the records in one database are integrated with those in other databases 
and when data are disseminated directly to users. Most biometric systems 
today involve databases to which biometric samples captured from a pop
-ulation of individuals have been submitted and are later searched to ˚nd 
matching enrolled individuals with the same biometric characteristics. In 
some systems, a sample is compared to the reference biometric data asso
-ciated with the claimed identity (which means maintaining a database of 
reference data, even if it is not searched at each use). A national system of 
ID cards or passports based on biometric data would rely on a database.
The costs of electronically capturing biometric samples and storing 
the data continue to drop, as do the costs of data integration and dissemi
-nation, and the technical ability to do so is expanding as well, serving to 
increase interest in storing biometric information in databases. The ben
-e˚ts of storage capacity and data integration and sharing could include 
the following:
Ł Administrati
ve ef˜ciencies.
 One of the many applications might be 
giving a homeless shelter the ability to check whether an applicant has 
a criminal record; another might be allowing law enforcement to check 
whether a particular individual used a certain facility at a certain time.
Ł Business purposes.
 Sports teams could collaborate to examine the 
usage patterns and demographics of their season ticket holders, perhaps 
to avoid issuing more tickets than they have seats or to look for joint 
advertising opportunities.
Ł Research uses.
 Biometric data are needed for testing biometric sys
-tem performance and for developing new systems and features.
50
Although processing and sharing biometric information can bring many 
bene˚ts, there are also concerns that stem from the ease with which bio
-metrics technology integrates with database technology, increasing the 
likelihood of privacy violations. For this reason, it has been suggested 
49
 In addition to the lack of policy guidance, there can be logistical and practical challenges 
to information sharing. For example, even within the DOD structure, the GAO has found 
gaps in biometrics sharing across missions. See http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-49. 
For a more thorough treatment of information sharing and privacy, not just with respect to 
biometrics but also generally, see Peter Swire, Privacy and information sharing in the war 
on terrorism, 
Villano
va Law Re
view
 51:260 (2006).
50
 A. Ross, S. Crihalmeanu, L. Hornak, and S. Schuckers, A centralized web-enabled multi
-modal biometric database, 
Proceedings of the 
200
4 Biometric Consortium Conference
 (BCC), 
September 2004.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
that privacy must be designed into the systems rather than added on at 
a later time.
51
Currently there does not seem to be much of an ingrained culture of 
privacy protection for biometric databases, beyond that which exists for 
information systems generally or state and local efforts such as the Illi
-nois statute mentioned previously. With the exception of some agencies, 
mainly statistical agencies, there is little historical tradition of maintaining 
the con˚dentiality of biometric databases. This is in spite of the fact that 
if biometric data associated with an individual falls into the wrong hands 
that individual could be at risk of identity theft.
52
 Moreover, sharing of 
information from biometric databases raises questions of (1) whether the 
information would be used for purposes not intended or inconsistent with 
the purposes of the original biometric application and (2) what informa
-tion about intended uses of the system should be disclosed to users and 
how that information should be presented.
Protection of Biometric Data
The protection of personal information is not the only reason for pro
-tecting biometric data. Another is the desire to prevent third parties from 
linking records between systems, determining the enrolled users in a sys
-tem, or discovering a doppelganger (an individual who is a close match 
for an enrolled user). The encryption of biometric data stored in central
-ized databases or on a personal device such as a smart card, coupled with 
appropriate security measures to limit probing of the database, can be 
effective in countering these threats. Encryption and database protection, 
however, are insuf˚cient to protect against identity theft by an attacker 
impersonating an individual by mimicking his or her biometric traits.
It is natural to draw a parallel between password-based authentica
-tion and biometric veri˚cation of identity. In a password-based system, a 
secret password is presented to con˚rm a claimed identity; in a biometric 
veri˚cation system, the trait is presented to con˚rm the claimed identity. 
It would appear that exposure of an individual™s biometric data is compa
-rable to disclosure of a secret password, with the added complication that 
while it is easy to replace a password, the same is not true for a biometric 
51
 ﬁBiometric technology is inherently individuating and interfaces easily to database tech
-nology, making privacy violations easier and more damaging. If we are to deploy such sys
-tems, privacy must be designed into them from the beginning, as it is hard to retro˚t complex 
systems for privacy.ﬂ Available at http://www.eff.org/Privacy/Surveillance/biometrics/.
52
 As noted in Chapter 1, access to sensitive systems should rely not just on the presentation 
of the correct biometric sample but rather on the security of the full process. Concerns about 
identity theft arise because not all biometric systems offer adequate security, and some could 
be vulnerable to attack by impersonators.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
 115
trait. Further, biometric data are exposed not only when data leak from 
unencrypted or poorly protected databasesŠthey can, at least in prin
-ciple, be derived from publicly observable human traits. The submission 
of a password and the presentation of a biometric trait are not, however, 
analogous. As discussed in Chapter 1, the security value of a biometric 
veri˚cation system stems from measures surrounding the presentation 
and capture of the biometric trait. These measures cope with public dis
-closure of an individual™s biometric data by verifying that a presented 
trait is genuine and not an artifact employed by an attacker. However, 
when the sample capture is remote and unattended, as would be the case 
for most systems associated with computer access, there are few technical 
safeguards and minimal protection against the use of artifacts. In these 
circumstances, one would not expect a biometric recognition system to 
provide reliable protection against a premeditated attack.
SUMMARY
Although biometric systems can be bene˚cial, the potentially lifelong 
association of biometric traits with an individual, their potential use for 
remote detection, and their connection with identity records may raise 
social, cultural, and legal concerns. Such issues can affect a system™s 
acceptance by users, its performance, or the decision on whether to use it 
in the ˚rst place. Biometric recognition also raises important legal issues 
of remediation, authority, and reliability, and, of course, privacy. Ulti
-mately, social, cultural, and legal factors are critical and should be taken 
into account in the design, development, and deployment of biometric 
recognition systems.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
5Research Opportunities and 
the Future of Biometrics
The ˚rst four chapters of this report explain much about biometric 
systems and applications and describe many of the technical, engineering, 
scienti˚c, and social challenges facing the ˚eld. This chapter covers some 
of the unsolved fundamental problems and research opportunities related 
to biometric systems, without, however, suggesting that existing systems 
are not useful or effective. In fact, many biometric systems have been suc
-cessfully deployed. For example, hand geometry systems serve to control 
access to, among others, university dorms, nuclear power plants, and 
factories, where they record time and location.
1 Automated ˚ngerprint 
identi˚cation systems (AFISs) integrate automatic and manual processes 
in criminal justice applications and civilian applications such as national 
identity systems.
An emerging technology such as biometrics typically confronts unre
-alistic performance expectations and is sometimes unfairly compared 
with approaches such as passwords that are not really alternatives. An 
effective biometric solution does not have to beŠnor can it beŠ100 per
-cent accurate or secure. For example, if there exists a 1 percent possibility 
of successful ﬁbuddy punchingﬂ (signing in for a friend or colleague), a 
hand geometry system can easily be seen as preventing 99 percent of such 
1 
A.K. Jain, R. Bolle, and S. Pankanti, eds., 
Biometrics: Personal Identi˜cation in Networked 
Society,
 Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer Academic Publishers (1998), as cited in A.K. Jain, S. Pankanti, 
S. Prabhakar, L. Hong, A. Ross, and J. Wayman, 
Biometrics: A Grand Challenge,
 Proceedings 
of the 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Cambridge, England (2004). 
Available at http://biometrics.cse.msu.edu/Publications/GeneralBiometrics
/Jainetal_
 
BiometricsGrandChallenge_ICPR04.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 117
fraud. A particular application demands not perfection but satisfactory 
performance justifying the additional investments needed for the biomet
-ric system. In any given case, the system designer should understand the 
application well enough to achieve the target performance levels.
Nevertheless, solutions to the problem of recognizing individuals 
have historically been very elusive, and the effort needed to develop 
them has consistently been underestimated. Because humans seem to 
recognize familiar people easily and with great accuracy, such recogni
-tion has sometimes incorrectly been perceived as an easy task. Consider
-ing that a number of governments around the world have called for the 
nationwide use of biometrics in delivering crucial societal functions such 
as passports, there is an urgent need to act. Excepting for their application 
in national forensic AFISs, biometric recognition systems have never been 
tried at such large scales nor have they dealt with the wide use of nonfo
-rensic sensitive personal information. The current performance of some 
biometric systemsŠin particular with regard to the combination of error 
rate, robustness, and system securityŠmay be inadequate for large-scale 
applications processing millions of users at a high throughput rate.
If there is a pressing public need for these applications, and if it is 
determined that biometric systems and technologies are the most appro
-priate way to implement them, then our understanding of the underlying 
science and technology must be robust enough to support the applica
-tions.
2 There is no substitute for realistic performance evaluations and 
sustained investment in research and development (R&D) to improve 
human recognition solutions and biometric systems.
3 The rest of this 
chapter outlines a research agenda focusing on (1) technical and engineer
-ing considerations, (2) social challenges, and (3) broader public policy 
considerations. The chapter concludes with a high-level overview of what 
constitutes a well-designed biometric system.
TECHNOLOGY AND ENGINEERING 
RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
In recent years several research agendas for biometric technologies 
and systems have set important challenges for the ˚eld.
4 The issues and 
2 
The National Science Foundation Center for Identi˚cation Technology Research is one 
program taking an interdisciplinary approach to research related to biometrics. More infor
-mation about the center is available at http://www.nsf.gov/eng/iip/iucrc/directory/citr.
jsp.
3 
Standardization efforts, discussed elsewhere in this report, can help facilitate the cycle of 
build-test-share for transitioning the technology from concept to business solution.
4 
See, for example, A.K. Jain, S. Pankanti, S. Prabhakar, L. Hong, A. Ross, and J. Wayman, 
Biometrics: A Grand Challenge,
 Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Pattern 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
research opportunities raised in this chapter are meant to complement, not 
replace or supersede these other articulations. Indeed, the U.S. government 
has created or funded several interdisciplinary, academia-based research 
programs that provide an institutional foundation for future work. The 
focus of this report has been on broad systems-level considerations, par
-ticularly for large-scale applications, and the technical challenges outlined 
in this Chapter re˜ect that focus. But as these other agendas demonstrate, 
there are numerous opportunities for deeper understanding of these 
systems at almost every level. This section lays out several technical and 
engineering areas the committee believes would bene˚t from sustained 
research and further investigation: human factors, understanding the 
underlying phenomena, modality-related technical challenges, opportuni
-ties to advance testing and evaluation, statistical engineering aspects, and 
issues of scale.
Human Factors and Affordance
Because biometric technologies and systems are deployed for human 
recognition applications, understanding the subject-technology interface 
is paramount. A key piece of the biometric recognition process is the input 
of the human characteristic to be measured. With the exception of recent 
work at NIST-IAD
5 and at Disney, very little effort has been expended on 
the ﬁaffordanceﬂŠthe notion that what is perceived drives the action that 
occurs, or, put another way, that form can drive functionŠof biometric 
systems.
6 Biometric systems should implicitly (or explicitly) suggest to the 
user how they are to be interacted with.
7Recognition, Cambridge, England (2004); National Science and Technology Council, Sub
-committee on Biometrics, ﬁThe National Biometrics Challengeﬂ (2006), available at http://
www.biometrics.gov/Documents/biochallengedoc.pdf; E. Rood and A.K. Jain, 
Biometrics 
Research Agenda,
 report of an NSF Workshop (2003); and Mario Savastano, Philip Statham, 
Christiane Schmidt, Ben Schouten, and Martin Walsh, Appendix 1: Research challenges, 
BioVision: Roadmap for Biometrics in Europe to 
2010,
 Astrid Albrecht, Michael Behrens, Tony 
Mans˚eld, Will McMeechan, and Marek Rejman-Greene, eds. (2003), available at http://ftp.
cwi.nl/CWIreports/PNA/PNA-E0303.pdf.
5 
M. Theofanos, B. Stanton, and C. Wolfson, Usability and biometrics: Assuring successful 
biometric systems, NIST Information Access Division (2008); M. Theofanos, B. Stanton, C. 
Sheppard, R. Micheals, J. Libert, and S. Orandi, Assessing face acquisition, NISTIR 7540, 
Information Access Division Information Technology Laboratory (2008); and M. Theofanos, 
B. Stanton, C. Sheppard, R. Micheals, Nien-Fan Zhang, J. Wydler, L. Nadel, and W. Rubin, 
Usability testing of height and angles of ten-print ˚ngerprint capture, NISTIR 7504 (2008).
6 
J.J. Gibson, The theory of affordances, in 
Percei
ving, Acting, and Knowing
, Robert Shaw and 
John Bransford, eds. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum Associates (1977).
,7 
This idea can be extended even to systems where the subject is unaware of the interaction 
but behaviors are being suggested to facilitate data collection.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 119
International standards, such as the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO)/IEC 19795 series,
8 generally contain an informa
-tive annex on best practices for data collection for the modality under 
consideration. For example, ISO/IEC 19794-5 contains an annex on best 
practices for face images specifying that full frontal face poses should be 
used and rotation of the head should be less than +/Œ 5 degrees from fron
-tal in every direction. This requirement presents an affordance challenge 
that has not yet been adequately addressed by the technologiesŠnamely, 
how can a system be designed to suggest to the user a pose that meets this 
requirement? (The committee was told about one system that presented 
an image that, when viewed from the proper angle, was clearly visible 
to the user.) Similar challenges exist with every modality/application 
combination and will require a modality- and application-speci˚c set of 
solutions.
ﬁQualityﬂ has been used to indicate data collected in compliance with 
the assumptions of the matching algorithms, such that recognition perfor
-mance of the algorithm can be maximized, which means that ﬁaffordanceﬂ 
and data ﬁqualityﬂ are tightly linked. System operators and administra
-tors face their own challenges when interfacing with the systems. How 
should the interfaces of attended systems be designed so that the operator 
knows how and when to collect proper images, how to recognize when 
poor-quality images have been collected, and how to guide the data sub
-ject in making better presentations? Very little research in this area has 
been conducted, and there is opportunity for signi˚cant progress.
Distinctiveness and Stability of Underlying Phenomena
There are many open questions about the distinctiveness of the under
-lying biometric traits in these systems and about human distinctiveness 
generally. One typical assumption in the design of most biometric sys
-tems has been that characteristics, if properly collected, are suf˚ciently 
distinctive to support the application in question. This assumption has 
not, however, been con˚rmed by scienti˚c methods for speci˚c biometric 
characteristics, either by prospectively collecting and analyzing biometric 
samples and feature patterns or by exploiting databases of samples or 
feature patterns assembled for other purposes. A broad and representative 
sampling of the population in which distinctiveness is being evaluated 
should be obtained and a minimum quality speci˚cation should be set to 
which biometric samples should conform. More generally, the develop
-ment of a scienti˚c foundation for reliably determining the distinctive
-8 
ﬁInformation technologyŠbiometric performance testing and reporting,ﬂ ISO/IEC 
19795.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
0 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
ness of various biometric traits under a variety of collection modes and 
environments is needed.
In other words, what is the effective limit on accuracy for a spe
-ci˚c biometric trait in a realistic operating environment? This becomes 
a particularly important question at scaleŠthat is, when the systems are 
expected to cope with large user populations and/or large reference data
-bases. Even in DNA analysis, there has been controversy and uncertainty 
over how to estimate distinctiveness.
9 In biometric systems, ﬁground 
truthﬂŠthe collection of facts about biometric data subjects and recogni
-tion events to allow evaluation of system performanceŠis challenging, 
particularly for passive surveillance systems, where failures to acquire 
may be dif˚cult to detect.
10
There are also open questions about the stability of the underlying 
traitsŠhow persistent (stable) will a given individual™s biometric traits 
be over time? Some biometric traits, such as ˚ngerprints, appear to be 
reasonably stable, but others, such as facial characteristics, can change sig
-ni˚cantly over even short periods of time. Depending on the capture and 
matching algorithms, changes in a trait over time may or may not have 
an effect on system performance and whether that person is appropriately 
recognized. Understanding more about the stability of common biometric 
traits will be important, especially if biometric systems are deployed for 
comparatively long (years or decades) periods of time.
All of this suggests several avenues of research that could strengthen 
the scienti˚c underpinnings of the technology. There needs to be empirical 
analysis of base-level distinctiveness and the stability of common biomet
-ric modalities, both absolutely and under common conditions of capture, 
and research into what types of capture and what models and algorithms 
produce the most distinguishable and stable references for given modali
-ties. Further, the scalability of various modalities under different capture 
and modeling conditions must be studied. The individuality of biometric 
identi˚ers, their long- and short-term physiological/pathological varia
-tions, and their relationship to the user population™s genetic makeup all 
merit attention as well.
9 
P.J. Bickel, Discussion of ﬁThe evaluation of forensic DNA evidence,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences
 94(11): 5497 (1997). Available at http://www.pnas.org/content/
 94/11/5497.full?ck=nck.
10
 Ted Dunstone and Neil Yager, 
Biometric System and Data Analysis: Design, E
valuation, and 
Data Mining
, New York: Springer Science+Business Media (2008).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 121
Modality-Related Research
Every biometric system relies on one or more biometric modalities. 
The choice of modality is a key driver of how the system is architected, 
how it is presented to the user, and how match vs. nonmatch decisions 
are made. Understanding particular modalities and how best to use the 
modalities is critical to overall system effectiveness. Research into several 
interrelated areas will bring continued improvement:
Ł Sensors. 
Reducing the cost of sensor hardware; improving the 
signal-to-noise ratio, the ease of use and affordability, and the repeatability 
of measures; and extending life expectancy.
Ł Segmentation. 
Improving the reliability of identifying a region of 
interest when the user presents his or her biometric characteristics to 
the systemŠfor example, locating the face(s) in an image or separating 
speech signal from ambient noise.
Ł In
variant representation. 
Finding better ways to extract invariant 
representation (features) from the inherently varying biometric signalŠ
that is, what kind of digital representation should be used for a face (or 
˚ngerprint or other feature) such that the trait can be recognized despite 
changes in pose, illumination, expression, aging, and so on.
Ł Robust matching. 
Improving the performance of the matching algo
-rithm in the presence of imperfect segmentation, noisy features, and inher
-ent signal variance.
Ł Reference update. 
Developing ways to update references so that they 
can account for variations and the aging of reference data in long-lived 
systems.
Ł Indexing. 
Developing binning and partitioning schemes to speed 
up searches in large databases.
Ł Robustness in the face of ad
versaries. 
Improving robustness to attacks, 
including the presentation of falsi˚ed biometric traits (perhaps, for exam
-ple, through automated artifact detection).
Ł Individuality. 
Exploring the distinctiveness of a particular biometric 
trait and its relationship to the matching performance. Does information 
about distinctiveness serve to increase understanding of the effective 
limits on matching performance, for example?
In addition to the general challenges described above, there are also 
challenges speci˚c to particular biometric modalities and traits. While the 
following discussion does not describe all the challenges for each modal
-ity, it does offer some potentially fruitful avenues of investigation for the 
most common ones.
An ongoing challenge for facial recognition is segmentationŠdistin
-guishing facial features from surrounding information. Another signi˚
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
cant challenge for it is invariant representationŠthat is to say, ˚nding a 
representation that is robust and persistent even when there are changes 
in pose, expression, illumination, and imaging distance, or when time 
has passed.
Speci˚c challenges with respect to ˚ngerprints include reducing the 
failure to enroll (FTE) and failure to acquire (FTA) rate, perhaps through 
the design of new sensors, artifact detection, image quality de˚nition 
and enhancement, and high-resolution ˚ngerprint matching. Fingerprint-
based biometric systems could also be improved by increasing the speed 
of capture and minimizing contact, particularly for 10-print systems.
Iris recognition systems present R&D opportunities in the following 
areas: sensors; optimization of the illumination spectrum; reducing FTE 
and FTA rates; capturing and recognizing the iris at greater distances and 
with movement of the subject; and reducing the size of the hardware.
Improving speaker separation, normalizing channels, and using 
higher-level information (that is, beyond basic acoustic patterns) would all 
offer opportunities to improve voice recognition. In addition, robustness 
and persistence are needed in the face of language and behavioral changes 
and the limited number of speech samples.
Information Security Research
In many applications, biometric systems are one component of an 
overarching security policy and architecture. The information security 
community is extensive and has long experience with some of the chal
-lenges raised by biometric systems, which gives it a real opportunity 
for fruitful and constructive interaction with the biometrics community. 
Biometric systems pose two kinds of security challenges. The ˚rst is the 
use of biometrics to protectŠprovide security forŠinformation systems. 
For what types of applications and in which domains is an approach 
incorporating biometric technologies most appropriate? This is a question 
for the broader information security community as well as the biometrics 
community and requires that we understand the goals and needs of an 
application to ascertain whether a biometrics-based approach is useful.
Assuming that a biometrics system is in place, the second security 
challenge is the security, integrity, and reliability of the system itself.
11
 Information security research is needed that addresses the unique prob
-lems of biometric systems, such as preventing attacks based on the pre
-sentation of fake biometrics, the replay of previously captured biometric 
samples, and the concealment of biometric traits. Developing techniques 
11
 See NRC, 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (2007) for an in-depth discussion of security.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 123
for protecting biometric reference information databases to avoid their use 
as a source of fake biometrics is another area for such research. Decision 
analysis and threat modeling are other critical areas requiring research 
advances that will allow employing biometric systems more fully across 
a range of applications.
Testing and Evaluation Research
Testing and evaluation are an important component in the design, 
development, and deployment of biometric systems. Several areas related 
to the testing and evaluation of biometric systems are likely to prove 
fruitful. This section describes a few of them. While there has been sig
-ni˚cant work on testing and evaluating a variety of approaches,
12
 it is the 
committee™s view that an even broader approach has merit. Moreover, 
while standardized evaluations of biometric systems are highly useful 
for development and comparison, their results may not reliably predict 
˚eld performance. Methods used successfully for the study and improve
-ment of systems in other ˚elds (for example, controlled observation and 
experimentation on operational systems guided by scienti˚c principles 
and statistical design and monitoring) should be used in developing, 
maintaining, assessing, and improving biometric systems. (See Chapter 
3 for lessons that may be applicable from other domains.) The work over 
the last decade within the international standards community to reach 
agreement on fundamental concepts, such as how error rates are to be 
measured, has clari˚ed the application of test methods under the usual 
laboratory conditions for biometric systems deployments.
13
 Guidance for 
potential deployers of biometric systems on what is even a useful and 
appropriate initial set of questions to ask before getting into the details 
of modalities and so forth, as developed by a number of groups, has 
12
 NIST™s emerging National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) for 
biometrics represents progress in formalizing testing programs but does not yet provide 
speci˚c testing methods required for different products and applications and does not yet 
address operational testing. The NVLAP Handbook 150-25 on Biometrics Testing is available 
at http://ts.nist.gov/Standards/Accreditation/upload/NIST-Handbook-150-25
_public_
draft_v1_09-18-2008.pdf.
13
 Note that while these standards are aimed at a broad swath of systems, they are not seen 
as appropriate for governments to use for large-scale AFIS systems, where they would need 
to be tested for conformance to standards, compliance with system requirements, alignment 
with capacity and accuracy requirements, and satisfaction of availability and other tradi
-tional system parameters.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
proven particularly useful.
14
 And of course, in addition to the technical 
questions that need to be addressed, there are issues regarding how to 
measure cost over the life cycle of the system and how to assess poten
-tial and actual return on investment (ROI). Unfortunately, ROI analysis 
methodologies and case studies have been lacking in comparison to other 
types of assessments. See Box 5.1 for a brief discussion and example of 
an ROI assessment.
Ultimately, determining the performance of an operational system 
requires an operational test, because adequately modeling all of the fac
-tors that impact human and technology performance in the laboratory is 
extremely dif˚cult. Although the international standards community has 
made progress in developing a coherent set of best practices for technol
-ogy and scenario testing, guidelines for operational testing are still under 
development and have been slowed by the community™s general lack of 
experience with these evaluations and a lack of published methods and 
results.
15
 Designing a system and corresponding tests that can cope with 
ongoing data collection is a signi˚cant challenge, making it dif˚cult for a 
potential user of biometric systems, such as a federal agency, to determine 
how well a vendor™s technology might operate in its applications and to 
assess progress in biometric system performance. Careful process and 
quality control analysisŠas distinct from traditional, standardized testing 
of biometric systems that focuses on match performance for a test data 
setŠat all stages of the system life cycle is essential. In addition, testing 
methods and results should be suf˚ciently open to allow disinterested 
parties to assess the results.
Test Data Considerations
One challenge meriting attention is test data for biometric systems. 
Designing large-scale systems requires large test data sets that are rep
-resentative of the subject population, the collection environment, and 
system hardware expected in the target application. How does one deter
-mine which user population will be representative of the target applica
-tion? The committee believes it is unlikely that being representative of 
the target application is the same as being representative of the popula
-tion as a whole, because the population that should be considered will 
vary depending upon the ultimate application for which the system is 
14
 For example, the recommendations of the U.K. Biometrics Working Group in ﬁUse 
of Biometrics for Identi˚cation and Authentication: Advice on Product Selection, Issue 
2.0ﬂ (2002). Available at http://www.cesg.gov.uk/policy_technologies/biometrics/media/
biometricsadvice.pdf.
15
 ISO/IEC 19795-6, Biometric Performance Testing and ReportingŠPart 6: Testing Meth
-odologies for Operational Evaluation, is under development by ISO JTC1 SC37.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 125
used. Legal and privacy concerns have limited the collection and shar
-ing of both test and operational data (for example, various data sets col
-lected by the U.S. government) with researchers,
16
 raising the question of 
whether biometric data can be made nonidenti˚able back to its origin.
17
 If it cannot, could synthetic biometric data be created and used in lieu of 
real biometric data?
18
 If the latter is possible, does the use of synthetic 
(imagined) data offer any scienti˚c validity in assessing performance of a 
system using real data? When test results are available, who has access to 
them? These and related questions merit attention from not just the T&E 
community but the broader biometrics communities as well.
Usability Testing
Many factors related to usability can affect system effectiveness and 
throughput and may also affect how well the system performs its recogni
-tion tasks. Testing and evaluation mechanisms are therefore needed that 
provide insight into how well a system under consideration handles a 
variety of user interface expectations.
Despite the recent focus of NIST™s information access division on 
usability testing, there is still major work to be done. One potential area of 
investigation is to incorporate into the design of the interface information 
on the expected motor control and cognitive capabilities of the user popu
-16
 Government operational biometric dataŠthat is, personally identi˚able information 
(PII)) for research and testing are governed by the privacy impact assessments (PIAs) and 
system-of-record notices (SORNs) associated with the speci˚c systems, which are required 
by the Privacy Act of 1974. Whether the Privacy Act provides the latitude to use operational 
biometric and biometric-related data for large-scale research and testing purposes (during 
acquisition and operation) so long as data privacy and integrity are adequately protected is 
subject to interpretation. Various scenarios for how such data might be shared include these: 
(1) using the data (such as from IAFIS or US-VISIT) internal to the agency collecting the data, 
(2) using such data outside the agency collecting the data (such as providing multiagency 
data to NIST for analysis), or (3) providing such data to a university and/or industry team 
for analysis, etc. Assuming the Privacy Act permits such uses, then the PIAs and SORNs 
would have to specify such use of the data. The NIST multimodal biometric application 
resource kit (MBARK) data set is an example of test data collected but not disseminated 
for privacy reasons. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has released its former 
IDENT database to NIST for testing (NIST reports refer to it as DHS-2), but it has not been 
released to general researchers.
17
 Fingerprint images that are suf˚ciently similar to the original ˚ngerprint can be re
-constructed from data representations of the ˚ngerprints. See J. Feng and A.K. Jain, FM 
model based ˚ngerprint reconstruction from minutiae template, 
International Conference on 
Biometrics
 (2009), pp. 544-553. Available at http://biometrics.cse.msu.edu/Publications
/Fingerprint/FengJain_FMModel_ICB09.pdf.
18
 SFINGE, a ˚ngerprint synthesis technique, is described in Chapter 6 of D. Maltoni, D. 
Maio, A.K. Jain, and S. Prabhakar, 
Handbook of Fingerprint Recognition
, 2nd edition, Springer 
Verlag (2009).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
BOX 5.1
 Return on Investment and Suitability Considerations
Determining the return on investment (ROI) for a biometric system is very much 
dependent on the application. It is based, among other things, on the risk the sys
-tem is mitigating, the severity of the risk (projected loss in dollars should a security 
breach occur), and the anticipated bene˜ts to the implementer of success. Making 
the business case for biometrics has proved dif˜cult for many reasons, including 
the following: (1) the business value of security and deterrenceŠif they are the goal 
of the biometric system under consideration, is always dif˜cult to quantify, regard
-less of technology; (2) fraud rates and costs of long-standing business systems (for 
example, PINs and passwords) are not well understood; and (3) total costs for bio
-metrics systems have not been well documented or reported. Some media reports 
have been critical of biometric systems on the issue of return on investment, but 
not enough systematic study has been done on this issue to reach any ˜rm, general 
conclusions.A primary distinction between types of applications is between commercial ap
-plications aimed at, say, convenience or fraud reduction and applications whose 
goal is improving national or large organization security. Commercial applications 
of biometric systems are almost completely driven by ˜nancial considerations. Deci
-sions about the implementation of commercial biometric systems are made based 
on expected cost savings, enhanced customer service or convenience, or regulatory 
compliance. When biometric systems are deployed as a component of a security ap
-paratus, they face similar challenges to investment in cybersecurityŠthat is to say, 
the improvements are notoriously hard to quantify.
Commercial application ROI computations tend to be problematic, but those 
for national security applications tend to be even more dif˜cult, with the biggest 
problems being determining the probability of an attack, the costs of a successful 
attack, and the life-cycle costs of the biometric system, including supervision and 
management costs. This is an area where case studies and research are badly needed 
and requires considering all the factors discussed in earlier chapters. It is especially 
important to take into account the trade-offs for life-cycle costs associated with 
equipment, maintenance, operational labor, speed of operation and impact on users 
(for example, on employees and travelers) both in absolute terms but also relative 
to the cost of doing nothing or of implementing another solution. It is important to 
know how the performance and trade-offs of the system can be characterized as well 
as which trade-offs are appropriate for which applications.
It may be that Disney is the ˜rst commercial biometric system deployer known to 
have experienced a complete life cycle, and their experience serves as a useful brief 
case study of ROI analysis. The company has gone through an end-of-life system 
analysis and made a business case decision to replace its existing ˜nger geometry 
technology with a different, newer biometric modality and technology, multispectral 
˜ngerprint scanning. The company determined through internal testing and analy
-sis that the newer technology could increase both the accuracy and throughput to 
a degree that provided an attractive ROI by cutting down on staff and increasing 
guest satisfaction.
In the Disney application, the objective was purely commercial, the risk prob
-abilities and potential losses could be closely estimated, and the bene˜ts could be 
measured directly. The objective was to implement a biometric to tie customers to 
their nontransferable gate passes in order to cut down on fraud (illegal pass resale or 
transference), which had grown to sizable proportions. Initially, the project applied 
only to season passes, which were issued simply as paper documents that could 
easily be transferred or resold, often by tour-group operators, who would transfer 
them (in violation of state lawŠbut hard to enforce), costing Disney millions of dol
-lars in lost revenues.
Once the season passes were tied to a biometric characteristic, which ensured 
that the user of the pass was the person who had originally purchased it,
1 the in
-cidence of fraud fell dramatically and revenues grew commensurately. The ROI for 
the implementation of this biometric system was very easily calculated and turned 
out to be very high.
1 The
 Disney system does allow transference of passes within families and other small af˜nity groups. This raised dif˜cult design issues and has led some users of the system to wrongly conclude, after transferring passes between family members, that the system does not work.lations. Such information would allow the use of public health statistics to 
estimate the percentage of the general population (or subpopulation) that 
would be expected to have either cognitive or physical dif˚culties using 
the systems. By incorporating this understanding of the skills expected 
of users, designers and developers could tune the interfaces in ways that 
would increase their usability.
Usability is affected by other factors as well. For example, some 
unknown percentage of the population has a condition in which the 
˚ngers do not possess the usual friction ridges central to the functioning 
of ˚ngerprint-based biometric system. In addition, some unknown (but 
believed to be nonzero) percentage of the population has either no irises or 
irises of unusual shape. When setting baseline error rates, it is important 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 127
BOX 5.1
 Return on Investment and Suitability Considerations
Determining the return on investment (ROI) for a biometric system is very much 
dependent on the application. It is based, among other things, on the risk the sys
-tem is mitigating, the severity of the risk (projected loss in dollars should a security 
breach occur), and the anticipated bene˜ts to the implementer of success. Making 
the business case for biometrics has proved dif˜cult for many reasons, including 
the following: (1) the business value of security and deterrenceŠif they are the goal 
of the biometric system under consideration, is always dif˜cult to quantify, regard
-less of technology; (2) fraud rates and costs of long-standing business systems (for 
example, PINs and passwords) are not well understood; and (3) total costs for bio
-metrics systems have not been well documented or reported. Some media reports 
have been critical of biometric systems on the issue of return on investment, but 
not enough systematic study has been done on this issue to reach any ˜rm, general 
conclusions.A primary distinction between types of applications is between commercial ap
-plications aimed at, say, convenience or fraud reduction and applications whose 
goal is improving national or large organization security. Commercial applications 
of biometric systems are almost completely driven by ˜nancial considerations. Deci
-sions about the implementation of commercial biometric systems are made based 
on expected cost savings, enhanced customer service or convenience, or regulatory 
compliance. When biometric systems are deployed as a component of a security ap
-paratus, they face similar challenges to investment in cybersecurityŠthat is to say, 
the improvements are notoriously hard to quantify.
Commercial application ROI computations tend to be problematic, but those 
for national security applications tend to be even more dif˜cult, with the biggest 
problems being determining the probability of an attack, the costs of a successful 
attack, and the life-cycle costs of the biometric system, including supervision and 
management costs. This is an area where case studies and research are badly needed 
and requires considering all the factors discussed in earlier chapters. It is especially 
important to take into account the trade-offs for life-cycle costs associated with 
equipment, maintenance, operational labor, speed of operation and impact on users 
(for example, on employees and travelers) both in absolute terms but also relative 
to the cost of doing nothing or of implementing another solution. It is important to 
know how the performance and trade-offs of the system can be characterized as well 
as which trade-offs are appropriate for which applications.
It may be that Disney is the ˜rst commercial biometric system deployer known to 
have experienced a complete life cycle, and their experience serves as a useful brief 
case study of ROI analysis. The company has gone through an end-of-life system 
analysis and made a business case decision to replace its existing ˜nger geometry 
technology with a different, newer biometric modality and technology, multispectral 
˜ngerprint scanning. The company determined through internal testing and analy
-sis that the newer technology could increase both the accuracy and throughput to 
a degree that provided an attractive ROI by cutting down on staff and increasing 
guest satisfaction.
In the Disney application, the objective was purely commercial, the risk prob
-abilities and potential losses could be closely estimated, and the bene˜ts could be 
measured directly. The objective was to implement a biometric to tie customers to 
their nontransferable gate passes in order to cut down on fraud (illegal pass resale or 
transference), which had grown to sizable proportions. Initially, the project applied 
only to season passes, which were issued simply as paper documents that could 
easily be transferred or resold, often by tour-group operators, who would transfer 
them (in violation of state lawŠbut hard to enforce), costing Disney millions of dol
-lars in lost revenues.
Once the season passes were tied to a biometric characteristic, which ensured 
that the user of the pass was the person who had originally purchased it,
1 the in
-cidence of fraud fell dramatically and revenues grew commensurately. The ROI for 
the implementation of this biometric system was very easily calculated and turned 
out to be very high.
1 The
 Disney system does allow transference of passes within families and other small af˜nity groups. This raised dif˜cult design issues and has led some users of the system to wrongly conclude, after transferring passes between family members, that the system does not work.to have estimates of the percentage of the population lacking the required 
trait, because this lack interacts with the design of sensors and algorithms. 
It may well be that each modality will have lower error rate bounds that 
cannot be improved upon by better sensors, algorithms, or collection 
procedures. More research is needed to understand this. Such questions 
are related to the distinctiveness and stability of the underlying biometric 
traits, discussed above.
Other usability considerations relate to the ease of participation. Is the 
system designed to take into account user needs (such as tables on which 
to set their items if necessary) and physical differences (such as height and 
weight)? What kinds of user assistance should be provided? What accom
-modations could be made for people who are unfamiliar with the system, 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
or, conversely, for people who are very familiar with it (much as toll pass 
transponder users can use dedicated lanes on highways)?
ROI Analysis Methodologies and Case Studies
Determining the potential ROI and identifying which system char
-acteristics contribute is an important means of evaluating any biometrics 
deployment. In addition to how well a system meets its requirements, 
there are issues about measuring cost over the life cycle of the system 
and assessing potential (and actual) ROI. There are relatively few ROI 
analysis methodologies and case studies. The research opportunity here 
is to develop methods for examining likely costs and cost savings that 
take into account the technical life cycle as well as ongoing maintenance 
and usage costs.
Evaluati
ve Frameworks for Potential Deployers
In addition to system and technology tests, there is a signi˚cant 
opportunity to develop an evaluative model that would guide potential 
procurers and users of biometric systems. Guidance for potential users of 
biometric systems on an appropriate initial set of questions to ask before 
getting into the details of modalities and so forth has proven particularly 
useful.
19
Testing When Data Changes
Designing a system and tests that can cope with ongoing data collec
-tion after it has been deployed is a signi˚cant challenge. The characteris
-tics of the data may change from what was assumed during testing. This 
could be due to changes in the technology, changes in the user population, 
changes in how the system is used, or all of the above. Such potential 
changes to the data make it a challenge for potential users of biometrics, 
such as federal agencies, to readily determine how well a given vendor™s 
technology might operate for the agency™s applications over time. Devel
-oping testing and evaluation methodologies that can account for such 
potential changes or offer information on how a system™s performance 
19
 The NRC report 
Protecting Indi
vidual Pri
vacy in the Struggle Against Terrorists: A Framework 
for Assessment 
(The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2008) provides a frame
-work for assessing program ef˚cacy as well as impacts on privacy. The U.K. Biometrics 
Working Group developed another such document, which is available at http://www.cesg.
gov.uk/policy_technologies/biometrics/media/biometricsadvice.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 129
might change in the event of signi˚cant changes to the data characteristics 
is an opportunity for further investigation.
Operational Testing
Finally, operational testing is problematic in that most existing sys
-tems do not retain the data needed to determine error and throughput 
rates. Each system collects and stores different data in application-speci˚c 
ways. Additionally, ground truth (all of the relevant facts about all par
-ticipants) cannot be known in real applications with arbitrary user popu
-lations. Privacy rights of the data subjects may prevent using collected 
data for testing purposes. Lastly, because system operators may not wish 
others to know about operational performance for reasons of security, 
very few operational test results have ever been published. The ISO/IEC 
JTC1 SC37 standards committee has been working for a number of years 
on basic guidance for operational testing, but progress on this standard, to 
be known as ISO/IEC 19795, Part 6, has been slow, re˜ecting the inherent 
dif˚culties in making general statements about operational tests.
Systems-Level Statistical Engineering Research
In addition to the modality-related technical challenges outlined 
above, there are broad systems-level considerations to take into account. 
In particular, statistics and statistical engineering offer opportunities for 
progress and the development of design principles and model designs for 
operational testing of biometric systems and experimentation with modi
-˚able system parameters. This section outlines some potential research 
questions in statistical engineering and biometric systems that merit 
attention.
Statistical approaches come into play with respect to the user popula
-tions, including cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of the variability 
of various biometric modalities over time, the association of biometrics 
with demographic and medical factors, and the effects of demographic 
factors and physical characteristics on failure to acquire and error rates.
Another systems-level consideration is error rates in biometric sys
-tems, including the following topics:
Ł The relative contribution to error of different phases and com
-ponents of biometric recognition (on an algorithm-by-algorithm basis, 
because error rates and their causes are algorithm speci˚c);
Ł The potential for algorithm-speci˚c quality control measures to 
reduce error rates in varying populations of data subjects;
Ł The application of known statistical methods for analysis of cor
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13
0 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
related data to estimation
20
 of false match and false nonmatch rates for 
recognition tasks; and
Ł The investigation of new statistical models for the estimation as 
above but from biometric databases where information on replication 
is incompleteŠthat is, replication is known only for a subset, or some 
information about variation in replicate measurements is available from 
an external source.
Other areas of potential investigation include studies of statistical 
ef˚ciency and cost-bene˚ts of different approaches to choosing, acquir
-ing, and utilizing multimodal biometrics of various sorts. Issues to be 
considered would include the relative algorithmic-dependent within-class 
and between-class variation of sample choice such as multiple instances 
of 2 ˚ngerprints versus single instances of 10 ˚ngerprints versus single 
instances of 2 ˚ngerprints combined with two-dimensional facial imag
-ing. The aim is to develop the most informative fusion methods based 
on application- and algorithm-dependent multivariate distributions of 
biometric features.
Research on Scale
There are many ways in which scale may manifest itself in biometric 
systems. These include the number of sensors in the system, the number 
of comparisons being performed for a given unit time or a given input 
sample, the number of users (including administrators and operators), the 
geographic spread of the system, the size of the potential user population, 
or any combination of these factors. Addressing issues of scale in biomet
-ric systems offers numerous opportunities for research.
For instance, one question is this: How does the number of persons 
who have references in the enrolled database affect the speed of the sys
-tem and its error rates? For some applications and associated algorithmic 
approaches, the size of the database might not matter if typical operation 
involves only a one-to-one comparisonŠthat is, one set of submitted 
samples being compared to one set of enrollment records. For large-scale 
identi˚cation and screening systems, sequentially performing a very large 
number of one-to-one matches is not effective; there is a need for ef˚
-ciently scaling the system to control throughput and false-match error 
rates as the size of the database increases.
Typical approaches to scaling include (1) using multiple hardware 
20
 The committee notes the reluctance to use interval estimation because of lack of agree
-ment on how to handle systematic errors except through personal probability. See ISO/IEC, 
Guide 98-3 (1995) 
Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement
.Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 131
units, (2) coarse pattern classi˚cation (for example, ˚rst classifying a ˚n
-gerprint into classes such as arch, tented arch, whorl, left loop, and right 
loop), and (3) extensive use of exogenous data (such as gender, age, and 
geographical location) supplied by human operators. Although these 
approaches perform well in practice, they come at a price. Using hardware 
linearly proportional to the database size is expensive. Coarse pattern 
classi˚cation offers substantial scaling advantages even when single mea
-sures are available and even more advantage with multiple measuresŠfor 
example, ˚ngerprints from multiple ˚ngersŠbut can add to the nonmatch 
error rates. Use of exogenous information creates a mechanism for inten
-tionally avoiding identi˚cationŠfor example, dressing as the opposite sex 
or appearing olderŠif someone is trying to avoid being recognized by the 
system, not to mention potential privacy compromises.
Ideally, one would like to index biometric data patterns in some way 
similar to that used in conventional databases in order to bene˚t from 
lessons learned in other arenas. However, due to large intraclass variation 
in biometric data caused by variation in collection conditions and human 
anatomies and behaviors, it is not obvious how to ensure that samples 
from the same pattern fall into the same index bin. There have been very 
few published studies on reliably indexing biometric patterns.
21
 Ef˚cient 
indexing algorithms would need to be developed for each technology/
modality combination. It is unlikely that any generic approach would 
be applicable to all biometric measures, although efforts to understand 
similarities and where lessons from one type of system can be applied to 
another are warranted.
False-match errors generally increase with the number of required 
comparisons in a large-scale identi˚cation or watch-list system. As most 
comparisons are false (for example, a submitted sample compared to the 
enrollment pattern of another person), increasing the size of the data
-base increases the number of opportunities for a false match. However, 
in large-scale systems it is unlikely that a sample would be compared 
against every possible match in the database. Instead, just as with search 
algorithms generally, the set of items to compare against is winnowed 
according to certain criteria as quickly as possible to save time and mem
-ory. Because of the nonindependence of sequential comparisons using 
the same sample data, coupled with architectural and algorithm design 
choices that are aimed at ˚nding any matches while sustaining through
-put rate and limiting active memory, the relationship between the number 
21
 J.L. Wayman, Multi-˚nger penetration rate and ROC variability for automatic ˚ngerprint 
identi˚cation systems, in N. Ratha and R. Bolle, eds., 
Automatic Fingerprint Recognition Sys
-tems
, New York: Springer Verlag (2003).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
of false matches and database size is a poorly understood issue meriting 
further investigation.
22
Although a watch-list database in a screening system is much smaller 
than that in a large-scale identi˚cation application, the number of continu
-ous or active comparisons may be huge. Therefore, as in large-scale appli
-cations, the throughput and error-rate issues are also critical in screening 
applications. Computationally, scaling of large systems for near-real-time 
applications involving 1 million identities is becoming feasible, as is 
screening the traf˚c for 500 recognized identities. However, designing and 
building a real-time identi˚cation system involving 100 million identities 
is beyond our understanding. More research is needed here as well.
Social Science Research Opportunities
Biometric systems require an intimate association between people and 
the technologies that collect and record their biological and behavioral 
characteristics. This is true whether the application is overt or covert, 
negative claim or positive claim. It is therefore incumbent on those who 
conceive, design, and deploy biometric systems to consider the cultural 
and social contexts of these systems. Unfortunately, there are few rigorous 
studies of these contexts. Below is a framework for developing a portfolio 
of future research investigations that could help biometric systems better 
cope and perform within their cultural and social contexts.
Cultural and social issues arise at essentially two different levelsŠfor 
the individual and for society. At the level of the individual, whether they 
are interacting actively or passively with a biometric system (for example, 
the person seeking entry to a facility), the issue is the performance of a 
biometric system. At the societal level, the issue is the social impact of the 
biometric system (for example, all are affected, either directly or indirectly, 
by the trade, tourism, and terrorism effects of a biometric passport).
At the level of the individual, social considerations are critical in the 
design, deployment and functioning of biometric systems. As we have 
noted, system performance may well be degraded if relevant social factors 
are not adequately taken into consideration. For example, religious beliefs 
that call for adherents to cover their faces in public make facial-recognition 
biometrics problematic. Thus if a biometric system is to work well for a 
broad range of people it must take into account behaviors resulting from 
22
 See, for example, J.L. Wayman, Error rate equations for the general biometric sys
-tem, 
IEEE Robotics and Automation
 6(1): 35-48, and H. Jarosz, J.-C. Fondeur, and X. Dupré, 
Large-scale identi˚cation system design, J.L. Wayman, A.K. Jain, D. Maltoni, and D. Maio, 
eds.,
 Biometric Systems: Technology, Design, and Performance E
valuation
, New York: Springer 
(2005).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 133
such things as religion or social convention. Every biometric system has 
a protocol for how it is to be interacted with. The protocol may be simple 
or complex, uniform in application, or tailored to the individual. Obvi
-ously, however, a good protocol for a biometrics system must recognize 
variations in biological features. A system based on ˚ngerprints must have 
ways to gracefully accommodate a person who is missing a ˚nger or who 
otherwise does not have usable ˚ngerprints.
In addition to the design issue of affordance, previously discussed, 
research is needed to determine effective, appropriate, and graceful pro
-tocols, processes, and devices that gain the cooperation of participants, 
and the protocols and devices must be acceptable to the community. In 
biometric systems that are essentially surveillance systems, compliance 
should be thought of as more than acquiescence and should extend to 
gracefully (perhaps without notice) promoting the types of behavior (for 
example, face pose and angle) that result in useful biometric measures. 
Full compliance represents the ideal interaction of the participant with 
the biometric system from the viewpoint of the system designers. Accept
-ability to the community refers to the endorsement, or at least the lack 
of active disapproval, by signi˚cant governmental and public leadership 
groups. In any case, community acceptability is not guaranteed. In˜uen
-tial parts of the community may ˚nd biometric systems overly intrusive, 
unfair to certain groups, or inadequately protective of the individual™s 
privacy.
The dimensions of individual compliance and community accept
-ability are discussed next. One part of the design process for particular 
systems or, more realistically, for a particular class of systems might be 
to develop data that predict how well the biometric system will perform 
in a target community and on factors that may make the system more 
acceptable to that community. Predictive aspects may just have a statis
-tical relationship with subject compliance or community acceptability, 
while acceptability factors probably have a causal relationship. Develop
-ing data in these areas will provide the evidence needed to assess the 
relationships.
The extent and nature of participant compliance can be discovered 
and con˚rmed using either or both of two basic research strategies: ˚eld 
studies using ethnographic tools such as in cultural anthropology or atti
-tude studies of using survey methods such as are common in sociology. 
Some of the things that might predict participant compliance include 
participant attitudes toward authority, their willingness to try new tech
-nology, their adherence to certain religious or cultural beliefs, and the 
geographic distribution of the population. Such work could, in theory, 
be part of the design work for biometrics systems but is generally not 
done, possibly because of the expense and effort involved. Research that 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
sheds light on these issues would provide valuable information for those 
designing and building biometric systems.
Factors that motivate participant compliance can be discovered by 
experimental studies, essentially creating laboratory environments in 
which the factors can be controlled. This research paradigm is common in 
experimental psychology, but the extent to which such controlled studies 
might develop data that re˜ect factors encountered in operational appli
-cations is only speculative. Some candidate factors include self-interest, 
enforcement, inducement, social pressure, conviction, habit or practice, 
behavior of other actors, pleasantness of the experience, and attention to 
cultural norms. The more common approach is to survey data subjects 
who have just encountered an operational system to elicit their opinions,
23
 but even this approach has rarely been applied.
Aspects that predict the extent and nature of community acceptabil
-ity can be discovered and con˚rmed using either or both of two basic 
research strategies: ˚eld studies of similar deployments using ethno
-graphic toolsŠas indicated for participant compliance above, or focus 
groups that are asked to discuss how they view various characteristics 
of a biometric system such as are common in marketing studies. The 
kinds of aspects that might be predictive of community acceptability 
include resemblance to existing well-tolerated systems, operated under 
the auspices of a respected institution, or a system that meets all legal 
requirements
One factor in motivating community acceptability is whether com
-munity concernsŠfor example, fairness, privacy, and con˚dentialityŠare 
addressed. Using data from research in these and related areas, it should 
be possible to address a variety of relevant questions, such as: Where 
on the scale of purely voluntary to mandatory is a particular biometric 
system? In largely voluntary systems does cooperation vary by subgroup 
such as age, sex, or race? Does habituation lead to greater cooperation? 
How important is it that participants believe they or others will not 
be harmed? What factors in˜uence such trust? What are effective and 
appropriate compliance mechanisms for biometric systems? Although it 
is not reasonable to expect designers of a speci˚c system to conduct such 
research, these questions could be addressed as part of a more general 
research agenda.
23
 As was done, for example, by the Orkand Corporation in 
Personal Identi˜er Project: Final 
Report
, California Department of Motor Vehicles report DMV88-89 (1990).
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 135
PUBLIC POLICY CONSIDERATIONS AND 
RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
Numerous issues come into play beyond technical and engineer
-ing considerations in government use of biometric systems. These other 
issues include the following:
Ł To what extent can the need for a biometric system be satis˚ed by 
current technical capability? Balancing mandates with maturity of sys
-tems and technology is critical. Aggressive schedules can push technology 
development forward but not all challenges can be addressed on short 
notice.
Ł Is there suf˚cient ˜exibility and time to support the risk manage
-ment needed to develop and deploy a biometric system? Governments 
must avoid increasing risk through overly constrained integration and 
testing timelines and budgets. The risks include the possibility not only 
that the system will fail or be compromised but also the possibility that 
the system will be rejected by its users or be so cumbersome or inef˚cient 
that it is withdrawn from use.
Ł Should participation in the system be mandated? Such a mandate 
might foster a climate of distrust or social unrest.
Ł What is the nature of the biometrics workforce? To the extent that 
biometric systems and related technologies are seen as important to meet 
public policy goals, is there suf˚cient incentive to grow and maintain the 
needed expertise? Training and maintaining consistent biometrics work
-force has been dif˚cult. Several organizations recently announced plans 
to create certi˚cation programs for professionals, but consensus must be 
reached on what skills are required of a professional in this area. The cre
-ation of a biometrics undergraduate program at West Virginia University 
is a step in the right direction. (The program has a ready customer: the 
FBI™s Criminal Justice Information Center in Clarksburg, West Virginia.)
Ł The sourcing of the technology is crucial to the government™s suc
-cessful deployment of technological and information systems, including 
biometric systems. There is an inherent danger in relying on companies 
with manufacturing, research, or development activities centered over
-seas. For biometric systems, especially, the risk is the potential for U.S. 
biometric data to be collected by foreign governments, inviting scrutiny 
of U.S. information on border control systems and other critical infrastruc
-ture by persons not cleared by the U.S. government.
The social science considerations described above may have impacts 
on broader public policy considerations. Systematic empirical research 
and factual analysis would help provide an evidence case for public 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
policy in this area. Some key research questions that have an impact on 
public policy include the following:
Ł What lessons can be learned from environmental impact state
-ments and privacy impact assessments that might be relevant to deciding 
whether social impact assessments for biometric systems are useful?
Ł Do existing or proposed biometric systems represent a serious 
potential for identity theft?
Ł How have authoritarian regimes made use of human recognition 
methods to assert their control over individuals? In what ways might 
biometric systems enable these sorts of uses? How could such a risk be 
mitigated?
Ł To what extent are privacy requirements, interagency control issues, 
and policy constraints, or the perception thereof, inhibiting the research 
use and sharing of existing biometric data?
Ł What belief sets, if any, lead to an aversion to certain biometric 
technologies?
A reliable and effective biometric system may be perceived as pro
-viding irrefutable proof of identity of an individual, notwithstanding the 
many uncertainties already mentioned, raising concerns for users. Will 
the information regarding biometrics-based access to resources be used 
to track individuals in a way that infringes on privacy or anonymity? 
Will biometric data be used for an unintended purpose: For example, will 
˚ngerprints provided for access control be matched against ˚ngerprints in 
a criminal database? Will data be used to cross-link independent records 
from the same personŠfor example, health insurance and grocery pur
-chases? How would a user be reassured that a biometric system is being 
used for the intended purpose only?
Designing information systemsŠnot only biometric systemsŠwhose 
functionality is veri˚able during deployment is very dif˚cult. One solu
-tion might be a system that meticulously records recognition decisions 
and the people who accessed the logged decisions using a biometric-based 
access control system. Such a system could automatically warn users if a 
suspicious pattern is seen in the system administrator™s access of users™ 
logs. Another solution might be biometric cryptosystemsŠcryptographic 
keys based on biometric samples. Radical approaches such as total trans
-parency attempt to solve the privacy issues in a novel way. But there are 
no obviously satisfactory solutions on the horizon for the privacy prob
-lem. Additional research on the relationship between biometric (bodily) 
information and privacy is needed.
The privacy protections required to facilitate data collection from and 
about biometric systems need to be clearly established. Because many of 
these systems are deployed to satisfy security needs, it is reasonable to 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES AND THE FUTURE OF BIOMETRICS
 137
expect that performance and vulnerability data need to be protected. For 
best results, the data sets for such research should be very large, contain 
very few errors in ground truth (metadata indexing), be appropriately 
randomized, and represent the populations of interest to target applica
-tions. To the extent consistent with privacy and security, the results of the 
studies should be published in the peer-reviewed scienti˚c literature and 
the biometric samples used made widely available to other researchers.
REALIZING A WELL-DESIGNED BIOMETRIC SYSTEM
Research in the areas described above is warranted more than ever 
as biometric systems become widespread and are used in critical applica
-tions. This report concludes by taking a step back and presenting a vision 
of a well-designed biometric system that should persist even as progress 
is made on the challenges described earlier in this chapter.
A well-designed biometric system includes more than technology. 
It is a complex combination of technology, public policy, law, human 
processes, and social consensus. In the long term, there may be new 
modalities that allow recognizing human characteristics and behaviors 
quickly and effectively with little or no interaction on the individual™s 
part. Human beings may turn out to possess distinctive traits that have 
yet to be fully explored or that cannot be suitably represented by present 
technology. Some of the potential sources of suitable signals currently 
being pursued include inductive signature and brain waves (EKG activ
-ity). Each of these potential signal sources could bring with it a new set 
of societal and policy issues requiring exploration.
Even with all of these uncertainties, and even with the many intrigu
-ing open questions that merit research, the committee believes that the 
following framework for a well-designed biometric system will apply for 
the foreseeable future. Progress in such research will lead to even more 
well-designed systems. This framework is offered as both an evaluative 
tool and as a development tool.
A well-designed biometric recognition system will have (at least) the 
following characteristics:
Ł The system will be designed to take into account that no biometric 
characteristic is entirely stable and distinctive. In other words, it will take 
into account that biometric similarity represents a likely, not a de˚ni
-tive, recognition and and that the corresponding is true for a failure to 
˚nd similarity. In particular, presumptions and burdens of proof will be 
designed conservatively, with due attention to the system™s inevitable 
imperfections.
Ł The policies of such a system will recognize that any claimed prob
-abilities of correctness depend on external assumptions about dynamic 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
presentation distributions, and that these assumptions, whether subjec
-tive or based on estimates from past internal or external data, are fallible. 
It will enable system operators and users to recognize that biometric 
information has a life cycle. Biometric information is collected or modi
-˚ed during, for example, enrollment, recognition, and so on. But policies 
should also recognize that changes in the biometric characteristics of the 
individual can lead to incorrect or failed recognition.
Ł The system will be designed so that system operators and users 
recognize that some inaccurate information may be created and stored 
in the databases linked to biometric references, and that over time infor
-mation in these databases will become out of date. In particular, the reli
-ability of information in the database is independent of the likelihood of 
correct recognition. The system will be designed to handle challenges to 
the accuracy of database information in a fair and effective way.
Ł Because the system™s sensors and back-end processes are not per
-fectly accurate, it will need to handle failures to enroll, failures to acquire 
samples, and other error conditions gracefully and without violating 
dignity, privacy, or due process rights.
Ł Because some individuals will attempt to force the system into fail
-ure modes in order to avoid recognition, the system™s failure modes must 
be just as robustly designed as the primary biometrics-based process.
Ł The system™s security, privacy, and legal goals must be explicit and 
publicly stated, and they must be designed to protect against a speci˚c 
and enumerated set of risks. The system will speci˚cally address the pos
-sibility that malicious individuals may be involved in the design and/or 
operation of the system itself.
Ł It will recognize that biometric traits are inherently not secret and 
will implement processes to minimize both privacy risks and risks of 
misrecognition arising from this fact.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
This report lays out a broad systems view and outlines many of 
the subject areas with which biometrics research intersects. The com
-mittee also describes many open research problems, ranging from deep 
scienti˚c questions about the nature of individuality to vexing technical 
and engineering challenges. It raises questions about appropriate system 
architecture and life-cycle design as well as questions about public policy 
regarding both private sector and government use of biometric systems. 
It notes that biometrics is an area that bene˚ts from analyzing very large 
amounts of data. These and other aspects of biometrics suggest many 
fruitful areas and interesting problems for researchers from a range of 
disciplines.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141
ABiosketches of Committee 
Members and Staff
COMMITTEE MEMBERS
JOSEPH N. PATO,
 Chair
, is Distinguished Technologist at Hewlett-
Packard™s HP Laboratories. Previously he served as chief technology 
of˚cer for Hewlett-Packard™s Internet Security Solutions Division. He is 
currently a visiting fellow with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Computer Science and Arti˚cial Intelligence Lab Decentralized Informa
-tion Group (DIG). Since 1986, Mr. Pato has been involved in security 
research and development, studying authentication, identi˚cation, and 
privacy issues. Currently Mr. Pato is developing a research program that 
will analyze security issues in the health care industry. Mr. Pato™s current 
research focuses on the security needs of collaborative enterprises on the 
Internet, addressing both interenterprise models and the needs of light
-weight instruments and peripherals directly attached to the Internet. Spe
-ci˚cally, he is looking at critical infrastructure protection and the con˜u
-ence of trust, e-services, and mobility. These interests have led him to look 
at the preservation of Internet communication in the event of cyberter
-rorism, trust frameworks for mobile environments, and applying privacy 
considerations in complex systems. His past work includes the design of 
delegation protocols for secure distributed computation, key exchange 
protocols, interdomain trust structures, the development of public- and 
secret-key-based infrastructures, and the more general development of 
distributed enterprise environments. Mr. Pato is also a founder of the IT 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (IT-ISAC), where he has served 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
as a board member. Mr. Pato has participated on several standards or advi
-sory committees of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
(IEEE), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), National Institute 
for Standards and Technology (NIST), Department of Commerce, W3C, 
Financial Services Technology Consortium (FSTC), and Common Open 
Software Environment (COSE). He has represented Hewlett-Packard to 
the Open Software Foundation (OSF) Architecture Planning Council, 
the technical arm of the OSF Board of Directors. He has also served on 
the Technical Planning Committee evolving the Distributed Computing 
Environment (DCE) and chaired the Security and Remote Procedure Call 
(RPC)/Programming Model/Environment Services working groups. He 
has served as the vice-chair for the Distributed Management Environment 
(DME)-DCE-Security working group of the OSF Security Special Interest 
Group. In the past, Mr. Pato served as the co-chair for the OASIS Secu
-rity Services Technical Committee, which developed Security Assertions 
Markup Language (SAML) from June 2001 until November 2002. SAML 
1.0 was approved as an OASIS standard on November 1, 2002. Mr. Pato 
served as a key member of the NRC committee that wrote 
Who Goes There? 
Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy 
(2003). Mr. Pato™s graduate work 
was in computer science at Brown University.
BOB BLAKLEY
 is vice president and research director for Burton Group 
Identity and Privacy Strategies. He covers identity, privacy, security, 
authentication, and risk management. Before joining Burton Group, Dr. 
Blakley was chief scientist for security and privacy at IBM and served 
on the National Academy of Sciences™ Committee on Authentication 
Technologies and Their Privacy Implications. He has served as general 
chair of the 2003 IEEE Security and Privacy Conference and as general 
chair of the New Security Paradigms Workshop. Dr. Blakley is the former 
editor of the Object Management Group Common Object Request Broker 
Architecture (OMG CORBA) security speci˚cation and authored 
CORBA 
Security: An Introduction to Safe Computing with Objects
, published by 
Addison-Wesley. He is also editor of Open Group™s Authorization Appli
-cation Programming Interface (API) speci˚cation effect and currently 
holds more than 10 patents on security-related technologies. Dr. Blakley 
received an A.B. in classics from Princeton University and a master™s 
degree and Ph.D. in computer and communications sciences from the 
University of Michigan.
JEANETTE BLOMBERG
 is research staff member and program manager 
for practice-based service innovation at the IBM Almaden Research Cen
-ter. Before assuming her current position, Dr. Blomberg was a founding 
member of the pioneering Work Practice and Technology group at the 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 143
Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC), Director of Experience Model
-ing Research at Sapient Corporation, and industry-af˚liated professor 
at the Blekinge Institute of Technology in Sweden. Since joining IBM 
Research she has led projects on interactions among IT service providers 
and their clients, collaboration practices among globally distributed sales 
teams, the place of stories in corporate imaginaries, and new approaches 
to work-based learning. Her research explores issues in social aspects 
of technology production and use, ethnographically informed organiza
-tional interventions, participatory design, case-based prototyping, and 
service innovation. Dr. Blomberg is an active member of the participatory 
design community, having served as program co-chair twice, and she 
sits on a number of advisory boards, including the Foresight panel of the 
IT University of Copenhagen, the Program in Design Anthropology at 
Wayne State University, and the Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Confer
-ence (EPIC). Dr. Blomberg received her Ph.D. in anthropology from the 
University of California, Davis; before embarking on her career in high 
tech, she was a lecturer in cultural anthropology and sociolinguistics at 
UC Davis.
JOSEPH P. CAMPBELL
 received B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electri
-cal engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1979, the Johns 
Hopkins University in 1986, and Oklahoma State University in 1992, 
respectively. Dr. Campbell is currently a senior member of the technical 
staff at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Lincoln Laboratory in 
the Information Systems Technology Group, where he conducts speech-
processing research and specializes in advanced speaker recognition meth
-ods. His current interests are high-level features for speaker recognition 
and forensic-style applications of it, creating corpora to support speech-
processing research and evaluation, robust speech coding, biometrics, and 
cognitive radio. Before joining Lincoln Laboratory, he served 22 years at 
the National Security Agency (NSA). From 1979 to 1990, Dr. Campbell was 
a member of NSA™s Narrowband Secure Voice Technology research group. 
He and his teammates developed the ˚rst DSP-chip software modem 
and LPC-10e, which enhanced the Federal Standard 1015 voice coder 
and improved U.S. and NATO secure voice systems. He was the princi
-pal investigator for the CELP voice coder and led the U.S. government™s 
speech coding team in developing for it. CELP became Federal Standard 
1016 and is the foundation of digital cellular and voice-over-the-Internet 
telephony systems. From 1991 to 1998, Dr. Campbell was a senior scien
-tist in NSA™s Biometric Technology research group, where he led voice 
veri˚cation research. From 1994 to 1998, he chaired the Biometric Consor
-tium, the U.S. government™s focal point for research, development, test, 
evaluation, and application of biometric-based personal identi˚cation and 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
veri˚cation technology. From 1998 to 2001, he led the Acoustics Section 
of NSA™s Speech Research branch, conducting and coordinating research 
on and evaluation of speaker recognition, language identi˚cation, gender 
identi˚cation, and speech activity detection methods. From 1991 to 1999, 
Dr. Campbell was an associate editor of 
IEEE Transactions on Speech and 
Audio Processing
. He was an IEEE Signal Processing Society Distinguished 
Lecturer in 2001. From 1991 to 2001, Dr. Campbell taught speech process
-ing at the Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Campbell is currently a member 
of the IEEE Signal Processing Society™s board of governors; an editor of 
Digital Signal Processing
 journal; a chair of the International Speech Com
-munication Association™s Speaker and Language Characterization Special 
Interest Group (ISCA SpLC SIG); a member of ISCA, Sigma Xi, and the 
Acoustical Society of America; and a fellow of the IEEE.
GEORGE T. DUNCAN
 is a professor of statistics, emeritus, in the H. 
John Heinz III College and the Department of Statistics at Carnegie Mel
-lon University. He was on the faculty of the University of California, 
Davis (1970-1974) and was a Peace Corps volunteer in the Philippines 
(1965-1967), teaching at Mindanao State University. His current research 
work centers on statistical con˚dentiality. He has published more than 70 
papers in such journals as 
Statistical Science
, 
Management Science
, 
Journal 
of the American Statistical Association
, 
Econometrica
, and 
Psychometrika
. He 
has received National Science Foundation (NSF) research funding and 
has lectured in Brazil, Cuba, England, Italy, Turkey, Ireland, Mexico, and 
Japan, among other places. He chaired the Panel on Con˚dentiality and 
Data Access of the National Academy of Sciences (1989-1993), producing 
the report 
Pri
vate Li
ves and Public Policies: Con˜dentiality and Accessibility 
of Go
vernment Statistics
. He chaired the American Statistical Association™s 
Committee on Privacy and Con˚dentiality. He is a fellow of the American 
Statistical Association, an elected member of the International Statistical 
Institute, and a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science. In 1996 he was elected Pittsburgh Statistician of the Year by 
the American Statistical Association. He has been editor of the Theory and 
Methods Section of the 
Journal of the American Statistical Association
. He has 
been a visiting faculty member at Los Alamos National Laboratory and 
was the Lord Simon Visiting Professor at the University of Manchester. He 
received a B.S. (1963) and an M.S. (1964) from the University of Chicago 
and a Ph.D. (1970) from the University of Minnesota, all in statistics.
GEORGE R. FISHER
 runs both an investment advisory ˚rm, George 
Fisher Advisors LLC, and a real-estate-development ˚nance company, 
George Fisher Finance, LLC, in Boston, Massachusetts. He was formerly 
on the board of directors of Prudential Securities in New York City, where 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 145
he led the merger of Prudential Securities into Wachovia. Prior to joining 
Prudential, Mr. Fisher was chief information of˚cer at Fidelity Invest
-ments, where he managed technology oversight, consolidating mutual 
fund and brokerage platforms. Mr. Fisher also spent 16 years at Morgan 
Stanley, ˚rst as a principal for Technical Services Worldwide, transforming 
manual, low-volume systems into Wall Street leaders; later, as a managing 
director, he became the deputy general manager for Morgan Stanley Asia, 
restructuring Chinese operations and managing the explosive growth of 
Asia™s regional markets. Mr. Fisher earned a B.A. in economics and com
-puter science from the University of Rochester. He has also earned certi˚
-cations from the National Association of Securities Dealers (Series 3, 7, 63, 
24, and 27), the National Association of Corporate Directors (Director of 
Professionalism), the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan, and the 
Association of International Education of Japan, earning Level 4 language 
pro˚ciency. Mr. Fisher is a certi˚ed ˚nancial planner (CFP).
STEVEN P. GOLDBERG
 was the James and Catherine Denny Professor 
of Law at the Georgetown University Law Center. An expert in law and 
science, Mr. Goldberg was the author of 
Culture Clash: Law and Science in 
America
 (1996), winner of the Alpha Sigma Nu Book Award, and coauthor 
of the widely used text 
Law, Science, and Medicine
. He served as a law clerk 
to D.C. Circuit Court Chief Judge David L. Bazelon and U.S. Supreme 
Court Justice William J. Brennan, Jr. He also served as an attorney in the 
General Counsel™s Of˚ce of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Mr. 
Goldberg was a member of the District of Columbia and Maryland bars 
and the Section on Science and Technology of the American Bar Associa
-tion. He received an A.B. from Harvard College and a J.D. from Yale Law 
School. He died on August 26, 2010.
PETER T. HIGGINS,
 founder of Higgins & Associates, International, 
has 41 years™ experience in the information technology ˚eld and has been 
involved with biometrics since the late 1980s. He was a member of the UK 
Home Of˚ce, Identi˚cation and Passport Service™s Biometrics Assurance 
Group (UK BAG) from 2006 through June 2009, when UK BAG™s mission 
was completed. He was an instructor of biometrics at the University of 
California, Los Angeles, Extension School for many years. He chaired the 
International Association for Identi˚cation™s AFIS Committee for 5 years 
and is a well-known consultant and lecturer in the ˚eld of large-scale 
biometric procurement and testing. In 2002 he joined John Woodward 
and Nick Orlans in authoring the McGraw-Hill/Osborne book 
Biometric 
Identi˜cation in the Information Age
. In 2004 he joined Peter Komarinski, 
Kathleen Higgins, and Lisa Fox in writing the Elsevier Academic Press 
book 
Automated Fingerprint Identi˜cation Systems
. Previously he served 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
as deputy assistant director of engineering with the FBI and was the 
program manager for the FBI™s Integrated Automated Fingerprint Iden
-ti˚cation System (IAFIS). Before that, he served in technical, operational, 
and executive positions with the Central Intelligence Agency. Mr. Higgins 
received a B.A. in mathematics from Marist College and an M.S. in theo
-retical math and computer science from Stevens Institute of Technology 
in Hoboken, New Jersey.
PETER B. IMREY,
 a biostatistician and epidemiologist, is a professor of 
medicine at the Cleveland Clinic, where he holds appointments in the 
Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve 
University, the Lerner Research Institute™s Department of Quantitative 
Health Sciences, and the Neurological Institute™s Mellen Center for Mul
-tiple Sclerosis Treatment and Research. He previously taught at the Uni
-versity of North Carolina (biostatistics, 1972-1975) and the University of 
Illinois (medical information science; statistics; and community health, 
1975-2002), and is an adjunct professor, Department of Statistics, Uni
-versity of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Dr. Imrey has made research 
and expository contributions to statistical analysis of categorical data 
and diverse health science areas, including meningococcal disease, diet 
and cancer, and dental data analysis. He has served on editorial boards 
of three statistical journals and the 
Encyclopedia of Biostatistics
 (2nd edi
-tion), on numerous federal special study sections and emphasis panels, 
and on the National Academies™ committee that produced the report 
The Polygraph and Lie Detection
 (2003). He has held multiple biostatistical 
leadership posts in the International Biometric Society (an international 
society promoting the development and application of statistical and 
mathematical theory and methods in the biosciences), the American Sta
-tistical Association, and the American Public Health Association (APHA). 
Dr. Imrey has been honored by APHA™s Statistics Section and is a fellow 
of the American College of Epidemiology and a member of Sigma Xi and 
Delta Omega honorary societies. He received an A.B. in mathematics and 
statistics from Columbia University and a Ph.D. in biostatistics from the 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
ANIL K. JAIN
 is University Distinguished Professor in the Department 
of Computer Science and Engineering at Michigan State University. His 
research interests include pattern recognition, exploratory pattern analy
-sis, Markov random ˚elds, texture analysis, object recognition, and bio
-metric authentication. He received the best paper awards in 1987, 1991, 
and 2005 and was cited for outstanding contributions in 1976, 1979, 1992, 
1997, and 1998 from the Pattern Recognition Society. He also received the 
1996 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks
 Outstanding Paper Award. He 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 147
is a fellow of the IEEE, the ACM, AAAS, SPIE, and the International Asso
-ciation of Pattern Recognition (IAPR). He was editor in chief of the 
IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 
(1991-1994). He 
has received a Fulbright Research Award, a Guggenheim fellowship, the 
Alexander von Humboldt Research Award, the IEEE Computer Society 
Wallace McDowell award, the King-Sun Fu Prize from IAPR, and the IEEE 
ICDM Outstanding Research Contribution award. He holds six patents in 
the area of ˚ngerprint matching and has written a number of books on 
biometrics, including 
Handbook of Biometrics
, 
Handbook of Multibiometrics
, Handbook of Face Recognition
, and 
Handbook of Fingerprint Recognition
. He 
is a member of the Defense Science Board and served on the National 
Academies Committee on Improvised Explosive Devices. Dr. Jain was 
the co-organizer of the NSF workshop on the biometrics research agenda, 
held in May 2003, and has organized several conferences on biometrics. 
He received a Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Ohio State University 
in 1973.
GORDON LEVIN 
is senior engineer with the Advanced Systems group 
of Design and Engineering at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Florida, 
where the world™s largest commercial biometric application has been 
operating since 1997. As a licensed electrical engineer, he is the engineer 
of record for all physical security system design performed on the 42-
square-mile property. Mr. Levin has been a member of the Biometric 
Consortium Working Group (BCWG) since 1999 and the sole commercial 
end user to be a participating representative acting under NIST and the 
NSA to incubate biometric standards for submission to ANSI and the 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO). In 2002 he was the 
keynote speaker at the plenary meeting of ISO/IEC Joint Technical Com
-mittee 1 Subcommittee 37 on Biometrics. He also participated in the Avia
-tion SecurityŒBiometrics Working Group, which was assembled in the 
wake of 9/11 to report on passenger protection and identity veri˚cation. 
This report was instrumental in the strategic planning for the soon-to-
be-formed Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and its plans 
for adopting biometric technology. Prior to joining Walt Disney World in 
1997, Mr. Levin had been a private consultant engineer working in the 
DOD and commercial sectors in specialized security and electronic system 
design and construction.
LAWRENCE D. NADEL 
is a fellow in the Center for National Security 
and Intelligence, Identity Discovery and Management Division at Noblis. 
With more than 15 years™ experience in biometrics, he has focused on the 
requirements for implementing effective and interoperable biometric sys
-tems and issues associated with it, objective methods for testing and evalu
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
ating the performance of these systems, and means for assessing biometric 
sample quality. Dr. Nadel currently leads Noblis™s Biometrics Support 
Services Program for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)/US-
VISIT. He contributed to US-VISIT™s conversion from 2-prints to 10-prints, 
helped strategize innovative solutions to biometric veri˚cation of non-U.S. 
citizens departing the U.S., and is supporting US-VISIT™s implementation 
of multibiometrics and standards-based data sharing. He has provided 
technical leadership to other national identi˚cation and security-related 
projects for the FBI, TSA, DOD, and the National Institute of Justice. Dr. 
Nadel was co-principal investigator for a 2-year Noblis-funded research 
project investigating approaches to multi-biometric fusion. He has chaired 
the Noblis Biometric Identi˚cation Cluster Group since early 2000 and is 
a participant in the INCITS-M1 biometrics standards development group 
and the NIST NVLAP Biometrics Working Group. Dr. Nadel earned a B.S. 
in electrical engineering from the Polytechnic Institute of NYU and M.Sc. 
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and biomedical engineering from the Ohio 
State University.
JAMES L. WAYMAN
 is a research administrator in the Of˚ce of Graduate 
Studies and Research at San Jose State University. He served as director 
of the U.S. National Biometric Test Center in the Clinton administration 
(1997-2000). He holds four patents in speech processing, is a principal 
U.K. expert on the ISO/IEC standards committee biometrics, and the edi
-tor of the ISO/IEC standard on voice data format. Dr. Wayman is a senior 
member of the IEEE and a fellow of the IET. He is coeditor of J. Way
-man, A. Jain, D. Maltoni and D. Maio, 
Biometric Systems
 (Springer, 2005) 
and was a member of the NRC™s committee that wrote 
Who Goes There? 
Authentication Through the Lens of Pri
vacy
. He has been a paid biometrics 
advisor to 8 national governments. Dr. Wayman received his Ph.D. degree 
in engineering from the University of California, Santa Barbara, in 1980.
STAFF
LYNETTE I. MILLETT
 is a senior program of˚cer and study director at 
the Computer Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research 
Council of the National Academies. She currently directs several CSTB 
projects, including a comprehensive exploration of sustaining growth 
in computing performance and an examination of how best to develop 
complex, software-intensive systems in the DOD environment. She served 
as study director for the CSTB reports 
Social Security Administration Elec
-tronic Ser
vice Pro
vision: A Strategic Assessment
 and 
Software for Dependable 
Systems: Suf˜cient E
vidence?
 Her portfolio includes signi˚cant portions 
of CSTB™s recent work on software, identity systems, and privacy. She 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 149
directed the project that produced 
Who Goes There? Authentication Through 
the Lens of Pri
vacy
, a discussion of authentication technologies and their 
privacy implications; and 
IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About Nationwide 
Identity Systems
, a post-9/11 analysis of the challenges presented by large-
scale identity systems. She has an M.Sc. in computer science from Cornell 
University, where her work was supported by graduate fellowships from 
the NSF and the Intel Corporation; and a B.A. with honors in mathemat
-ics and computer science from Colby College, where she was elected to 
Phi Beta Kappa.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15
0BWatch-List Operational 
Performance and List Size:
A First-Cut Analysis
Let 
p be the probability that someone presenting to a watch-list sys
-tem has been previously enrolled, and 
F(·) be a prior distribution on this 
probability. 
F(·) may be discrete and even a point prior with all mass at 
one possible value 
 of 
p, a continuous distribution on the interval [0,1] 
such as a Beta distribution, or any other probability distribution function 
on a probability space on [0,1]. Two types of results may be distinguished 
here: matching an enrolled presenter to the correct prior enrollment sam
-ple or, less restrictively, recognizing that the presenter has previously 
enrolled, although perhaps by matching to the wrong enrollee. The latter 
is pertinent to watch-list performance because such a result would serve 
the intended function of denying privileges, even if for the wrong reason. 
We distinguish here between these two possibilities by referring to the 
˚rst as identi˚cation and to the second as watch-list recognition.
Addressing the identi˚cation problem ˚rst, one is trying to match 
a person speci˚cally with his or her enrollment record and is in error if 
the correct match is missed. The con˚dence we should place in a claimed 
matchŠthat is, its ﬁpredictive valueﬂŠis the probability that a claimed 
match is correct:
PPV
(p) = 
P(true match with enrollment sample
|claimed 
match with enrollment sample
) =
P(true match with presenter™s enrollment sample
) =
P(claimed match with anyone™s enrollment sample
)p × 
P(true match 
| enrolled
)p × 
P(any match
|enrolled
) + (1 
 p) × 
P(any match
|unenrolled
)Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 151
Consider the effect on this predictive value of enrolling one additional 
person in a watch list of length 
n, assuming the pattern of presentations to 
the list is ˚xed at proportion 
p of previous enrollees. In addition to com
-parisons with the slightly shorter previous list, the presenter is now com
-pared to the new enrollee. This cannot increase and may decrease P(
true 
match
|enrolled
), because each comparison offers an additional opportu
-nity for an enrolled presenter to be erroneously matched with the wrong 
enrollee by matching more closely with someone else™s stored data than 
with his or her own. Similarly, both denominator terms cannot decrease 
and may increase, because the new comparison offers any presenter an 
oppportunity of falsely matching with an extra enrollee.
Hence the ratio, 
PPV
(p), cannot increase and may decrease with watch
-list length. Using the subscript to indicate watch-list length, 
PPV
n+1
(p) 
 PPV
n(p) for any speci˚c 
p. Thus, the posterior means for the two list sizes 
over the distribution 
F(p) must hold the same relationship:
EP
PV
pP
PV
pd
Fp
PPV
pd
Fp
nnn((
))
()
()
()
()
1101001EP
PV
pn((
)).
These expectations are the marginal probabilities that a claimed 
match is correct for the different list sizes, so increasing list length by one 
enrollee cannot increase and may be expected to decrease the con˚dence 
warranted by a watch-list identi˚cation. Iterating this point shows that 
lengthening the list by any amount must have the same implications. 
However, this argument depends on decoupling the presentation distri
-bution 
F(p) from enrollee characteristics. In a ˚nite population setting, 
where increasing enrollment increases 
p, a much more complicated argu
-ment might be required, with the outcome dependent on the speci˚cs of 
functional relationships. A general argument that would work in such a 
setting is not obvious.
Our con˚dence in a nonmatch is 
NPV
(p) =
P(unenrolled and claimed nonmatch
|claimed nonmatch
) =
P(unenrolled and claimed nonmatch
) =
P(claimed nonmatch
)(1 
 p) × 
P(claimed nonmatch
|unenrolled
).(1 
 p) × 
P(claimed nonmatch
|unenrolled
) + 
 p 
× 
P(claimed nonmatch
|enrolled
)As noted above, increasing watch-list size by one new enrollment 
without changing 
p offers an additional opportunity for each unenrolled 
presenter to falsely match. Thus, 
P(claimed nonmatch
|unenrolled
) can
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
not increase and may decrease. The new enrollee can affect results only 
for those enrolled presenters failing to match their enrollment samples 
and gives such presenters an additional chance to match the watch 
list, although incorrectly, thus decreasing 
P(claimed nonmatch|enrolled
). 
Assuming that list size does not affect the presentation distribution 
F(p), 
the net impact depends on the ratio of the two probabilities. In the simplest 
conceivable model, when comparisons between pairs of individuals are 
independent and true and false-match probabilities are uniformly 
1 and 
0, these are respectively (1 Œ 
0)n and (1 Œ 
1)(1 Œ 
0)
nŒ1
 when n subjects 
are enrolled, and both are multiplied by (1 Œ 
0) with each new enroll
-ment, leaving their ratio and 
NPV
(p) unchanged. But if 
0 depends on 
enrollment status, as might occur when attempts are made to compromise 
the identi˚cation process, then 
NPV
(p) can decrease or increase when 
0 is higher for comparisons of unenrolled to enrolled presenters, or of one 
enrolled to other enrolled presenters, respectively. The expectation would 
change accordingly, in either direction.
Considering the watch-list recognition problem from the same per
-spective, one is now satis˚ed with a claim that the presenter matches 
someone on the list, without concern for whether the match is to the 
presenter™s own enrollment sample. The de˚nition and above discussion 
of NPV remain unaltered because a false match of a presenting enrollee, 
which is the event adjudicated differently by identi˚cation and watch-
list recognition, does not contribute to probabilities conditioned on the 
absence of a match. Moreover,
PPV
(p) =
P(true match with any enrollment sample|claimed match with list
) =
P(claimed match with list and true match with any enrollment sample
) =
P(claimed match with list
)p × 
P(claimed match with anyone
|enrolled
)p × 
P(claimed match with anyone
|enrolled
) + 
 (1 
 p) × 
P(false match
|unenrolled
)With a new enrollment to the list, an enrolled presenter who fails to 
match the correct enrollment sample has an added chance of matching 
the new enrollee and being correctly ˜agged as previously enrolled. This 
increases the numerator probability rather than decreasing it, as was the 
case for individual identi˚cation: numerator and denominator thus both 
increase. In the simple case described above, 
PPV
 can be shown to decline 
with list size, as was the case for identi˚cation. However, other scenarios 
and results are conceivable; if match probabilities differ for enrolled and 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 153
unenrolled presenters, the prior distribution 
F(û) depends on list size, and 
match comparisons may be dependent.
For an example of how linkage of 
F(p) to list size can change these 
results, consider a closed set identi˚cation system scaled up by enrolling 
many more users, each of whom interacts with the system daily to obtain 
workplace access, perhaps in a rapidly expanding corporation. Unless 
the number of attempted intrusions increases greatly, 
F(p) is shifted to the 
right and 
p stochastically increases. In the resulting change, the increas
-ing dominance of the 
PPV
 fraction by its numerator term outweighs the 
increasing chance of false recognition for any single impostor challenge, 
because impostor challenges occur with declining relative frequency. Con
-˚dence in a match would thereby increase rather than decrease.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
CStatement of Task
The Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB) will 
convene an expert committee to provide a comprehensive assessment 
of biometrics that examines current capabilities, future possibilities, and 
the role of government in their development. This project will build on 
CSTB™s recent project on authentication technologies and privacy. It would 
explore the technical and policy challenges associated with the develop
-ment, evaluation, and use of biometric technologies and the systems that 
incorporate them. It would examine associated research challenges and 
identify a multi- and interdisciplinary research agenda to begin to meet 
them. Multiple stakeholders and points of view on multiple technologies, 
applications, and implementation issues would be examined as part of the 
study. International perspectives and considerations would be explored as 
well. Throughout the study, inputs would be gathered through testimony 
and written material on the challenges, capabilities, and requirements of 
biometric systems as well as related policy and social questions.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.155
DTesting and Evaluation Examples
Large-scale biometric systems traditionally undergo a series of tests 
beyond technology and scenario testing. These large-scale system tests 
are typically at the system level, not just the biometric subsystem level, 
and occur multiple times in the life of a system in such forms as fac
-tory acceptance tests before shipment, site or system acceptance tests 
before initiating operations, and in-use tests to ensure that performance 
remains at acceptable levels and/or to reset thresholds or other technical 
parameters.
The following examples outline aspects of testing from three real-
world, large-scale systems: the FBI™s Integrated Automated Fingerprint 
Identi˚cation System (IAFIS), Disney™s entrance control system, and the 
U.S. Army™s Biometrics Automated Toolkit (BAT). Note that there are 
numerous other systems that offer lessons as wellŠthese include the 
DOD™s Common Access Card, US-VISIT, California™s Statewide Finger
-print Imaging System (CA SFIS), and so on. The inclusion or exclusion 
of systems in this discussion is not meant to convey a judgment of any 
sort.
THE FBI™S IAFIS SYSTEM
IAFIS underwent numerous tests before and after deployment in 1998 
and 1999. After deployment the FBI tracked performance for 5 years to 
determine the threshold for automatic hit decisions. After measuring and 
analyzing the performance data, the FBI was able to say with con˚dence 
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
that all candidates for whom the 10-˚ngerprint to 10-˚ngerprint search 
score was above a certain level were always declared as matches (or hits) 
by the examiners. As a result of this analysis the FBI was able to let the 
IAFIS system automatically declare as matches about 25 percent of the 
hits that previously required human intervention. This test used routine 
operational data in an operational environment and was not orchestrated 
to include any controls or prescreening on the input data. The transactions 
were run through the system normally, and match decisions were made 
by human examiners working with candidates presented by the IAFIS 
automated matchers.
DISNEY™S ENTRANCE CONTROL SYSTEM
Walt Disney World (WDW) has publicly reported
1 on internal testing 
using several different biometric technologies over the years. (See Box 5.1 
for more on Disney™s use of biometrics.) WDW tested various hand geom
-etry and ˚nger scanning technologies at several theme park locations to 
evaluate alternative technologies to the then-existing ˚nger geometry 
used in its turnstile application. WDW also tested technologies for other 
applications to increase guest service and improve operating ef˚ciency. 
Testing there is done in four stages: laboratory testing, technology testing, 
scenario testing, and operational evaluation. Since WDW has had exist
-ing biometric technology in place since 1996 and a substantial amount of 
experience with the biometric industry, its mind-set is that a threshold has 
been set for performance in both error rates and throughput and prospec
-tive vendors must exceed this level of performance to be considered for 
future enhancement projects.
In WDW lab testing, prospective biometric devices or technologies 
are examined for the underlying strengths of their technology/modality, 
usability, and accuracy. This testing is performed under optimal, controlled 
conditions for all of the relevant parameters that can affect performance. 
Parameters like technology construction and architecture, component 
mean time between failures, and theoretical throughput are extrapolated 
based on the results of laboratory tests. The goal of laboratory testing is 
to quickly determine whether a device or technology is worth investigat
-ing further. If a technology does not meet a performance level above the 
existing technology under optimal conditions, there is no point in inves
-tigating further.
If a prospective biometric device or technology is determined to be 
promising in the WDW lab environment, then the next stage of testing, 
1 
Available at http://www.biometrics.org/bc2007/presentations/Tues_Sep_11/Session_
III/ 11_Levin_IBIA.pdf.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
 157
called ﬁtechnology testing,ﬂ is conducted to examine the limitations of the 
technology where some of the parameters will be controlled and others 
will be allowed to vary into ﬁextreme limitsﬂ to see how the technology 
reacts and where it fails. For example, increasing the amount of ambient 
lighting for a facial recognition system or increasing the amount of back
-ground noise for a voice system stresses the capabilities of those systems. 
If the technology is still determined to be promising, scenario testing is 
performed by testing the technology in the live, operational environment 
with real-world users.
2 Typically, all data are captured and subsequently 
analyzed to determine if the system performed as expected, better, or 
worse. Analysis is performed to determine if some parameter was unex
-pectedly affecting performance. Often video of the user interactions will 
be recorded to assist in the data analysis and is particularly useful if the 
results of the testing show unexplained anomalies or unexpected results. 
For example, video of the interactions may detect users swapping ˚ngers 
between enrollment and subsequent use in a ˚ngerprint system. During 
this entire testing process, a potential system enhancement cost/bene˚t 
analysis is updated with the results of each round of the testing. If the 
performance gain is determined to be worthwhile, a business decision 
may then be made to migrate to the new technology. Disney has followed 
these scenario tests with operational tests on deployed systems to esti
-mate actual error and throughput rates.
U.S. ARMY™S BIOMETRIC AUTOMATED TOOLKIT
BAT was developed in the late 1990s by the Battle Command Battle 
Lab of the Army Intelligence Center at Fort Huachuca, Arizona, as an 
advanced concepts technology demonstration (ACTD) to enable U.S. 
military forces to keep a ﬁdigital dossierﬂ on a person of interest.
3 Other 
features such as biometric collection and identi˚cation badge creation 
were also included. BAT uses a rugged laptop and biometric collection 
devices (facial images, ˚ngerprints, iris images, and, in some cases, voice 
samples) to enroll persons encountered by the military in combat opera
-tions. Hundreds of devices were rushed into production to meet demand 
during Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom in 
Afghanistan.
This military use of biometrics ensures that a person, once registered, 
can later be recognized even if his or her identity documents or facial 
characteristics change. This permits postmission analysis to identify per
-2 
J. Ashbourn, ﬁUser Psychology and Biometric Systems Performanceﬂ (2000). Available at 
http://www.adept-associates.com/User%20Psychology.pdf.
3 
Available at http://www.eis.army.mil/programs/dodbiometrics.htm.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
sons of future interest and in-mission analysis to detain persons of interest 
from biometrically supported watch lists. These systems are considered by 
many to be a technical success today, and the data are shared, when appro
-priate, with the FBI, DHS, and the intelligence community. When ˚rst 
deployed they did not go through factory or system acceptance tests due 
to the rapid prototyping and the demand for devices. After operational 
use, it was determined that the ˚ngerprints collected were not usable by 
the FBI because several factors had not been considered in the original 
tactical system design, which did not include sending output to the FBI™s 
strategic system, IAFIS. BAT was then formally tested operationally and 
the required changes identi˚ed and made. The operational retests before 
and after deployment showed that the current generation BAT systems 
generally met all of the image quality and record format protocols speci
-˚ed by the FBI. These BAT devices, however, use proprietary reference 
representations to share information on watch lists, which makes them 
less interoperable with standards-based systems than with one another.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.159
EThe Biometrics Standards Landscape
Since September 11, 2001, there has been increased interest in using 
biometrics for national security purposes, some of which have been codi
-˚ed in legislation, including the Enhanced Border Security and Visa Entry 
Reform Act of 2002
1 and the PATRIOT Act of 2001.
2 As a result, biometric 
standards activities, previously largely limited to the forensics commu
-nity, have been accelerated through national and international standards 
bodies. To speed up development of standards, NIST helped to establish 
a national standards body and requested the formation of an interna
-tional standards body, both of which aim to increase the development 
and deployment of national and international biometrics standards for a 
variety of applications.
The following sections outline the main biometrics standards bod
-ies, discuss some speci˚c standards, and describe some of the challenges 
facing the processes. As with standards in other technologies, biometric 
standards face tension between being ˜exible enough to enable innova
-tion while suf˚ciently prescriptive and detailed to allow interoperability 
and useful comparison of technologies and their capabilities.
1 
PL 107-173.
2 
PL 107-56.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
0 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
STANDARDS BODIES
To facilitate standards work at the international level, ISO/IEU JTC 
1/SC 37 was established in June 2002 at the request of the United States, 
which is represented within SC37 by the International Committee for 
Information Technology Standards, M1 technical committee on biomet
-rics (INCITS M1). This body coordinates the development of biometric 
standards based on consensus development with the industrial, academic, 
and government communities. Within SC 37, there are six areas of focus: 
(1) vocabulary and concept harmonization; (2) biometrics data transfer; 
(3) data format standards for interoperability; (4) standard speci˚c appli
-cation pro˚les; (5) performance testing and reporting; and (6) cross-juris
-dictional (legal and social) aspects for nongovernmental applications of 
biometrics.
3 INCITS M1 participates in ˚ve of these six working groups. 
Development of security standards for biometrics is speci˚cally outside 
the remit of SC37 but is included in the work of SC27. Other international 
standards bodies include the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU-T) and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Spe
-ci˚c work is also being carried out by specialized international groups 
including OASIS and the Open Group.
Nationally, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) coor
-dinates voluntary standardization and conformity assessments in the 
United States, approves the creation of all national and international stan
-dards, and may also implement any changes to the standards as well.
MAJOR STANDARDS
Standards aim to establish generic sets of rules for different products 
and to facilitate interoperability, data exchange, consistency of use, and 
other desirable features. One outcome of standards development is to 
achieve stability and consistency of biometric technologies and products 
that bene˚t consumers and investors. In the past decade, over 20 major 
international standards have been developed and approved, including 
the following:
Ł BioAPI, to enable hardware interoperability while retaining previ
-ous data,
Ł Fingerprint minutiae 19794-2,
Ł Fingerprint image 19794-4,
Ł Face image 19794-5,
3 
The work of WG6 was limited to nongovernmental applications at the request of INCITS 
M1.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
 161
Ł Iris image 19794-6,
Ł Hand geometry image 19794-10, and
Ł Testing and reporting fundamentals 19795-1.
ANSI has approved multiple national standards for the exchange of 
biometric data, two biometric application pro˚les, two biometric inter
-face standards, and the Common Biometric Exchange Formats Frame
-work. These standards are generally closely related to corresponding 
international standards, either serving as input to the creation of the 
corresponding international standard or simply repeating an established 
international standard. Application tensions can arise when the ANSI 
standard and the corresponding international standard have signi˚cant 
differences. The National Science and Technology Council Subcommittee 
on Biometrics and Identity Management released the report ﬁRegistry of 
USG-Recommended Biometric Standards Version 1.0ﬂ on June 5, 2008, 
clarifying which parts of which standards should be used for U.S. govern
-ment applications. Two other standards are described below as examples 
of the challenges and complexities that can arise in the development of 
biometric standards.
Standard for the Interchange of Biometric Data
For the past 25 years the FBI and NIST have successfully developed 
and updated a standard for the exchange of ˚ngerprint information. This 
standard is of˚cially titled 
Information Technology: American National Stan
-dard for Information SystemsŠData Format for the Interchange of Fingerprint, 
Facial, & Other Biometric InformationŠPart 
1 NIST Special Publication 
500-
271
 ANSI/NIST-ITL 
1-200
7. That standard has recently been updated to 
XML format to re˜ect the emerging needs of the defense and intelligence 
communities and de˚nes about 20 record types for use in exchanging 
biometric information (faces, ˚ngers, palms, latent prints, and irises) and 
related biographic and event data (e.g., date and time of enrollment). It 
has been one of the most successful and widely used biometrics stan
-dards. Criminal justice, border control, national identity, and social ben
-e˚ts programs all over the world have adopted the ANSI/NIST standard 
for the exchange of ˚ngerprint images for their electronic ˚ngerprint-
based transactions.
This standard permits communities of interest, known as domains, 
to implement those portions of the standard that are relevant to their 
needs. For instance, the FBI™s implementation, known as the Electronic 
Biometric Transmissions Speci˚cation, or EBTS, permits local, state, and 
federal agencies and departments to electronically exchange biometric 
and biographic information across various criminal-justice-oriented net
-Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
works, independent of the source (vendor) of the equipment used. When 
the FBI ˚rst issued the EFTS
4 in 1994, it selected Type 4 high-resolution 
gray-scale images and stated that they would not accept Types 3, 5, or 
6 ˚ngerprint images. As a result, those record types are not used in any 
large-scale ˚ngerprint automation projects.
After producing the EFTS the FBI next focused on image quality stan
-dards. Fingerprint image quality is the dominant factor in the AFIS ability 
to match ˚ngerprints. The FBI added an Appendix F to the EFTS to specify 
image quality speci˚cations (IQS) for capture devices and printers. This 
IQS standard is also used worldwide in procurement of live scan devices, 
˚ngerprint card scanners, and printers. Each domain (e.g., Interpol) has 
its own implementation document that speci˚es which records and which 
demographic data ˚elds it will accept. These implementation documents 
normally show their relationship to the FBI™s EFTS to include the IQS.
NIST developed an automated tool to rate the quality of ˚ngerprint 
images. In October 2004 NIST released an updated version of this suite 
of tools for handling digital ˚ngerprint images. NIST Fingerprint Image 
Software 2 was developed by NIST™s Image Group for the FBI and DHS 
and is available free to U.S. law enforcement agencies as well as to manu
-facturers and researchers of biometric systems. New to this release is a 
tool that evaluates the quality of a ˚ngerprint scan at the time it is made. 
Problems such as dry skin, the size of the ˚ngers, and the quality and 
condition of the equipment used can affect the quality of a print and its 
ability to be matched with other prints. The tool rates each scan on a scale 
from 1 for a high-quality print to 5 for an unusable one.
NIST also worked with the FBI to develop ˚ngerprint data compres
-sion standards acceptable to the latent print examination community. This 
compression standard, known as Wavelet Scalar Quantization (WSQ), 
is widely used in both forensic and civil AFIS systems, although newer 
systems seem to be migrating to use of JPEG-2000 for the compression 
of ˚ngerprints. It is important to note that the 10-˚ngerprint images are 
compressed for transmission and storage while the latent print images 
are never compressed.
The FBI works with industry to permit vendors to self-assess prod
-ucts in order to place the products on the FBI certi˚ed products list. The 
self-certi˚cation reports are evaluated by FBI personnel supported by 
MITRE Corporation experts. Products on the list are typically certi˚ed 
as meeting Appendix F IQS with speci˚c software drivers and operating 
system releases.
This is a case of a particular project or system, IAFIS, requiring a stan
-4 
Electronic ˚ngerprint transmission speci˚cation (EFTS) is the predecessor of the current 
EBTS. The EBTS expands upon the EFTS to include additional biometric modalities.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
 163
dard and driving the development and implementation. Most of the other 
standards activity in the biometrics arena is driven not by a project but 
by a more general sense of a need for interoperability and a level playing 
˚eld for technology providers.
Fingerprint Minutiae Exchange Standard
One area where there is a big push to develop and implement an 
extension to the ANSI/NIST standard for ˚ngerprint exchange is the 
exchange of certain types of minutiae (or features) records rather than 
images. While the standard as written permits the exchange of minutiae 
in lieu of images, the minutiae de˚ned in the standard are not as useful 
for processing across different vendor environments, from an algorithmic 
perspective, as permitting a vendor to receive an image and extract their 
proprietary minutiae set.
5 The ANSI/NIST standard currently supports at 
least eight vendor minutiae sets, per Table 15 of the standard.
The reasons for the push in this direction are twofold. First, when 
agencies exchange ˚ngerprints for searching rather than retention, ˚n
-gerprint minutiae can be transmitted and searched much more rapidly 
than ˚ngerprint images. Second, when verifying the identity of a person 
presenting a personal identity veri˚cation (PIV) card, it would be time-
consuming to extract the ˚ngerprint image from the PIV card™s chip and 
extract the features each time the card is used. Storing a common, interop
-erable set of minutiae on the card was selected to reduce transaction time 
considerably. The standard selected for storing templates on PIV cards is 
ANSI/INCITS 378.
Benchmarking is a form of testing often used in large-scale AFIS and 
Automated Biometric Identi˚cation Systems (ABIS)
6 source selection. In 
the 1980s there was an ANSI/IAI standard for Benchmarking AFIS Sys
-tems,
7 but when the time came to update the standard a decision was 
made to not update it; as a result, in conformance with ANSI process 
rules, the standard was allowed to fade away.
5 
A new standard for ˚ngerprints that includes extended features is available at http://
˚ngerprint.nist.gov/standard/cdeffs/Docs/CDEFFS_DraftStd_v03_Final.pdf. A recent 
 
paper shows there is a strong performance gain in using extended features for latent ˚nger
-print matching. See Anil K. Jain and Jianjiang Feng, Latent ˚ngerprint matching, 
IEEE 
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence,
 February 25 (2010). IEEE Computer 
Society Digital Library, IEEE Computer Society, available at http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.
org/10.1109/TPAMI.2010.59.
6 
Automated Biometric Identi˚cation Systems are modeled on the function of AFIS systems 
but are not tied to ˚nger imaging modalities and are often multimodal.
7 American National Standard for forensic identi˚cationŠautomated ˚ngerprint identi˚ca
-tion systemsŠbenchmark tests of relative performance [ANSI/IAI 1-1988].
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164
 BIOMETRIC RECOGNITION
One trend in large-scale AFIS benchmarking is to perform three sets 
of tests that are described below. This approach is becoming an ad hoc 
standard for large-scale AFIS benchmarking:
Ł Operational demonstrations,
Ł Lights-out performance, and
Ł Best practices performance.
Operational demonstrations are intended to evaluate user interfaces, 
compression rates, scanner ˜exibility, end-to-end work˜ows, report gen
-eration, and administrative tasks. Lights-out testing measures the perfor
-mance of the underlying biometric matchers for ˚ngerprints, palm prints, 
and latent impressions with no human intervention other than feeding 
scanners and ﬁlassoingﬂ latent impressions within an image. Best prac
-tices performance testing measures the performance of the underlying 
biometric matchers for ˚ngerprints, palm prints, and latent impressions, 
with ˚ngerprint personnel permitted to perform quality control steps 
such as sequence correction and editing of low-quality images.
Another trend in benchmarking large-scale matcher systems that will 
be servicing larger systems is to bring the algorithms in house and run 
them under very controlled conditions against millions of records.
CHALLENGES IN THE BIOMETRIC STANDARDS ARENA
Despite the growing interest in and increasing approval of adopting 
biometric standards, a variety of challenges remain.
So-called patent ambush is one such challenge. It involves embed
-ding a company™s proprietary information in a standard and revealing 
the information only after the standard has been approved by a standards 
body, with the intention to exclude some companies from using the stan
-dard or to extract higher royalties from other companies that use the stan
-dard. Although proprietary information may become part of the standard, 
companies are required to formally disclose such information. However, 
the standards process should also uncover instances of patented tech
-nology as a proposed standard proceeds through review and approval 
phases. Instances of patent ambush have occurred in other technology 
industries
8 and are the subject of litigation in the area of biometrics.
As the standards process is designed to enhance the competitive
-ness of biometrics markets, many biometrics companies want to develop 
8 
See, for instance, a discussion of patent ambush in telecommunications standards, avail
-able at http://www.lawdit.co.uk/reading_room/room/view_article.asp?name=../articles/
EC%20Closes.htm.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX E
 165
their own standard rather than pay royalties to use another company™s 
approved standard. This is not unique to biometrics by any means but 
often results in international standards bodies granting standards to 
the companies that propose them. A related challenge is that standards 
inevitably involve compromises and thus end up as a lowest common 
denominator among the various companies offering competing commer
-cial biometric products. Evaluation and testing might then require more 
than mere standards compliance. NIST, for example, has conducted per
-formance tests at a level that surpasses the standards that have been estab
-lished by the international standards body. Two tests that have included 
additional criteria by NIST include the facial recognition challenge 2006 
test and the MINEX 2006 test, which aim to enable interoperability of 
˚ngerprints at the minutiae level.
Interoperability presents its own problem in the standards arena. 
What is an appropriate or useful level of interoperability? How can we 
arrive at a shared de˚nition? These issues have been addressed by the 
international standards community,
9 but work remains to be done. A 
related problem of interoperability is the tendency to decrease overall 
performance as the standard seeks the lowest common factors among 
the interoperating technologies. Multimodal biometrics fusion (MBF) can 
add more complexity to the standards process. MBF is the combining of 
more than one biometric modality, such as combining a ˚ngerprint with 
an iris scan. (See Chapter 2 for more details.) Establishing standards for 
multimodal biometrics presents additional challenges, given the dif˚cul
-ties of establishing interoperability among unimodal biometrics. Many of 
these issues have been discussed in ISO/IEC documents.
10
9 
Information technologyŠBiometric performance testing and reportingŠPart 4: Inter
-operability performance testing, ISO/IEC 19795-4:2008.
10
 Information technologyŠBiometricsŠMultimodal and other multibiometric fusion, 
ISO/IEC Technical Report 24722:2007.
Biometric Recognition: Challenges and OpportunitiesCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.