DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12797Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of EarnedDoctorates: A Workshop Summary70 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38164-2 | DOI 10.17226/12797Thomas J. Plewes, Rapporteur; Committee on National Statistics; Division ofBehavioral and Social Sciences and Education; National Research CouncilProtecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Thomas J. Plewes, RapporteurCommittee on National StatisticsDivision of Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationProtecting and AccessingData from the Survey
 of Earned DoctoratesA 
Wo
rkshop 
Summ
ar
yProtecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
  500 Fifth Street, N.W. 
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils 
of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the 
Institute of Medicine. The members of the steering committee for the workshop were 
chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
Support of the work of the Committee on National Statistics is provided by a consor
-tium of federal agencies through a grant from the National Science Foundation (award 
number SES-0453930). Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the 
views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-14667-8International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-14667-4Additional copies of this report are available from National Academies Press, 500 Fifth 
Street, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-
3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2010 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Research Council. (2010). 
Protecting and Accessing Data 
from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop Summary
. Thomas J. Plewes, Rappor
-teur. Committee on National Statistics, Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and 
Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a man
-date that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c and technical matters. 
Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of 
the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. 
It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with 
the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. 
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at 
meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy 
of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination 
of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the 
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 
be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues 
of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the 
Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s 
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in 
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become 
the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the Na
-tional Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and 
the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both 
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest 
are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vSTEERING COMMITTEE FOR A REVIEW OF 
CONFIDENTIALITY CRITERIA FOR STATISTICS FROM THE 
SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
BARBARA A. BAILAR
 (Chair), Consultant, Washington, DC
ROBERT
 F. B
ORUCH
, Graduate School of Education and Statistics, 
University of Pennsylvania
SCOTT
 HOLAN
, Department of Statistics, University of 
MissouriŒColumbia
WILLIE PEARSON, JR., School of History, Technology and Society, 
Georgia Institute of Technology
ANNE C. PETERSEN, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral 
Sciences, Stanford University
ROBERT
 SANTOS
, The Urban Institute, Washington, DC
MARK S. SCHNEIDER, American Institutes for Research, 
 Washington, DC
LATAN
YA SWEENEY, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon 
University
THOMAS J. PLEWES
, Study Director
MICHAEL J. SIRI, Program Associate
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
 2008Œ2009WILLIAM F. E
DDY (Chair), Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon 
University
KATHARINE
 ABRAHAM, Department of Economics and Joint 
Program in Survey Methodology, University of Maryland
ALICIA CARRIQUIRY, Department of Statistics, Iowa State University
WILLIAM DuMOUCHEL, Phase Forward, Inc., Waltham, MA
JOHN HALTIWANGER
, Department of Economics, University of 
Maryland
V. J
OSEPH
 HOT
Z, Department of Economics, Duke University
KAREN KAFADAR
, Department of Statistics, Indiana University 
DOUGLAS
 MASSEY, Department of Sociology, Princeton University
SALLY MORTON
, Statistics and Epidemiology, RTI International, 
Research Triangle Park, NC
JOSEPH
 NEWHOUSE
, Division of Health Policy Research and 
Education, Harvard University
SAMUEL H. PRESTON
, Population Studies Center, University of 
Pennsylvania
HAL STERN, Department of Statistics, University of California, Irvine
ROGER T
OURANGEAU
, Joint Program in Survey Methodology, 
University of Maryland
ALAN
 ZASLAVS
KY, Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard 
Medical School
CONSTANCE
 F. C
ITRO
, Director
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiAcknowledgments
This report summarizes the proceedings of a workshop to review 
con˜dentiality criteria for the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) 
of the National Science Foundation (NSF). The workshop was 
sponsored by NSF and convened by the Committee on National Statistics 
(CNSTAT), Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, of 
the National Research Council (NRC). 
We thank the experts in survey methodology, con˜dentiality and pri
-vacy policy, and data masking and suppression techniques and the users 
of science and engineering human resources statistics who served on the 
steering committee. They provided invaluable guidance during the course 
of developing the workshop, in the process of securing expert presentations, 
and in conducting the workshop. Although the steering committee played 
a central role in designing and conducting the workshop, it did not actively 
participate in writing this workshop summary.
The staff of NSF™s Division of Science Resources Statistics played an 
important role in preparing for and conducting the workshop. As back
-ground for the workshop, this staff prepared a substantial paper describing 
the new disclosure protection strategies that the agency proposed to adopt in 
publishing future editions of the race, gender, and ethnicity tables for SED.
 Under the leadership of Lynda Carlson and her deputy, Mary Frase, the 
division staff went to great lengths to assemble information and present it 
to the workshop in a concise and useful manner. Mark Fiegener, the survey 
manager, and Steve Cohen, the division™s chief statistician, were the primary 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
authors of that background paper. Fiegener also served as the primary point 
of coordination between the steering committee and NSF.
The presentations in the workshop were designed to shed light on 
various issues involved in selecting appropriate con˜dentiality criteria for 
statistics from SED. The task of describing the context for the protection of 
con˜dential data in the federal government fell to Brian Harris-
Kojetin of 
the Statistical and Science Policy Of˜ce, Of˜ce of Information and Regula
-tory Affairs, Of˜ce of Management and Budget, and to Alvan 
Zarate, a con
-sultant who previously served as the con˜dentiality of˜cer of the National 
Center for Health Statistics. 
Mark Fiegener and Steve Cohen gave presentations on the options 
that NSF faced when trying to achieve a balance between protecting the 
data from SED and making them accessible to the many users of the infor
-mation. The input of users of the survey data was summarized by Shirley 
McBay, of the 
Quality Education for Minorities Network. Jacob Bournazian 
of the Energy Information Agency summarized emerging models across the 
federal government for ensuring access while maintaining con˜dentiality. 
Jerome Reiter of Duke University discussed the emerging ˜eld of disclosure 
risk assessments. Latanya Sweeney, a member of the steering committee, 
was also scheduled to discuss disclosure risk but was unable to participate 
in the workshop.
The steering committee also acknowledges the excellent work of the 
staff of CNSTAT and the NRC for support in developing and organizing 
the workshop and this report. Under the direction of Constance Citro, 
director of CNSTAT, the study director, Thomas Plewes, provided valuable 
assistance to the steering committee in organizing the meetings and serving 
as rapporteur for the workshop. He was ably assisted by Michael Siri, also 
on the staff of CNSTAT.
This workshop summary was reviewed in draft form by individuals 
chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the Report Review Committee of the NRC. 
The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and criti
-cal comments that assist the institution in making its report as sound as 
possible, and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for 
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review 
comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity 
of the deliberative process. 
The panel thanks the following individuals for their review of this 
report: Barbara A. Bailar, consultant, Washington, DC; Craig Calhoun, 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 ixOf˜ce of the President, Social Science Research Council, Brooklyn, N
Y; George T. Duncan, Department of Statistics, Emeritus, Heinz College, 
Carnegie Mellon University; Willie Pearson, Jr., School of History, Technol
-ogy and Society, Georgia Institute of Technology; 
Kenneth E. Redd, Re
-search and Policy Analysis, National Association of College and University 
Business Of˜cers, Washington, DC; and Nora Cate Schaeffer, Department 
of Sociology, University of WisconsinŒMadison.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of 
the report, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. 
The review of this report was overseen by Eleanor Singer, Institute for Social 
Research, University of Michigan. Appointed by the NRC, she was respon
-sible for making certain that the independent examination of this report was 
carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of 
the report rests entirely with the author and the institution. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiContents1 Introduction
 12 Context for the Protection of Con˜dential Data 
 73 National Science Foundation Options, Decision, and Impact 
 15 4 User Requirements 
 275 Ensuring Access and Con˜dentiality
 346 Participant Views and Unresolved Issues
 44References
 47Appendixes
A Workshop Agenda and Participants
 49B Biographical Sketches of Steering Committee Members
 53Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Introduction
The implementing guidance for the Con˜dential Information Pro
-tection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act, issued by the U.S. Of˜ce of 
Management and Budget in June 2007, noted increasing concerns 
on the part of survey respondents with issues of con˜dentiality and privacy 
and outlined the requirements that federal agencies must meet to honor a 
pledge of con˜dentiality protection. In response, the Division of Science 
Resources Statistics (SRS) of the National Science Foundation (NSF) un
-dertook a detailed review of existing rules and procedures for protection of 
the data collected under a pledge of con˜dentiality in all its surveys.
The Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED), the focus of this report, col
-lects data on the number and characteristics of individuals receiving research 
doctoral degrees from all accredited U.S. institutions (see Box 1-1). The 
results of this annual survey are used to assess characteristics and trends in 
doctorate education and degrees. This information is vital for education 
and labor force planners and researchers in the federal government and in 
academia.As a result of its review, SRS implemented more stringent procedures 
to protect the con˜dentiality of data provided by respondents to SED. 
These new procedures, which were implemented for the 2006 SED data 
released in 2007, suppressed many previously published data elements. 
The suppressed elements were mostly in ˜elds in which very small numbers 
of doctoral degrees had been awarded. Nonetheless, the data about these 
˜elds in which few degrees had been awarded were often closely watched 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
by users, in part precisely because of their rarity. The data items that were 
suppressed pertained to race/ethnicity, gender, and sub˜eldsŠall of which 
were of interest to policy makers, researchers, and educational institutions. 
The organizations and institutions that had previously relied on these data 
to assess progress in this most important measure of achievement and equal
-ity suddenly found themselves without a yardstick with which to measure 
progress. Since the elimination of the data came without warning and for 
reasons that were not made clear to data users, their reaction was negative.
In response to these user concerns, NSF took a number of steps: gather
-ing information from users, reconsidering the means by which con˜dential 
data can be protected from disclosure, and securing outside review of its 
decisions. The workshop that is summarized in this report is one of those 
initiatives. The goal of the workshop was to address the appropriateness of 
the decisions that SRS made and to help the agency and data users consider 
future actions that might permit release of useful data while protecting the 
con˜dentiality of the survey responses. 
BOX 1-1 
 Survey of Earned Doctorates
The Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) surveys all individuals 
who earned research doctorates from accredited U.S. institutions 
between July 1 and June 30 of the preceding year. 
A research 
doctorate is a doctoral degree that (1) requires the completion 
of an original intellectual contribution in the form of a dissertation or 
an equivalent project of work (e.g., a musical composition) and (2) is 
not primarily intended as a degree for the practice of a profession. 
The most common research doctorate degree is the Ph.D. 
The total 
universe in the 2007 survey comprised more than 48,000 research 
doctorate recipients from over 420 accredited U.S. doctorate-
granting institutions. The response rate is usually about 92 percent, 
but every recipient of a research doctorate degree in the reporting 
year is included in the survey, whether or not they responded to it. 
For nonrespondents, limited records (containing ˜eld of study, doc
-torate institution, sex, and baccalaureate degree) are constructed 
on the basis of information collected from commencement pro
-grams, graduation lists, and other similar public records.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 3DECISION TO SUPPRESS DATA
Con˜dentiality is an issue for SED mainly because individuals who 
earn doctorate degrees from institutions of higher education supply infor
-mation about themselves when they respond to the survey. This information 
includes sensitive matters that many individuals want to keep private, such 
as future plans, money owed as a result of their schooling, and expected 
income, among others. These individual-level data are collected by SRS under a pledge of 
con˜dentiality to the individual respondent. The importance of protecting 
personally identi˜able data supplied by respondents is heightened because 
SED is a virtual census of everyone receiving a research doctorate in a 
given year (see Box 1-1). Indeed, if a person received a research doctorate 
in a given year, it is known with a very high certainty that the individual™s 
information is contained in the survey. 
In the revised procedures to protect the con˜dentiality of data, SRS 
decided to suppress from publication a number of data cells with very small 
counts. These occurred in tables in an annual publication series, 
Doctorate 
Recipients from United States Universities: Summary Report
 (also known as 
the Interagency Summary Report), as well as in a number of additional 
standard tabulations of SED data. These tabulations, which have been 
produced when ordered by interested parties, include the 
Race/Ethnicity, 
Gender, and Fine Field of Study
 Tables 
(called here the REG tables), which 
report national-level counts of doctorate recipients by detailed or ˜ne ˜eld 
of doctorate, gender, race/ethnicity, and citizenship. The cells primarily af
-fected are certain categories for the variables of race/ethnicity, citizenship, 
and gender, because the numbers of people in those groups who obtain 
doctorates in any given year are quite small, particularly when the data are 
arrayed by ˜ne ˜eld of degree.
NSF received many complaints from the user community about these 
changes, in which less information from the survey was available than 
before, particularly for underrepresented minorities. A great deal of the 
concern related to the fact that SRS had implemented the changes without 
prior input from the user community and without much warning to spon
-soring agencies and others who closely follow trends in these data series. 
Users strongly suggested that SRS solicit user input as to how best to design 
new tables to meet a broad spectrum of user needs. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
RESPONSE TO USER CONCERNS
SRS reacted to these user concerns on multiple levels. The agency, in 
essence, retracted the decision to suppress the 2006 data and made them 
available in published form. Then SRS began a deliberate process of seeking 
input from stakeholders through a series of meetings and other outreach ac
-tivities with users to solicit their views about the presentation of SED data. 
It also initiated an internal research effort to develop alternative formats for 
new tables presenting SED data by race/ethnicity, citizenship, and gender. 
In doing so, SRS considered best practices used by federal statistical 
agencies to protect individually identi˜able data and, speci˜cally, the prin
-ciples documented in the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology™s 
Statistical Policy Working Paper 22 (Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 
2005). It also opened for consideration new disclosure methodologies 
published in the research literature. SRS published the results of this work 
in a paper that discusses the issues; the activities undertaken to determine 
the types of, needs for, and uses of the data by a variety of users; the alter
-native approaches considered for presenting the data; and the rationale for 
choosing the approaches used in the proposed new tables (National Science 
Foundation, 2009). 
The workshop summarized in this report is the culmination of the 
outreach activities initiated by SRS. At the request of SRS, the Committee 
on National Statistics of the National Research Council formed an ad hoc 
steering committee to plan for and conduct a workshop for the purpose 
of reviewing the proposed con˜dentiality criteria established for the SED. 
The major purpose of the workshop was to convene experts to address the 
decisions that SRS made on how to best present SED data so as to maximize 
the amount of data that can be released while maintaining the pledge of 
con˜dentiality made to respondents. The event was intended to provide an 
opportunity for experts in the ˜eld to provide input on the procedures SRS 
used and on the tables themselves. 
The exchange of information and the publication of this report were 
the sole goals of the workshop. This report is intended as a record of the 
discussion of key issues identi˜ed by the steering committee and discussed 
by the subject-matter experts who attended the workshop. It draws no 
conclusions, nor does it make any recommendations. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 5REPORT OVERVIEW
Following this introduction, Chapter 2 continues with a discussion of 
the context for the protection of con˜dential data in the federal govern
-ment. It takes a speci˜c look at methods for protecting con˜dential data as 
propounded throughout the federal statistical agencies and in the statistical 
profession. The basis for this discussion consists of three major pieces of 
legislation: (1) the congressional mandate to NSF, the National Science 
Foundation Act of 1950, as amended; (2) the Privacy Act of 1974; and (3) 
the Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act of 
2002. Federal agency practices are outlined in Statistical Policy Working 
Paper 22 (Of˜ce of Management and Budget, 2005). The perspective of the 
statistical profession, as contained in a 2008 statement on data access and 
personal privacy and appropriate methods of disclosure control (American 
Statistical Association, 2008), is also described in this chapter. 
Chapter 3 presents the highlights of the NSF decision paper that lays 
out the options it considered for publishing future editions of the race/eth
-nicity and gender tables for SED. The preferred method would display ˜ne 
˜elds of degree in which 25 or more doctorates are awarded in a given year 
and would aggregate the ˜ne ˜elds in which fewer than 25 doctorates are 
awarded into ˜elds de˜ned by the Classi˜cation of Instructional Programs 
taxonomy. The chapter summarizes the workshop™s lively discussion of the 
pros and cons of this proposed new strategy.
Chapter 4 steps back and takes a look at the requirements for the data 
from SED, particularly for the race and ethnicity categories. For this chap
-ter, the report of the series of outreach meetings on the impact of the sup
-pression of small cells on the survey is the main point of reference (
Quality Education for Minorities Network, 2009).
Chapter 5 takes a broader view of the issue, looking at emerging models 
for ensuring con˜dentiality and data access and an emerging framework for 
assessing the risk of redisclosure of con˜dential information from published 
sources. The stock of optional methods for protecting data is growing rap
-idly in the federal statistical system, and academic research is developing 
increasingly sophisticated techniques for assessing the risk of redisclosure. 
The discussion of these new methods is included to assist NSF as it consid
-ers how to re˜ne the decision it has reached to protect con˜dential data and 
make them accessible. The information in this chapter may well inform 
other federal statistical agencies facing issues similar to those confronted by 
NSF over the past 2 years.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
In the ˜nal chapter, the views of participants on the appropriateness of 
the NSF decision to aggregate rather than suppress data are summarized. 
The chapter includes a series of issues that were raised in the general discus
-sion period but not resolved during the workshop. They are presented as 
topics that could be further investigated by the NSF staff.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72Context for the Protection of 
 Con˜dential Data
This chapter sets out the legal and policy context in which the Divi
-sion of Science Resources Statistics (SRS) of the National Science 
Foundation (NSF) operated when confronting the issue of publica
-tion of data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED). This context also 
sets the stage for deciding on the new parameters for publishing data based 
on responses from small population groups.
The chapter begins with a description of the NSF legislative mandate 
pertaining to con˜dentiality of respondents and their responses. It then dis
-cusses the legislation and implementing guidance for the original decision 
to withhold some data from publication: the Con˜dential Information Pro
-tection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act of 2002 (CIPSEA). Finally, the chapter 
addresses the several rules, guidelines, and practices that have emerged in 
the federal statistical system and the statistical profession, which also serve 
to establish the context for decisions on the balance between con˜dentiality 
and access by federal statistical agencies.
NSF LEGISLATION AND PRACTICE
Workshop presenter Stephen Cohen (National Science Foundation) 
began by saying that the SRS is both a part of the National Science Foun
-dation and one of the major agencies in the federal statistical system. It is 
the primary organization in NSF that carries out its congressional mandate 
ﬁto provide a central clearinghouse for the collection, interpretation, and 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
analysis of data on scienti˜c and engineering resources and to provide a 
source of information for policy formulation by other agencies of the Fed
-eral Governmentﬂ (National Science Foundation Act of 1950, as amended; 
42 U.S.C. 1862).
1 The National Science Foundation Act of 1950, as 
amended, in conjunction with the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended,
2 de
-˜nes the requirement to protect the con˜dentiality of respondent data. The 
NSF act pertains to SED because, although it is sponsored and funded by 
a consortium of federal agencies, NSF is the lead agency in the consortium, 
provides the bulk of funding, and is responsible for implementing the sur
-vey and disseminating the ˜ndings. The act provides the legal authority to 
collect the SED.Section 14(i) of the NSF act, as amended, provides that survey re
-sponses ﬁshall not be disclosed to the public unless the information has 
been transformed into statistical or abstract formats that do not allow for 
the identi˜cation of the supplier.ﬂ In addition to the restriction on pub
-lic disclosure of identi˜able statistical data, section 14(i) also speci˜cally 
prohibits public disclosure of the ﬁidentities of individuals, organizations, 
and institutions supplying informationﬂ in responses to NSF surveys (see 
Box 2-1).
The legislative imperatives pertaining to SED are re˚ected in the con
-˜dentiality pledge statements included with both the paper and the web-
based versions of the questionnaire. The con˜dentiality pledge statement 
on the survey forms assures potential respondents that their answers will 
not be disclosed to the public in identi˜able form and speci˜cally refers to 
the NSF act and the Privacy Act.
The reasons for NSF™s concern for the con˜dentiality of survey re
-sponses, Cohen stated, are based on these legal dictates, as well as on practi
-cal concerns that confront all statistical agencies that collect data from the 
public. In the face of increasing resistance to responding to statistical surveys 
generally, the assurance of protection of respondents™ answers from public 
disclosure is considered essential to the continued ability of federal agen
-cies to collect survey data. This is particularly the case with SED, for which 
the danger of revealing con˜dential information provided by individual 
respondents is perceived to be greater than in many other sample surveys 
because there is a very high likelihood that information about a member of a 
1Available at 
http://www4.law.cornell.edu/uscode/42/usc_sec_42_00001862----000-. 
html.2Available at 
http://www.usdoj.gov/oip/privstat.ht
m.Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTEXT FOR THE PROTECTION OF CONFIDENTIAL DATA
 9relatively small groupŠdoctoral graduates in a given yearŠwill be included 
in the published data.The data are most useful when they are tabulated by multiple classi˜ca
-tion variables within a single table (e.g., ˜eld of doctoral degree by gender 
of doctorate recipient for particular years). The tabulation of data for small 
groups creates the possibility of small counts in individual data cells. Tables 
reporting counts of doctorate recipients by race/ethnicity and by ˜eld of 
degree are particularly likely to yield data cells with small counts, because 
relatively few doctoral degrees may be awarded in a single year in a given 
˜eld or relatively few doctoral degrees may be awarded to members of a 
particular demographic group in a year. 
There is a perceived danger that doctorate recipients are especially 
vulnerable to statistical disclosure because a number of other sources of 
information about them could be linked to the published data that would 
permit their identi˜cation. For example, the University of Michigan™s data
-base of dissertation abstracts and other data sets on the web are susceptible 
to yielding information on the members of small groups of doctoral recipi
-ents. The ability to match records between SED and the other data sources 
is facilitated by the growth of data-mining techniques. Finally, the close-knit 
character of some academic ˜elds in which, as one workshop participant 
suggested, ﬁeverybody knows everybody,ﬂ simpli˜es the task of linking small 
cells in SED tables to the names of particular individuals. 
ADDITIONAL STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS FOR 
 DATA PROTECTION
Concern over the possibility of reidentifying the respondents in SED 
had existed for a long time. However, prior to 2006, suppression had not 
been applied to the counts of ˜ne ˜eld of doctoral degrees by race/ethnicity, 
gender, or citizenship. The immediate impetus for the action was the pub
-lication of implementation guidance for Title V of the E-Government Act: 
the Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act of 
2002. In his presentation to the workshop, Brian Harris-
Kojetin (Of˜ce of 
Management and Budget) described the purposes, issues, and requirements 
of CIPSEA and the reach of the implementation instructions.
As part of the E-Government Act, the con˜dential information protec
-tion legislation was designed to ˜ll long-standing gaps in the ability of the 
federal statistical agencies to prohibit disclosure of information in identi˜
-able form, control access to and uses made of statistical information, ensure 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
BOX 2-1 
 NSF Legislation Regarding 
 Public Disclosure of Information
(A)
 Information supplied to the Foundation or a contractor of the 
Foundation in survey forms, questionnaires, or similar instruments for 
purposes of section 
1862 (a)(5) or (6) of this title by an individual, an 
industrial or commercial organization, or an educational, academic, 
or other nonpro˜t institution when the institution has received a 
pledge of con˜dentiality from the Foundation, shall not be disclosed 
to the public unless the information has been transformed into sta
-tistical or abstract formats that do not allow for the identi˜cation of 
the supplier. 
(B) Information that has not been transformed into formats described 
in subparagraph (A) may be used only for statistical or research 
purposes. 
(C) The identities of individuals, organizations, and institutions sup
-plying information described in subparagraph (A) may not be dis
-closed to the public. 
(2) In support of functions authorized by section 
1862 (a)(5) or (6) of 
this title, the Foundation may designate, at its discretion, authorized 
persons, including employees of Federal, State, or local agencies 
or instrumentalities (including local educational agencies) and em
-ployees of private organizations, to have access, for statistical or 
research purposes only, to information collected pursuant to section 
1862 (a)(5) or (6) of this title that allows for the identi˜cation of the 
supplier. No such person mayŠ 
(A) publish information collected pursuant to section 
1862 (a)(5) or 
(6) of this title in such a manner that either an individual, an industrial 
or commercial organization, or an educational, academic, or other 
nonpro˜t institution that has received a pledge of con˜dentiality from 
the Foundation can be speci˜cally identi˜ed; 
(B) permit anyone other than individuals authorized by the Founda
-tion to examine data that allows for such identi˜cation relating to an 
individual, an industrial or commercial organization, or an academic, 
educational, or other nonpro˜t institution that has received a pledge 
of con˜dentiality from the Foundation; or 
(C)
 knowingly and willfully request or obtain any nondisclosable 
information described in paragraph (1) from the Foundation under 
false pretenses. 
(3)
 Violation of this subsection is punishable by a ˜ne of not more than 
$10,000, imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both. 
SOURCE: Section 14(i) of the NSF Act (42 U.S.C. 1873(i)), in con
-junction with the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended (
http://www.usdoj.
gov/oip/privstat.ht
m).that information is used exclusively for statistical purposes, and, by doing 
so, strengthen and foster public trust in pledges of con˜dentiality. Harris-
Kojetin described the bene˜ts of CIPSEA, including the application of uni
-form protection across agencies, coverage of all data collected for statistical 
purposes under a pledge of con˜dentiality, strong penalties for disclosure 
($250,000 ˜ne and/or 5 years in prison), and exemption from Freedom of 
Information Act requests. Under the authority of CIPSEA, the director of 
the Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB) coordinates and oversees 
the con˜dentiality and disclosure policies and promulgates rules and guid
-ance for implementing the act. The implementing guidance for CIPSEA 
was published in draft form in October 2006 (Of˜ce of Management 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTEXT FOR THE PROTECTION OF CONFIDENTIAL DATA
 11BOX 2-1 
 NSF Legislation Regarding 
 Public Disclosure of Information
(A)
 Information supplied to the Foundation or a contractor of the 
Foundation in survey forms, questionnaires, or similar instruments for 
purposes of section 
1862 (a)(5) or (6) of this title by an individual, an 
industrial or commercial organization, or an educational, academic, 
or other nonpro˜t institution when the institution has received a 
pledge of con˜dentiality from the Foundation, shall not be disclosed 
to the public unless the information has been transformed into sta
-tistical or abstract formats that do not allow for the identi˜cation of 
the supplier. 
(B) Information that has not been transformed into formats described 
in subparagraph (A) may be used only for statistical or research 
purposes. 
(C) The identities of individuals, organizations, and institutions sup
-plying information described in subparagraph (A) may not be dis
-closed to the public. 
(2) In support of functions authorized by section 
1862 (a)(5) or (6) of 
this title, the Foundation may designate, at its discretion, authorized 
persons, including employees of Federal, State, or local agencies 
or instrumentalities (including local educational agencies) and em
-ployees of private organizations, to have access, for statistical or 
research purposes only, to information collected pursuant to section 
1862 (a)(5) or (6) of this title that allows for the identi˜cation of the 
supplier. No such person mayŠ 
(A) publish information collected pursuant to section 
1862 (a)(5) or 
(6) of this title in such a manner that either an individual, an industrial 
or commercial organization, or an educational, academic, or other 
nonpro˜t institution that has received a pledge of con˜dentiality from 
the Foundation can be speci˜cally identi˜ed; 
(B) permit anyone other than individuals authorized by the Founda
-tion to examine data that allows for such identi˜cation relating to an 
individual, an industrial or commercial organization, or an academic, 
educational, or other nonpro˜t institution that has received a pledge 
of con˜dentiality from the Foundation; or 
(C)
 knowingly and willfully request or obtain any nondisclosable 
information described in paragraph (1) from the Foundation under 
false pretenses. 
(3)
 Violation of this subsection is punishable by a ˜ne of not more than 
$10,000, imprisonment for not more than 5 years, or both. 
SOURCE: Section 14(i) of the NSF Act (42 U.S.C. 1873(i)), in con
-junction with the Privacy Act of 1974, as amended (
http://www.usdoj.
gov/oip/privstat.ht
m).and Budget, 2006) and in ˜nal form in June 2007. This guidance de˜ned 
ﬁstatistical purpose,ﬂ identi˜ed statistical agencies covered by the act, and 
outlined CIPSEA requirements. 
It is important to de˜ne statistical purpose, because CIPSEA protection 
applies only to information acquired under a pledge of con˜dentiality for 
exclusively statistical purposes.
3 Statistical purpose includes the description, 
estimation, or analysis of characteristics of groups, without identifying the 
3This provision varies somewhat from the provisions in the National Science Founda
-tion Act of 1950 as amended, in that the NSF act applies to information collected for both 
statistical and research purposes.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
individuals or organizations that make up such groups; it also includes the 
methods and procedures to support these purposes. Likewise, CIPSEA 
applies throughout the federal government but grants statistical agencies 
special authority, which allows them to empower special sworn agents to 
analyze, collect, and process data protected under CIPSEA. Statistical agen
-cies are de˜ned as agencies or organizational units of the executive branch 
whose activities are predominately the collection, compilation, processing, 
or analysis of information for statistical purposes. OMB has determined 
that the Division of SRS of NSF is a statistical agency for the purposes of 
CIPSEA.According to Harris-
Kojetin, CIPSEA is prescriptive, in that it requires 
statistical agencies to inform respondents about con˜dentiality protection 
(using a pledge on the collection instrument) and the use of the informa
-tion, to collect and handle con˜dential information in ways that minimize 
the risk of disclosure, to ensure the information is used for only statistical 
purposes, and to review information to be disseminated to prevent identi˜
-able information from being reasonably inferred by either direct or indirect 
means. The guidelines do not go into the means that agencies should use 
to review and protect information. For that, the OMB guidance refers 
agencies to Statistical Policy Working Paper 22 (Of˜ce of Management 
and Budget, 2005).
FURTHER GUIDELINES FOR 
 STATISTICAL DATA PROTECTION
In addition to the legislation covering the federal statistical system and 
that pertaining speci˜cally to NSF, several other sources can be used as guid
-ance for federal agencies in resolving issues of con˜dentiality and access. 
These include Statistical Policy Working Paper 22 and the recently issued 
American Statistical Association statement, ﬁData Access and Personal Pri
-vacy: Appropriate Measures of Disclosure Control.ﬂ
4 Alvan 
Zarate, former con˜dentiality of˜cer for the National Center for 
Health Statistics (NCHS), described these sources and outlined principles 
traditionally used by federal statistical agencies to protect tabular data from 
disclosure. Although not directly supported by legislation, Working Paper 
22 has been cited in rules relating to the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act of 1996, the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act 
4Available at http://www.amstat.org/news/statementondataaccess.cfm.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTEXT FOR THE PROTECTION OF CONFIDENTIAL DATA
 13of 2009, and the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clini
-cal Health Act of 2009. Its purposes are straightforward: to detail existing 
methods of statistical disclosure limitation for tables and microdata ˜les; to 
provide recommendations and guidance for selection and use of appropriate 
techniques; to promote the development, sharing, and use of statistical dis
-closure limitation software; and to encourage research to develop improved 
methods.  In general, Working Paper 22 notes that disclosure protection tech
-niques are applied to data cells containing small counts of demographic 
variables because ﬁif a cell has only a few respondents and the characteristics 
are suf˜ciently distinctive, then it may be possible for a knowledgeable user 
to identify the individuals in the populationﬂ (Of˜ce of Management and 
Budget, 2005, p. 57). The most common disclosure limitation techniques 
applied to small cells are cell suppression, data aggregation, and data per
-turbation (i.e., ﬁadding noiseﬂ to data). These are some of the options that 
were considered by NSF in the process of coming to the current decision 
on disclosure limitation.
Zarate reported that in developing Working Paper 22, the Federal 
Committee on Statistical Methodology recommended creation of a group 
to communicate and share information on con˜dentiality, statistical disclo
-sure limitation, and restricted access. The Con˜dentiality and Data Access 
Committee consists of representatives of federal statistical agencies who 
deal with con˜dentiality, data access, and disclosure review techniques. 
It developed a checklist on disclosure potential that agencies can use to 
identify tabular data that are at risk of disclosure; the committee also shares 
information on emerging mechanisms for restricted access (see Chapter 4). 
The recommendations of Working Paper 22 are heeded in the federal sta
-tistical system as indications of good practices when it comes to making 
decisions on the use of data suppression or other techniques to protect the 
con˜dentiality of tabular data. A more recent source of information on good practices is the Ameri
-can Statistical Association™s statement, ﬁData Access and Personal Privacy: 
Appropriate Methods of Disclosure Control.ﬂ
5 This statement gives the 
association™s perspective on the assessment of the risk associated with data 
dissemination and an overview of the way in which statisticians can help 
limit that risk. The statement recognizes that tabular data are subject to risk 
because, ﬁalthough tables are intended to protect individual information by 
5Available at http://www.amstat.org/news/statementondataaccess.cfm.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
presenting grouped ˜gures, there are situations in which the size and/or the 
distribution of those groups can reveal more information about individuals 
. . . than had been publicly known.ﬂ The statement makes the case that the 
context of privacy protection has changed. The same powerful and sophis
-ticated electronic technologies that have made data readily accessible to the 
public ﬁpose a distinct threatŠin perception if not in realityŠto privacy, 
as well as a potential for in˚icting great harm on persons.ﬂ
Zarate shared several illustrations of the risk of disclosure and tech
-niques for overcoming those risks based on his experiences at NCHS. Like 
the NSF act of 1950, as amended, the Public Health Service Act of 1974 
contains language specifying that no identi˜able information may be used 
for any purpose other than for which it was provided, nor may be it released 
to any party not agreed to by the supplier (Section 308(d)). The protection 
of data at the agency engages a con˜dentiality of˜cer, a disclosure review 
board, and the data division director. As part of the review process, the 
agency uses a disclosure checklist, which contains a series of questions to 
determine the geographic detail, the presence of sensitive variables (such as 
age, race, occupation, income, and household type), and whether other da
-tabases contain similar data. It is recognized that risk of disclosure remains 
even if all possible protections are applied, so the rule is that protection is 
paramount. Data are released for research ﬁonly when the risk is judged to 
be extremely lowﬂ (National Center for Health Statistics, 2004, p. 14). 
In response to a question, 
Zarate stated that NCHS reviews its deci
-sions on risk of disclosure every 4 years or so because threats change as 
computational power and techniques evolve. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.153National Science Foundation Options, 
Decision, and Impact
This chapter addresses the issues and options that the National Sci
-ence Foundation (NSF) considered when it faced a decision about 
how best to balance protection for and access to information from 
the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED). It discusses the decision that the 
agency came to after its extensive outreach program. Using information 
provided by NSF in a paper prepared especially for this workshop (National 
Science Foundation, 2009), this chapter assesses the impact of the decision 
in terms of the ability to protect data and the capacity to make useful data 
available to data users.
 A BALANCING ACT
The objective of the NSF strategy for disclosure protection, according 
to Stephen Cohen, is to balance data utility and disclosure risk. As NSF 
tries to make the data more useful and accessible to data users, the risk of 
disclosure of con˜dential information also tends to increase (see Figure 
3-1). At the zero/zero point, there is no disclosure risk, nor is there any 
utility. Releasing all information creates an exceptionally high disclosure 
risk. Cohen submitted that the issue for the statistical agency is where to 
draw the line.For NSF, there is a tension between the usefulness of its published 
products and the pledge of con˜dentiality that is tied to a legislative man
-date. It is a balancing act for all of the NSF surveys that are collected under 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
FIGURE 3-1 Balancing data utility and disclosure risk.
SOURCE: Presentation of Stephen Cohen, SED Workshop, May 27, 2009. Adapted 
from Duncan, 
Keller-McNulty, and Stokes (2001).
a pledge of con˜dentiality, but it is even more complicated in the case of 
SED because of the nature of the data that are collected.
The survey collects a mixture of information on the education, socio
-economic characteristics, and plans of doctorate recipients. Some data are 
more sensitive than others. For example, some of the information collected 
would generally be considered public knowledge, such as the type and ˜eld 
of the doctoral recipient™s degree. This information is widely disclosed in 
university graduation programs, announcements, and publications. The 
information can also be readily gleaned from various databases of dis
-sertationsŠsuch as Pro
Quest and dissertations.comŠwhich identify the 
authors of dissertations, their institutions, and other possibly identifying 
information, such as the date of the dissertation.
Some of the information collected would be considered by many 
people to be very private and personal and thus sensitive. Such information 
includes birth year, citizenship status at graduation, country of birth and 
citizenship, disability status, graduate and undergraduate educational debt, 
postgraduation plans (e.g., work, postdoctorate or other study, training), 
sources of ˜nancial support during graduate school, and salary of next 
position. Because the individual responses are protected by NSF and the 
contracted collection organization, the National Opinion Research Center 
(NORC), the data are published only in tabular form at high levels of 
aggregation. 
There would be little concern over the protection of sensitive informa
-R01632, figure 3-1 revised, redraw
n as ve
ctorsDisclosure RiskData UtilityRisk-Utility Curv
e fo
rProposed DisclosureProtection StrategyProtecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION OPTIONS, DECISION, AND IMPACT
 17tion except for the fact that some statistical tables, which are included in an 
annual publication series, 
Doctorate Recipients from United States Universi
-ties: Summary Report
 (also known as the Interagency Summary Report), 
involve cross-tabulations of multiple variables and produce data cells with 
small counts. In addition, NORC has traditionally generated a number of 
additional standard tabulations of data when ordered by interested par
-ties. These ﬁon orderﬂ tabulations include the 
Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and 
Fine Field of Study
 Tables 
(called here the REG tables). The REG tables 
report national-level counts of doctorate recipients by ˜ne ˜eld of doc
-torate, gender, race/ethnicity, and citizenship. The survey contractor also 
has produced on-demand tabulations of the SED data customized to the 
requester™s research speci˜cations. These sets of tables have been released 
with data based on very small cell counts and were judged to be especially 
at risk of disclosure.
DECISION TO SUPPRESS CELLS IN TABULATIONS
The publication of new guidelines for the Con˜dential Information 
Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act by the Of˜ce of Management and 
Budget (2007) triggered a review by the staff of the Division of Science 
Resources Statistics (SRS) of the data protection across all of its surveys that 
collect con˜dential data. Based on its review, SRS concluded that, to protect 
the con˜dentiality of information provided by respondents to the SED and 
to apply a consistent policy across all SRS surveys, it was necessary to alter 
procedures for releasing data from the SED. Data suppression methods, 
which involve replacing data cells that are deemed sensitive to potential 
disclosure with a suppression symbol, had previously been used only spar
-ingly in the survey. At this time, data suppression was applied broadly to a 
large number of tables in the 2006 Interagency Summary Report and, for 
the ˜rst time, to the 2006 REG tables. In response to a question, Cohen 
stated that the decision to suppress the data was preemptive; that is, there 
had been no complaints about the old policy that resulted in publication of 
˜ne ˜eld cells, but the agency had received undocumented feedback from 
users of other NSF surveys that there were concerns about the potential for 
disclosure of con˜dential information.
The publication of the suppressed 2006 REG tables and 2006 Inter
-agency Summary Report generated a strong negative response from the 
SED data user community concerning diminished access to information 
about underrepresented minorities. As discussed in Chapter 4 of this sum
-Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
mary, users believe that the loss of this information would harm programs 
to increase minority participation in particular degree ˜elds. 
The community voiced frustration with SRS for implementing the 
additional con˜dentiality protections without ˜rst consulting with, or at 
least informing, the relevant stakeholder groups. These stakeholder groups 
include universities, government agencies, and associations that use SED 
race/ethnicity data for planning, preparing funding proposals, tracking 
progress, measuring impacts, ful˜lling speci˜c federal, state, and institu
-tional reporting requirements, and many other activities that have as their 
objective an increase in the representation of currently underrepresented 
minorities in science and engineering ˜elds.The reaction of NSF to the response of stakeholders was immediate, 
Cohen reported. NSF reissued the 2006 Interagency Summary Report 
and 2006 REG tables using its earlier level of con˜dentiality protection, 
acknowledging that the user community had not been noti˜ed or involved 
in discussions of changes in the release of the 2006 data. The agency also set 
about to explore alternative disclosure protection strategies that would max
-imize the reporting of REG data and simultaneously meet the requirements 
of protecting the con˜dentiality of information provided by respondents. 
At the same time, the agency initiated efforts to learn about the data 
needs and uses of the SED data user community. It undertook to sponsor 
three activities to solicit stakeholder feedback that would inform its efforts. 
The disclosure protection strategy options are discussed below. The initia
-tives to elicit stakeholder input are reported in Chapter 4.
DISCLOSURE LIMITATION OPTIONS
Cell suppression as a strategy to protect against disclosure of con˜
-dential information can be a complex and iterative process. For example, 
when cells that are considered to be sensitive to potential disclosure (based 
on counts that fall below a predetermined threshold) are suppressed, ad
-ditional cells may also be affected. They may be subject to something called 
ﬁcomplementary cell suppression,ﬂ a situation in which the values of the 
suppressed sensitive cells could still be calculated as a residual between the 
published values of other cells and the unchanged marginal totals in the 
table. In complementary suppression, nonsensitive cells also are suppressed 
in order to preclude the possibility of deriving the value of the sensitive 
cell.With regard to complementary suppression, Cohen referred to recent 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION OPTIONS, DECISION, AND IMPACT
 19work of Lawrence Cox, which was circulated at the workshop (Cox, 2008). 
Cox pointed out problems with the use of complementary cell suppression. 
In his view, ﬁsuppression sacri˜ces both con˜dential and noncon˜dential 
data, forcing potentially signi˜cant degradation in data quality and usabili
-ty.ﬂ These effects are often compounded because mathematical relationships 
induced by suppression tend to produce ﬁover-protected solutions.ﬂ 
Another disclosure limitation option that is sometimes used by statisti
-cal agencies is data perturbation, which involves adding positive and nega
-tive values drawn randomly from a probability distribution to microdata 
records, so that the sum of the ﬁnoiseﬂ equals zero (i.e., the positive and 
negative values cancel) and high-level aggregate totals are not affected. Con
-trolled rounding, in which the values of individual data cells in a statistical 
table are altered, again without affecting the marginal totals in the table, 
is another perturbation scheme. NSF did not consider data perturbation 
a viable option because of the interest of some SED data users in tracking 
small cells of race/ethnicity data; precision of the data in small cells is very 
important to these users. 
The more traditional solution for statistical agencies is to aggregate data 
cells along a data dimension until cell values become suf˜ciently large to 
make it very dif˜cult to identify the individuals whose data are presented 
in the cells. Indeed, Cohen reported that, on the basis of these consider
-ations, NSF determined that the data aggregation approach was the most 
promising. 
Cohen outlined three alternatives that were developed and tested by 
NSF to aggregate the SED data in the REG tables by their three major 
components: race/ethnicity categories, ˜ne ˜eld of degree, and year of 
degree award:
1.  
The ˜rst alternative would be to 
combine the racial/ethnic groups 
into a ﬁminoritiesﬂ total
. In this option, the degree counts for black, 
Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaska Native doctorate recipients 
would be lumped into a category called ﬁunderrepresented minori
-tiesﬂ and that total would be published for ˜ne ˜elds in which there 
were 25 or more degree recipients. This alternative would have the 
advantage of providing a consistent taxonomy of ˜elds over time, 
but it would mask data on individual minority groups. 
2.  
A second alternative would be to 
aggregate by racial/ethnic categories 
and ˜ne ˜eld of degree
, again establishing a minimum degree count 
of 25 or more in the year. This option would have the same limita
-Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
tion as the ˜rst option, but it could also result in the publication of 
fewer ˜ne ˜elds. 
3.  
A third alternative would be to 
aggregate across years by combining 
2, 3, or 
4 years together
. This option would permit publication of much 
more detail for racial/ethnic groups and by ˜ne ˜elds of degree, but 
it would aggregate the data over a number of years, eliminating the 
long series of annual observations and resulting in a gap period in 
which data could not be published while additional year(s) of data 
were being obtained.
NSF evaluated these alternatives against the objective of maximizing 
the level of detail reported on race/ethnicity/gender by ˜ne ˜eld of degree 
while still protecting personally identi˜able information provided by SED 
respondents. In the user input sessions reported in Chapter 4, all of these 
options were found to be wanting in some fashion. However, the option 
that would involve aggregation across years, thus preserving information 
about speci˜c minority groups and detailed ˜elds, was generally considered 
to be the least disruptive for the purposes to which the users put the data. 
The user groups also recommended that SRS explore aggregating ˜ne 
˜eld of degree using the Classi˜cation of Instructional Programs (CIP) 
taxonomy. The CIP is the of˜cial, general-purpose taxonomy of education 
programs maintained and periodically updated by the National Center for 
Education Statistics of the U.S. Department of Education. The recommen
-dation of aggregating across years was based upon the options presented by 
NSF at the user outreach meetings, which had not developed detailed CIP 
aggregation proposals at that time.
DATA PROTECTION STRATEGY
Mark Fiegener, SED survey manager, discussed the strategy that, after 
consideration of user feedback, SRS ˜nally adopted. The chosen option 
switches the focus of the disclosure protection strategy from suppression 
based on counts in individual cells to counts in domainsŠin this case, ˜eld 
of degree. The approach follows the principles used in releasing microdata 
sets for small geographic areas: data about small geographic areas are released 
if population totals
 (domain counts) are suf˜ciently large and, for individual 
data points that may have unusual or potentially unique characteristics in 
the geographic area, if additional criteria are met. The application of these 
principles to the REG tables for SED implies that it would be safe to pub
-Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION OPTIONS, DECISION, AND IMPACT
 21lish race/ethnicity and gender detail about a particular ˜eld of degree if the 
population of research doctorates in that ˜eld is suf˜ciently large.
As reported by Fiegener, the solution that considers domain counts 
was eventually adopted by NSF with the rationale that it would preserve 
the ability to identify the racial/ethnic groups that comprise the underrep
-resented minority population. The key would be to use aggregation rather 
than cell suppression methods to protect the con˜dentiality of respondent 
data. Aggregation would permit reporting of small counts and the display 
of data cells that contain fewer than 5 doctoral recipients by adopting rules 
that would minimize the risk of reidenti˜cation.
The key to this methodology, Fiegener went on, is to publish detail 
only when the population is large enough to preclude individual reidenti
-˜cation. ﬁLargeﬂ came to be de˜ned as ˜ne ˜elds of degree in which 
25 or 
more doctorates
 are awarded in a given year. For these ˜ne ˜elds, NSF will 
display counts of doctorate recipients (even counts of fewer than 5, includ
-ing zero) in all REG tables. Likewise, ˜elds of degree in which 
fewer than 
25 doctorates
 are awarded in a given year will not be displayed separately; they 
will be aggregated for that year in all REG tables with ﬁrelatedﬂ ˜ne ˜elds, 
so that degree counts in combined ˜elds are at least 25. 
The selection of a cutoff point of 25 was questioned by workshop 
participants. A justi˜cation for its selection was provided later in the work
-shop by Cohen, who stated that 25 was selected because the number of 
racial/ethnic categories published is 5, and NSF made the judgment call 
that 5 times the cell count would be a comfortable compromise between 
making the data useful and affording protection for the con˜dentiality of 
the data.In the afternoon session, Mary Frase, SRS deputy director, reported 
that slightly less than 4 percent of all degrees in 2006 were in ˜elds that had 
fewer than 25 degrees awarded. Although this accounted for about a quarter 
of all ˜elds, most of the small ˜elds were well below the 25 threshold. The 
small size of these ˜elds tends to minimize the adverse analytical impact of 
the data suppression policy that is being implemented.
This methodology may also introduce issues with small ˜elds that may 
meet, exceed, or fail to meet the cutoff of 25 on a year-to-year basis. NSF 
was encouraged, in the afternoon session, to conduct some research on pat
-terns of movement around the threshold by ˜elds based on past experiences. 
To limit the possibility of inadvertent disclosures based on the possibility of 
˜ne ˜elds that are near the threshold becoming subject to possible disclosure 
because they would meet or fail to meet the cutoff from year-to-year, NSF 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
plans to reassess the ˜ne ˜elds selected for aggregation on a 3-year cycle. 
The 3-year review would permit assessment of the risk of disclosure on an 
on-going basis and afford the opportunity to add new ˜elds and emerging 
˜elds on a scheduled basis.The actual aggregation of ˜ne ˜elds will be guided by the CIP tax
-onomy. In some cases, it is expected that CIP guidance may be equivocal, 
and NSF subject-area experts will then be consulted for recommendations 
about appropriate aggregation partner(s) for particular ˜ne ˜elds of degree. 
Aggregation choices based on NSF observations of special circumstances 
that cropped up when applying the methodology to 2006 data were codi˜ed 
into six ﬁaggregation rules.ﬂ The rules specify how below-threshold ˜elds 
will be aggregated under different circumstances (see Box 3-1).
In discussing the potential application of these aggregation rules, 
BOX 3-1 
 Aggregation Rules
Aggregation Rule 1
: When two or more below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds 
share a 4-digit Classi˜cation of Instructional Program (CIP) code,* 
aggregate the degree counts from these ˜ne ˜elds into one or more 
aggregated ˜elds that have above-threshold degree counts.
Aggregation Rule 2
: When a below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld does not 
share a 4-digit CIP code with any other below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld, but 
does share a 4-digit CIP with an above-threshold ˜ne ˜eld, aggregate 
the degree count from the below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld with an above-
threshold ˜ne ˜eld, and, if there are multiple possible aggregation 
candidates, aggregate with the above-threshold ˜eld that has the 
smallest degree count. 
Aggregation Rule 3
: When a single below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld does 
not share a 4-digit CIP code with any other below- or above-threshold 
˜ne ˜eld, aggregate the degree count from the below-threshold ˜ne 
˜eld with the appropriate ﬁother ˜eldsﬂ category within the same 
major ˜eld. 
Aggregation Rule 4
: When multiple below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds do not 
share 4-digit CIP codes with any other below- or above-threshold ˜ne 
˜elds, and the total of the degree counts exceeds the minimum count 
threshold, aggregate the degree counts from the below-threshold 
˜ne ˜elds together into a new ﬁcombined ˜eldsﬂ category within the 
same major ˜eld. 
Aggregation Rule 5
: When a below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld shares a 4-
digit CIP code with all other ˜ne ˜elds in its major ˜eld, the CIP code 
cannot determine the appropriate aggregation partner. In this case, 
advice from ˜eld experts will be sought to determine the best aggre
-gation partner(s) for the below-threshold ˜eld. If no aggregation part
-ners are deemed appropriate and there are multiple such ˜elds, the 
below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds will be aggregated into a new ﬁcombined 
˜eldsﬂ category if the total of degree counts rise above the threshold, 
as speci˜ed in Aggregation Rule 4, and will be aggregated into ﬁother 
˜eldsﬂ if there is a single such ˜eld or the combined degree counts of 
multiple ˜elds remain below-threshold, as in Rule 3. 
Aggregation Rule 6
: When an ﬁother ˜eldﬂ is below the minimum 
count threshold after all the other aggregation rules have been ap
-plied, aggregate the ﬁother ˜eldﬂ with the ﬁgeneral ˜eld,ﬂ if there is one. 
The degree counts in this ﬁgeneral-otherﬂ combined ˜eldŠor in a be
-low-threshold ﬁother ˜eldﬂ without an associated ﬁgeneral ˜eldﬂŠwill 
be displayed if the total degree count exceeds ˜ve.
*See text for de˜nition of CIP codes.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION OPTIONS, DECISION, AND IMPACT
 23BOX 3-1 
 Aggregation Rules
Aggregation Rule 1
: When two or more below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds 
share a 4-digit Classi˜cation of Instructional Program (CIP) code,* 
aggregate the degree counts from these ˜ne ˜elds into one or more 
aggregated ˜elds that have above-threshold degree counts.
Aggregation Rule 2
: When a below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld does not 
share a 4-digit CIP code with any other below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld, but 
does share a 4-digit CIP with an above-threshold ˜ne ˜eld, aggregate 
the degree count from the below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld with an above-
threshold ˜ne ˜eld, and, if there are multiple possible aggregation 
candidates, aggregate with the above-threshold ˜eld that has the 
smallest degree count. 
Aggregation Rule 3
: When a single below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld does 
not share a 4-digit CIP code with any other below- or above-threshold 
˜ne ˜eld, aggregate the degree count from the below-threshold ˜ne 
˜eld with the appropriate ﬁother ˜eldsﬂ category within the same 
major ˜eld. 
Aggregation Rule 4
: When multiple below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds do not 
share 4-digit CIP codes with any other below- or above-threshold ˜ne 
˜elds, and the total of the degree counts exceeds the minimum count 
threshold, aggregate the degree counts from the below-threshold 
˜ne ˜elds together into a new ﬁcombined ˜eldsﬂ category within the 
same major ˜eld. 
Aggregation Rule 5
: When a below-threshold ˜ne ˜eld shares a 4-
digit CIP code with all other ˜ne ˜elds in its major ˜eld, the CIP code 
cannot determine the appropriate aggregation partner. In this case, 
advice from ˜eld experts will be sought to determine the best aggre
-gation partner(s) for the below-threshold ˜eld. If no aggregation part
-ners are deemed appropriate and there are multiple such ˜elds, the 
below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds will be aggregated into a new ﬁcombined 
˜eldsﬂ category if the total of degree counts rise above the threshold, 
as speci˜ed in Aggregation Rule 4, and will be aggregated into ﬁother 
˜eldsﬂ if there is a single such ˜eld or the combined degree counts of 
multiple ˜elds remain below-threshold, as in Rule 3. 
Aggregation Rule 6
: When an ﬁother ˜eldﬂ is below the minimum 
count threshold after all the other aggregation rules have been ap
-plied, aggregate the ﬁother ˜eldﬂ with the ﬁgeneral ˜eld,ﬂ if there is one. 
The degree counts in this ﬁgeneral-otherﬂ combined ˜eldŠor in a be
-low-threshold ﬁother ˜eldﬂ without an associated ﬁgeneral ˜eldﬂŠwill 
be displayed if the total degree count exceeds ˜ve.
*See text for de˜nition of CIP codes.
Fiegener mentioned several illustrative tabulations to show the impact of 
applying the various rules. An example was given applying Aggregation 
Rule #1: When two or more below-threshold ˜ne ˜elds share a 4-digit CIP 
code, aggregate the degree counts from these ˜ne ˜elds into one or more 
aggregated ˜elds that have above-threshold degree counts in Table 1a of the 
SED published tables for 2006. In the example, NSF could combine forest 
sciences and biology, forestry and related sciences, and wood science and 
pulp/paper technology ˜ne ˜elds (the shaded items shown in Table 3-1) 
into a combined ˜eld based on the shared CIP code (0305), forestry and 
other related science. This CIP ˜eld would yield the minimum count of 25 
doctorates and would be deemed to be publishable. In response to a question, Fiegener stated that NSF plans to re-compute 
and reconsider the aggregations anew each year. For example, if there were 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
an explosion in Ph.D.s in a ˜ne ˜eld in a year following a year in which 
there were too few to warrant separate publication, the year in which the 
25 threshold was met would be published. When ˜elds decline, the ˜elds 
would become susceptible to aggregation into higher level CIP ˜elds. 
Over time, Fiegener believes that NSF will gain experience and learn 
to present the data better. For example, for cases in which the CIP does not 
lead to a clear aggregation decision, NSF would call on internal experts in 
the various ˜elds of science to advise on appropriate aggregations, thus serv
-ing as a further mechanism for rationalizing the decisions. It is expected that 
in-house subject-matter experts can provide unbiased advice on aggregation 
decisions. Over time, the decisions based on this advice could be codi˜ed, 
turned into metadata, and used as the basis for future decisions.
TABLE 3-1
 Application of the CIP Aggregation Rule to Agricultural 
 Fields
Research Doctorates Awarded to U.S. Citizens and Permanent Residents, By 
 Race/Ethnicity, Gender, & Fine Field of Study: 1997-2006
Total, U.S. Citizens and Permanent Residents
1997199819992000200120022003200420052006CIP CodeAgricultural sciences/natural resources
700676635621566531607610599620 Forest engineering
4102011nanana Forest sciences & biology
191371417101222151903.05 Forest/resources management
1518137841018252703.05 Forestry & related science, other
3141293432322616151203.05 Horticultural science
2530252317242224182501.11 Natural resources/conservation
1216181320223130434103.01 Plant pathology/phytopathology
3228252927262724312901.11 Poultry science
522634397601.09 Plant sciences, other
1214141912101220172001.11 Soil chemistry/microbiology
2112181914191711101401.12 Soil sciences, other
2743362824242426232301.12 Wildlife/range management
4145354431303935313901.11  
Wood science & pulp/paper technology
14109276678403.05 Agriculture general
346512215401.00 Agricultural sciences, other15191917171181661001.99NOTE: CIP = Classi˜cation of Instructional Programs; see text for explanation of 
shaded text; and na = doctorate degree not offered in this ˜eld in this year.
SOURCE: National Science Foundation/National Institutes of Health/National
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION OPTIONS, DECISION, AND IMPACT
 25TABLE 3-1
 Application of the CIP Aggregation Rule to Agricultural 
 Fields
Research Doctorates Awarded to U.S. Citizens and Permanent Residents, By 
 Race/Ethnicity, Gender, & Fine Field of Study: 1997-2006
Total, U.S. Citizens and Permanent Residents
1997199819992000200120022003200420052006CIP CodeAgricultural sciences/natural resources
700676635621566531607610599620 Forest engineering
4102011nanana Forest sciences & biology
191371417101222151903.05 Forest/resources management
1518137841018252703.05 Forestry & related science, other
3141293432322616151203.05 Horticultural science
2530252317242224182501.11 Natural resources/conservation
1216181320223130434103.01 Plant pathology/phytopathology
3228252927262724312901.11 Poultry science
522634397601.09 Plant sciences, other
1214141912101220172001.11 Soil chemistry/microbiology
2112181914191711101401.12 Soil sciences, other
2743362824242426232301.12 Wildlife/range management
4145354431303935313901.11  
Wood science & pulp/paper technology
14109276678403.05 Agriculture general
346512215401.00 Agricultural sciences, other15191917171181661001.99NOTE: CIP = Classi˜cation of Instructional Programs; see text for explanation of 
shaded text; and na = doctorate degree not offered in this ˜eld in this year.
SOURCE: National Science Foundation/National Institutes of Health/National
 Fiegener further reported that NSF is still seeking outside input on 
what to do about ˜elds in which the number of degrees could meet or be 
above the publication threshold but that would consist of degrees granted 
by a very small number of institutions. This would increase the risk of re
-identi˜cation of degree recipients because they came from a limited number 
of institutions. In 2006, there were 14 ˜elds in which 25 or more doctorates 
were awarded by fewer than 20 institutions. In fact, in that same year, there 
was one ˜eld of studyŠart educationŠin which 11 or fewer institutions 
offered doctorate degrees; 9 of the 25 art education doctoral degrees were 
awarded by just one institution. In these special cases, NSF plans to provide 
detailed published notes regarding the aggregation decisions to inform data 
users.Endowment for the Humanities/U.S. Department of Education/U.S. Department 
of Agriculture/National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Survey of Earned 
Doctorates, 2006.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
The issue of volatility in the availability of data series was also discussed. 
The output of doctorate degrees in some ˜elds varies widely by year, so in 
one year the number may meet the threshold for publication and in the 
next may fail to meet it. Again, to assist users, NSF plans to publish detailed 
notes outlining the reason for the elimination of data series. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274User Requirements 
The outreach program, which the National Science Foundation 
(NSF) pursued after retracting its decision to suppress some data 
from the 2006 Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED), consisted of 
two major efforts: a web-based survey and a series of outreach meetings.  At 
the conclusion of the outreach program, the Division of Science Resources 
Statistics (SRS) summarized the ˜ndings and considered them in selecting 
an approach to protecting con˜dentiality in the survey in the future.
WEB-BASED SURVEY
Stephen Cohen reported on the SRS collaboration with the SED 
contractor to develop and implement a brief web survey to collect infor
-mation from known users of the 
Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and Fine Field of 
Study
 Tables 
(called here the REG tables) and the 
Doctorate Recipients from 
United States Universities: Summary Report
 (also known as the Interagency 
Summary Report). The major purpose of the web survey was to gather in
-formation from these data users about their uses of the SED data and their 
preferences for disclosure protection alternatives. 
The sample for the web survey consisted of three types of data providers 
and users: (1) deans of institutional units that administer the survey (n = 
543), (2) data users who asked to receive the REG tables annually (n = 31), 
and (3) individuals who requested the 2006 REG tables via the SRS website 
between June and September 2008 (n = 297). The survey focused on the 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
following information: frequency of SED data use; whether SED data were 
used to ful˜ll speci˜c federal, state, or institutional reporting requirements; 
whether users aggregate or average data across ˜elds of study, racial/ethnic 
categories, or year (and their preferences for these types of aggregation); and 
uses of other SED reports. NSF received responses from 373 (43 percent) 
of the 871 sample units.1  The major ˜ndings of the web-based survey were that most respondents 
(81 percent) use the Interagency Summary Report, half are REG tables us
-ers, and 25 percent are users of other SED data products. Although REG 
tables users and Interagency Summary Report users examine race/ethnicity/
gender data across the range of degree ˜elds, over 70 percent said they focus 
more on the degree counts of women and underrepresented minorities.  
 There is a core of long-term users of these data; nearly 30 percent of 
respondents stated that they have been using SED data products for more 
than 10 years. They use SED data for a variety of purposes; ful˜lling state, 
federal, or institutional requirements is an important, but not the domi
-nant, reason for using SED data. Approximately 30 percent of respondents 
aggregate SED data (across ˜elds of degree or across years) for some report
-ing purposes, often for completing reports to be provided to various of˜ces 
in NSF itself. Not surprisingly, about two-thirds of respondents prefer the 
option of a 2-year aggregation of SED data to a 3- or 4-year aggregation for 
disclosure protection (Simko and Dominguez, 2008). 
DATA USER OUTREACH MEETINGS
Shirley McBay, president of the 
Quality Education for Minorities 
(QEM) Network, reported on her organization™s project to organize, 
schedule, and conduct eight outreach meetings with representatives of mi
-nority-serving doctoral degree-granting institutions, leading institutional 
producers of doctoral degrees to minority recipients, and science, technol
-ogy, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professional organizations. The 
meetings took place between mid-October and early December 2008 in 
geographically dispersed locations in order to reach a range of institutions 
and associations. A sample of job titles of the institutional participants in
-cludes assistant vice chancellor, associate vice provost for academic affairs, 
associate vice president for research, dean, and director of institutional 
research. Job titles of participants from associations include president, ex
-1NSF did not present ˜ndings for the three groups of respondents separately. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USER REQUIREMENTS
 29ecutive director, research manager, director of publications/journals, and 
principal research analyst.
The meetings were designed to provide opportunities for participants 
to learn about SED con˜dentiality and privacy requirements, describe 
their speci˜c SED data uses and needs, and give feedback to SRS about 
the disclosure protection alternatives. The small (focus) group format of 
the meetings enabled participants to become informed about the details of 
and rationale for the alternative approaches, ask clarifying questions, and 
leverage the insights of fellow participants. As a result, in comparison to the 
web survey, the outreach meetings provided SRS with more comprehensive 
information about the impacts of the alternatives on the data uses and needs 
of these SED data users, as well as a deeper understanding of their prefer
-ences for the particular attributes of the different alternatives, albeit from a 
smaller group of respondents.
The outreach meetings followed a common agenda. 
QEM staff led 
introductions, reviewed the meeting agenda, and described the background 
materials prepared for all participants. SRS staff (at least two attended every 
meeting) described the mission and data resources of the SRS division, 
the broader issues of con˜dentiality/privacy and data access (including the 
relevant legislation and Of˜ce of Management and Budget guidelines), and 
the most common methods of protecting against the statistical disclosure 
of con˜dential information. SRS then presented three alternative disclosure 
protection approaches, ˜elded questions, and received initial feedback. 
Summarizing the lessons learned in these outreach meetings, McBay listed 
the ways that users say they have been using the SED data (see Box 4-1).
McBay pointed out that one of the practical concerns voiced by the 
outreach meeting participants was that the loss of data on speci˜c minority 
groups by ˜eld would negatively affect the programs to increase the partici
-pation of minorities in the ˜elds. For example, the observation was made 
that American Indians would be specially impacted by this suppression 
because their numbers are usually smaller than those of other underrepre
-sented minority groups. This is such a small community that, in fact, all 
members know the graduates by ˜eld, and they actively seek to put forward 
these doctorate awardees as role models.
Some groups use the data to follow trends in awards to minorities by 
˜eld and to make comparisons with peer institutions.  Some of this infor
-mation is needed to prepare proposals to other parts of NSF to support 
programs for enhancing minority doctorate opportunities. Accreditation 
agencies often require information that compares the institution with peers 
and the size of the pool from which its student population is drawn. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
BOX 4-1
  How SED Data Are Used by Participating Institutions 
and Organizations
Ł Making comparisons with other institutions/organizations
Ł Preparing proposals
Ł Policy making
Ł Measuring accomplishments
Ł  
Serving as a resourceŠusing data to develop action plans 
for diversity and faculty recruitment
Ł  
ReportingŠusing data to support reports to funding sources 
and accrediting bodiesŁ  
Forming collaborationsŠto help lay the foundation for col
-laborations to broaden science, technology, engineering, 
and mathematics (STEM) participation
Ł  
Budget planningŠto justify long- and short-term budget 
plansŁ Being aware of the existence of potential role models
Ł  
PublishingŠto inform the public as well as the SED user 
community of the status of STEM Ph.D. production for un
-derrepresented minorities
Ł  
Developing programsŠto establish baselines for developing 
new STEM-focused doctoral programs
Ł  
Implementing programsŠsuch as tracking students™ com
-pletion rates
Ł  
Identifying top producers of STEM Ph.D.s to underrepre
-sented minoritiesŠusing data to identify best practices and 
to recognize top STEM departments
Ł  
Responding to data requests in a timely and informed 
mannerSOURCE: Workshop presentation by Shirley McBay.
Later in each meeting, participants described their uses of SED data 
and the impacts of data suppression, assessed the utility of the alternative 
disclosure protection approaches for their particular data uses, and ex
-pressed their preferences. New approaches raised by participants were also 
discussed (Quality Education for Minorities Network, 2009).
Finally, McBay summarized the preferences of the outreach meeting 
attendees for NSF to:Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USER REQUIREMENTS
 31Ł  
Obtain external advice on the interpretation of the con˜dentiality 
pledge and on ways to modify it to accommodate the reporting of 
small cells by race/ethnicity, gender, and citizenship. 
Ł  
Develop and discuss an action plan regarding data suppression 
with representatives of the other federal agency sponsors of the 
SED reportŠthe National Institutes of Health, the National Aero
-nautics and Space Administration, the National Endowment for 
the Humanities, the U.S. Department of Education, and the U.S. 
Department of AgricultureŠand, at NSF, the Social, Behavioral 
and Economic Directorate™s Advisory Committee, the SRS Human 
Resources Experts Panel, the Committee on Equal Opportunities in 
Science and Engineering
, and senior staff/program of˜cers in other 
NSF directorates responsible for speci˜c initiatives for broadening 
participation. 
Ł  
In cases in which data on a racial/ethnic group would be lost in the 
aggregation, include ﬁn < 3ﬂ in the table cell to indicate that the 
actual number in the cell ranges from zero (0) to two (2).  
Ł  
Aggregate the REG data to broad degree ˜elds using the Classi˜ca
-tion of Instructional Programs (CIP) codes, which would support 
the accurate tracking, assessment, and reporting of ˜elds of study 
and program completion activity (e.g., biological and biomedical 
sciences; computer and information sciences; engineering; math
-ematics and statistics; physical sciences; and psychology). 
Ł  
Document what REG data are lost at various threshold levels. 
Ensure that summary data tables include data on U.S. citizens and 
permanent residents to get a more accurate picture of the complete 
pool of STEM doctoral degree recipients in the United States, and 
revisit the policy of placing respondents who indicate more than one 
race in the ﬁotherﬂ category (in conjunction with the implementa
-tion of the new standards for reporting race and ethnicity as directed 
by the Of˜ce of Management and Budget, which require separate 
reporting of people who indicate more than one race).
2Ł  
Investigate and report on the impact of small data cell suppression 
on the SRS WebCASPAR (Integrated Science and Engineering 
Resources Data System) databaseŠa system that contains informa
-2See http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/assets/information_and_regulatory_affairs/
re_guidance2000update.pdf. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
tion about academic science and engineering resources and is newly 
available on the web.
Ł  
Develop a strategy to ensure that information about these potential 
changes is broadly communicated. 
Ł  
Modify the SRS licensing process to make it easier and timelier for 
individuals to access unpublished restricted data and review the 
list of individuals/groups with these licenses to determine if special 
steps/outreach efforts are needed to ensure greater diversity among 
those with licenses. Ł  
Continue to pursue development of a data enclave that will make 
STEM data easily accessible to data users. Ł  
Take steps to ensure that signi˜cant racial/ethnic diversity exists 
among the leaders, conveners, and participants in data workshops 
conducted with SRS support.
CONCLUSIONS 
Cohen referred to the NSF decision paper to summarize the preferences 
gleaned from analysis of the web-based survey and the outreach meetings 
(National Science Foundation, 2009):
Ł  
Report small counts of doctorate recipients
. In general, data users 
strongly prefer aggregation to data suppression as a method to pro
-tect the con˜dentiality of individually identi˜able data. They want 
data cells containing small counts (including zero) to be displayed. 
Ł  
Disaggregate racial/ethnic categories
. Data users strongly prefer that 
racial/ethnic categories be reported separately and not aggregated 
into a combined minorities category. Similarly, data users prefer 
that SRS report the multirace data separately, in its own (new) 
category, instead of combining that data in the Other-Unknown 
race/ethnicity category. 
Ł  
Minimize aggregation.
 Although users prefer aggregation over sup
-pression, they prefer methods that result in less data aggregation. 
 -  
If years are aggregated, data users prefer a 2-year aggregation over 
a 3- or 4-year one. However, they prefer no aggregation of years 
and having REG data reported for single years.
 -  
Most data users prefer that more ˜ne ˜elds of degree be displayed 
as single ˜elds rather than be aggregated into combined ˜elds.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.USER REQUIREMENTS
 33Ł   
Aggregate ˜elds in a meaningful way
. If ˜ne ˜elds are aggregated, the 
CIP taxonomy could be used to inform the aggregation. Institu
-tions are familiar with CIP codes and report data to the Depart
-ment of Education using them. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.345Ensuring Access and Con˜dentiality
The National Science Foundation (NSF) has largely completed its 
review of the options for reducing disclosure risk from the tabular 
data in the 
Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and Fine Field of Study Tables 
(called here the REG tables) of the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) and 
has announced its design decision for moving forward for the next publica
-tion round. Issues of con˜dentiality protection and data access, however, 
are ongoing and require continual review, as capabilities for both protec
-tion and intrusion in published tabulations are enhanced over time. This 
chapter summarizes information from the workshop on emerging models 
for ensuring access and con˜dentiality and developments in risk manage
-ment that can help guide thinking about how to improve both access and 
protection in the future. 
EMERGING METHODS FOR ACCESS AND CONFIDENTIALITY
As mentioned in Chapter 2, the Con˜dentiality and Data Access Com
-mittee of the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology has taken on 
most of the responsibility for tracking, sharing, and documenting work on 
emerging methods for providing access to statistical data while limiting the 
risk of disclosure of con˜dential information in the federal government. At 
the workshop, Jacob BournazianŠthe con˜dentiality of˜cer of the U.S. 
Department of Energy™s Energy Information Administration, the chair of 
the Con˜dentiality and Data Access Committee during 2001Œ2003, and 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENSURING ACCESS
 AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
35the lead author of the revised version of Working Paper 22Šprovided an 
assessment of the current status of research and development on methods 
to provide access and limit disclosure risk in the federal government. These 
emerging models include research data centers (RDCs), which permit 
onsite use of con˜dential ˜les in a closely delimited area with specialized 
equipment and extreme security; systems of remote access over secure elec
-tronic lines to dedicated computers; fellowships and postdoctoral programs, 
in which researchers can be treated as agency employees, permitting a less 
restrictive form of access; and use of con˜dential data offsite but under 
highly restricted conditions, as spelled out in a legally binding agreement, 
such as a license. The emerging role of public query systems for accessing 
tabular and microdata was also discussed.
Bournazian began by stating his overall assessment that the data aggre
-gation approach selected by NSF is compatible with both user needs and 
future growth in accessing data. However, he cautioned that any disclosure 
limitation approach adopted today must be designed with public database 
query systems in mind, and that NSF may need to develop a restricted ac
-cess model to complement the application of the data aggregation approach 
for tabular data.The issues surrounding the application of different disclosure limita
-tion methods are appropriately considered at the design stage, rather than 
at the back end of the system, and the approach that ultimately gets chosen 
may have rami˜cations on future data release strategies, he observed. To 
the extent that some users are not satis˜ed with the access afforded in the 
scheme selected to protect the data, NSF may need offer to restricted access 
to the microdata. 
Risk Assessment
The selection of the appropriate disclosure limitation methods, 
Bournazian suggested, should be based on the results of a formal risk assess
-ment.1 The information that could be disclosed by the table design using 
prior releases is the appropriate basis for the assessment. It is important for 
NSF to look at the risk of reidenti˜cation of individuals in small cell counts 
by matching ˜les to the tabular data. If there are only a few identi˜ed disclo
-1In this report, risk is de˜ned as the likelihood that a disclosure will occur, and a risk 
assessment is the calculation of the probability that an identity could be associated with a 
data item.Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
sure risks, then the hierarchical structure of the ˜eld of study variable used as 
the identi˜er can be collapsed, using a scheme that follows the Classi˜cation 
of Instructional Programs (CIP) taxonomy, as already decided by NSF. If 
there are a large number of disclosure risks, the branches of the hierarchical 
structure should be removed or collapsed.
When making the risk assessment, he continued, an important con
-sideration is the unique nature of the information in the SED ˜les. There 
is a high likelihood of knowing whether or not a speci˜c person is in the 
survey. Indeed, with a 92 percent response rate, the likelihood is virtually as
-sured. For this reason, it is essential to consider all ˜les in the public domain 
to which an intruder could potentially match a small cell, including the 
University of Michigan dissertation ˜les by year, search engines, individual 
searches, mailing lists, public records such as state driver™s license ˜les, and 
similar public and proprietary sources. 
The results of this risk assessment will assist NSF in deciding on the 
best means to protect the tabular and public-use ˜les. 
Accessing Con˜dential Data
In addition to tabular aggregation, Bournazian observed that a means 
for NSF to satisfy the twin concerns of data access and con˜dentiality is to 
make data ˜les available under highly controlled conditions. Recently, dis
-closure protection research and innovations in computing technology have 
signi˜cantly increased the range and depth of access to materials previously 
not released or available only to very few users. He named the four options 
that have emerged across the federal statistical agencies that afford increased 
access and protection: (1) licensing, (2) RDCs, (3) remote access through 
data enclaves, and (4) remote access through online query systems. 
Licensing
Licensing is already an option offered to users by NSF to institutions. 
Under licensing arrangements, researchers in institutions obtain access to 
restricted data by signing an agreement or license pertaining to the institu
-tion. Such agreements may be cumbersome: they require a demonstrated 
need for sensitive data; authorization for all users at the requesting institu
-tion; signature by a senior of˜cial and key staff; a data security plan; agree
-ment by researchers not to identify individual research subjects or to link 
data received with other microdata ˜les; and review of all statistical output 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENSURING ACCESS
 AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
37before publication. They are for a speci˜ed period of time, with the stipula
-tion that data ˜les must be returned or destroyed. Some licensors require 
fees or approval by an institutional review board (or both). However, licens
-ing has not been very effective for the SED data because very few licenses 
have been sought or awarded for data from this survey.
Research Data Centers
RDCs are a relatively expensive option for a statistical agency and the 
data users that have to pay for the access. The access through an RDC is 
usually at the of˜ces of the agency that holds the data or at a remote site 
under the control of the RDC, under highly restricted conditions. The es
-sential characteristics of these centers are that a research proposal must be 
submitted; a formal agreement covers the research and analysis to be done, 
the data to be used, and the types of output; data ˜les must be stripped of 
personal identi˜ers; and data processing equipment must be dedicated to 
the restricted use. The data holder usually conducts a thorough disclosure 
review of the output, and all materials removed from the site are inspected. 
Adherence to these strictures is ensured by the physical presence of and 
oversight by agency staff.
Remote Access and Online Query Systems
A growing number of government agencies have been developing 
remote access systems and online query systems that combine a database 
system with a spreadsheet program to allow users to request tabulations 
and correlation matrices from restricted microdata ˜les. To avoid the risk 
of disclosure, the data produced are categorical, all counts are weighted, and 
estimates are produced only for cells with at least 30 respondents. Some 
agencies manage the system through research data centers, and others, such 
as the National Institute of Standards and Technology and the U.S. Depart
-ment of Agriculture, use the secure facilities of third parties, one such being 
the National Opinion Research Center (NORC) data enclave.
2Like the RDC option, remote access is governed by procedures to 
2The NORC data enclave is a service that provides a con˜dential, protected envi
-ronment in which authorized researchers can access sensitive microdata remotely. It is 
designed primarily to disseminate sensitive microdata that have not been fully deidenti
-˜ed for public use (see http://www.norc.org/DataEnclave/).
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
evaluate and approve proposals, grant and monitor access, ˜lter data queries 
through a set of primary disclosure rules, and generate tabular presenta
-tions of the results of accessing the records (never the records themselves). 
To illustrate the state of the art in remote access and online query systems, 
Bournazian described the systems of three federal statistical agencies:
1.  
The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) has developed 
six online public query systems for releasing aggregate statistics. 
NCHS also provides remote access to restricted microdata through 
a system that allows authorized users (those who have submitted a 
research plan for preapproval) to submit an analysis program, the 
speci˜c query, and information on the purpose of the query. NCHS 
then sends back a dummy data set to allow the user to make sure 
the program is working. If so, the user returns the program, which 
is run by NCHS against the database, and only the results that have 
been submitted to disclosure review by the agency are returned to 
the user.
2.  
The National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) system per
-mits authorized users to go to the agency website, obtain authoriza
-tion by completing an online, ﬁone clickﬂ agreement, submit queries 
to the database that contains the con˜dential data, and get responses 
that are sanitized to ensure that there is no inadvertent release of 
con˜dential data.3.  
The National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS) uses the 
Quick
-Stats system. It combines an RDC-type center in 40 ˜eld of˜ces 
around the country with online queries using a virtual private net
-work. Access is limited to authorized users, and the results of queries 
are inspected by ˜eld of˜ce staff to ensure no release of con˜dential 
data. When the request is complicated, requiring interface with the 
database, it is also possible to purchase special tabulations at a cost of 
$500 per tabulation or $500 per day. The Economic Research Ser
-vice in conjunction with the National Agricultural Statistics Service 
also developed a system for users to generate customized data tables 
by accessing microdata from the Agricultural Resource Management 
Survey (ARMS) Program. In the ARMS system, disclosure limita
-tion has already been applied to the microdata. 
 Like these systems for accessing microdata, the use of online query 
systems for releasing tabular data has been growing in federal statistical 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENSURING ACCESS
 AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
39agencies. The main reasons for this growth, Bournazian suggested, is that 
these systems avoid hard-copy publication costs, allow customized table de
-signs, and preserve intelligence on the most popular queries and reports in 
ways that can be used by agencies to further improve access over time. The 
agencies that have led in the development of this capability are NCES, the 
Census Bureau, NASS, the Energy Information Administration, NCHS, 
and the Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
Bournazian called the online statistical database query systems the next 
step in the evolution of the release of statistical data by national statistical 
of˜ces. He postulated that an online query system would permit NSF to 
control the data on race/ethnicity and gender from SED that are accessible 
without suppressing values. An online system addresses disclosure risk in 
advance, because risk has already been factored into the rules that govern 
the availability of data to the user, ensuring that no tabulation available to 
the user represents a disclosure.
In the discussion period that followed Bournazian™s presentation, Lynda 
Carlson, director of the NSF Science Resources Statistics Division, reported 
that NSF is now considering a data enclave arrangement for accessing SED 
and other science and engineering statistical series, as well as an online query 
system. The agency intends to test the NORC enclave and is considering 
an online query system developed by Space Time Research. These capabili
-ties are being developed in a manner that will ensure that the environment 
is controlled to prevent inadvertent disclosure of con˜dential data. The 
agency is also mindful of the cost of the system. Mark Schneider of the American Institutes for Research and former 
director of NCES expressed concern about data loss in an online query 
system in which the raw values have been suppressed. This is especially 
troublesome when the data inquiry is designed to extract data from the 
database to feed into a model. Missing values will invalidate the model 
run, thus limiting the kind of statistical and trend analysis that the inquiry 
was designed to yield. For this reason, NCES selected, as its primary access 
option, a restricted access model (licensing) rather than an online query 
system for its users. However, NCES continues to support an online 
system, the Data Access System (DAS). DAS is a website that provides 
public access to education survey data collected by the U.S. Department 
of Education as well as to analytic reports about education policy issues. 
On this website, users can create their analysis tables and covariance analy
-ses using the DAS application, view and download predesigned analysis 
tables and the DAS programming ˜les used to create them, and view the 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
highlights of report ˜ndings, with ˜gures and tables, for various topics 
written by researchers for NCES.
3Bournazian pointed out that the DAS system had limited value for 
NSF because it is designed for sample-based data ˜les, whereas the SED 
data are nearly a census, so the issues over disclosure are of greater concern. 
In his view, a targeted online query system is most suitable for NSF.
ISSUES IN DISCLOSURE RISK FOR TABULAR DATA
According to the next presenter, Jerome Reiter of Duke University, 
when assessing disclosure risk, it is important to ˜rst distinguish between 
the types of disclosure. He indicated that there are two main types of dis
-closure risk: (1) identi˜cation disclosure, in which by matching a record in 
released data it is possible to learn that someone participated in the study, 
and (2) attribute disclosure, in which records could yield the value of a 
sensitive variable for an individual being targeted. 
He contends that it is important to make the distinction between iden
-ti˜cation disclosure and attribute disclosure in the context of SED tabular 
data. Understanding of these types of disclosure will assist in thinking about 
the release strategy.
One measure of identi˜cation disclosure risk is the number of popu
-lation ﬁuniques,ﬂ that is, a data record that is unique in the population. 
This differs from sample uniqueness because being a sample unique is not 
necessarily revealing. If there are many people in the population with the 
same characteristics as the person in the sample, there is not necessarily a 
risk of disclosure. But if there are few persons in the population with the 
same characteristics, there is a greater risk. To understand the amount of risk 
from population uniques, one needs to understand what an intruder already 
knows about the subject based on key variables. Other factors affecting the 
calculation of risk are whether the data are continuous and whether statisti
-cal disclosure limitation methods that alter the data have been applied. 
A growing body of literature considers the issue of computing the risk 
from population uniques. Recent work by Skinner and Shlomo assessed the 
risk of identi˜cation of respondents in survey data, using applications from 
the United 
Kingdom™s Of˜ce for National Statistics. The authors set out to 
quantify the risk associated with matching categorical key variables between 
microdata records and external data sources, as well as the risk associated 
3Available at http://nces.ed.gov/das/.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENSURING ACCESS
 AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
41with the application of statistical models, Poisson regressions, and log linear 
models to sample data in order to predict population estimates from sample 
counts. They found stability across the models, and, as a result, they were 
able to quite successfully match records (Skinner and Shlomo, 2008).
In Reiter™s view, the SED data are virtually a census of the population 
of persons who earn doctorate degrees, and thus it is not necessary to use 
the methods of Skinner and Shlomo to estimate the number of population 
unique records. The NSF simply can determine uniqueness in the available 
data based on the REG variables. 
If NSF decides to perturb REG data values, Reiter suggested it would 
also be important to estimate the risk of disclosure from probability-based 
methods that intruders may employ to reidentify a target individual regard
-less of whether the person is unique in the population. The agency could 
do this by using probability-based methods that mimic an intruder who 
attempts to make direct matches with an external database. To estimate the 
risk of reidenti˜cation from probability-based methods, it is necessary to 
make assumptions about intruder knowledge and behavior. 
To illustrate the risk from these methods, Reiter set out a scenario in 
which an intruder gained knowledge about a particular person™s graduation 
year, ˜eld of study, presumed gender, and inferred other information from 
a source such as the University of Michigan™s doctoral dissertation database. 
The SED ˜les could be searched for people with the characteristics of the 
targeted person, and, if a small number of people match those characteris
-tics, the intruder can claim that the target of the intrusion participated in 
the SED. To measure this type of risk, Reiter drew from work by Duncan and 
Lambert (1986). Reiter set up an example using notation in which 
z is re
-leased data on r records, and 
M is information about disclosure protection 
the agency has applied. If the target (t) has the characteristics of a white 
man, a U.S. citizen, with a degree granted in 1999, then:
Let J = j when record 
j in Z matches t.Let J = r + 1 when target is not in 
Z.For 
j = 1, –, r + 1, intruder computes Pr(J = j|t,
Z,M).In this formulation, the intruder would select j with highest probability.
If nonresponse is ignored, then:
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
Pr(J = r + 1|t,
Z,M) = 0.(r)K = j|t,Z,M) = 1/r1.If nonresponse is taken into account, then only minor adjustments are 
required. Reiter suggested that statistical agencies could go through every 
record j in the database and compute the probabilities of redisclosure. 
Attribute disclosure risk measures address the question, ﬁGiven released 
data and information known by the public, how well can an intruder repro
-duce the original data?ﬂ Say the intruder knows the graduation year, gender, 
and ˜eld. Can he or she learn race or citizenship? 
Ł Released data: 
Z. Ł Information about disclosure protection: M. 
Ł Target: t (e.g., man, Ph.D. in statistics, 1999).
Intruder tries to learn his race. The intruder seeks 
Pr(Race = 
k|t, Z, M)where k = 1 for white, k = 2 for black, etc.
In Reiter™s formulation, the intruder would select k with highest probability. 
Thus, for original tabular (census) data, the probability of an attribute dis
-closure equals conditional percentages of each race type, given the target™s 
known characteristics. The risk measure could simply be the percentage of 
times the intruder gets it right.
Reiter also addressed the issue of the risk associated with small cell 
counts. He concluded that small counts usually imply small conditional 
probabilities, but they are not necessarily indicative of the risk for attribute 
disclosure. From this, he suggested that it might be possible to use fewer 
types of alterations to the data or fewer aggregations of the data if the risk 
of concern is attribute disclosure.
He then discussed trends in disclosure risk assessment, highlighting 
algebraic methods and three computer science approaches. The algebraic 
method assumes that there is a full table with all variables, but it is not 
released to the public because of possible disclosure concerns. Using com
-putational algebra, for modest size tables, it would be possible to enumerate 
all possible tables that are consistent with the published margins and ˜xed 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ENSURING ACCESS
 AND CONFIDENTIALITY 
43tables and thus generate nondisclosed information (Fienberg and Slavkovic, 
2004).The approach to risk assessment known as the k-anonymity approach 
is a computer science method based on the assumption that every combina
-tion of key variables has at least k minus one record (Sweeney, 2002). The 
k-anonymity approach is helpful in understanding the risk of disclosure, but 
Reiter suggested that one of the downsides of k-anonymity is that it does 
not necessarily prevent disclosures when the intruder has external informa
-tion, so it may not be adequately protective. 
L-diversity is a protective measure that ensures that any block of key 
variables has at least L well-represented variables. With this methodology, 
there is a mix with a minimum number (L) of persons in each grouping, 
and fewer disclosures are thus possible. 
Differential privacy is a mathematical way of representing the idea that 
the incremental risk of an individual joining a data set would be small. It is 
a way of depicting the risk to an individual of joining a data set. Reiter also discussed the possibility of releasing partially synthetic data; 
that is, data that have been modeled to have the statistical properties of the 
original data but that are not the same as the original data. Initially suggest
-ed by Little (1993), this method would create multiple, partially synthetic 
data sets for public release so that the released data would comprise a mix 
of observed and synthetic values and would look like the actual data (Reiter, 
2005). In this method, statistical procedures valid for the original data 
would be valid for the released data. The advantages for the SED tabular 
data are that it would be possible to publish ˜ne ˜eld level of detail for the 
REG tables and preserve the longitudinal character of the data. The method 
would be straightforward for analysts and not too dif˜cult to implement, 
since there is only a small number of variables. This method could also be 
applied to the microdata ˜les.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.446Participant Views and Unresolved Issues
The workshop served to emphasize the tension between data access 
and con˜dentiality protection. It pointed out the need for the Na
-tional Science Foundation (NSF) to continually solicit input from 
respondents and data users on decisions regarding the balance between 
access and protection. 
As for the speci˜c options for protecting the Survey of Earned Doctor
-ates (SED) data, participants in the workshop expressed their views that the 
NSF had made the correct decision in selecting an aggregation approach 
to limiting disclosure risk for the 
Race/Ethnicity, Gender, and Fine Field of 
Study Tables
 (called here the REG tables). In summarizing the workshop, 
Mark Schneider said that ﬁwe are now going in the direction of aggregation 
rules.ﬂ Jacob Bournazian™s overall assessment was that the data aggregation 
approach selected by NSF is both compatible with user needs and with fu
-ture growth in accessing data. At the conclusion of his presentation, Jerome 
Reiter commended NSF for the decision to select an aggregation approach 
rather than a data suppression one. 
Although most people at the workshop agreed with the approach 
selected by NSF, there were important caveats. Reiter, for example, agreed 
that suppression should be avoided but pointed out that aggregation, as 
envisioned in the NSF solution, also has some drawbacks. These drawbacks 
and other unresolved issues brought up in the general discussion period are 
outlined below.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PARTICIPANT VIEWS AND UNRESOLVED ISSUES
 45Partially synthesized data
. Reiter pointed out that the NSF solution 
protects against reidenti˜cation based only on ˜eld. It fails to protect against 
the possibility of colleague or self-identi˜cation. He is concerned that, if 
a colleague knows the ˜eld, the year, and the gender (or similar sensitive 
information), the data will not be able to be fully protected.
One means of protecting against this problem is to partially synthesize 
only the small cells that are most susceptible to being disclosed, publish
-ing simulated data for the 4 percent of cells that are most sensitive. The 
simulated data would look and behave like actual data, valid inferences 
could be derived from statistical procedures, and longitudinal series could 
be preserved. This methodology would avoid the problem inherent with 
the use of the ﬁcutoff of 25ﬂ rule, in that cells would not be subject to 
publication one year and disappearance in another year because the cutoff 
was not attained. However, as several participants pointed out, the users of the data need 
actual counts for policy evaluation and other purposes, and synthetic data 
would not suit their purposes. The use of synthetic data was compared to 
data perturbation, with the important difference that the aggregates would 
be unaffected. Using synthetic data might lead to the further problem, 
Schneider suggested, of having a dual approach in which because some 
number of users want the real data, different representations of the same 
data cells would be generated from the restricted data sets, and two sets of 
numbersŠsynthetic and realŠwould be published. 
Concentration criteria
. A possible solution to the problem of colleague 
identi˜cation, as suggested by Stephen Cohen, would be to set criteria for 
concentrations. This approach would be similar to the rules now used by 
some government agencies to publish data only for companies in which 
there is not a concentration of the variable of interest. In this case, the con
-centration rules could be based on the number of schools that contribute 
doctorates to the ˜eld.In the discussion that followed Reiter™s presentation, Cohen gave an 
example of how a smart intruder with some knowledge could identify a 
respondent through the published tables. The NSF contractor was able to 
use Google scholar, dissertation abstracts, and a candidate whose gender 
and race were surmised from a faculty photograph found on a departmental 
website to ˜nd a match in the SED. The result was judged to be a correct 
match. This exercise lent support to the aggregation decision. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
Volatility of the data
. Among the issues that warrant additional investi
-gation, according to several participants, is that of the volatility of the esti
-mates when the cutoff of 25 rule is applied. The NSF proposal would be to 
reassess the ˜ne ˜elds every 3 years to identify ˜elds to be added or deleted 
based on the number of doctorates in a ˜eld and the number of schools 
granting those doctorates. Currently, NSF adds 8 to 10 new ˜elds and loses 
2 or 3 ˜elds as a result of these triennial reviews. The decision is usually a 
joint decision between NSF and the sponsoring agencies of the survey. 
Informed consent
. One means of avoiding the problem of potential 
identi˜cation of persons in the published small cells is to obtain the permis
-sion of individuals to have personal characteristics and other data published. 
This would be done by asking for their informed consent to make their data 
available. It was suggested that informed consent would be sought only for 
certain sensitive data items, such as gender, race, or ethnicity. This might 
avoid increased nonresponse that might accompany asking for informed 
consent for the whole array of data collected by the survey.
According to Cohen, the NSF legislation seems to prohibit requesting 
the informed consent of the respondents for release of their data. Although 
the Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act 
permits the solicitation of the informed consent of respondents, the NSF 
legislation and the data collection strategy militate against using this author
-ity for SED. Nonetheless, Lynda Carlson agreed that it would be useful to 
test an application of informed consent to the SED to see if obtaining such 
consent would be feasible. If so, NSF would then be in a position to deal 
with the implementation of such a procedure.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47References
American Statistical Association. (2008). 
Data Access and Personal Privacy: Appropriate Meth
-ods of Disclosure Control
. Available: http://www.amstat.org/news/statementondataaccess.
cfm [accessed November 2009].
Cox, L.H. (2008). A data quality and data con˜dentiality assessment of complementary 
cell suppression. In J. Domingo-Ferrer and 
Y. Saygin (Eds.), 
Privacy in Statistical Data 
Bases 
200
8 (pp. 13-23). Lecture Notes in Computer Science 5262. Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag.
Duncan, G., and Lambert, D. (1986). Disclosure-limited data dissemination (with com
-ments). Journal of the American Statistical Association, 
81, 10-28. Duncan, G., 
Keller-McNulty, S., and Stokes, S.L. (2001). 
Disclosure Risk vs. Data Utility: The 
R-U Con˜dentiality Map
, Technical Report Number 121. Research Triangle Park, NC: 
National Institute of Statistical Sciences. 
Fienberg, S.E., and Slavkovic, A.B. (2004). Making the release of con˜dential data from 
multi-way tables count. Chance, 17(3), 5-10.Little, R. (1993). Statistical analysis of masked data. 
Journal of Of˜cial Statistics, 
9(2), 
407-426.National Center for Health Statistics. (2004). 
NCHS Staff Manual on Con˜dentiality
. Avail
-able: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/misc/staffmanual2004.pdf. [accessed June 2009].
National Science Foundation. (2009). 
Disclosure Protection Strategies for Race/Ethnicity/Gender 
(REG) Tables for the Survey of Earned Doctorates
. Unpublished.
Of˜ce of Management and Budget. (2005). 
Report on Statistical Disclosure Limitation 
Methodology
, Statistical Working Paper #22. Available: http://www.fcsm.gov/working-
papers/SPWP22_rev.pdf [accessed November 2009].
Of˜ce of Management and Budget. (2006). 
Implementation Guidance for Title V of the 
E-Government Act, Con˜dential Information Protection and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act 
of 
200
2 (CIPSEA)
. Available: http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/assets/omb/inforeg/
proposed_cispea_guidance.pdf [accessed November 2009].
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 IMPROVING
 THE DESIGN OF SESTAT
Quality Education for Minorities Network. (2009). 
Outreach Meetings to Provide Feedback to 
the National Science Foundation™s Science Resources Statistics (SRS) Division on the Impact 
of Data Suppression in the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) Reports. 
Available: http://
www.qem.org/SRS.htm [accessed November 2009].
Reiter, J. (2005). Using CART to generate partially synthetic public use microdata. 
Journal 
of Of˜cial Statistics, 
21(3), 441-462. Simko, C., and Dominguez, M. (2008). 
Results from the Survey of Earned Doctorates User 
Group Web Survey
. Chicago: National Opinion Research Center.
Skinner, C., and Shlomo, N. (2008). Assessing identi˜cation risk in survey micro-data. 
Journal of American Statistical Association, 
103(483), 989-1001. Sweeney, L. (2002). 
K-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy. 
International Journal of 
Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-based Systems,
 10(5), 557-570.Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49Appendix A
Workshop Agenda and Participants
AGENDA
Goals for the Workshop:
 1.  
Review proposed con˜dentiality criteria for the Survey of Earned 
Doctorates
 2.  
Consider the ˜ndings of a series of data user and stakeholder  meetings  3. Address the appropriate content of the public-release tables
 4. Consider disclosure policies and practices in other federal agencies
 5.  
Consider options for access to the survey data through a secure 
enclave arrangement
Wednesday, May 
27, 2009Open Session
 8:00Œ8:30 am Call to Order and Introductions
    
Barbara Bailar, Chair 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
8:30Œ10:00  
Session 1: Context for Protection of Con˜dential 
Data
    
Moderator: Mark Schneider
    
Disclosure Policies Pertaining to the Federal 
Statistical System (CIPSEA)
     
Brian Harris-
Kojetin, Of˜ce of Management and 
Budget
    
Overview of Disclosure Policies and Practices: FCSM 
Working Paper 22, American Statistical Association 
Guidelines NCHS Experience
    
Alvan 
Zarate, consultant 10:00Œ10:15 Break
10:15Œ11:30  
Session 2: Overview of NSF Options, Decision 
and Impact
    Moderator:RobertSantos
Moderator: Robert Santos
      
Mark Fiegener, SED Survey Manager, National 
Science Foundation, Division of Science 
Resources Statistics
     
Steve Cohen, Chief Statistician, National Science 
Foundation, Division of Science Resources 
Statistics
11:30Œ12:15 pm  
Session 3: User Requirements for the Survey of 
Earned Doctorates Data
    
Moderator: Anne Petersen
    
Findings of the 
QEM Outreach Meetings 
     
Shirley McBay, 
Quality Education for Minorities 
(QEM) Network
12:15Œ1:00  
Working Lunch
 (Roundtable Discussions of User 
Needs) 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 511:00Œ2:00  
Session 4: Models for Assuring Access and 
Con˜dentiality    
Moderator: Scott Holan 
   
Emerging Models for Access and Con˜dentiality
     
Jacob Bournazian, Energy Information 
Administration 
 2:00Œ2:15 Break
2:15Œ3:00  
Session 5: Future Options for Assuring Access and 
Protecting Con˜dentiality
    
Moderator: Willie Pearson, Jr.
    
Issues in Disclosure Risk Assessments
    
Jerome P. Reiter, Duke University 
 3:00Œ5:00 pm  ﬁOpen Mikeﬂ Discussion and Summary
    
Moderator: Barbara Bailar, Chair
PARTICIPANTS
Barbara A. Bailar, Independent consultant
Jacob Bournazian, Energy Information Agency
Joan Burrelli, National Science Foundation
Lynda Carlson, National Science Foundation
Chanda Chhay, Caset Associates, Ltd.
Constance Citro, National Research Council
Stephen Cohen, National Science Foundation
Mark Fiegener, National Science Foundation
Mary Frase, National Science Foundation
Brian Harris-
Kojetin, Of˜ce of Management and Budget
Scott Holan, University of Missouri-Columbia 
Howard 
Kurtzman, American Psychological Association
Shirley McBay, 
QEM Network
William Pate, Center for Workforce Studies (APA)
Willie Pearson, Jr., Georgia Institute of Technology
Anne C. Petersen, Stanford University
Thomas Plewes, National Research Council
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
D. Matthew Powell, National Science Foundation
Jerome Reiter, Duke University
Robert Santos, Urban Institute
Mark S. Schneider, American Institutes for Research
Michael Siri, National Research Council
Roberta Spalter-Roth, American Sociological Association
Vincent Welch, National Opinion Research Center
Alvan 
Zarate, Independent consultant
 Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53Appendix B
Biographical Sketches of Steering 
Committee Members
Barbara A. Bailar 
(Chair) is retired from the National Opinion Research 
Center (NORC) and now consults on survey methodology. Prior to joining 
NORC, she was the executive director of the American Statistical Associa
-tion. Most of her career was spent at the U.S. Census Bureau, where she 
was the associate director for statistical standards and methodology. She 
has published numerous articles in such journals as 
Journal of the American 
Statistical Association
, Demography,
 and 
Survey Research Methods.
 She is a 
past president of the American Statistical Association and the International 
Association of Survey Statisticians, as well as a past vice president of the In
-ternational Statistical Association. She is an elected fellow of the American 
Statistical Association and the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science. At the National Research Council, she chaired the Committee 
on Social Security Representative Payees. She has a Ph.D. in statistics from 
American University.
Robert F. Boruch
 is university trustee chair professor of education and 
professor of statistics at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsyl
-vania. He is codirector of the Center for Research and Evaluation of Social 
Policy and codirector of the Policy Research, Evaluation, and Measurement 
Program, both in the Graduate School of Education. He has served on 
advisory committees for the U.S. Department of Education, the National 
Institutes of Health, and many other federal agencies. He is also on the 
advisory boards for the Coalition for Evidence-Based Policy and the Society 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
for Research on Educational Effectiveness and serves on the editorial board 
of Evaluation Review
 and other journals. He is an elected fellow of both 
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the American Statistical 
Association, and a lifetime National Associate of the National Academies. 
His work focuses on research methods for determining the severity and 
scope of social and education problems, implementation of programs and 
policies, and estimating the effects and the effectiveness of interventions. He 
contributes to work on randomized trials in education and training, welfare 
reform, health services, housing, and crime and justice, with a particular 
interest in the assessment or improvement of programs sponsored by federal 
agencies and private foundations. He has a B.E. from Stevens Institute of 
Technology and a Ph.D. from Iowa State University.
Scott Holan
 is an assistant professor in the Department of Statistics at 
the University of MissouriŒColumbia. His research interests include time 
series, Bayesian methods, nonparametric and semiparametric regression, 
data con˜dentiality, and spatial statistics. In 2005 he was awarded a research 
fellowship by the American Statistical Association/National Science Foun
-dation/Bureau of Labor Statistics to work on problems involving seasonality 
and data con˜dentiality. In 2006, he was awarded a National Institute of 
Statistical Science new researcher fellowship to conduct research on data 
con˜dentiality. He has M.S. and B.S. degrees in mathematics from the 
University of Illinois, Chicago, and a Ph.D. in statistics from Texas A&M 
University. 
Willie Pearson, Jr.,
 is professor of sociology in the School of History, Tech
-nology, and Society at the Georgia Institute of Technology. He specializes 
in the sociology of science and the family. His most recent book is entitled 
Beyond Small Numbers: Voices of African American Ph.D. Chemists
 (2005). 
He has held postdoctoral fellowships at the Educational Testing Service 
and the Of˜ce of Technology Assessment, U.S. Congress. He is a fellow 
of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). He 
has served as a lecturer in Sigma Xi™s Distinguished Lectureship Program; 
as chair of the National Science Foundation™s Committee on Equal Op
-portunities in Science and Engineering, and as chair of the AAAS Com
-mittee for Science, Engineering and Public Policy. Currently, he serves on 
advisory committees in the Education and Human Resources Directorate 
(National Science Foundation) and the Burroughs Wellcome Fund. He is a 
lifetime National Associate of the National Academies and is a member of 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 55the Center for the Advancement of Scholarship on Engineering Education. 
He is also a member of the Committee on U.S. Competitiveness: Under
-represented Groups and the Expansion of the Science and Engineering 
Workforce Pipeline and the Ford Foundation Diversity Fellowships Review 
Panel on Sociology. He has a Ph.D. from Southern Illinois University. 
Anne C. Petersen
 is deputy director at the Center for Advanced Study in 
the Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University and is also professor of psy
-chology at Stanford. Formerly she was senior vice president for programs 
at the W.
K. 
Kellogg Foundation, where she provided leadership for all 
programming, including development of effective programming strategies, 
teamwork, policies, philosophies, and organization-wide systems. She was 
deputy director and chief operating of˜cer of the National Science Founda
-tion. She served as the ˜rst vice president for research, dean of the Gradu
-ate School, and professor of adolescent development and pediatrics at the 
University of Minnesota. She was the ˜rst dean of the College of Health and 
Human Development at Pennsylvania State University. She is a member 
of the Institute of Medicine and a fellow of the American Association for 
the Advancement of Science, the American Psychological Association, and 
the American Psychological Society. She was president of the International 
Society for the Study of Behavioral Development. She has a Ph.D. from 
the University of Chicago.
Robert Santos
 is senior institute methodologist at the Urban Institute in 
Washington, DC. He previously worked at NuStats, the National Opinion 
Research Center at the University of Chicago, and the Survey Research Cen
-ter at the University of Michigan.
 His professional credits include numerous 
reports and papers, and leadership roles in survey research associations.
 He 
has served as a member of the Census Advisory Committee of Professional 
Associations and on the editorial board of 
Public Opinion Quarterly
. He 
has held numerous
 elected and appointed leadership positions in both the 
American Statistical Association and the
 American Association for Public 
Opinion Research.
  He is a fellow of the American Statistical Associa
-tion and a recipient of its 2006 Founder™s Award for excellence in survey 
statistics and contributions to the statistical community. For the National 
Research Council, he was a member of the Panel to Assess the Bene˜ts of 
the American Community Survey for the National Science Foundation 
Science Resources Statistics Division
. He has an M.A. in statistics from the 
University of Michigan.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 DATA FROM THE SURVEY OF EARNED DOCTORATES
Mark S. Schneider
 is vice president of the American Institutes for Re
-search. He leads special initiatives in the Education, Human Development, 
and Workforce Division. He served as commissioner of the National Center 
for Education Statistics. He previously served as deputy commissioner of 
the National Center for Education Research. Prior to joining the federal 
government, he was professor of political science and chair of the Depart
-ment of Political Science at the State University of New 
York at Stony 
Brook, which he joined as an assistant professor in 1974. He is a past vice 
president of the American Political Science Association. He has a B.A. from 
the City University of New 
York and a Ph.D. from the University of North 
Carolina. He was a Fulbright Hays senior fellow at Osmania University in 
Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India.
Latanya Sweeney 
is associate professor of computer science, technology 
and policy in the School of Computer Science at Carnegie Mellon Univer
-sity. She also founded and serves as the director of the Laboratory for Inter
-national Data Privacy (Data Privacy Lab) at Carnegie Mellon University. 
The Data Privacy Lab works with real-world stakeholders to solve today™s 
privacy technology problems. Her work involves creating technologies and 
related policies with provable guarantees of privacy protection while al
-lowing society to collect and share person-speci˜c information. Her work 
has received awards from numerous organizations, including the American 
Psychiatric Association, the American Medical Informatics Association, and 
the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. The American College of Medical 
Informatics inducted her as a fellow in 2006. She joined the faculty of Carn
-egie Mellon as an assistant professor in 1998. She is the codirector of the 
Ph.D. program in computation, organizations and society at Carnegie Mel
-lon and she is the editor-in-chief of the 
Journal of Privacy Technology
. She 
has an A.L.B. in computer science (cum laude) from Harvard University 
and an S.M. in electrical engineering and computer science and a Ph.D. in 
computer science, both from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
The Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) was established in 1972 
at the National Academies to improve the statistical methods and informa
-tion on which public policy decisions are based. The committee carries out 
studies, workshops, and other activities to foster better measures and fuller 
understanding of the economy, the environment, public health, crime, 
education, immigration, poverty, welfare, and other public policy issues. It 
also evaluates ongoing statistical programs and tracks the statistical policy 
and coordinating activities of the federal government, serving a unique role 
at the intersection of statistics and public policy. The committee™s work is 
supported by a consortium of federal agencies through a National Science 
Foundation grant.
Protecting and Accessing Data from the Survey of Earned Doctorates: A Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.