DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12800Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st Century248 pages | 7 x 10 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38589-3 | DOI 10.17226/12800Committee on Scientific Use of the Radio Spectrum; Committee on RadioFrequencies; Board on Physics and Astronomy; Division on Engineering andPhysical Sciences; National Research CouncilSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Scienti˜c Use of the Radio Spectrum
Committee on Radio Frequencies
Board on Physics and Astronomy
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy 
of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of 
the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard 
for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. 0410006, by the 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Award No. NNH05CC15C, and by the Depart
-ment of Commerce under Award No. DG133R04CQ0009, TO #26. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclu
-sions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not 
necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-14686-9
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-14686-0
Copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., 
Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 (in the Washington 
metr
opolitan area), Internet: http://www.nap.edu; and from the Board on Physics and Astronomy, 
National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, Internet: http://www.
national-academies.org/bpa.
Copyright 2010 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society of distinguished 
scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and 
technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it 
by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National 
Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its 
administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences 
the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National 
Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure 
the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters 
pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National 
Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg 
is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate 
the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge 
and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by 
the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the 
public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both 
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.or
gSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON SCIENTIFIC USE OF THE RADIO SPECTRUM
MARSHALL H. COHEN, California Institute of Technology, 
Co-Chair
ALBIN J. GASIEWSKI, University of Colorado at Boulder, 
Co-Chair
DONALD C. BACKER, University of California, Berkeley
ROBERTA BALSTAD, Columbia University
STEVEN W. ELLINGSON, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
DARREL EMERSON, National Radio Astronomy Observatory
AARON S. EVANS, University of Virginia and National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory
JOEL T. JOHNSON, Ohio State University
PAUL KOLODZY, Kolodzy Consulting, LLC
DAVID B. KUNKEE, The Aerospace Corporation
MOLLY K. MACAULEY, Resources for the Future, Inc.
JAMES M. MORAN, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
LEE G. MUNDY, University of Maryland at College Park
TIMOTHY J. PEARSON, California Institute of Technology
CHRISTOPHER S. RUF, University of Michigan
FREDERICK S. SOLHEIM, Radiometrics Corporation
DAVID H. STAELIN, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
ALAN B. TANNER, Jet Propulsion Laboratory
Staff
DONALD C. SHAPERO, Director, Board on Physics and Astronomy
BRIAN D. DEWHURST, Program Of˜cer (through July 2009)
DAVID LANG, Program Of˜cer
MERCEDES ILAGAN, Administrative Assistant (through February 2008)
CARYN KNUTSEN, Program Associate (from March 2008)
VAN AN, Financial Associate (through May 2008)
BETH DOLAN, Financial Associate (from June 2008)
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viCOMMITTEE ON RADIO FREQUENCIES
PAUL A. VANDEN BOUT, National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 
Chair
 JEFFREY PIEPMEIER, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 
Vice-Chair
ANA P. BARROS, Duke University 
DOUGLAS C.-J. BOCK, University of California, Berkeley/Combined Array for 
Research in Millimeter-wave Astronomy 
STEVEN W. ELLINGSON, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
DAVID G. LONG, Brigham Young University 
DARREN McKAGUE, University of Michigan 
JAMES M. MORAN, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics 
MELINDA PIKET-MAY, University of Colorado at Boulder 
STEVEN C. REISING, Colorado State University 
ALAN E.E. ROGERS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology/Haystack Observatory 
LUCY ZIURYS, University of Arizona 
Staff
DONALD C. SHAPERO, Director, Board on Physics and Astronomy
DAVID B. LANG, Program Of˜cer
CARYN J. KNUTSEN, Research Associate
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
BOARD ON PHYSICS AND ASTRONOMY
MARC A. KASTNER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Chair
ADAM S. BURROWS, Princeton University, 
Vice-Chair
PHILIP H. BUCKSBAUM, Stanford University
PATRICK L. COLESTOCK, Los Alamos National Laboratory
JAMES DRAKE, University of Maryland
JAMES EISENSTEIN, California Institute of Technology
ANDREA M. GHEZ, University of California, Los Angeles
PETER F. GREEN, University of Michigan
LAURA H. GREENE, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
MARTHA P. HAYNES, Cornell University
JOSEPH HEZIR, EOP Group, Inc.
MARK B. KETCHEN, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center
JOSEPH LYKKEN, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory
PIERRE MEYSTRE, University of Arizona
HOMER A. NEAL, University of Michigan
MONICA OLVERA DE LA CRUZ, Northwestern University
JOSE N. ONUCHIC, University of California, San Diego
LISA J. RANDALL, Harvard University
CHARLES V. SHANK, Janelia Farm, HHMI
MICHAEL S. TURNER, University of Chicago
MICHAEL C.F. WIESCHER, University of Notre Dame
Staff
DONALD C. SHAPERO, Director
MICHAEL MOLONEY, Associate Director
ROBERT L. RIEMER, Senior Program Of˜cer
JAMES LANCASTER, Program Of˜cer
DAVID B. LANG, Program Of˜cer
TERI THOROWGOOD, Administrative Coordinator
CARYN J. KNUTSEN, Research Associate
BETH DOLAN, Financial Associate
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
In the early years of the 21st century, policy of˜cials recognized both the need 
for additional blocks of frequencies in the electromagnetic spectrum for new tech
-nologies and the desires of existing users to obtain additional bandwidth. A number 
of activities were thus begun, with the goals of identifying unused frequencies 
and suggesting methods by which the regulatory structure could encourage their 
more ef˜cient use. In June 2002, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
formed the Spectrum Policy Task Force for the following purposes:
1.
 To provide speci˜c recommendations to the FCC for ways in which to 
evolve the current ﬁcommand-and-controlﬂ approach to spectrum policy 
into a more integrated, market-oriented approach that provides greater 
regulatory certainty while minimizing regulatory intervention; and
2.
 To assist the FCC in addressing ubiquitous spectrum issues, including 
interference protection, spectral ef˜ciency, effective public-safety commu
-nications, and implications of international spectrum policies.
The Spectrum Policy Task Force concluded that ﬁwhile the commission has 
recently made some major strides in how spectrum is allocated and assigned in 
some bands, principally through ˚exible rules and competitive bidding, spectrum 
policy is not keeping pace with the relentless spectrum demands of the market. 
The task force has begun the process of reexamining 90 years of spectrum policy to 
Preface
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xPREFACE
ensure that the commission™s policies evolve with the consumer-driven evolution 
of new wireless technologies, devices, and services.ﬂ
1 Recognizing the growing importance of radio observations to their respective 
missions and the increasing potential for interference from new wireless technolo
-gies, NASA, the Department of Commerce, and the National Science Foundation 
commissioned the National Research Council (NRC) to identify the spectrum 
needs of today™s scienti˜c activities and to assist spectrum managers in balancing 
the requirements of scienti˜c uses of the spectrum with those of other interests. 
This report is written in response to that request. The committee discussed its 
original charge at length and chose to consider only the passive (ﬁreceive-onlyﬂ) 
scienti˜c applications of the radio spectrum, and speci˜cally how the requirements 
for spectrum could be expected to evolve over the next two decades.
2 This deci
-sion did not imply any prioritization of the active versus passive scienti˜c uses of 
the spectrum, but instead stemmed from the committee™s recognition that passive 
scienti˜c uses involve unique issues and that the committee had a limited amount 
of time in which to complete its task. 
To address its task, the NRC™s Committee on Scienti˜c Use of the Radio 
 
SpectrumŠcomprising representatives of universities, private industry, and non
-pro˜t organizations
3Šemployed four in-person meetings, four town hall meetings, 
and numerous teleconferences in the development of its report. The committee™s 
work was aided by presentations from a number of outside experts who provided 
detailed information at in-person meetings. 
The committee focused on three major topics: Earth remote sensing (see Chap
-ter 2), radio astronomy (see Chapter 3), and interference mitigation (see Chapter 4). 
It conducted an in-depth study of each of the major topics, including the current and 
expected future status of Earth remote sensing and radio astronomy and applicable 
radio frequency interference mitigation technologies. The committee developed a 
series of ˜ndings on the basis of the material presented in these chapters, together 
with an associated series of recommendations, to help ensure the viability of these 
scienti˜c endeavors. The ˜ndings and recommendations are detailed in Chapter 5. 
As dictated by the statement of task, the committee did not make recommendations 
on the allocation of speci˜c frequencies, but it did comment on spectrum use by the 
relevant scienti˜c communities and how it might be protected in the future.
This report attempts to lay the foundation of an effort to identify the spectrum 
needs of radio astronomy and Earth remote sensing, identify the bene˜ts of these 
two activities, and develop practical, forward-looking approaches to spectrum 
1 
Federal Communications Commission, 
Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force
, Washington, 
D.C., November 2002.
2 
The committee™s statement of task appears in Appendix A.
3 
Biosketches of the members of the committee are provided in Appendix B.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
PREFACE
access that are needed to ensure the necessary conditions for their important 
observations.
It is noted that a report on the uses of passive service
4 bands for both Earth 
remote sensing and radio astronomy by a panel of the NRC™s Committee on Radio 
Frequencies (CORF) was published in 2007.
5 The present report differs from the 
2007 report in assessing both the current and future uses of the passive services. 
This report also includes a focus on technology for interference mitigation. 
4 
The passive services are those for which the signal is produced by nature and the applications are 
ﬁreceive-only.ﬂ
5 
National Research Council, 
Handbook of Frequency Allocations and Spectrum Protection for Scienti˜c 
Uses
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures 
approved by the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Report Review Committee. 
The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments 
that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible 
and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, 
and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to 
thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Paul Feldman, Fletcher, Heald & Hildreth, PLC,
Dale N. Hat˜eld, Independent Consultant,
 Longmont, Colorado
Anthony Janetos, Paci˜c Northwest National Laboratory,
Roger Lang, George Washington University,
Michael Marcus, Marcus Spectrum Solutions,
Thomas Meissner, Remote Sensing Systems, Inc.,
Steven Reising, Colorado State University,
Chris Salter, National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, Cornell University, 
Paul Vanden Bout, National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 
William ﬁJackﬂ Welch, University of California, Berkeley, and
David Woody, California Institute of Technology, Owens Valley Radio 
Observatory.
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
vACKNOWLEDGMENT
 OF
 REVIEWERS
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments 
and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommenda
-tions, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. The review of 
this report was overseen by Martha Haynes, Cornell University. Appointed by the 
NRC, she was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of 
this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all 
review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of 
this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvSUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION
 61.1
 The Passive Radio Spectrum, 8
1.2
 Prospects for Future Scienti˜c Use of the Radio Spectrum, 12
1.3
 The Interference Problem, 13
1.4
 Interference Mitigation, 15
1.5
 Enabling Scienti˜c Uses of the Radio Spectrum, 16
2 THE EARTH EXPLORATION-SATELLITE SERVICE
 18
2.1
 Speci˜c Application Areas of Passive Microwave Remote 
 Sensing, 23
Weather Forecasting and Monitoring, 24
Severe Weather and Disasters, 30
Climate and Global Change, 33
Resource Management, 41
Aviation, 43
Defense and Public Safety, 45
International Partnerships, 46
Education and Technology, 47
Contents
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviCONTENTS
2.2
 Brightness Temperatures, Geophysical Measurements, and 
 Missions, 48
Fundamentals of Microwave Radiometry for EESS 
 Applications, 48
Measurement of Speci˜c Geophysical Parameters, 52
2.3
 Current and Future Space Missions, Activities, and Spectrum 
 Usage, 53
2.4
 Current and Future Non-Space-Based Activities and Spectrum 
 Usage, 59
2.5
 The Impact of Radio Frequency Interference on Earth Exploration-
 
Satellite Service Observations, 61
Introduction to the Problem of Radio Frequency Interference: 
Immediate Impacts on EESS, 61
Evidence of Impact of Radio Frequency Interference on EESS 
Observations, 63
Potential Future Radio Frequency Interference and Its Impact on 
 EESS Observations, 80
2.6
 Summary of the Importance of and Risks to Continued 
 Contributions of the Earth Exploration-Satellite Service 
 in the Future, 86
3 THE RADIO ASTRONOMY SERVICE
 88
3.1
 The Scienti˜c Impact of Radio Astronomy, 90
Origin of Planets and the Solar System, 90
Origin and Evolution of the Universe, 92
Pulsars and General Relativity, 95
Galactic Nuclei and Black Holes, 96
Galaxies, 101
Solar Physics and Space Weather, 102
Serendipity and the Transient Universe, 104
Summary, 105
3.2
 Radio Observatories and Radio Telescopes, 106
3.3
 Spectrum Requirements and Use, 113
Continuum and Line Observations, 113
Atmospheric Windows and Absorption Features, 115
Current Radio Astronomy Service Allocations, 115
Spectrum Use, 115
3.4
 Sensitivity Requirements, 120
Sensitivity Limits, 122
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiCONTENTS
3.5
 Interference and Its Mitigation, 123
Examples of Interference in a Protected Band, 125
Mitigation, 127
3.6
 Importance of Radio Astronomy to the Nation, 130
Radio Interferometry, 130
Communications Disruptions, 131
Fundamental Physics, 132
Technology Development, 132
Precision Antennas, 132
Distributed Network Computing, 133
Education and Public Outreach, 133
4  
TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 O
PPORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 M
ITIGATION
  OF
 R
ADIO
 F
REQUENCY
 I
NTERFERENCE 
135
4.1
 Trends in Active Spectrum Usage, 136
Current Allocations, 136
Current Utilization Studies, 138
4.2
 Major Drivers of Spectrum Use, 145
Assessment of Trends in Spectrum Use for 2008Œ2015, 145
Third-Generation and Fourth-Generation Systems, 148
Unlicensed Uses of the Radio Frequency Spectrum, 149
Regulatory Changes That Impact Use, 151
Technology Changes That Impact Use, 153
Summary, 155
4.3
 Unilateral Mitigation Techniques, 156
Technologies for Unilateral Mitigation, 157
4.4
 Mitigation Through Cooperative Spectrum Usage, 168
4.5
 Mitigation Costs, Limitations, and Bene˜ts, 172
Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS), 173
Radio Astronomy Service (RAS), 173
Nature of the Costs of Radio Frequency Interference to 
 the EESS and the RAS, 174
Summary, 176
5 FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 177
5.1
 Societal Value of the Passive Services, 178
5.2
 Characteristics of the Passive Spectrum Services, 180
5.3
 Threats to the EESS and the RAS from Unintentional Radio 
 Frequency Interference, 182
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiiCONTENTS
5.4
 Technology for Mitigation of Radio Frequency Interference, 185
5.5
 Protection of the EESS and the RAS, 187
5.6
 The Path Forward, 191
5.7
 Conclusion, 193
APPENDIXES
 A Statement of Task
 197
B Biosketches of the Committee Members
 199
C Density of Interferers Equation
 208
D  
Analysis of Out-of-Band Emission Impacts to the EESS from §27.53 
 of the FCC Rules
 210
E  
Descriptions of Earth Exploration-Satellite Service Parameters 
 Related to Table 2.1
 214
F Acronyms and Abbreviations
 221
G Glossary
 226
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Natural radio emissions from objects as diverse as hurricanes and distant 
 
galaxies yield vital information about the planet Earth and its place in the universe. 
Observations of Earth are central to weather forecasting and climate
 studies, and 
radio observations of the cosmos are similarly critical for increasing our under
-standing of the universe and answering grand questions such as that on the origin 
of planets. Such information is gathered by geoscientists using complex Earth-
orbiting satellites and ground-based equipment and by radio astronomers using 
large, ground-based radio telescopes. Signals from natural radio emissions are 
extremely weak, and the equipment used to measure them is becoming more and 
more sophisticated and sensitive.
The radio spectrum is also being used by radiating, or ﬁactive,ﬂ services, ranging 
from aircraft radar to rapidly expanding consumer services such as cellular telephony 
and wireless Internet. These valuable active services transmit radio waves and thereby 
potentially interfere with the receive-only, or ﬁpassive,ﬂ scienti˜c services, which do 
not radiate. Transmitters for the active services create an arti˜cial ﬁelectronic fog,ﬂ 
which can cause confusion and, in severe cases, totally blind the Earth Exploration-
Satellite Service (EESS) and Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) receivers.
Both the active and the passive services are increasing their use of the spectrum, 
and so the potential for interference, already strong, is also increasing. This tension 
between the active services™ demand for greater spectrum use and the passive users™ 
need for quiet spectrum is at the heart of this report™s discussion and motivates 
the ˜ndings and recommendations of the study committeeŠthe National Research 
Council™s Committee on Scienti˜c Use of the Radio Spectrum. 
Summary
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
2Many billions of dollars have been invested in the nation™s radio astronomy and 
Earth remote sensing facilities. The public marvels at new discoveries made at radio 
astronomy observatories, and the nation remains ever more reliant on accurate and 
up-to-date weather and climate information retrieved from Earth remote sensing 
satellites. The use of the radio spectrum to obtain these observations is regulated 
and protected in accordance with national and international spectrum rules, but 
the relatively recent proliferation of wireless technology is challenging engineers™ 
abilities to mitigate unwanted interference from the active services.
Complex rules govern the occupancy and use of the electromagnetic spec
-trum, both nationally and globally, but these rules have not adequately evolved 
with technology. Inef˜ciencies in spectrum use exist while demand increases, and 
most regulations are not aligned with or even cognizant of the special needs of 
passive scienti˜c users. These issues are identi˜ed in this report, and addressing 
them presents the nation with an exceptional opportunity to adapt to the wireless 
revolution while protecting the passive users of the radio spectrum. 
The radio spectrum is a ˜nite resource that has been managed as such for the past 
70 years by the federal government. This management enabled the growth of strong 
commercial and scienti˜c communities. The endless pursuit of better techniques 
to leverage the unique characteristics of the radio spectrum has led to discoveries 
and innovations of enormous scienti˜c and societal value. Over the past 20 years, 
rapid technological improvements have exponentially increased the capabilities of 
scienti˜c, commercial, and government users. But today, the current regulatory 
regime is straining to enable the capabilities and meet the needs of the various com
-munities of users. A new path is needed to preserve access to the radio spectrum, 
in which important scienti˜c discoveries are made and civilian and government 
remote sensing operations are conducted, while allowing for growth that serves an 
increasingly mobile society. This Summary presents the report™s key ˜ndings and 
recommendations.
Finding:
 Passive remote sensing observations are essential for monitoring Earth™s 
natural systems and are therefore critical to human safety, the day-to-day opera
-tions of the government and the private sector, and the policy-making processes 
governing many sectors of the U.S. economy.
Finding:
 Radio astronomy has great potential for further fundamental discoveries, 
including the origins and evolution of the universe, the nature of matter, and life 
in other solar systems, which will have an enormous impact on our understanding 
of fundamental physics and the place of humanity in the universe. 
Recommendation:
 Recognizing that the national investment in passive radio 
astronomy and Earth remote sensing is dependent on access to the radio spectrum, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3SUMMARY
the committee recommends that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
and the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) 
ensure that access to spectrum for passive radio and microwave observations of 
Earth environmental variables and radio astronomical observations of the sky is 
protected in the development of future spectrum policy.
Technological innovations continue to increase the utility of the radio spectrum. 
The advent of new technologies designed to exploit the diversity of the radio spec
-trum in space, frequency, polarization, and time will increase the ef˜ciency of its use. 
However, the current means for managing spectrum use must be changed, as the cur
-rent policies threaten to thwart scienti˜c discovery, diminish the usefulness of critical 
environmental observations, and limit economic growth because of the inef˜cient 
use of ˜nite spectral resources. Therefore, new spectrum management policies need 
to be explored for the sake of ensuring these critical national capabilities.
Finding:
 Radio wave bands (10 MHz to 3 THz) are indispensable for collecting 
information associated with speci˜c astronomical and environmental phenomena. 
Often the same bands are equally indispensable for both passive Earth remote sens
-ing and radio astronomy, and the passive nature of both services enables them to 
share the spectrum productively. Currently, 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 
3 GHz is allocated to the RAS and EESS on a primary basis, and 4.08 percent is 
allocated on a secondary basis (measured in hertz). 
Finding:
 Important scienti˜c inquiry and applications enabled by the Earth 
 
Exploration-Satellite Service and the Radio Astronomy Service are signi˜cantly 
impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (RFI). Such RFI has reduced 
the societal and scienti˜c return of EESS and RAS observatories and necessi
-tates costly interference mitigation, which is often insuf˜cient to prevent damage 
from RFI.
Finding: 
Better utilization of the spectrum and reduced RFI for scienti˜c as well 
as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum 
usage. Progress toward these goals would be made by gathering more information 
through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. This would be bene˜cial 
to both the commercial and the scienti˜c communities.
Recommendation:
 The Department of Commerce/National Telecommunications 
and Information Administration (NTIA), in collaboration with the National Science 
Foundation (NSF), NASA, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra
-tion (NOAA), should spearhead the development of a national spectrum assessment 
system that measures the radio frequency (RF) environment with appropriately high 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
4resolution in time, space, and frequency for purposes of spectrum development and 
management, based on the spectral and spatial density of emitters.
The next generation of spectrum management policies must enable better 
sharing of the spectrum as well as diminishing the impact that users have on the 
RF spectrum. This can be done by exploiting currently available technologies and 
hastening the development of nascent technologies. New policies should encour
-age the following: 

The development of the means for direct interaction between active and 
passive spectrum users to protect current and future scienti˜c uses of the spectrum. 
The nation needs to provide the policies that will make the spectrum more useful 
and productive for all users.
Recommendation:
 The EESS and RAS communities should be provided additional 
support through NSF, NASA, and NOAA to increase their participation in
 spectrum 
management forums within the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 
FCC, NTIA, and other organizations. The goal of such participation is to foster 
outreach, advance the understanding of interference and regulation issues, and 
initiate mutual cooperation for interference mitigation.

The development and implementation of technology to address RFI for cur
-rent and future satellite systems to ensure that the national investment in scienti˜c 
uses of the spectrum is preserved.
Recommendation:
 Investment in the development of mitigation technology should 
be increased so that it is commensurate with the costs of data denial that result from 
the use of systems without mitigation. To this end, NSF and NASA should support 
research and development for unilateral
1 RFI mitigation technology in both EESS 
and RAS systems. NASA, NOAA, and the Department of Defense should require 
that appropriate RFI analyses and tests and practical RFI mitigation techniques be 
applied to all future satellite systems carrying passive microwave sensors.

A regulatory environment that enables sharing the spectrum in both space 
and time. This is a ﬁwin-winﬂ scenario that will enable additional scienti˜c uses 
without impacting commercial development.
Recommendation:
 The NSF, NASA, and NTIA should jointly support research and 
development for cooperative RFI mitigation techniques and the associated forums 
1 
As discussed in Chapter 4.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5SUMMARY
and outreach necessary to enable the development of standards for greater spectral 
utilization and interference avoidance. 
Recommendation: 
As cooperative spectrum-sharing techniques come into use, 
NSF and NASA spectrum managers should work with the regulatory agencies to 
enable
 observations that require an extremely wide spectral range. Such observa
-tions would provide a useful metric for the effectiveness of spectrum-sharing 
techniques for the passive services.
These new initiatives are not easy, nor will they make success a certainty. It 
will take a national effort to understand clearly the needs of both communities, 
scienti˜c and commercial, and to motivate each to make the choices necessary to 
enable greater access for each to the radio spectrum. The next generation of scien
-ti˜c users of the radio spectrum needs to be afforded the capacity to develop the 
technology to seek new horizons. 
Recommendation: 
The Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy should create a 
new, permanent, representative technology advisory body to identify technical and 
regulatory opportunities for improving spectrum sharing among all active and 
passive users, both government and nongovernment.
In one sense, spectrum used for passive purposes, including Earth remote 
sensing and radio astronomy, can be likened to parkland preserved for public use. 
The true societal value of small parcels of land, especially in crowded urban areas, 
de˜es monetization, and proactive measures are required to ensure the preserva
-tion and shared use of such land. A small fraction of the radio spectrum allocated 
for passive purposes performs a similarly valuable societal function and requires 
proactive management to remain availableŠin this case for scienti˜c purposes. 
The passive services both offer a critical return to society through operations in 
support of environmental prediction and provide scienti˜c intellectual value. 
Although the impacts of the passive services are dif˜cult to quantify, they are valu
-able to society for providing vital information for climate and weather studies and 
in allowing astronomical studies of the heavens. The quiet radio bands, like public 
parks, deserve protection. 
It would be in the strongest interests of the nation to ensure that access to 
spectrum for scienti˜c purposes is maintained during the coming decades. The 
committee™s recommendations provide a pathway for putting in place the regula
-tory mechanisms and associated supporting research activities necessary to accom
-plish this important task. The committee believes that such a pathway will also lead 
to greater ef˜ciency in the active use of the spectrum, which should bene˜t all direct 
and indirect consumers of wireless telecommunications and data services. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61Introduction
Natural radio emissions from objects as diverse as hurricanes and distant gal
-axies are employed by scientists to study the objects themselves. This information 
is vital for analyzing and forecasting weather and climate and for understanding 
the distant cosmos. The geophysical studies use remote sensing satellites and 
ground-based instruments, and the radio astronomy observations employ large, 
ground-based radio telescopes, or antennas. The techniques used by the two groups 
are fundamentally similar. The variations in the strength and polarization of the 
radio signals with direction, frequency, and time are measured with receivers of 
ever-increasing sensitivity and sophistication. The detailed techniques must be 
different because satellites pass quickly over any given spot on Earth, whereas a 
radio telescope can track a given source in the sky for hours. The two groups of 
users, working within the Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) and the Radio 
Astronomy Service (RAS), use many of the same frequency bands, and they have 
many interference problems in common.
The launch of the ˜rst U.S. Earth remote sensing satellite, TIROS-1, in 1960, 
ushered in an era of unprecedented scienti˜c understanding of the planet as a com
-plex system of systems. For the ˜rst time humanity was provided the opportunity to 
visualize and understand the interactions of many of Earth™s constituent processes. 
This global view was only made possible by the development of advanced sensors 
that were able to take advantage of the new perspective offered by satellites. Chief 
among the new classes of sensors used in the nearly ˜ve decades since TIROS has 
been the passive microwave radiometer, which holds the unique advantage over 
optical and infrared systems of being able to probe through clouds. These sensors 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7INTRODUCTION
are passive in that they do not transmit any signals or communications; they only 
receive naturally occurring signals. Passive instruments are thus much different 
from active devices, with which people are most familiar. Active devices include 
cellular telephones, wireless Internet networks, garage-door openersŠanything 
that emits a signal, whether purposefully or not. Owing to the unique purposes for 
which passive instruments are used, these instruments also have unique designs and 
needs, which are discussed in detail in this report. These passive devices are used 
by Earth scientists for economically and scienti˜cally important observations of 
Earth™s environment and by astronomers to observe the vast reaches of the cosmos 
beyond this planet. 
The use of passive microwave sensors allows rainfall, clouds, ocean sur
-face winds, temperature, and moisture distributionsŠthe primary variables of 
 
meteorologyŠto be quanti˜ed over the globe, under clear and cloudy conditions 
and during both day and night. Data from passive microwave sensors are now a 
vital component in the complex calculations used for weather prediction.
In addition to enabling new understanding of atmospheric processes, passive 
microwave observations
1 have brought about a new understanding of Earth™s sur
-face processes. The distinct microwave signatures produced by water in its various 
phases (liquid, ice, vapor) permit all-weather measurements of environmental 
variables such as snowpack depth, soil moisture, sea ice extent, sea surface tempera
-ture, and sea surface salinity. These and other related passive microwave observ
-ables, including biomass and vegetation water content, are becoming increasingly 
important as drivers of industry and agriculture, particularly as global resources of 
freshwater, arable land, and ˜sheries are further stretched to satisfy an increasingly 
large and demanding global population. The role played by passive microwave 
observations from space as well as from surface-based and airborne platforms in 
the management of these resources and the understanding of their interactions 
with other natural systems cannot be overstated. Currently, 21 satellites carrying 
passive microwave sensors are orbiting Earth. 
During roughly the same era in which Earth remote sensing was developedŠbut 
preceding it by about a decadeŠpassive radio observations were used to study the 
makeup of the cosmos under what is now the discipline of radio astronomy. Radio 
astronomy is a young science, about 60 years old, but it has contributed enormously 
1 
The terms 
passi
ve microwa
ve obser
vations
, 
microwa
ve brightness
, 
microwa
ve emission,
 and similar 
terms that are used in Chapter 3 of this report, on the EESS (remote sensing), are synonymous with 
the terms 
radio obser
vations
, 
radio brightness,
 and 
radio emission
 that are used throughout Chapter 4, 
on radio astronomy. The popular use of 
microwa
ve within the passive remote sensing community may 
have arisen in an attempt to distinguish microwave observations from visible and infrared remote 
sensing observations in which the Rayleigh-Jeans approximation is not applicable, and radiance power 
is expressed as an equivalent brightness temperature. The EESS passive microwave measurements are 
referenced to absolute temperature.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
8to the understanding of the universe. It provided the ˜rst view of the cosmos outside 
the optical band and revealed an extraordinary variety of remarkable objects and 
phenomena that had never been suspected, including pulsars (spinning condensed 
stars acting as rotating radio beacons), the cosmic microwave background radiation 
(showing the universe to have started in an
 initial
 explosionŠthe Big BangŠand 
to have been expanding ever since), gigantic molecular clouds where new stars are 
being born, and active galactic nuclei (in which reside giant black holes fed by a 
disk of gas and dust and from which emanates an enormously energetic pair of 
jets, going far across intergalactic space). In the near future, radio astronomical 
observations will provide insights about the events that occurred around the time 
that the ˜rst stars were bornŠknown as the epoch of reionization. 
Radio sciences have a strong practical importance. Accurate weather forecasting 
is vital for many activities critical to human health, welfare, and securityŠincluding 
agriculture, transportation, military defense, and the mitigation of damage from 
extreme weather events such as hurricanes, wild˜re, and drought. These applica
-tions and others are discussed in detail in Chapter 2 of this report. The long-term 
monitoring of Earth is vital for climate assessment and prediction and is a major 
aid in the understanding of climate changeŠone of the most important problems 
currently facing humanity. The proper management of the environment both now 
and for decades to come will be contingent on remotely sensed data. 
On a larger scale, radio astronomy opened people™s view of the cosmos to take 
in the violent, enormously complex universe that it is now known to be. The shift 
in thought engendered by radio astronomy is analogous to that caused 500 years 
ago when it was ˜rst recognized that Earth orbits the Sun: the notion of Earth™s 
special location in the universe disappeared, and people began seeing their world 
as an element of the cosmos rather than as its center. But radio astronomy also 
has practical applications in technology that support today™s development of our 
information infrastructure, as discussed in Chapter 3. These include technical 
developments in high-performance antennas, sensitive radio receivers, electronics, 
computing, signal processing, and scienti˜c education.
Unfortunately, human-made radio frequency interference (RFI) can make the 
radio science measurements more dif˜cult, and in some cases it can render them 
unusable. This problem is introduced in §1.3 and §1.4 below and discussed in 
depth in Chapter 4.
1.1
 THE PASSIVE RADIO SPECTRUM
Radio astronomy and passive Earth remote sensing both rely on detecting, 
recording, and interpreting weak natural radio frequency emissions. These emis
-sions are radiated by all absorptive bodies: for example, forests, clouds, the Sun, 
and galaxies. The detailed features of the radiation provide information on the 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9INTRODUCTION
temperature, density, composition, motion, and other characteristics of the object 
or medium being observed. Earth studies and astronomical studies cover most of 
the radio spectrum, ranging from about 15 MHz (the lower limit for the radio 
transparency of Earth™s ionosphere), to the current limits of radio technology at 
many hundreds of gigahertz. The highest radio frequencies (at 1 THz and above) 
merge with infrared radiation, and some studies require continuous measurements 
from the radio into the infrared bands, and even on to optical bands or beyond. 
Natural radio emissions are generated by a variety of mechanisms. All matter 
emits ﬁthermal noise,ﬂ with a characteristic frequency spectrum that depends on its 
temperature. While hot objects, such as stars, emit mainly in the infrared, optical, 
and ultraviolet portions of the electromagnetic spectrum, cold gas, dust between 
the stars, and materials on Earth such as water, soil, and atmospheric gases with 
smaller temperatures (of a few hundred kelvin and below) emit mostly in the radio 
wave and submillimeter-wave portions of the spectrum (see Figure 1.1). 
Radio radiation is also emitted from atoms and molecules when they move 
from one quantum state to another. This 
line radiation
 appears at characteristic 
Figure 1-1R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 1.1
 The characteristics of the electromagnetic spectrum. See Figures 1.2 and 1.3 in this 
chapter for a more detailed picture of the atmospheric penetration of electromagnetic waves. Image 
from NASA, 
Science Program for NASA™s Astronomy and Physics Division
, Washington, D.C., 2006.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
10frequencies determined by the particular quantum transition of the atomic or 
molecular species in question (Figures 1.2 and 1.3). The measurement of radiation 
at and near these transition frequencies is extremely important for both Earth sci
-ence and radio astronomy. In Earth remote sensing, line radiation spectra can be 
used to obtain temperature and humidity pro˜les in the atmosphere from the sur
-face of Earth on up into the mesosphere. Observations for such pro˜ling purposes 
occur near the centers of atmospheric absorption lines and within the immediately 
adjacent ﬁwingsﬂ on either side of the line centers. In radio astronomy, a proper 
interpretation of line radiation provides information on the composition, density, 
and temperature of the material under study. Radio astronomers are interested in 
frequency bands where an interesting atomic or molecular transition occurs and 
where Earth™s atmosphere is particularly transparent. Spectra from these bands 
are often used to derive the motions in cosmic clouds, or in galaxies. Because 
different moleculesŠfor example CO and HCNŠhave different excitation condi
-tions, the study of several molecules (or several lines from one molecule) can give 
three-dimensional information about the cloud. This is analogous to the way that 
atmospheric pro˜les are found in Earth science measurements. 
FIGURE 1.2
 The opacity of Earth™s atmosphere in the radio range of frequencies from 1 to 1000 GHz for 
six scenarios. Image courtesy of A.J. Gasiewski, University of Colorado.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11INTRODUCTION
For many nongaseous materials on Earth (such as liquid water, ice, soil, snow, 
and vegetation), the radiation is broadened by the strong interaction of closely 
spaced molecules into a continuum that exhibits a slow spectral variation over a 
wide range of frequencies. Continuum radiation spectra can also occur when the 
scale of surface roughness or feature size (i.e., raindrop or cloud-particle diameter) 
is comparable to or smaller than a wavelength of the radiation. In Earth remote 
sensing, continuum radiation spectra are measured at a variety of microwave fre
-quencies. Optimal frequencies for measuring continuum radiation are between the 
major transition frequencies for oxygen and water vapor (see Figures 1.2 and 1.3). 
In these ﬁwindows,ﬂ the ability to probe through the atmosphere is maximized, thus 
making the continuum radiation easy to observe. Similar frequencies are used in 
radio astronomy for continuum measurements. 
The Doppler effect, in which motion of the emitter toward or away from the 
observer shifts the received frequency, provides a means of determining the motion 
of the material. Doppler-shifted radiation enables the measurement of the rotation 
of matter in spiral galaxies and that of the motion of air in the upper atmosphere. 
The expansion of the universe leads to a similar shift in the frequencies of spectral 
1008060402001000800600400200Fr
equency (GHz)Pe
rcent Tr
ansmittanceFigure 1-3R01628editable vector imageFIGURE 1.3
 The transmission spectrum of Earth™s atmosphere in the radio range of frequencies from 
1 to 1000 GHz at Mauna Kea, Hawaii, a very dry site at an altitude of approximately 14,000 ft. Such 
high, dry sites are drier than Scenario E as given in Figure 1.2, making them suitable for
 astronomical 
observations above 200 GHz. Note that the water vapor line at 22 GHz (see Figure 1.2) causes neg
-ligible loss in transmission at this site, but the lines at 556 and 752 GHz are so strongŠeven on 
the high mountaintopŠthat the atmospheric transmission is essentially zero, and no astronomical 
observations can be made from 520 to 580 GHz and 730 to 780 GHz. Image courtesy of L. Ziurys, 
 
University of Arizona.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
12lines that increase as the distance to the source increases. This effect, known as the 
cosmological redshift, allows distances to faraway galaxies to be accurately mea
-sured. (See Box 3.2, ﬁRedshift,ﬂ in Chapter 3 of this report.)
Another widespread emission mechanism is synchrotron radiation, generated 
by the acceleration of electrons in a magnetized plasma. Our Milky Way Galaxy is 
suffused with a dilute plasma that emits synchrotron radiation at frequencies of 
about 1 GHz and below. Over a much wider frequency range, this radiation is also 
associated with some of the most powerful events in the universe: pulsars, super
-novae, gamma-ray bursts, and quasars, in which matter falling into a giant black 
hole radiates a prodigious amount of radiation; and radio galaxies, in which jets 
and giant cocoons of plasma ejected from a galaxy nucleus extend well outside the 
host galaxy. Synchrotron and thermal radiation are emitted across broad frequency 
bands and with a characteristic spectral shape. Their measurement is often not 
restricted to any one particular frequency, although when the band shape needs to 
be de˜ned, many samples of the spectrum at well-separated frequencies are needed. 
The spectral lines from quantum transitions, however, must be measured at their 
speci˜c natural frequencies with allowance for Doppler shifts. 
1.2
 PROSPECTS FOR FUTURE SCIENTIFIC USE OF THE RADIO SPECTRUM
With the threat of climate change and related environmental changes over the 
next several decades, the need for environmental information for critical policy and 
economic decision making will increase. The ability of passive microwave Earth 
remote sensing to study water in various phases, at both continuum and spectral 
line frequencies, means that these instruments will be increasingly used to pro
-vide key information. Whether obtained for use in day-to-day weather forecasting 
operations or for long-term climate studies, passive microwave measurements of 
Earth represent one of the most important scienti˜c uses of the radio spectrum. 
A number of contemporary problems in physics also require radio astronomers™ 
continued ability to observe the cosmos. For instance, studies at radio frequencies 
provide the only way to investigate the epoch of reionization that occurred when 
ultraviolet radiation from the ˜rst stars ionized intergalactic space, bringing the 
universe to the state in which it exists today. Radio astronomy also provides the only 
way to study large numbers of pulsars to determine if Einstein™s theory of general 
relativity is actually correct in the universe™s most extreme conditions.
Finally, the use of passive radio techniques to observe the Sun provides the 
prospect of monitoring our own star for subtle changes in emission characteristics 
that may lead to geomagnetic disturbances. Such disturbances regularly affect the 
operation of satellite communications, navigation systems, and terrestrial power 
grids. Just as Earth environmental information is expected to grow in societal 
importance in the decades ahead, so is space environmental information.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13INTRODUCTION
1.3
 THE INTERFERENCE PROBLEM
Because the total radio spectrum is a limited resource, competition exists 
among its various users. In the United States, spectrum use is regulated by the 
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) for federal 
government users and by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for 
all others. The regulation of spectrum use includes the assignment of frequency 
bands, the speci˜cation of maximum allowed power levels, and other speci˜c 
conditions (ﬁfootnotesﬂ) regarding potential interference with other users. The 
regulations identify the uses as ﬁservicesﬂ (see §4.1 in Chapter 4), and this report 
focuses
 primarily on the Radio Astronomy Service and the Earth Exploration-
Satellite Service.
The U.S. regulatory system, as well as the International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU) system, was organized prior to 1950, when there were far fewer uses 
for the radio spectrum than there are now.
2 As new technologies have been devel
-oped, the FCC has allocated new bands for them. During the past two decades, 
however, the pace of development in radio communications has begun to strain the 
regulatory system, with the biggest problem being a lack of unallocated spectrum 
available for new technologies.
There are two fundamentally different categories of spectrum users. One cat
-egory consists of active usersŠthose who transmit radio signals to achieve their 
ends, which may be voice or data communications, radar surveillance, or even Earth 
remote sensing using radars or other transmitters. As a group, active users need 
ever-increasing amounts of spectrum for the ever-increasing uses that are invented; 
telecommunications companies (in particular) pay large sums of money to obtain 
the rights to use it. The other category consists of passive users, such as those in 
radio astronomy and passive remote sensing, who operate in receive-only mode. 
These users also need increasing amounts of spectrum to obtain the increased 
sensitivity required for new studies and services. 
The uses and desires of these two communities of spectrum users are asym
-metric, because the passive services do not transmit any radio signals. Accordingly, 
active users can interfere with passive users but not vice versa. Since the passive 
services can operate in any spectral band, they can face radio frequency interfer
-ence from active services over much of the spectrum. This can include (at times) 
interference in the bands allocated on an exclusive, primary basis to the passive 
services. Such interference is discussed in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. See Box 1.1 for 
more information.
2 
For a description of the U.S. regulatory process and the ITU process, see National Research Council, 
Handbook of Frequency Allocations and Spectrum Protection for Scienti˜c Uses
, Washington, D.C.: The 
National Academies Press, 2007, Ch. 1.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
14BOX 1.1
 Passive Service Measurements and Radio Frequency Interference
Receivers for Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) and Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) 
activities are extremely sensitive, as they must respond to very weak natural radiations. Follow
-ing is a list of characteristics of EESS and RAS measurements that must be taken into account 
in considering radio frequency interference (RFI).
Technology improvements are enabling more ambitious and sophisticated Earth remote 
sensing and radio astronomy experiments. Thus system sensitivity requirementsŠand 
hence RFI thresholdsŠare steadily tightening.
The spectral requirements of the RAS and EESS continue to increase, and some obser
-vations in the bands allocated to the active services are essential.
Weak radio interference can generate erroneous scienti˜c results even when such 
interference is essentially undetectable. When such interference is detectable, it only 
becomes so after a long period of observation time has passed, meaning that the entire 
observation is ruined.
Radio astronomy bandwidths are large, up to 1 GHz and more, and integration times 
are often long, up to 10
5 seconds (about a day), and can extend to months.
Radio astronomy studies extend out to redshifts of greater than 6 (see Box 3.2 in 
Chapter 3), so that for the most distant objects, frequencies of the spectral lines are 
reduced by up to a factor of more than 7. For the important hydrogen (H) line at 
21 cm (1.42 GHz), for example, this means that sensitive studies need to be made 
at essentially all frequencies from 1.42 GHz down to the very high frequency range 
(30-300 MHz).
Satellite-based passive Earth remote sensing measurements occur on a continuous 
basis and over the entire globe. A set of line and window frequencies extending from 
approximately 1 GHz to higher than 500 GHz is used. 
EESS observations of trace gases such as ozone or compounds of nitrogen usually 
require the measurement of several spectral lines for every molecular species under 
study. This means that many speci˜c frequency bands are required, and it is not practi
-cal to restrict measurements to the bands assigned to the passive services.
To be more speci˜c, three types of unwanted emissions that cause interfer
-ence are de˜ned in the FCC regulations: ﬁspuriousﬂ emission, ﬁout-of-bandﬂ 
emission, and emissions in adjacent channels. See the glossary in this report for 
greater detail. Loosely speaking, spurious emissions come from a transmitter 
emitting at frequencies outside its assigned band and are caused, for example, 
by no
nlinearities that generate harmonics. Out-of-band emissions are emissions 
at neighboring frequencies that are spread into adjacent bands by the modula
-tion process. Both can interfere with radio astronomy and Earth remote sensing 
observations. The generation of small spurious and out-of-band signals is vir
-tually inevitable due to the technological limitations in transmitter electronics, 
but the actual levels emitted can be controlled at the transmitter and kept to 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15INTRODUCTION
within allowable limits. Emission in adjacent channels can create a ﬁblockingﬂ 
interference within a receiver. However, this particular occurrence is a result of 
the technical limitations of the receiver, not the transmitter. The allowed emission 
levels within these categories are de˜ned by regulatory agencies (the FCC and 
the NTIA) and through international treaties, as discussed in Chapter 4. In the 
vast majority of cases, both spurious and out-of-band RFI is inadvertent, that is, 
unintentional. Nonetheless, such emissions are prohibited if they rise above the 
allowed level in a protected band. However, in cases where Earth remote sens
-ing or radio astronomy observations must be made in bands where no primary 
allocation for these uses exists, there is no recourse with respect to the problems 
and data outages caused by RFI.
Finding:
 Owing to their receive-only nature, the passive Earth Exploration
-Satellite 
Service and Radio Astronomy Service, operating from 10 MHz to 3 THz, are inca
-pable of interfering with other services.
1.4
 INTERFERENCE MITIGATION
Users of the RAS and EESS go to considerable effort to mitigate the effects of 
RFI. Such effort includes careful attention to the design of the receivers to block 
authorized transmissions that are nearby (both in terms of geography and in terms 
of frequency), excision techniques (in time and frequency) to eliminate unwanted 
signals, and, now in development, advanced processing techniques to recognize RFI 
and either excise it or subtract it. These ﬁunilateralﬂ techniques are all expensive 
to do on a regular basis. Furthermore, there are fundamental limitations on their 
ability to distinguish natural thermal noise (the desired signal) from an ef˜ciently 
modulated communications or radar signal (the RFI) in which power is uniformly 
distributed across the allocated band. 
Cooperative interference mitigation involves cooperative use of spectrum, 
with RAS and EESS users coordinating their observations to take advantage of 
the large amounts of unused spectrum at any time and location. Cooperative 
mitigation techniques hold great promise, but are untested and would require 
new spectrum use policies and practices so that these techniques could develop. 
Both unilateral interface mitigation and cooperative interference mitigation are 
discussed in Chapter 4.
Another major mitigation cost is incurred up front when an observatory is 
located in a remote area to escape RFI. Current interest in locating receiver arrays 
to the far side of the Moon is perhaps the most extreme example of this type of 
cost. While this strategy can be useful for radio astronomy, Earth remote sensing 
satellites observe the entire Earth over the course of each day and therefore could 
not avail themselves of a similar advantage. See Box 1.2 for more information.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
16BOX 1.2
 Important Characteristics of Radio Frequency Interference
Following is a list of important characteristics of radio frequency interference (RFI):
Licensed transmitters, such as television, taxi radios, and cellular telephones occupy 
˜xed spectral bands. RFI from these sources can in some cases be eliminated by avoid
-ing those frequency bands. However, vigilance in keeping spurious and out-of-band 
emissions down to acceptable levels is always necessary. 

Strong spurious and out-of-band signals are in fact seen in Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) 
and Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) experiments. For example, Figure 3.10 in 
Chapter 3 shows an example of interference in the band 1610.6-1613.8 MHz, a band 
allocated to the RAS on a shared primary basis. Figures 2.15 through 2.18 in Chap
-ter 2 show inadvertent RFI to the NASA-Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency Advanced 
Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth (AMSR-E) sensors at 10.6-10.7 GHz. 
Low-power, unlicensed transmitting devices are rapidly proliferating. They range from 
cordless telephones to local area computer networks to digital cameras to automotive 
anticollision radars, to name only a few of many examples. Since these are personal 
devices, the total emission level is generally proportional to the population and level 
of development in any given area.
Radio telescopes gain a great deal of protection from RFI by locating in remote
 areasŠfor example, in the National Radio Quiet Zone in West Virginia, behind high moun
-tains, or in remote desert areas. However, the RAS cannot hide from RFI caused by 
airplanes or satellites ˚ying overhead. The locating of observatories far from commonly 
used ˚ight paths is considered, when possible. 

The EESS, operating mainly from low-Earth-orbit satellites, cannot escape the RFI caused 
by multitudes of low-power-radiating devices as it passes over populated areas. Over 
parts of Europe and North America, some EESS data products are now ruined by RFI.
Many active communications systems, including television, are moving to more ef˜
-cient use of spectrum, especially in ˜lling up their assigned bands uniformly. This 
results in less white space where scientists might be able to operate with passive 
equipment. It also means that the signals more closely resemble the random noise of 
natural signals and are thus less recognizable as RFI.
1.5
 ENABLING SCIENTIFIC USES OF THE RADIO SPECTRUM
The goal of this report is to highlight the importance of the passive uses of the 
radio spectrum, to identify issues that threaten the ability of the science services to 
provide bene˜ts to society, and to recommend steps for the mitigation or elimina
-tion of these threats while recognizing the importance of the other services. Chap
-ters 2 and 3 discuss the knowledge gained from and bene˜ts to society produced 
by the EESS and RAS, respectively, as well as current and future spectrum require
-ments for maintaining progress. Chapter 4 discusses current trends in spectrum use 
and technology that shape the environment in which the EESS and RAS operate, as 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17INTRODUCTION
well as methods for mitigating the impact of interference. Finally, Chapter 5 pro
-vides the committee™s recommendations for continuing to enable passive scienti˜c 
uses of the radio spectrum. The committee™s ˜ndings are presented throughout the 
report and in Chapter 5, and an acronym list and glossary of terms are provided in 
the appendixes, in addition to other useful supplementary material. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
2The Earth 
 Exploration-Satellite Service
In 1960 the ˜rst weather satellite dramatically opened humanity™s eyes to the 
beauty and complexity of Earth™s atmosphere. Never before had anyone photo
-graphed a hurricane™s movement or cyclonic shape (see Figure 2.1) or observed 
the global form of atmospheric waves on a planetary scale. After proving the 
usefulness of orbiting weather observations, NASA and the National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) began developing ever more sensitive and 
innovative space-based instruments that help people understand the natural world 
around them and their impact on it (see Box 2.1). Modern observation systems 
offer economically and societally important forecasts extending farther into the 
future than ever before, but these advances depend on protected radio frequency 
allocations.
With the development of more advanced instrumentation, it quickly became 
clear that there were great opportunities to observe at wavelengths other than what 
is usually called light. In fact, visible light is now only a small part of the story. 
Most current satellite sensors also observe terrestrial emissions at infrared and/or 
radio wavelengths. These environmental applications have evolved over the past 50 
years by combining radio astronomy and geophysical techniques to form the new 
scienti˜c ˜eld known as microwave remote sensing. 
Human eyes evolved to detect visible light because Earth™s atmosphere allows 
solar radiation to pass through an ﬁatmospheric windowﬂ at those wavelengths. 
In the same way, the ﬁeyeﬂ of the satellite (the receiver) is designed to view Earth 
through atmospheric windows at other wavelengths, rather than observing re˚ected 
sunlight as human eyes do. Analogous to what infrared goggles (providing heat 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Figure 2-1R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.1
 Hurricane Camille as it approaches the Gulf States in 1969, as photographed from the 
NASA Nimbus III satellite. Image courtesy of NASA/Nimbus III Satellite.
vision) do, most satellite instruments detect the inherent emission of radiation 
(heat) from the atmosphere and terrestrial surface at wavelengths that reveal details 
invisible to human eyes. When the atmosphere itself is of interest, opaque wave
-lengths that do not pass through the atmosphere but are absorbed by it offer more 
information. Each window and opaque band responds differently to the various 
properties of the terrestrial surface and atmosphere, allowing those properties to be 
studied by a simultaneous analysis at multiple frequencies. The accuracy of these 
studies increases with the number of observed frequencies. The unique ability of 
passive microwave sensors to ﬁsee throughﬂ most clouds makes those sensors essen
-tial, particularly where clouds are persistent. The sensors are passive in that they 
do not transmit signals but instead only receive the natural background emission. 
Scientists can thus extract information from the radio spectrum on enviro
nmental 
properties as varied as atmospheric temperature and humidity, precipitation rate, 
soil moisture, ocean salinity, and ocean waves (and therefore surface winds and 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
20BOX 2.1
 The Origin of Earth Remote Sensing
Earth remote sensing techniques have developed over many years, evolving out of astron
-omy and accelerating as satellite technology became more robust. 
Before 1932: 
Use of optical astronomy (initial passive spectral observations of stellar 
and planetary surface and atmospheric temperatures and compositions, demonstrating 
basic methods).
1932: The ˜rst radio astronomy observations by pioneer radio astronomer Karl Jansky, 
revealing cosmic radiation.
1940-1945: Wartime studies of centimeter- and millimeter-wave atmospheric absorp
-tion spectra and passive radiation; the development of sensitive radiometry.
1968: Launch of the ˜rst passive microwave radiometer on the Soviet Cosmos-243 
satelliteŠit observed sea surface temperature, land temperature, snow/ice cover, water 
vapor, and liquid water using four unscanned window channels at 3.5-37 GHz (unfor
-tunately short-lived, operating only for weeks).
1972, 1975: 
The ˜rst long-lived satellites to image window-channel parameters 
(humidity over ocean, sea ice, ocean roughness and wind, snow cover, precipitation, 
land temperature, etc.) and atmospheric temperature pro˜les: Nimbus-E Microwave 
Spectrometer (NEMS; two window channels and three opaque channels) and
 Electrical 
Scanning Microwave Radiometer (ESMR) imaging at 19.36 GHz launched on the 
NASA Nimbus-5 satellite in 1972, and the Scanning Microwave Radiometer (a wide-
swath imaging version of NEMS) and the dual-polarized ESMR imaging at 37 GHz 
launched on Nimbus-6 in 1975.
1978: The ˜rst operational weather satellites to incorporate imaging passive micro
-wave spectrometers for temperature sounding (microwave sounding unit with four 
opaque-band channels at 50-58 GHz on TIROS-N and NOAA-6 and -7).
1987: The ˜rst operational satellites to monitor surface parameters and atmospheric 
water (Special Sensor Microwave/Imager with seven window channels at four fre
-quencies, 19.35-85.5 GHz, ˜rst launched by the Defense Meteorological Satellite 
Program).Post-1987:
 Launch of continually improved research (NASA) and operational (National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Department of Defense) passive micro
-wave instrument types.
ocean internal waves). The full global coverage provided by satellites enables scien
-tists to monitor Earth™s environment far more accurately and completely than had 
been possible using traditional means such as weather stations and balloon sound
-ers. Satellite data have also greatly improved the accuracy of weather forecasts and 
enabled sensitive, large-scale climate studies revealing, for example, the effects of 
ozone-modifying trace gases. Figure 2.2 presents a typical image of the abundance 
of water vapor over the oceans as observed by combining observations in multiple 
frequencies obtained by the Advanced Microwave Scanning
 Radiometer-Earth 
(AMSR-E) imaging passive microwave spectrometer.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Figure 2-2R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.2
 Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth (AMSR-E) data showing tropospheric 
water vapor abundance over Earth™s oceans, denoted by the colors in the image. Land is denoted 
by shades of gray, its shade depending on the elevation; sea ice is denoted by white. AMSR-E data 
are produced by Remote Sensing Systems and sponsored by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs 
 
DISCOVER Project and the AMSR-E Science Team. Data are available at www.remss.com.
Today, the United States operates a suite of more than 30 satellites that measure 
Earth™s planetary environment and collectively represent many billions of dollars 
invested by U.S. taxpayers. 
The signi˜cance of the passive radio services is suggested not only by the 
substantial government investment in their development and operation, but also 
by their impact on the national economy. The environmental products facilitated 
by the passive services are critical for day-to-day, long-term, and severe weather 
forecasting and also for the Department of Defense (DOD) and for the energy, 
agriculture, and transportation industries.
1 The U.S. investment in passive Earth 
observatories provides the nation with a high degree of economic leverage over 
environmental events.
1 
The 2006 report 
Economic Statistics for NOAA
 states that ﬁweather and climate sensitive industries, 
both directly and indirectly, account for about one-third of the Nation™s GDP in sectors ranging from 
˜nance, insurance, and real estate to services, retail and wholesale trade and manufacturing. Industries 
directly impacted by weather such as agriculture, construction, energy distribution, and outdoor 
recreation account for nearly 10 percent of GDP.ﬂ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 
Economic Statistics for NOAA
, Washington, D.C., 2006.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
22On a larger scale, Earth™s climate is deemed so important to humanity that the 
2007 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) and Albert Gore, Jr., ﬁfor their efforts to build up and disseminate 
greater knowledge about man-made climate change, and to lay the foundations 
for the measures that are needed to counteract such change.ﬂ
2 The prize was 
based on the laureates™ assessment that large-scale climate change would irrevo
-cably alter
 living conditions in many places in the world and thus lead to wide
-spread civil unrest. Consistent with this assessment of the importance of climate 
to
 humanity are estimates that the potential consequences of global change in its 
various manifestations (sea ice loss, global warming and drought, coral bleach
-ing, tropical ecosystem collapse, and other interrelated environmental problems) 
would be associated with unprecedented societal costs to the United States and 
the world.
3 These staggering costs demand that the most precise information on 
global environmental processes be made available to decision makers grappling 
with questions of environmental policy. The precision of this information and the 
overall understanding of climate change are driven by both observational science 
and improved understanding and models of the environment, which in turn are 
dependent on the availability of spectrum for use in environmental observation. 
At stake are potential measures including limits on emissions of greenhouse gases 
such as carbon dioxide and methane, limits on aerosols and chloro˚uorocarbons, 
restrictions on deforestation and freshwater usage, and stiff requirements for agri
-cultural and manufacturing practices and the transportation industry.
It is also useful to note the educational value of government programs that 
apply radio science to environmental problems. These programs are largely con
-ducted either through or in collaboration with universities and thereby train many 
graduate students at the cutting edge of both radio- and microwave-frequency 
technology and Earth science, thus contributing to economic sectors critical to 
U.S. global competitiveness and the defense of the nation.
The importance of environmental radio services has increased in parallel with 
the use of public and commercial wireless and other electronics technologies (see 
discussion in Chapter 4). Collectively there has been a substantial increase in the 
number of human-made radio signals that can interfere with and corrupt needed 
scienti˜c and operational passive observations of the environment.
4 The commod
-itization of wireless and other electronics technology has signi˜cantly increased the 
pressure on the passive uses of the spectrum in terms of allocations and disruptive 
2 
Available at http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/2007/; accessed August 26, 2008.
3 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Working Group II Report, 
Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability
, Geneva, Switzerland, 2007.
4 
Scienti˜c obser
vations
 are those conducted for research purposes. 
Operational obser
vations
 are 
conducted in consistent, repeated ways for use in products such as weather forecasts.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
interference. As quickly as techniques have been developed to mitigate human-
made interference, they are eroded by other expanding active uses of the spectrum. 
Moreover, as the spectral ef˜ciency of wireless technology improves, the interfer
-ence that it produces increasingly resembles random noise, which is more dif˜cult 
to identify and mitigate. These dif˜culties are compounded by the increased use of 
spectrum licenses that permit unlimited numbers of approved devices to be used, 
with decreasing means for enforcement or further mitigation. Section 2.5 discusses 
these dif˜culties in a variety of circumstances. 
Most active services can use coding techniques, better antenna systems, and 
higher-power transmitters to survive even high levels of interference, but these 
techniques are not applicable to passive services. There is a fundamental
 asymmetry 
between the spectral requirements of active communications services and passive 
environmental uses. Advances in wireless technology are rapidly increasing the abil
-ities of competing communications services to share radio spectrum through agile 
time-frequency multiplexing, whereas the measurement precisions of the passive 
services are intrinsically limited by the strength of natural emissions, the reception 
bandwidth, and the observing time.
The competition for radio spectrum also has global implications, as the U.S. 
environment is affected by environmental conditions in other nations and vice 
versa. Both U.S. and foreign environmental satellites ˚y over almost the entire globe 
and continuously observe within the same spectral bands everywhere; thus critical 
environmental radio bands need to be uncontaminated everywhere. The data from 
these diverse, Earth-orbiting, multinational assets are increasingly being shared in 
the global public interest, which parallels the separate national interests, and can 
be obtained by no other means. Furthermore, the national character of environ
-mental services and the multidecadal times required for their development and 
use in space make them much less nimble than the private sector that can develop 
new radiating products in a period of months. It has therefore become clear that a 
new look at spectrum policies and regulations is necessary in order to protect the 
critical passive environmental observations by Earth observation satellites and to 
permit the passive and active services to coexist productively. This chapter discusses 
the reasons behind the need for new regulations, which are further elaborated on 
in Chapter 4.
2.1
 SPECIFIC APPLICATION AREAS OF PASSIVE 
 MICROWAVE REMOTE SENSING
Earth remote sensing is critically important to the United States and to the 
advancement of human scienti˜c knowledge about Earth and the enviro
nmental 
processes that support life and commerce. Microwave remote sensing, or the Earth 
Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) in regulatory parlance, provides direct eco
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
24nomic bene˜ts to the nation by obtaining information that has economic value 
to both the public and private sectors. In addition, the collection of these data is a 
highly technical enterprise that strengthens the U.S. industrial, defense, telecom
-munications, and environmental sectors. The United States operates in a competi
-tive, information-dominated economy that is dependent not only on having access 
to the passive spectrum for obtaining data for commercial, governmental, and 
public purposes, but also on having skilled engineers who are trained in the most 
sophisticated microwave engineering techniques.
Passive and active remote sensing act in tandem to collect environmental 
information and ultimately to provide the bene˜ts to society referred to above. 
Much of the data that lead to these bene˜ts, however, is only available from passive 
microwave sensors, and these sensors have unique needs that must be met to enable 
the measurements that they make. For example, passive microwave remote sensing 
is indispensable for better numerical weather forecasting, large-scale monitoring 
of subsurface soil moisture, and so on, and improvements in weather forecasting 
are important economically and strategically. 
This section presents a sampling of applications in which passive access to 
the microwave spectrum is essential for the country. The discussion is orga
-nized in the following broad topics: weather forecasting and monitoring, severe 
weather and disasters, climate and global change, resource management, aviation, 
defense and pubic safety, international partnerships, and education and technol
-ogy. The subsection on international partnerships includes discussion of a recent 
international effort, initiated by the United States and the Group of Eight (G8), to 
ensure that the nations of the world engaged in space remote sensing collaborate 
in exchanging data to bene˜t their societies.
Weather Forecasting and Monitoring
Satelliteborne passive microwave sensors are a critical part of the global weather 
monitoring system. Passive microwave sensors are particularly critical for measur
-ing temperature, humidity, and precipitation pro˜les in the cloud-affected tropo
-sphere below approximately 10 km, where most economically important weather 
occurs, and in measuring sea surface winds and temperatures and soil moisture. 
Part of the reason for this importance is that weather radars measure only the 
re˚ectivity of water and ice droplets in the atmosphere but are
 insensitive to these 
other parameters. Even so, the extraction of useful information from radar re˚ec
-tivity measurements relies greatly on knowledge of the droplets™ size distribution, 
which requires complex and costly multiband radar measurements to measure 
directly. Passive microwave radiometers, however, directly measure the total quan
-tity of liquid water as well as water vapor and other variables. Such radiometers 
can herald impending weather events by measuring the presence of water vapor in 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
advance of cloud formation and then detect the formation of liquid water droplets 
well in advance of the detection by rain radars. Moreover, when used in conjunction 
with weather radars, passive radiometers provide a high degree of precision in the 
measurement of the path- or area-averaged quantities being observed that serve 
to calibrate the radar™s signal. In this manner the radiometer is able to facilitate 
the radar™s capability to provide high resolution. Radars are thus useful in con
-junction with radiometers but not as a substitute for them, as exempli˜ed by the 
recent Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) and the CloudSat and future 
Aquarius and Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP) missions.
Modern weather forecasts are based primarily on numerical weather prediction 
(NWP) models run on massively parallel computers. These models use direct data 
assimilation (DDA), a powerful technique developed during the past two decades 
that incorporates all available data from satellites, balloons, radars, and surface 
stations to steer NWP models. Major worldwide centers developing and operating 
these models are located in the United States, Europe, Canada, China, Japan, and 
Australia. Their algorithms, from the beginning, have relied heavily on passive 
microwave measurements of relevant environmental variables, and they will con
-tinue to do so as spatial and temporal resolutions improve. Passive microwave data 
in the opaque temperature-sensitive bands above 50 GHz have been particularly 
helpful because of their insensitivity to most clouds; these observations probably 
constitute the single most valuable data source currently enabling 1-week weather 
forecasts. The demand for improved space and time resolution has been relentless 
since the inception of NWP modeling in the 1970s and is expected to continue 
for the foreseeable future, particularly as wireless devices enabled by the Global 
Positioning System increase the demands for ever more site-speci˜c, personalized 
information on weather. 
In recent decades, the accuracy and usefulness of weather forecasts have increased 
tremendously because of progress in both NWP systems and
 satellite-based remote 
sensing systems. Figure 2.3 illustrates this progress in terms of the number of days 
for which forecasts of a given quality are obtained. For the
 highest-quality Southern 
Hemispheric forecasts, satellite data increase the forecast from 12 hours to 2 daysŠa 
factor of fourŠand for an anomaly correlation of 0.6 the forecast doubles from 
3.25 to 6.5 days. The anomaly correlation is a common measure of forecast accuracy, 
with values above 0.6 generally considered to be signi˜cant.
Much of the improvement in forecasting shown in Figure 2.3 is due to the 
direct use of passive microwave data on their own, and to the integration of 
microwave and infrared data that combine the best features of both sensor types. 
Surface wind data over the ocean derived from spaceborne microwave measure
-ments have also been helpful. These improvements are particularly striking in the 
Southern Hemisphere where data from surface stations and balloon soundings 
are sparse, but they also extend forecasts in the Northern Hemisphere by roughly 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
26S. Hemisphere 1000 mb AC
 Z 20S - 80S Wa
ves 1-20 Au
g 15 - Sep 20, 
20030.50.550.60.650.70.750.80.850.90.95101
23
45
67
8Forecast [days]Anomaly Correlation controlno satelliteFigure 2-3R01628editable ve
ctor  imageFIGURE 2.3
 Anomaly correlation for days 0 to 7 for 500 hectopascal geopotential height in the zonal 
band 20°-80° South for August/September. The red and blue arrows indicate that the use of satellite 
data in the forecast model has doubled the length of a useful forecast (i.e., a forecast with anomaly 
correlation = 0.6). Image courtesy of NOAA.
25 percent. Passive microwave sensors are also useful for tracing the movement 
of water through normal weather cycles. For instance, surface soil moisture, snow 
cover, and snow-water-equivalent drive energy exchange with the atmosphere and 
therefore affect weather forecasts. The major impact of these surface variables on 
forecast accuracy is just beginning to be seen (Figure 2.4). 
Brief discussions of a few speci˜c weather-monitoring topics follow.
Soil Moisture
Accurate knowledge of the parameters of soil moisture (SM) has been shown 
to improve forecasts of local storms and seasonal climate anomalies. In Figure 2.5, 
panel (C) shows the observed difference in rainfall between two extreme years, 
the ˚ood year of 1993 minus the drought year of 1988, over the middle of the 
United States. Current atmospheric models tend to use sea surface temperatures 
(SSTs) as their primary boundary condition because so much of Earth™s surface is 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
12-Hours Ahead We
ather ForecastsWithLISWithoutLISObserve
dRainfallFigure 2-4R01628editable vector type ov
erlies bitmapped imagesFigure 2-5R01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 2.4
 A depiction of the impact of observations of soil moisture (left) on 12-hour rainfall 
forecasts that use Weather Research and Forecasting models (for June 12, 2002). Panels at right: 
Forecasts with and without the Land Information System (LIS) providing improved soil moisture initial 
and boundary conditions. Image courtesy of NASA.
FIGURE 2.5
 The value of soil moisture data to climate forecasts. Predictability of seasonal climate is 
dependent on boundary conditions such as sea surface temperatures (SST) and soil moistureŠsoil 
moisture being particularly important over continental interiors. In the results of a simulation driven 
only by SST (panel A), the climate anomaly in panel C (observed difference in rainfall between the 
˜ood year of 1993 minus the drought year of 1988) is not reproduced. Results of the simulation 
driven by SST and soil moisture (panel B), however, accurately predict this seasonal anomaly. 
SOURCE: D. Entekhabi, G.R. Asrar, A.K. Betts, K.J. Beven, R.L. Bras, C.J. Duffy, T. Dunne, R.D. Koster, 
D.P.
 Lettenmaier, D.B. McLaughlin, and W.J. Shuttleworth, ﬁAn Agenda for Land Surface Hydrology 
Research and a Call for the Second International Hydrological Decade,ﬂ 
Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society,
 80(10): 2043-2058 (1999).
ocean. However, models just using SSTs do not do a good job of capturing seasonal 
climate anomalies in the middle of large continents. As seen from the results in 
Figure 2.5(A), the climate anomaly is not reproduced. However, if SM data such 
as those derivable from space-based 1.4 GHz passive microwave measurements are 
incorporated, atmospheric models can accurately predict the seasonal anomalies in 
BCASpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
28extreme weather, as seen in Figure 2.5(B). In the second example of the importance 
of SM data (Figure 2.6), NWP can be improved over the continental United States 
by more accurately initializing the land surface state with soil moisture data. 
Soil moisture is also a key parameter in forecasting relating to agriculture, 
drought, and ˚ooding and for predicting vegetative stress and establishing related 
government policies. Passive microwave radiometers operating at frequencies of 
10 GHz and lower are sensitive to variations in soil density, type, and moisture 
content and are needed for SM measurements. Radiometry in the 1-2 GHz range 
is arguably the best means for measuring subsurface soil moisture on a national 
or global basis. 
Sea Surface Winds
Global sea surface wind data are critical for high-quality NWP forecasts, for 
developing data pertinent to tropical cyclone warnings, aircraft and ship opera
-tions, ship routing, and other civil and military operations. Sea surface wind data 
constitute one of the most important parameters in operational meteorological 
remote sensing. Space-based remote sensing of sea surface wind vector (SSWV) 
depends on precision measurements of polarimetric microwave emissions from 
the ocean surface. These measurements have been shown to improve the forecast
-ing capability of NWP models signi˜cantly, thus contributing to maritime and 
coastal safety and commerce. The accuracy of the wind vector products obtained 
from the Naval Research Laboratory™s (NRL™s) WindSat retrievals to date has 
reached or exceeded the accuracy of the wind vector products available from active 
 
scatterometer systems such as QuikScat at moderate to high wind speeds. Also, 
the ability of microwave radiometers to measure simultaneously atmospheric and 
sea temperature properties motivates attempts to improve further the accuracy 
Figure 2-6R01628uneditable bitmapped imageﬁBuffalo Creek Basin, PA
ﬂ 
replaced in image to rightBuffaloCreekBasin, PA
FIGURE 2.6
 Soil moisture data improve numerical weather prediction over continents by accurately 
initializing land surface states. In this example, 24-hour prior forecasts of a high-resolution atmo
-spheric model of rainfall are shown without (A) and with (B) soil moisture input data. The observed 
data are shown in panel C. Provided by the National Snow and Ice Data Center.
BCASpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
of the radiometer products. In addition, the National Polar-orbiting Operational 
Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS, which will be the next generation of 
U.S. weather satellites) will include a microwave radiometer (called the Microwave 
Imager/Sounder, or MIS) that will likely have many capabilities similar to those of 
WindSat, including the capability to measure multiple parameters. 
Sea Surface Temperature
Global, all-weather sea surface temperature data are critical for NWP and for 
climate research. SST measurements are important for understanding heat exchange 
and the coupling between ocean and atmosphere, and SST data are required by 
operational ocean analyses in order to properly constrain upper-ocean circulation 
and thermal structure. SST measurements in clear air can be obtained using
 electro-
optical (traditional) instruments; however, clouds prevent these measurements, 
so passive microwave measurements within the approximately 4-11 GHz region 
are critical for obtaining coverage in areas that are seasonally cloud-covered. For 
example, areas in the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone off the coast of Washington 
and Oregon are not imaged with traditional satellite SST sensors for weeks at a 
time owing to persistent stratus cloud cover, necessitating an all-weather solution. 
The standard SST measurement uncertainty for space-based SST measurements is 
0.5 K at 50 km passive microwave (all-weather) capability. 
Water Vapor Pro˜les
Global water vapor pro˜les are essential to the numerical weather prediction 
of rainfall and drought and help constrain such predictions in general. As in the 
case of temperature pro˜le measurements, combined microwave and infrared 
spectral data can yield what is nearly all-weather global performance, even in 
most cloudy conditions. Two different types of microwave observations are used: 
those in transparent bands within which the water vapor absorption stands out 
(1) against the colder ocean background (ocean partially re˚ects the extremely 
cold cosmic background radiation), or (2) against that of cold low
-emissivity 
land. No pro˜le information is usually retrievedŠonly an estimate of the
 column-
integrated abundance. The frequencies most often used for this purpose include 
18.7, 22, 23.8, 31.4, 37, and 89 GHz. To improve retrieval accuracies, these chan
-nels are often dual-polarized (horizontal and vertical) and scanned at a near-
 
constant angle of incidence (e.g., TRMM Microwave Imager [TMI], Special Sensor 
Microwave/Imager [SSM/I], Special Sensor Microwave/Imager Sounder [SSM/IS], 
WindSat, and AMSR-E). In addition, the opaque water vapor resonance near 
183 GHz is often used in combination with some of the lower frequencies; these 
frequencies generally include 89, 150, 164-168, and 176-191 GHz, but they must 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
30be used in combination with temperature pro˜le information to yield the most 
accurate results (e.g., Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit [AMSU], SSM/IS). 
Instruments retrieving water vapor pro˜les are generally used to retrieve other 
parameters simultaneously, such as cloud water content, precipitation rate, and 
ice and snow cover information.
Severe Weather and Disasters
One impact of world population growth over the past 50 years is an increased 
vulnerability to natural disasters. Weather-related disasters include tornadoes, 
hurricanes, hail, blizzards, ˚oods, mudslides, heat waves, forest ˜res, and drought. 
Some disasters have immediate impacts and others long-term effects; for example, 
rising sea levels could have major impacts on coastal areas, and severe declines in 
snow cover in the western United States could yield less spring snowmelt and water 
for summer agriculture and urban needs. 
Extreme weather events and other natural disasters can be costly, not only 
in terms of the immediate loss of life and property that they can cause, but also 
because of the efforts needed to anticipate and respond to such disasters and in the 
long-term economic and societal consequences of such events. NOAA estimates 
that the cost in the United States of damages from tornadoes, hurricanes, and ˚oods 
alone averages around $11.4 billion annually.
5 Even one major hurricane, however, 
can signi˜cantly exceed these costs. Although the full cost of Hurricane Katrina, 
which made landfall near New Orleans on August 28, 2005, will not be known for 
many years, insured losses alone are estimated at $40.0 billion.
6 EESS observations 
enable signi˜cant economic and societal savings owing to their ability to predict 
such costly natural events and to allow people to prepare for them.
To provide a perspective on the types of costs referred to above, Figure 2.7 
highlights major U.S. weather-related disasters over the past 25 years. As grow
-ing population density along the coasts of the nation has increased the cost of 
coastal disasters, the mitigating effect of improved weather forecasting has been 
reducing those costs by increasing the warning times and the accuracy of the 
forecasts, leading to increased life-saving evacuation and cost-reducing physical 
preparations while precluding such steps where they are not needed. According to 
a report from the National Research Council™s Space Studies Board, the error in 
3-day-forecast landfall positions of hurricanes was reduced from 210 miles in 1985 
to about 110 miles in 2004, arguably halving the preparation area while increas
-ing the population response and preparation effectiveness. Further, the accuracy 
5 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Of˜ce of the Chief Economist, 
Economic 
Statistics for NOAA
, 5th Ed., April 2006, p. 10.
6 
Ibid, p. 18.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Figure 2-7R01628editable vector imageDollar amounts shown are approximate damages/costs in $ billions.Location shown is the general area for the regional ev
ent. 
Seve
ral hurr
icanesmade multiple landfalls.Additional information for these ev
ents is av
ailable at NCDC WWW sitewww.ncdc.noaa.gov/ol/reports/billionz.html
1998 / $1.11993 / $1.31986 / $2.31998 / $8.31992 / $2.01980 / $48.41994 / $3.71988 / $61.61993 / $26.71997 / $4.11994 / $1.2
1995 / $3.61991 / $3.51995-1996 / $6.01983 / $5.91991 / $2.11998 / $1.51998 / $1.71996 / $1.2
1996-1997 / $3.41993 / $1.31992 / $35.61995 / $2.5(U.S. 
Vi
rg
in Island)1994 / $1.21985 / $2.81985 / $2.41998 / $6.51989 / $13.91990 / $1.41994 / $1.21998 / $1.11995 / $6.81997 / $1.1/ 
1993/ $7.01996 / $5.81999 / $6.51999 / $1.41999 / $1.71989 / $1.52000 / $2.1
2001 / $5.11982-1983 / $2.22002 / $10.0+LLegend1992 / $2.4LBillion Dollar Weather Disasters 1980 - 2005HurricaneTr
opical StormFloodSevere WeatherBlizzardFiresNor'easterIce StormHeat Wa
ve
/droughtFr
eeze
2003 / $2.52003 / $1.62004 / $14.02005 / $2.02004 / $7.02004 / $9.02003 / $5.02003 / $3.42005 / $125.0NOAA
™s
National Climatic Data Center2002 / $2.0
2000 / $4.2
1982-83 / $2.
22001 / $1.9
1999 / $1.
11996 / $3.0
1998 / $1.
11983 / $4.0
1985 / $2.2
1995 / $3.6
2004 / $15.02005 / $16.02005 / $16.0The U.
S.
 has sustained 67 weather related disasters ov
er the last 26 ye
ars with ov
erall damages/costs ex
ceeding $1.0 billion for each ev
ent.  55 of the disasters occured during or after 1990.  Total costs fo
r the 67 ev
ents were approximately $540 billion using an inflation/wealth index.2005 / $  1.0FIGURE 2.7
 Billion-dollar weather-related disasters in the United States from 1980 to 2005. NOTE: 
Earth Exploration-Satellite System measurements are now an important data source for improving the 
accuracy of forecasts. Image courtesy of NOAA.
of today™s 4-day forecasts is about the same as the 2-day forecasts of 20 years ago.
7 EESS measurements have played a major role in improving these forecasts. The 
insurance industry is also increasingly interested in using passive microwave data 
to arbitrate claims involving hurricane-related ˚ooding or winds that can often 
only be distinguished by passive microwave observations. 
Figure 2.8 illustrates the value of all-weather microwave SST measurements for 
hurricane forecasting. Figure 2.8(A) shows how the NASA TMI viewed the cold 
wake of Hurricane Bonnie through cloud cover as the hurricane moved up the 
eastern coast of the United States on August 24-26, 1998. Figure 2.8(B) shows the 
same scene as viewed in infrared by the Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer 
(AVHRR) a few days later as Hurricane Danielle moved up the coast on August 27. 
7 
National Research Council, 
Earth Science and Applications from Space: Urgent Needs and Oppo
rtu
-nities to Ser
ve the Nation,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2005, p. 9.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
32Figure 2-8R01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 2.8
 (A) Microwave imagery at 10 GHz supplied by the NASA Tropical Rainfall Measuring 
Mission (TRMM) Microwave Imager (TMI) showing a cold wake (blue region near the white dots) 
produced by Hurricane Bonnie on August 24-26, 1998. (B) The cold wake was not seen by the visible 
and infrared Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) imager because of the areas of 
persistent rain and cloud cover (white patches) over the 3-day period. When Danielle crossed Bonnie™s 
cold wake on August 29, Danielle™s intensity dropped. Although the cloud cover prevented AVHRR 
from observing this sequence, TMI was able to measure characteristics of the sea surface. Hurricane 
Bonnie™s track is shown by the white dots, and Hurricane Danielle™s track is shown by the gray dots. 
Image courtesy of NASA TRMM Microwave Imager.
The cold wake was invisible to AVHRR because of persistent clouds and rain. A 
retrospective analysis showed that the magnitude of the cold wake left by Hurricane 
Bonnie was critical to being able to predict the weakening of the second hurricane, 
Danielle, a few days later and could not have been done without the microwave 
measurements of sea surface temperature by TMI.
8 The strong dependence of hur
-ricane growth on local sea surface temperatures makes such measurements through 
hurricane cloud shields important, particularly since the overturning of the water 
by the hurricane itself can alter those temperatures rapidly. 
An example of the ability of satellite-based passive microwave sensors to 
observe the high wind speeds of a hurricane is provided in Figure 2.9, an image 
of the wind speed of Hurricane Katrina as it made landfall near New Orleans on 
August 28, 2005. In addition, an airborne system, the Stepped Frequency Micro
-wave Radiometer (SFMR), is currently included in NOAA™s hurricane-observing 
research aircraft. Measurements from this system contributed to 23 hurricane 
advisories in 2005, including the landfall intensity advisories of Hurricanes Katrina 
8 
F.J. Wentz, D.S. Gentemann, and D. Chelton, ﬁSatellite Measurements of Sea Surface Temperature 
Through Clouds,ﬂ 
Science,
 288(5467): 847-850 (May 5, 2000).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
˜9
2°˜9
0°˜8
8°˜8
6°+24
°+26
°+28
°+30
°+32
°Hurricane
Katr
ina,
20050829,
1214
UTC0510
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
knotsFigure 2-9a (left)R01628fully editable vectorsFigure 2-9b (right)R01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 2.9
 (Left) Image of the wind speed of Hurricane Katrina (in knots), observed by passive 
microwave radiometers on WindSat, a Naval Research Laboratory satellite, as Katrina makes landfall 
near New Orleans on August 28, 2005. (Right) Output from a model that combines data from WindSat 
and other remote sensing instruments. The model provides information on the hurricane™s wind speed. 
The values over land are extrapolations. Courtesy of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory.
and Rita. The passive microwave technique is so effective that the U.S. Congress 
mandated SFMR instruments for the ˚eet of U.S. Air Force WC-130J Hercules 
operational weather-monitoring aircraft.
Key impact areas for passive microwave observations of natural disasters 
include hurricane observations and the forecasting and monitoring of severe 
regional weather and both drought and ˚ood activity. The general usefulness of 
passive microwave observations in observing global meteorology also aids in the 
monitoring of other natural disasters and helps with the associated public-safety 
requirements.
Climate and Global Change
Perhaps the most signi˜cant global issue of the early 21st century is the pos
-sibility of global environmental change in response to human activity. The potential 
consequences of global change in its various manifestations (sea-level rise, sea ice 
loss, global warming and drought, coral bleaching, tropical ecosystem collapse, 
and other interrelated environmental problems) can be associated with societal 
costs from a reduction of 1 to 5.5 percent in global gross domestic product by 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
342050, depending on the carbon dioxide (CO
2) stabilization level.
9 Such costs 
demand that the most precise and relevant information on global environmental 
processes be available to decision makers. In many cases the measurement of key 
climate-related geophysical variables on a global scale is required, and space-based 
passive microwave radiometry is often the only reasonable means to collect these 
measurements.
Atmospheric Temperature Pro˜le and Clouds
Among the most important of human in˚uences on climate is the production 
of greenhouse gases, including CO
2, methane (CH
4), and various chloro˚uoro
-carbon (CFC; hydrochloro˚uorocarbon [HCFC]) and hydro˚uorocarbon (HFC) 
compounds. Of these, CO
2 and CH
4 rapidly become well mixed in the lower 
atmosphere and affect Earth™s radiation budget by trapping infrared radiation 
that would otherwise be expelled to space. Although CO
2 and CH
4 are themselves 
potent greenhouse gases and the primary cause of observed global warming, their 
indirect in˚uence on atmospheric water vaporŠa more potent and less predict
-able greenhouse gasŠis perhaps even more important. Tropospheric water vapor 
provides a feedback mechanism through which increased global warming adds to 
the capacity of the atmosphere to contain water vapor while simultaneously elevat
-ing evaporation rates. The monitoring of water vapor and cloud water content and 
their effects on global radiation ˚uxes is thus critical to understanding the causes 
of climate change and predicting future climates. Currently, cloud coverage and 
type are the most signi˜cant sources of uncertainty in global climate modeling. 
Radar observations are strongly dependent on unknown drop size distributions, 
and optical sensors do not penetrate clouds well; thus microwave radiometers on 
all types of platforms (satellite, aircraft, ships, and ground sites) are essential to 
making water vapor measurements and thus to the science of climate change.
The ability of passive microwave sensors to observe through clouds, in combi
-nation with frequent global microwave measurements of average mid-tropospheric 
and stratospheric temperatures near 54 GHz, has provided a unique record of 
global atmospheric change over the past two decades that validates other measures. 
The observed long-term warming of the mid-troposphere is roughly 0.2 
 0.04 K 
per decade.
10
 9 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 
Climate Change 
200
7: Synthesis Report
, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2007.
10
 C.A. Mears and F.J. Wentz, ﬁThe Effects of Diurnal Correction on Satellite-Derived Lower 
 
Tropospheric Temperature,ﬂ 
Science
, 309(5740): 1548-1551 (September 2, 2005).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Cloud Ice Water Path
Cloud ice water path (IWP) is the vertically summed mass of cloudborne ice 
particles per unit of area. As ice clouds can re˚ect a signi˜cant amount of sunlight, 
their impact on global radiative energy ˚uxes and hence climate change is consider
-able. Future global IWP measurements from space using passive microwave tech
-niques at frequencies from 89 GHz up to approximately 1 THz could characterize 
the coupling of the global hydrologic and energy cycles through upper tropospheric 
cloud processes.
11
 Such measurements would enable the development and testing 
of new self-consistent parameterizations of ice cloud processes and cloud systems, 
which could in turn guide improvements in ice cloud representation in global Earth 
system models. These improvements would signi˜cantly advance the understand
-ing of the hydrological cycle and climate predictability.
Ozone Depletion and Trace Gases
Climate is also strongly affected by trace gases in the upper troposphere, 
 
stratosphere, and mesosphere; some of these trace gases also facilitate the destruc
-tion of stratospheric ozone.
12
 A diminished ozone layer allows harmful ultraviolet-B 
(UV-B) radiation from the Sun to reach Earth™s surface, where it signi˜cantly enhances 
the probability of the occurrence of basal and squamous cell skin cancers and cata
-racts. The underlying chemical reactions that cause ozone depletion require chlorine 
and bromine to be present in suf˜cient quantities in the stratosphere.
13
 This revela
-tion was central to the framing of the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances That 
Deplete the Ozone Layer, which explicitly identi˜ed ozone-depleting substances that 
were subsequently banned in a series of international treatiesŠin 1989, 1990, 1991, 
1992, 1993, 1995, 1997, and 1999. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency esti
-mated in 1999 that the provisions of the Montreal Protocol, which sought to arrest 
runaway ozone depletion, would save 6.3 million lives from reduced levels of skin 
cancer, prevent 299 million cases of nonfatal skin cancers, and prevent the develop
-ment of 27.5 million cases of cataracts in the United States alone between 1990 and 
11
 K.F. Evans, J.R. Wang, P. Racette, G. Heyms˜eld, and L. Li, ﬁIce Cloud Retrievals and Analysis with 
Data from the Compact Scanning Submillimeter Imaging Radiometer and the Cloud Radar System 
During CRYSTAL-FACE,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied Meteorology
, 44: 839-859 (2005).
12
 J.R. Holton, P.H. Haynes, M.E. McIntyre, A.R. Douglass, R.B. Rood, and L. P˜ster, ﬁStratospheric-
Tropospheric Exchange,ﬂ 
Re
v. Geophys.
, 33: 403-439 (1995); P.M. de F. Forster and K.P. Shine, ﬁRadia
-tive Forcing and Temperature Trends from Stratospheric Ozone Changes,ﬂ 
Journal of Geophysical 
Research,
 102: 10841-10857 (1997).
13
 M.J. Molina and F.S. Rowland, ﬁStratospheric Sink for Chloro˚uoromethanes: Chlorine Atom-
Catalysed Destruction of Ozone,ﬂ 
Nature
, 249: 810-812 (June 28, 1974).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
362165.
14
 Passive microwave observations provide a valuable means for monitoring 
the distribution and concentration of ozone and other trace gases.
Ocean Altimetry and Sea Surface Variables
Microwave remote sensing plays a crucial role in monitoring the global ocean, 
with radiometry, altimetry, scatterometry, and synthetic aperture radar observations 
all having important climate applications. Ocean altimetry maps the
 topography 
of the ocean surface, from which ocean currents and atmospheric surface pressure 
can be derived. Maps of the currents are routinely used to help route commercial 
and military naval vessels and, in the commercial ˜shing industry, to help locate 
large ˜sh populations. Sea-level anomalies in the tropical Paci˜c, derived from 
altimeters, are perhaps the most sensitive precursor indicators of El Niño and 
La Niña events up to 1 year in advance.
15
 The recent series of satellite altimeter 
missionsŠTopography Experiment (TOPEX)/Poseidon, Jason-1, and the Ocean 
Surface Topography Mission (or Jason-2)Šhas been able to monitor the rise in 
global sea level, thus providing an important means of verifying the expansion of 
the oceans in response to climate change. These missions have also contributed 
signi˜cantly to the ability to forecast the occurrence of El Niño events as much 
as 1 year in advance.
16 
For each radar observation, coincident passive microwave 
radiometer measurements are needed in order to correct the radar altimeters™ 
determination of sea level for the variations in integrated atmospheric refractivity 
due to tropospheric water vapor.
17 
These refractivity radiometers operate near 19, 
23 and 34 GHz and require measurements of brightness temperature that are free 
of radio frequency interference (RFI).
18
 More generally, the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) implementa
-tion plan
19
 includes sustained observations of sea surface temperature, ocean wind 
14
 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 
The Bene˜ts and Costs of the Clean Air Act, 
199
0 to 
2010, 
EPA-410-R-99-001, prepared for the U.S. Congress by EPA Of˜ce of Air and Radiation/Of˜ce of 
Policy, November 1999, p. 64.
15
 D. Chen, ﬁApplying Satellite Remote Sensing to Predicting 1999-2000 La Nina,ﬂ 
Remote Sensing 
of En
vironment
, 77(3): 275 (2001).
16
 D. Chen, ﬁApplication of Altimeter Observation to El Niño Prediction,ﬂ 
International Journal of 
Remote Sensing
, 22(13): 2621-2626 (2001).
 17
 S.J. Keihm, M.A. Janssen, and C.S. Ruf, ﬁTOPEX/POSEIDON Microwave Radiometer (TMR): III. 
Wet Tropospheric Range Correction and Pre-Launch Error Budget,ﬂ
 IEEE Transactions on Geoscience 
and Remote Sensing
, 33(1): 147-161 (1995).
18
 Ibid.
19
 Global Climate Observing System Secretariat, ﬁImplementation Plan for the Global
 Observing 
System for Climate in Support of the UNFCCC (2010 Update),ﬂ Draft v1.0, November 13, 2009, 
Geneva, Switzerland. Available at http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/gcos/documents/GCOSIP-10_
DRAFTv1.0_131109.pdf, accessed 12/30/09.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
 
vector, and total columnar integrated atmospheric water vapor in the list of essen
-tial climate variables (ECVs) for satellite-based climate studies. All of these climate 
variables can be sensed simultaneously through the use of polarimetric, multiple-
frequency microwave radiometry, as practiced using NRL™s WindSat sensor. 
Rainfall and Snowfall Rates 
Rainfall and snowfall rates and total amounts of precipitation are highly 
valuable measurements that can be determined by on-orbit and ground-based 
microwave and millimeter wave radiometers.
20,
 21
 Knowledge of these quantities is 
important to the prediction of ˚oods, of crop health and yield, and of catchment 
replenishment for hydroelectric, irrigation, and domestic uses, and for other soci
-etal bene˜ts and impacts. 
Snow
Information about snow and frozen ground is critical for understanding funda
-mental hydrological processes and for detecting environmental change, assessing its 
impact, and validating environmental models. Snow cover and snow water equiva
-lent (SWE) data are derived using microwave imagery that is sensitive to emission 
from different snow depths and structure, in combination with visible imagery. In 
2004, a global monthly SWE climatology data set that blended Scanning Multi-
Channel Microwave Radiometer (SMMR) and SSM/I passive-microwave-derived 
SWE with NOAA optical sensor snow maps was completed. The data set serves as 
an important tool for climate research (see Figure 2.10). Snow cover and SWE are 
also important parameters for analyzing and improving numerical models of the 
atmosphere, including surface and atmosphere exchange processes, diagnostics, 
and forecasting.
20 F. Marzano, P. Ciotti, D. Cimini, and R. Ware, ﬁModeling and Measurement of Rainfall by Ground-
Based Multispectral Microwave Radiometry,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 
43: 1000-1011 (May 2005); and F.S. Marzano, D. Cimini, and R. Ware, ﬁMonitoring of Rainfall by 
Ground-Based Passive Microwave Systems: Models, Measurements, and Applications,ﬂ 
Ad
vances in 
Geosciences
, 2: 259-265 (2005).
21
 See C. Surussavadee and D.H. Staelin, ﬁGlobal Satellite Millimeter-Wave Precipitation Retrievals 
Trained with a Cloud-Resolving Numerical Weather Prediction Model: Part II: Performance Evalu
-ation,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 46(1): 109-118 (2008), which evaluates 
satellite observations of both rain and snowfall rates from satellites. A good conical scanning refer
-ence is C. Kummerow, J. Simpson, O. Thiele, W. Barnes, A.T.C. Chang, E. Stocker, R.F. Adler, A. Hou, 
R. Kakar, F. Wentz, P. Ashcroft, T. Kozu, Y. Hong, K. Okamoto, T. Iguchi, E. Kuroiwa, E. Im, Z. Haddad, 
G. Huffman, B. Ferrier, W.S. Olson, E. Zipser, E.A. Smith, T.T. Wilheit, G. North, T. Krishnamurti, 
and K. Nakamura, ﬁThe Status of the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission (TRMM) after Two Years 
in Orbit,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied Meteorology
, 39(12): 1965-1982 (2000).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
38Figure 2-10R01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 2.10
 National Snow and Ice Data Center global monthly Equal-Area Scalable Earth (EASE)-Grid 
snow water equivalent (SWE) climatology for the Northern Hemisphere, December 2004. The overall 
data set in which this climatology appears comprises monthly satellite-derived SWE climatologies 
from November 1978 through June 2003. The global data are gridded to the Northern and Southern 
25 kilometer EASE-Grids. Available at http://nsidc.org/research/projects/Armstrong_SWE.html. Pro
-vided by the National Snow and Ice Data Center.
Glaciers
Passive microwave sensors can perform spatial mapping of the amount of 
snow overburden and the melt state of large ice sheets such as those over Green
-land and Antarctica. Annual mapping of the ablation zone of the Greenland ice 
sheet is particularly important as a sensitive means of determining the melt state 
of the glacial margins and the region of continued deposition of snow.
22
 Passive 
22
 W. Abdalati and K. Steffen, ﬁSnowmelt on the Greenland Ice Sheet as Derived from Passive Micro
-wave Satellite Data,ﬂ 
Journal of Climate,
 10(2): 165-175 (1997).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
microwave window channels from approximately 10 GHz to approximately 90 GHz 
are sensitive to re˚ection caused by melting ice water and have been used to study 
subtle, regionally dependent climate trends in Greenland and Antarctica for nearly 
two decades. Knowledge of snow overburden is important as a means of estimat
-ing the heat transfer from the glacier to the atmosphere, as snow is a good thermal 
insulator. Passive microwave channels at 18 and 37 GHz are useful for measuring 
snow depth by virtue of the differential scattering signature available using these 
two bands. 
Sea Surface Salinity
Sea surface salinity (SSS) is a critical missing parameter that scientists need in 
order to meet climate research goals. Measuring global SSS over time will contrib
-ute to scientists™ understanding of change in the global Earth system and of how the 
system responds to natural and human-induced change. Global measurements of 
SSS can be achieved to approximately 0.2 practical salinity units using space-based 
passive microwave radiometry at 1.4 GHz and radar scatterometry at 1.26 GHz. 
These measurements can provide signi˜cant new information on how global pre
-cipitation, evaporation, and the water cycle are changing. Global SSS variability 
provides key insight regarding freshwater ˚ow into and out of the ocean associated 
with precipitation, evaporation, ice melt, and river runoff. Global SSS measure
-ments will also provide important background about how climate variation induces 
changes in global ocean circulation. The combination of global sea surface
 salinity 
and sea surface temperature measurements can be used to determine seawater 
density, which regulates ocean circulation and the formation of water masses. 
Sea Ice
One of the ˜rst applications of space-based passive microwave imagery was 
that of monitoring the location, extent, and thickness of sea ice. The ESMR data 
set provides the earliest all-weather, all-season imagery of polar sea ice. Some satel
-lite data of sea ice in the visible and infrared wavelengths were available in the late 
1960s and early 1970s (before the introduction of space-based passive microwave 
observations), but because the polar regions are either dark or cloud-covered for 
much of the year, the generation of consistent, long-term data records from visible 
and infrared sensing was not practical.
Passive microwave data introduced a major advance in the usefulness of satel
-lite sea ice imaging. The value of passive microwave data for sea ice studies derives 
from the large contrast in microwave emissivities between sea ice and open water. 
At 19.35 GHz, open water has an emissivity of approximately 0.44, whereas vari
-ous sea ice types have emissivities ranging from approximately 0.8 to 0.97. The 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
40resulting contrast in microwave brightness temperatures allows accurate estimates 
of sea ice concentrations (percentages of ocean area covered by sea ice) and hence 
identi˜cation of sea ice distributions throughout the region of observation, as 
well as
 temporal variations of these distributions throughout the time period of 
observation.
Freeze-Thaw Transition
An area of study similar to sea ice involves the seasonal freeze-thaw transition 
of the Northern Hemisphere, which is a signi˜cant source and sink of atmospheric 
CO
2. The exact timing of the spring thaw and the resulting length of the growing 
season can fundamentally affect the net carbon exchange budget between land and 
atmosphere.
23
 The thawing of polar tundra also results in more solar absorption 
and heating, with the possible runaway production of methane from the
 anaerobic 
decomposition of subsurface biomass. Passive microwave observations from spaceŠ
augmented by radarŠare the primary means for observing the freeze-thaw transi
-tion on a global scale.
24
 Determining the freeze-thaw transition requires the use of 
all of the primary atmospheric window channels between 1.4 and 90 GHz, up to 
and exceeding the EESS allocated bandwidth on primary or secondary basis.
25
Biomass
Earth™s vegetation canopy, or biomass, is a signi˜cant component of the global 
carbon inventory. It is also a major contributor to the net long-wave/short-wave 
albedo of the planet and hence to Earth™s energy balance and temperature. For these 
reasons, climate change can both be affected by and can itself affect the global dis
-tribution of biomass. The ability to perform comprehensive inventories of biomass 
from space is recognized as a critical step toward modeling and understanding 
Earth™s climate system.
26 
Passive microwave observations operating in all of the 
23
 S. Frolking, M.L. Goulden, S.C. Wofsy, et al., ﬁModeling Temporal Variability in the Carbon 
Balance of a Spruce/Moss Boreal Forest,ﬂ 
Global Change Biology
, 2: 343-366 (1996); J.T. Randerson, 
C.B. Field, I.Y. Fung, and P.P. Tans, ﬁIncreases in Early Season Ecosystem Uptake Explain Recent 
Changes in the Seasonal Cycle of Atmospheric CO
2 at High Northern Latitudes,ﬂ 
Geophysical Research 
 
Letters
, 26(17): 2765-2768 (1999); T.A. Black, W.J. Chen, et al., ﬁIncreased Carbon Sequestration by 
a Boreal Deciduous Forest in Years with Warm Springs,ﬂ 
Geophysical Research Letters
, 27(9): 1271-
1274 (2000).
24
 T. Zhang and R.L. Armstrong, ﬁSoil Freeze/Thaw Cycles over Snowfree Land Detected by Passive 
Microwave Remote Sensing,ﬂ
 Geophysical Research Letters
, 28(5): 763-766 (2001).
25
 National Research Council, 
Handbook of Frequency Allocations and Spectrum Protection for Scien
-ti˜c Uses
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
26
National Research Council, 
 Earth Science and Applications from Space: National Imperati
ves for 
the Next Decade and Beyond
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
primary atmospheric window channels between 1.4 and 90 GHz are valuable for 
monitoring the full range of vegetation canopy water content found in nature and 
are complementary to optical and synthetic aperture radar techniques. Improved 
techniques for biomass estimation using passive microwave methods are continu
-ously being developed.
27
 Resource Management
Another application for EESS measurements involves the management of 
water, energy, and land use, including agriculture and urbanization. All of these 
applications use observations from multiple sources, including satellites as well 
as aerial and ground-based measurements. Passive microwave remote sensing is 
particularly important for assessing phenomena such as soil type and moisture, 
which can then be related to lake, wetlands, and reservoir storage, to river discharge, 
and to linkages in the water, energy, and carbon cycles. Other passive microwave 
products can be used to monitor the size, nutrient status, and other health mea
-sures of forests, crops, and vegetation; changes in vegetation type, deforestation, 
and other land cover; and geographic characterization of the ﬁfootprintsﬂ of urban 
areas. Urban and suburban areas play an often-overlooked but important role in 
Earth™s physical and ecological systems, adding to the understanding of mesoscale 
climatic, hydrologic, and ecologic processes.
28
 Box 2.2 summarizes typical uses of EESS data in reservoir management, the 
deployment of renewable energy systems, and agricultural forecasting, as reported 
in a recent evaluation of uses of Earth observations by the U.S. Climate Change 
Science Program. An additional, long-standing use of data includes the assessment 
of food securityŠfor instance, in the Famine Early Warning System Network of the 
U.S. Agency for International Development
29
 (see an overview of and details about 
the network in a report published by the National Research Council in 2007
30 
).
One of the most recent applications of EESS data involves the use of informa
-tion about water quality, vegetation health, population distribution, and other 
observations as pathways by which to track disease vectors and their implica
-27
 S. Paloscia and P. Pampaloni, ﬁMicrowave Vegetation Indexes for Detecting Biomass and Water 
Conditions of Agricultural Crops,ﬂ 
Remote Sensing of En
vironment,
 40: 15-26 (1992); G. Macelloni, 
S. Paloscia, P. Pampaloni, and E. Santi, ﬁGlobal Scale Monitoring of Soil and Vegetation Using Active 
and Passive Sensors,ﬂ 
International Journal of Remote Sensing
, 24(12): 2409-2425 (2003).
28
 People and Pixels: Linking Remote Sensing and Social Science,
 Washington, D.C.: National
 Academy 
Press, 1998.
29
 Gregory E. Glass, ﬁRainy with a Chance of Plague: Forecasting Disease Outbreaks from Satellites,ﬂ 
Future Virology
, 2(5): 225-229 (2007).
30
 National Research Council, 
Contributions of Land Remote Sensing for Decisions About Food Security 
and Human Health,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
42BOX 2.2
 Examples of Earth Exploration-Satellite Service Measurements 
in Managing Water, Energy, and Agriculture
Reservoir Management
RiverWare is a river basin modeling system that integrates features of reservoirs (recreation, 
navigation, ˚ood control, and water quality and supply) and electric utility requirements in 
order to provide basin managers and power managers with a method for planning, forecasting, 
and scheduling reservoir operations. Inputs to RiverWare include microwave data from the 
Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth (AMSR-E) and data from other sensors such 
as the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) and the Advanced Spaceborne 
Thermal Emission and Re˚ection Radiometer (ASTER). RiverWare is a collaborative project 
among the Center for Advanced Decision Support for Water and Environmental Systems at the 
University of Colorado at Boulder, the Bureau of Reclamation, the Tennessee Valley Authority, 
and the Army Corps of Engineers. 
Renewable Energy Deployment
The U.S. Department of Energy™s National Renewable Energy Laboratory uses data from 
MODIS, the Multiangle Imaging Spectroradiometer (MISR), Advanced Very High Resolution 
Radiometer, Special Sensor Microwave/Imager, and a host of weather and other data
Šincluding 
measurements of ocean wind, solar and geothermal resources, upper air, and digital
 terrain/land 
coverŠto assist in the deployment of renewable energy technologies. This model, the Hybrid 
Optimization Model for Electric Renewables (HOMER), is used to design grid-connected and 
off-grid renewable energy systems. 
Agricultural Forecasting
Agricultural management has long employed moderate-resolution optical imagery, begin
-ning with the Agriculture and Resources Inventory Surveys and continuing with both the 
Aerospace Remote Sensing and the Large Area Crop Inventory Experiment programs during 
the 1970s and 1980s. Passive microwave data (from the SSM/I and AMSR-E and other systems) 
are now routinely incorporated into new agricultural applications. Perhaps most prominent 
among these is the system run by the U.S. Department of Agriculture™s Foreign Agriculture 
Service (USDA/FAS): the Production Estimate and Crop Assessment Division™s Crop Condition 
Data Retrieval and Evaluation (PECAD/CADRE) system. The FAS collects and analyzes global 
crop intelligence information and provides estimates to inform of˜cial USDA forecasts for the 
agricultural market. That market includes farmers, agribusiness enterprises, commodity
 traders, and researchers, as well as federal, state, and local agencies. PECAD/CADRE is one of the 
 
largest users of data from EESS agriculture-related measurements.
SOURCE: U.S. Climate Change Science Program, Synthesis and Assessment Product 5.1, ﬁUses 
and Limitations of Observations, Data, Forecasts, and Other Projections in Decision Support 
for Selected Sectors and Regions,ﬂ November 7, 2008. Available at http://www
.climatescience.
gov/Library/sap/sap5-1/˜nal-report/.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
tions for human health.
31
 Glass, in 
Future Virology,
 discusses the challenges and 
opportunities provided by EESS data and notes the potential for EESS to advance 
health assessment beyond the monitoring of disease outbreaks to the forecasting 
of outbreaks.
32
 The advance notice provided by accurate forecasting of outbreaks 
could allow better deployment of health resources to minimize the spread and 
impact of disease. 
Passive microwave observations of the hydrosphere and the cryosphere are 
similarly important. A scienti˜c understanding of the mechanism of cycling of 
freshwater and the amount and distribution of the world™s frozen water stores is 
essential for human survival. Again, passive microwave measurements made at a 
number of frequencies and from a number of platforms are unique in being able 
to provide this information. 
Aviation
For aviation, the most useful passive services are the U.S. and global weather 
services and forecasts, which bene˜t greatly from the inclusion of passive micro
-wave data from satellites. Surface-based, upward-looking microwave radiometers 
have the unique ability to remotely detect supercooled liquid water that adheres 
to aircraft ˚ight surfaces and helicopter rotors, and which has been responsible for 
numerous losses of aircraft and lives. These same radiometers also improve the 
skills of the forecasters of short-term local aviation weather. Currently, a sparse 
network of balloon-based pro˜ling (i.e., ﬁradiosondeﬂ) sites across the United 
States, with an average spacing of 315 km, sounds the atmosphere every 12 hours, 
supplemented by satellite overpasses every several hours. This sparse sampling 
severely limits short-term forecasting, especially that of severe weather. Ground-
based radiometers can duplicate continuously, autonomously, and with minimal 
ongoing costs many of the data
-pr
ovi
ding functions of radiosondes (except for 
measuring winds aloft and providing high vertical resolution). 
Fog events have a signi˜cant effect on aviation, slowing or halting airport air 
traf˜c operations and causing diversions of incoming air traf˜c.
33
 These events are 
seasonally chronic at some locations and infrequent at others. The onset, dura
-tion, and dissipation of fog are dif˜cult to measure and to predict with currently 
employed technologies (radars, radiosondes, visibility and surface meteorology sys
-tems). Ground-based radiometers can measure the vertical pro˜les of temperature, 
31
 Ibid.
32
 Gregory E. Glass, ﬁRainy with a Chance of Plague: Forecasting Disease Outbreaks from Satellites,ﬂ 
Future Virology
, 2(5): 225-229 (2007).
33
 For more information, see ﬁAirline Regulators Grapple with Engine-Shutdown Peril,ﬂ 
Wall Street 
Journal
, Monday, April 7, 2008.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
44water vapor, and fog liquid water and therefore have the ability to characterize such 
fog events. Dubai in the United Arab Emirates has recently had a highly capable 
three-dimensional fog prediction and monitoring system installed at its airport; the 
system is based on a microwave radiometer, a wind pro˜ler, surface meteorology, 
and a computer system.
As an example of the disruptions that fog events can create, on February 15, 
2001, a surface-based temperature, water vapor, and cloud liquid water micro
-wave radiometer detected precursors and the onset of meteorological conditions 
characteristic of persistent ground fog. This fog subsequently shut down Denver 
International Airport (DIA) for 18 hours at tremendous cost, stranded thousands 
of passengers, and caused a ripple across the entire air traf˜c scheduling and ˚ow 
system. When the situation, including the microwave radiometric temperature, 
water vapor, and cloud liquid pro˜le data, was replayed into the so-called ﬁMM5ﬂ 
NWP model at the National Center for Atmospheric Research, the model accurately 
predicted the onset, persistence, and dissipation of this fog. 
In another episode, on March 4, 2003, light, freezing drizzle was foreseen, 
detected, and tracked by a research microwave radiometer monitoring surface-
based temperature, water vapor, and cloud liquid water. This condition caused the 
failure of six jet engines owing to the ingestion of ice on United Airlines (UAL) 
737s that were taxiing for takeoff at Denver International Airport, grounding 
the six aircraft. The direct cost to UAL was reported to be $1.2 million, with an 
unknown cost resulting from the grounding of the aircraft for engine repairs, 
other resultant ˚ight cancellations, and further associated costs. In April 2007, 
this same meteorological condition was foreseen by microwave radiometers, 
whereupon the radiometer operator unsuccessfully attempted to contact UAL 
at DIA to forewarn the airline. Two more UAL aircraft lost engines and were 
grounded. Such losses should diminish as these sensors become operational. To 
date, UAL has reportedly lost 18 engines at DIA as a result of this meteorological 
condition. An operational system would have been able to forecast and nowcast 
this condition, allowing ample warning time for the implementation of preven
-tative procedures.
Beyond aviation issues, fog often causes hazardous surface transportation 
conditions. It was the cause of a 78-vehicle pileup on Interstate 5 near Fresno, Cali
-fornia, in 2002, as well as the precipitator of a number of recent multiple-vehicle 
accidents across the United States.
34
 Ground-based radiometers are being installed 
in Europe at problem locations for predicting and monitoring fog events.
34
 Gary Sanger, ﬁWinter Weather Summary,ﬂ available at http://newweb.wrh.noaa.gov/hnx/newslet/
spring02/summary.htm; accessed June 22, 2008.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Defense and Public Safety
Although the passive EESS bands are not speci˜cally allocated for defense pur
-poses, they are extensively used by meteorological satellites that support analyses 
and forecasts serving many defense needs. In fact, many radiometers on operational 
meteorological satellites are or have been part of the Defense Meteorological Satel
-lite Program (DMSP) satellite constellation operated by the U.S. Department of 
Defense (as listed in Table 2.2 later in this chapter). For example, the Special Sensor 
Microwave/Imager Sounder radiometer, which is aboard a DSMP satellite, measures 
atmospheric temperature and moisture pro˜les, sea surface winds, cloud liquid con
-tent, and land surface parameters on a continuous basis from low Earth orbit. This 
military meteorological polar-orbiting satellite program has been merged with those 
of NOAA and NASA in the NOAA Integrated Program Of˜ce to form the NPOESS 
program, which will soon launch its ˜rst satellite. Microwave meteorological satel
-lites improve forecasts of the following: (1) weather, which in˚uences essentially all 
combat missions in the air, on the ground, and at sea; (2) the dispersal and transport 
of released chemical, biological, or radiological agents, where such knowledge sup
-ports defensive measures; (3) the monitoring of the ducting of radio waves over the 
ocean caused by high gradients in the refractivity of the boundary layer, where such 
ducting can make ships and aircraft visible to radar at anomalously large distances 
or invisible at normal distances; (4) the traversability of muddy roads, tundra, or 
pack ice; (5) battle˜eld visibility; and (6) trajectory corrections for artillery and other 
projectiles. In addition there are nonmeteorological covert defense applications of 
passive sensors: for example, the passive detection of metallic objects, such as tanks 
and trucks concealed by foliage or camou˚age or ships shrouded in fog. 
Ground-based microwave radiometers can accurately and precisely measure 
(to better than 0.5
oC in most cases) the temperature pro˜le in the tropospheric 
boundary layer on a continuous basis. This capability is being used to measure and 
track inversions that trap clouds, pollution, and aerosols. Knowledge of bound
-ary layer temperature pro˜les is also important in predicting the transport and 
spread of accidental or hostile releases of biological agents, nerve agents, and 
radioactive agents. Such radiometers are being used for continuous monitoring 
at nuclear power plants in Switzerland, Las Vegas, Beijing, Taiwan, and elsewhere. 
These radiometers can also measure the water vapor and cloud liquid pro˜le in 
the boundary layer. Such data are highly important because of the interaction of 
clouds with aerosols and other gases to form smog. Radiometers can also be used 
to continuously monitor the atmospheric effects associated with large urban heat 
islands that can impact health, public utility loads, and human activities.
35
35
 Mikhail N. Khaikin, Iren Kuznetsova, Evgeny N. Kadygrov, and Evgeny A. Miller, ﬁInvestigation 
of Temporal-Spatial Parameters of an Urban Heat Island on the Basis of Passive Microwave Remote 
Sensing,ﬂ 
Theoretical and Applied Climatology
, 84(1-3): 161-169 (2006).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
46International Partnerships
It has long been known that sound management of the Earth system, in both 
its natural and human aspects, requires information that is timely, of known 
quality, long term in its availability, and global. In 2003, the United States hosted 
a ministerial-level Earth Observation Summit in Washington, D.C., to promote 
joint multilateral action that would lead to the continuous monitoring of the 
state of Earth in order ﬁto increase understanding of dynamic Earth processes, to 
enhance prediction of the Earth system, and to further implement our international 
environmental treaty obligations.ﬂ
36
 An ensuing series of summits established a 
mandate for the development of the Global Earth Observation System of Systems 
(GEOSS).
37
 GEOSS is a complex system of sensors, communication devices, stor
-age systems, and computational and other devices used to observe Earth and to 
gather the data needed for a better understanding and enhanced prediction of 
Earth™s processes. GEOSS is a ﬁsystem of systemsﬂ consisting of existing and future 
Earth observation systems contributing to an international and interoperable data 
network. The emphasis of GEOSS is on societal bene˜ts in nine key areas:

Disasters:
 Reducing loss of life and property from natural and human-
induced disasters;

Health:
 Understanding environmental factors affecting human health and 
well-being;

Energy:
 Improving the management of energy resources;

Climate:
 Understanding, assessing, predicting, mitigating, and adapting to 
climate variability and change;

Water:
 Improving water resource management through better understand
-ing of the water cycle;

Weather:
 Improving weather information, forecasting, and warning;

Ecosystems:
 Improving the management and protection of terrestrial, 
coastal, and marine resources;

Agriculture:
 Supporting sustainable agriculture and combating deserti˜ca
-tion; and

Biodi
versity:
 Understanding, monitoring, and conserving biodiversity.
The United States is a key signatory to the development of GEOSS through the 
international Group on Earth Observations (GEO). 
36
 Group on Earth Observations, ﬁDeclaration of the Earth Observation Summit,ﬂ Washington, 
D.C., July 31, 2003, available at http://earthobservations.org/docs/Declaration-˜nal%207-31-03.pdf; 
accessed December 30, 2009.
37
 See http://www.earthobservations.org/about_geo.shtml; accessed March 31, 2008.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
While GEOSS data originate from a variety of sources, there are many impor
-tant environmental parameters needed by GEOSS users that can be measured only 
by passive microwave sensors. These include global ocean salinity; sea ice charac
-teristics; soil moisture; rain, cloud, and related atmospheric hydrometric variables; 
water vapor and temperature pro˜les under clouds; and trace gases. Without the 
protection offered by EESS passive radio allocations, the international community 
would be denied information vital to achieving the goals of GEOSS designed for 
the bene˜t of society. 
Finding:
 Passive remote sensing observations are essential for monitoring Earth™s 
natural systems and are therefore critical to human safety, the day-to-day opera
-tions of the government and the private sector, and the policy-making processes 
governing many sectors of the U.S. economy.
Education and Technology
A large number of engineers working in the U.S. telecommunications and 
defense electronics industry have learned basic radio science skills through gradu
-ate or early-career work on any of a number of DOD, NASA, NOAA, National 
Science Foundation, or Department of Energy passive microwave sensor programs. 
Examples include spaceborne, airborne, shipborne, and ground-based
 sensor 
programs for environmental observation. Not all students trained in the passive 
microwave area continue their careers in the ˜eld, but the importance ascribed 
to precise instrument calibration, the detection of low signal levels, and innova
-tive signal and image processing provides unusually strong training for careers in 
many other economically important technology areas. The same can be said for 
students trained in radio astronomy (see §3.6). Accordingly, Earth remote sens
-ing contributes indirectly to those economic sectors that are critical to U.S. global 
competitiveness and defense.
In addition to radio science education, the application of passive microwave 
radiometry to environmental monitoring provides a key means of training Earth 
scientists. Whether they work in the U.S. government or in organizations around 
the globe, the next generation of students entering this discipline will need global 
experience in environmental stewardship and sustainability. The interconnected
-ness of regions, states, countries, and continents by environmental ties makes U.S. 
prosperity ever more contingent on the capabilities of environmental scientists, 
engineers, and managers outside the nation™s borders. To this end, valuable global 
experience in environmental observation is provided through satellite-based pas
-sive microwave studies. 
Technological spin-offs from passive microwave Earth remote sensing studies 
are numerous. They include new techniques for instrument calibration, image pro
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
48cessing, and data-assimilation capabilities that extend beyond the ˜elds of weather 
forecasting, radio detection methods using statistical moments, and radio imag
-ing techniques for aircraft navigation in all-weather conditions and for homeland 
security needs. Additionally, the technology underlying passive Earth remote sens
-ing has led to new submillimeter-wave imaging capabilities for detecting
 hidden 
weapons. This technology is now beginning to make its way into screening opera
-tions at airports across the United States. Also, the design of cost-effective, stable, 
integrated microwave receivers has been furthered as a result of needs for such 
receivers within the passive remote sensing community. Such receiver technology 
is now found in active communications and radar sensing devices. Finally, the 
requirement of extremely high main-beam ef˜ciency antennas in passive remote 
sensing has engendered the development of antennas with low sidelobes for other 
commercial and defense applications.
Finding: 
Passive microwave Earth remote sensing provides a diverse and valuable 
set of educational opportunities.
Finding:
 In addition to the intellectual bene˜ts that they provide, passive micro
-wave remote sensing studies provide many technological bene˜ts to American 
society. 
2.2
 BRIGHTNESS TEMPERATURES, GEOPHYSICAL MEASUREMENTS, 
AND MISSIONS
Section 2.1 established the range of applications and the importance of passive 
microwave radiometry. This section describes the processes by which these sensors 
operate, providing detailed information on the speci˜c geophysical measurements 
that result. In addition, a summary of previous and future radiometer missions is 
presented in order to provide context for the current state of passive microwave 
sensing.
Fundamentals of Microwave Radiometry for EESS Applications
All matter emits low levels of electromagnetic radiation. This radiated
 ﬁthermal 
noiseﬂ is determined by the temperature and electromagnetic properties of the 
emitting medium, including its ability to absorb, emit, and scatter
 electromagnetic 
waves. Geophysical properties of the medium can be inferred from microwave 
radiometer measurements of emitted thermal noise power to the extent that those 
properties are related to the bulk electromagnetic properties of the medium. The 
thermal noise power radiated at a given frequency is commonly expressed as a 
ﬁbrightness temperature.ﬂ This is the physical temperature of an ideal emitter 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
(called a blackbody) that would radiate the same amount of noise power at that 
frequency. The brightness temperature of a scene (reported in units of kelvin 
by a microwave radiometer) contains the geophysical information of interest. 
Although multiple geophysical parameters may affect the brightness tempera
-tureŠfor example, the temperature and moisture level of Earth™s surface and the 
temperature, humidity, and cloud properties of the atmosphereŠthese
 parameters 
can be distinguished when they have distinctive frequency and/or polarimetric 
signatures, so that simultaneous observations of the brightness temperature at 
multiple frequencies and polarizations enable simultaneous solutions for the 
geophysical properties of interest. There exists a long history of innovation in pas
-sive microwave EESS observations for solving this multiple-parameter estimation 
problem. For many applications, it is necessary for simultaneous measurements to 
be made over several octaves of the microwave spectrum in order to distinguish 
adequately the contributions to the brightness temperature made by the surface 
and the atmosphere. 
Traditional radiometer receivers simply estimate the thermal noise power (in 
watts) received within a particular radio band by a noncoherent radio receiver 
consisting of (typically) an antenna, a low-noise ampli˜er, a ˜lter that limits 
the observed portion of the frequency spectrum, and a square-law detector that 
provides a measurement of power in the channel. The output of the square-law 
detector is averaged over time and then recorded and processed to yield geo
 physical 
information. 
It is well known that the uncertainty in measurements of brightness tem
-perature is reduced by using larger bandwidths (insofar as is permitted by spec
-tral allocations) and longer integration times (constrained for spaceborne EESS 
observations by satellite orbit and coverage requirements). While calibration 
accuracy and internal noise once commonly dominated overall system uncer
-tainty, continuing instrument improvements now often achieve the fundamental 
sensitivity determined by the time-bandwidth product, thus reaching the maxi
-mum achievable sensitivity of the estimated geophysical parameters.
38
 Therefore, 
radio interference to passive systems must be compared to this fundamental limit. 
In contrast, modern communications systems have yet to approach this so-called 
Shannon limit. In other words, further improvement in EESS sensor technology 
will, in general, have minimal impact on measurement accuracy compared to 
greater time-bandwidth product usage. This is especially true for the most impor
-tant measurements currently being carried out on an operational basis in EESS. 
However, technological improvements in the use of spectrum for communications 
systems are still possible.
38
 See §3.4, ﬁSensitivity Requirements,ﬂ for more information on the signal-to-noise ratio of passive 
microwave measurements.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
50Although the physics that determines brightness-temperature signatures can be 
complex, usually just a few principal effects dominate. The absorption and emission 
of radio waves propagating through the terrestrial atmosphere are strong functions 
of frequency owing to resonant absorption by atmospheric gases.
 Figure 1.2 in 
Chapter 1 shows the total zenith attenuation of microwaves propagating upward 
through a clear standard atmosphere from sea level. Gas resonances are apparent 
near 23, 60, 118, 183, and 325 GHz. The primary atmospheric absorbers below 
350 GHz are molecular oxygen (resonances near 60 and 118 GHz) and water 
vapor (23, 183, and 325 GHz). Above the troposphere, absorption and emission 
by trace gases become more pronouncedŠfor example, HNO
3 at 182 GHz, N
2O at 201 GHz, ClO at 204 GHz, and O
3 at 206 GHz. Radio frequencies used for the 
Earth Exploration-Satellite Service are usually designated either as ﬁwindowsﬂ used 
for observing the surface or total atmospheric attenuation, or as ﬁopaqueﬂ and 
used for estimating atmospheric pro˜les of temperature or composition. Since 
radio astronomy uses these same windows to observe the universe from the ground, 
there is much spectrum compatibility between the two sciences. 
Systems for sensing atmospheric properties can be designed to exploit atmo
-spheric absorption and emission resonances. For example, many radiometers 
include observations near the semitransparent window frequencies 23 and 37 GHz 
in order to estimate the integrated columnar water vapor and liquid water con
-tent of the atmosphere. It is possible to estimate these two unknown abundances 
because the lower frequency is near the 22.235 GHz water vapor resonance, 
whereas at 37 GHz cloud absorption is relatively stronger. Observations at the 
two bands yield two relations that can be inverted to ˜nd the two unknowns, 
that is, the amounts of water vapor and liquid water. It is furthermore possible to 
estimate atmospheric temperature and/or molecular abundance versus altitude 
(i.e., temperature or abundance ﬁpro˜lesﬂ) by measuring atmospheric bright
-ness temperature as a function of frequency near a resonance. Frequencies in the 
more transparent regions farther from any resonance generally see deeper into 
the atmosphere, whereas frequencies near the more opaque core of a resonance 
sense only conditions relatively near the sensor. Comparing such measurements 
permits the temperature pro˜le to be determined if the composition is known, or 
the composition if the temperature pro˜le is known. By combining measurements 
of different spectral lines, both temperature and composition can be determined 
simultaneously.
A few underlying physical principles characterize the capabilities of most pas
-sive microwave sensors operating in the ﬁwindowﬂ channels. First, lower-frequency 
waves generally penetrate intervening media better and sense deeper beneath the 
surface. Thus low frequencies such as 1.4 GHz are preferred when sensing sub
-surface soil moisture beneath vegetative canopies. Second, the in˚uence of surface 
roughness tends to be largest when the length scales of the roughness are compa
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Fr
equency (GHz)
Wind speed
Liquid clouds
Wa
ter v
apor
Salinity
Sea-sur
fa
ce
 temperatur
eTbPi40
30
20
10
0+ŒFigure 2-11R01628editable vctorscopied from Figure 2-11, R00897rable to the electromagnetic wavelength. This fact motivates the use of X-band or 
higher frequencies in attempting to sense the short sea waves (capillary waves) that 
are most sensitive to sea surface winds at low wind speeds. Third, the dielectric 
constant of water is a strong function of frequency, temperature, and the water™s 
phase (i.e., ice, liquid, or vapor). A result is that the frequencies most sensitive to 
sea surface salinity are below approximately 2 GHz, whereas those most sensitive 
to sea surface temperature lie nearer to 5-10 GHz. Figures 2.11 and 2.12 illustrate 
for sea and land scenes, respectively, typical sensitivities of microwave radiometers 
to various environmental properties versus frequency.
Since multiple geophysical properties typically contribute to the observed 
brightness at a given frequency, multiple frequencies must be observed simultane
-ously in order to estimate them separately. Because all window channels exhibit 
some atmospheric absorption and emission, and even atmospheric resonant fre
-FIGURE 2.11
 Ocean scene: relative sensitivity of sea surface salinity, sea surface temperature, cloud 
liquid water, and integrated water vapor as a function of frequency for space-based measurements. 
Original ˚gure by Thomas T. Wilheit, NASA-GSFC.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
5251015
20
25
30
35
40Fr
equency (GHz)Soil moistureVe
getation biomassSurfa
ce roughnessIntegrated 
wa
ter vaporCloud liquid wa
terFigure 2-12R01628editable vector imagessome type reset as requested10Œ1TbPiMA
XFIGURE 2.12
 Land scene: relative sensitivity of the brightness temperature to soil moisture, cloud 
liquid water, and integrated water vapor as a function of frequency for space-based measurements. 
quencies are often not completely opaque, most instruments incorporate both 
window and opaque channels.
Finding:
 Effective passive microwave band allocations are necessary for the per
-formance of environmental observation functions. 
Finding:
 Radio wave bands (10 MHz to 3 THz) are indispensable for collecting 
environmental information associated with speci˜c physical phenomena. Often the 
same bands are similarly indispensable for radio astronomy, and the passive nature 
of both services enables them to share the spectrum productively.
Measurement of Speci˜c Geophysical Parameters
Whereas Figure 1.2 in Chapter 1 presents the basic physics of observations 
through Earth™s atmosphere for passive microwave spectral observations, Fig
-ures 2.11 and 2.12 also take into account fundamental characteristics of the mea
-sured parameters. Because the estimates of the geophysical parameters, also called 
Environmental Data Records (EDRs), are computed as a function of observed 
brightness temperatures, it is possible to ˜nd the average ratio of a change in a spe
-ci˜c EDR to the corresponding change in a particular brightness temperature. This 
ratio is called the ﬁsensitivityﬂ of the EDR (as distinguished from the radiometric 
uncertainty of the original radiometer measurement). For example, the sensitivity of 
surface wind speeds over ocean is expressed in units of ms
Œ1
KŒ1
. While the numerous 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
channels used in retrieving many EDRs can make this a complicated quantity to 
determine exactly, the values in Figures 2.11 and 2.12 generally re˚ect the sensitivity 
from the primary channels in˚uencing errors in a particular EDR. This ratio permits 
the accuracy requirements of a particular EDR to be related to the accuracy require
-ments of the associated radiometric system. Alternately, radio frequency interference 
levels (K) can be related to resulting errors in EDRs. For example, the sensitivity of 
sea surface temperature (SST) to the vertically polarized 5 GHz brightness tempera
-ture is roughly 0.5 K(T
b)/K(SST). Since current scienti˜c requirements for climate 
studies include retrievals of SST accurate to within 0.5 K or better, radio frequency 
interference that causes a 0.25 K change in 5 GHz brightness temperatures would 
pose a major problem for the retrieval of accurate sea surface temperatures. Similar 
quantitative statements can be made regarding other EDRs. 
It is important to recognize that the EDR products shown in Figures 2.11 and 
2.12 are simply unavailable on a global scale from any other type of sensor, par
-ticularly for all-weather conditions. These products include critical atmospheric 
parameters for NWP such as atmospheric temperature, humidity pro˜les, and 
precipitation rate. Considering global cloud conditions, surface infrared mea
-surements are possible over an average of 5 percent of Earth™s surface and over 
30 percent of Earth for the upper troposphere. At somewhat higher altitudes, 
atmospheric temperature and moisture pro˜les from microwave measurements 
(e.g., AMSU) are possible over 70 percent of Earth™s surface and 95 percent for the 
upper troposphere.
39
Table 2.1 provides a summary of the common geophysical products and the 
microwave frequencies used for their measurement in current, future, and pro
-posed missions, with an indication of the potential impact of those measurements 
from radio frequency interference (RFI) based on the current radio frequency 
environment.
2.3
 CURRENT AND FUTURE SPACE MISSIONS, 
 ACTIVITIES, AND SPECTRUM USAGE
Because of the wide range of EESS applications of microwave radiometry, 
numerous space-based missions are currently in operation or are planned for 
the near future. Table 2.2 provides a detailed list of such missions, including 
their planned spectrum usage and intended applications of Environmental Data 
Records. It is evident that microwave radiometry is widely used by the space agen
-cies of the United States and other nations for sensing both atmospheric and sur
-face properties and that passive microwave radiometry will continue to be widely 
39
 R. Saunders, ﬁUse of Microwave Radiances for Weather Forecasting,ﬂ presentation at the 24th 
Annual Space Frequency Coordination Group Meeting, France, September 20, 2004.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 TABLE 2.1
 Summary of Common Geophysical Products and the Microwave Frequencies Used for Their Measurement in Current, 
Future, and Proposed Missions, Including the Potential Impact of Those Measurements from Radio Frequency Interference Based on 
the Currently Known Radio Frequency EnvironmentEnvironmental 
Data Record 
Role and Significance
Earth Exploration-Satellite Service Passive Microwave Frequencies 
(GHz):
Summary of Radio Frequency 
Interference (RFI) Potential
1.4
6.8
10.7
18/19
23
37
50-60
89
150
183
Ocean Products
            Sea surface 
salinity
Global ocean 
circulation/heat 
exchange
1.4
 High: impact from out-of-band 
(OOB) emissions and adjacent 
emissions
Sea surface 
temperature
Numerical weather 
prediction (NWP), 
heat exchange, 
storm tracking and 
forecasting, climate 
operations
6.8
 Moderate over ocean: no frequency 
allocation
Sea surface 
winds
NWP, storm tracking, 
operations
10.7 
sea
18.7
23.8 
(sea)
37
 Moderate-low: over ocean, some 
potential for RFI at 10.7 GHz
Sea ice 
concentration
Climate, operations
18.7
37
 Low: higher frequencies and remote 
locations
Sea ice age
Climate, operations
18.7
37
 Low: higher frequencies and remote 
locations
   Atmospheric 
Products
            Temperature 
profile
NWP, storm 
forecasting, climate
50-60
 Moderate-low: potential for RFI due 
to spectrum-sharing rules at 
55-57
Moisture profile
NWP, storm 
forecasting, climate
23.8
50-60
89
150 
166
183
Moderate: collision avoidance radars 
at 24 GHz
Integrated water
NWP, clouds, climate
23.8
 Moderate: collision avoidance radars 
at 24 GHz
Cloud liquid 
water
Clouds, storms
18.7
23.8
37
 Moderate-low: slightly reduced 
sensitivity to collision avoidance 
radars
Cloud ice water 
Storms, climate
89
150 
166
183
Low: higher frequencies
Precipitation
Operations, climate
10.7
18.7
37
50-56
150 
166
183 
Moderate-high: 10.7 GHz over 
landŠespecially Europe
Land Parameters
            Soil moisture
Climate, NWP 
forecasting
1.4
6.8
10.7
18.7
 High: over land with 1.4 GHz 
OOB emissions and adjacent 
emissions and no allocations for 
6.8 GHz
Snow water 
equivalent
Climate, NWP, 
forecasting
18.7
23.8
37
 Moderate-low: some sensitivity to 
collision avoidance radars (over 
land)
Surface type
Climate
     37
 89
150
 Low: higher frequencies
NOTE: Additional detail on Earth Exploration-Satellite Service parameters related to this table is provided in Appendix E. In the columns ﬁEarth Exploration-
Satellite Service Passive Microwave Frequenciesﬂ and ﬁSummary of RFI Potential,ﬂ red indicates high RFI potential, yellow indicates moderate RFI potential, 
and green indicates low RFI potential. The colors in between (red-yellow and yellow-green) indicate moderate-high and moderate-low RFI potential.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  55
TABLE 2.1
 Summary of Common Geophysical Products and the Microwave Frequencies Used for Their Measurement in Current, 
Future, and Proposed Missions, Including the Potential Impact of Those Measurements from Radio Frequency Interference Based on 
the Currently Known Radio Frequency EnvironmentEnvironmental 
Data Record 
Role and Significance
Earth Exploration-Satellite Service Passive Microwave Frequencies 
(GHz):
Summary of Radio Frequency 
Interference (RFI) Potential
1.4
6.8
10.7
18/19
23
37
50-60
89
150
183
Ocean Products
            Sea surface 
salinity
Global ocean 
circulation/heat 
exchange
1.4
 High: impact from out-of-band 
(OOB) emissions and adjacent 
emissions
Sea surface 
temperature
Numerical weather 
prediction (NWP), 
heat exchange, 
storm tracking and 
forecasting, climate 
operations
6.8
 Moderate over ocean: no frequency 
allocation
Sea surface 
winds
NWP, storm tracking, 
operations
10.7 
sea
18.7
23.8 
(sea)
37
 Moderate-low: over ocean, some 
potential for RFI at 10.7 GHz
Sea ice 
concentration
Climate, operations
18.7
37
 Low: higher frequencies and remote 
locations
Sea ice age
Climate, operations
18.7
37
 Low: higher frequencies and remote 
locations
   Atmospheric 
Products
            Temperature 
profile
NWP, storm 
forecasting, climate
50-60
 Moderate-low: potential for RFI due 
to spectrum-sharing rules at 
55-57
Moisture profile
NWP, storm 
forecasting, climate
23.8
50-60
89
150 
166
183
Moderate: collision avoidance radars 
at 24 GHz
Integrated water
NWP, clouds, climate
23.8
 Moderate: collision avoidance radars 
at 24 GHz
Cloud liquid 
water
Clouds, storms
18.7
23.8
37
 Moderate-low: slightly reduced 
sensitivity to collision avoidance 
radars
Cloud ice water 
Storms, climate
89
150 
166
183
Low: higher frequencies
Precipitation
Operations, climate
10.7
18.7
37
50-56
150 
166
183 
Moderate-high: 10.7 GHz over 
landŠespecially Europe
Land Parameters
            Soil moisture
Climate, NWP 
forecasting
1.4
6.8
10.7
18.7
 High: over land with 1.4 GHz 
OOB emissions and adjacent 
emissions and no allocations for 
6.8 GHz
Snow water 
equivalent
Climate, NWP, 
forecasting
18.7
23.8
37
 Moderate-low: some sensitivity to 
collision avoidance radars (over 
land)
Surface type
Climate
     37
 89
150
 Low: higher frequencies
NOTE: Additional detail on Earth Exploration-Satellite Service parameters related to this table is provided in Appendix E. In the columns ﬁEarth Exploration-
Satellite Service Passive Microwave Frequenciesﬂ and ﬁSummary of RFI Potential,ﬂ red indicates high RFI potential, yellow indicates moderate RFI potential, 
and green indicates low RFI potential. The colors in between (red-yellow and yellow-green) indicate moderate-high and moderate-low RFI potential.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 TABLE 2.2
 Past, Current, Future, and Proposed Operational and Scienti˚c Earth Exploration-Satellite Service Missions Providing 
Critical Operational Data for Weather Forecasting and for Military and Civil Operations in Which the United States Has Participated
Past and Current Missions
Frequency (GHz)
Radio Frequency 
Interference (RFI) 
Experiences
Measurements
ESMR (2 past)
19.35
Minimum observed
Sea ice
SMMR (2 past)
6.6, 10.7
6 and 10 GHz, land
Ocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud 
liquid water, precipitation
NEMS/SCAMS (2 past)
23.8, 31.4, 50-60 (3 
channels)
Atmospheric temperature profile
TOVS (MSU) (1 current, 9 past)
50-60
Minimum observed
Atmospheric temperature profile
SSM/I (3 current, 4 past)
19.35, 22.2, 37, 85.5
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Ocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud 
liquid water, precipitation
SSM/T (3 current, 5 past)
50-60, 89
Minimum
Atmospheric temperature profile
SSM/T2 (4 current, 1 past)
89, 150, 183.31
Minimum
Atmospheric moisture profile
AMSU-A (4 current)
23.8, 31.4, 50-60, 89
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Atmospheric temperature profile
AMSU-B (4 current)
89, 150, 183.31
Significant RFI from nearby 
spacecraft downlinks
Atmospheric moisture profile
TOPEX (TMR) (1 past)
18, 21, 37
Minimum
Wave mode product correction for ocean altimetry
TMI (1 current)
10.7, 19.35, 23.8, 37, 85
10 GHz, Japan
Precipitation, ocean wind speed, SST*, integrated 
water vapor, cloud liquid water
JASON-1 JMR (1 current)
18.7 23.8, 34
Minimum
Wave mode product correction for ocean altimetry
HSB (1 current)
89, 150, 183.31
Minimum
Moisture profile
AMSR-E (1 current)
6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 36.5, 89
6 and 10 GHz, land
Ocean wind speed, global SST, integrated water 
vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitation
AMSR (1 past)
6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 50.3, 
52.8, 36.5, 89
6 and 10 GHz, land
Ocean wind speed, global SST, integrated water 
vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitation
WindSat (1 current)
6.8, 10.7, 18.8, 22, 37
6 GHz, land; 10 GHz, ocean 
and land; 18 GHz, ocean
Ocean wind vector, SST, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water, precipitation
SSM/IS (2 current)
19.35, 22.2, 37, 50-60, 91.6, 
150, 183.31
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Ocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and 
moisture profile, integrated water vapor, cloud 
liquid water, precipitation
MHS (2 current)
89, 150, 183.31
Minimum
Atmospheric moisture profile
MLS (1 current)
115.3-122.0, 177.2-206.2, 
221.4-240.5, 606.7-667.5, 
2481.9-2506.0
Minimum
Atmospheric trace species
Jason-2 AMR (1 current)
18.7, 23.8, 34
Minimum
Water vapor corrections for altimetry
Future Missions
Frequency (GHz)
RFI Susceptibility
Measurements
SMOS (MIRAS) (1)Šest. 2009
1.4
High impacts from out-of-
band (OOB) emissions
Soil moisture, sea surface salinity
Aquarius (1)Šest. 2010
1.4
High impacts from OOB 
emissions
Sea surface salinity
AMSR-2 (GCOM-W) (1)Šest. 
2011
6.9, 7.3, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 37
6 GHz RFI mitigation
Ocean wind speed, SST, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water, precipitation
GMI (GPM) (2)Šest. 2013
10.7, 23.8, 37, 89, 166, 
183.31
10 GHzŠEuropean Union
Ocean wind speed, precipitation, integrated water 
vapor, cloud liquid water, SST*
ATMS (NPOESS) (3)Šest. 2013
22.2, 31, 50-60, 89, 166, 
183.31
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Atmospheric temperature and moisture profile
SMAP (1)Šest. 2013
1.4
High impacts from OOB 
emissions 
Soil moisture and freeze-thaw for weather and 
water cycle processes
MIS (NPOESS) (3)Šest. 2016
6-7, 10.7, 18, 23, 37, 50-60, 
89, 166, 183.31
6 GHz, RFI mitigation; 10 
GHzŠEuropean Union
Ocean wind vector, SST, atmospheric moisture 
and temperature profile, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water
SSM/IS (3)Šest. 2009
19.35, 22.2, 37, 50-60, 91.6, 
150, 183.31
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Ocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and 
water profile, precipitation, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  57
TABLE 2.2
 Past, Current, Future, and Proposed Operational and Scienti˚c Earth Exploration-Satellite Service Missions Providing 
Critical Operational Data for Weather Forecasting and for Military and Civil Operations in Which the United States Has Participated
Past and Current Missions
Frequency (GHz)
Radio Frequency 
Interference (RFI) 
Experiences
Measurements
ESMR (2 past)
19.35
Minimum observed
Sea ice
SMMR (2 past)
6.6, 10.7
6 and 10 GHz, land
Ocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud 
liquid water, precipitation
NEMS/SCAMS (2 past)
23.8, 31.4, 50-60 (3 
channels)
Atmospheric temperature profile
TOVS (MSU) (1 current, 9 past)
50-60
Minimum observed
Atmospheric temperature profile
SSM/I (3 current, 4 past)
19.35, 22.2, 37, 85.5
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Ocean wind speed, integrated water vapor, cloud 
liquid water, precipitation
SSM/T (3 current, 5 past)
50-60, 89
Minimum
Atmospheric temperature profile
SSM/T2 (4 current, 1 past)
89, 150, 183.31
Minimum
Atmospheric moisture profile
AMSU-A (4 current)
23.8, 31.4, 50-60, 89
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Atmospheric temperature profile
AMSU-B (4 current)
89, 150, 183.31
Significant RFI from nearby 
spacecraft downlinks
Atmospheric moisture profile
TOPEX (TMR) (1 past)
18, 21, 37
Minimum
Wave mode product correction for ocean altimetry
TMI (1 current)
10.7, 19.35, 23.8, 37, 85
10 GHz, Japan
Precipitation, ocean wind speed, SST*, integrated 
water vapor, cloud liquid water
JASON-1 JMR (1 current)
18.7 23.8, 34
Minimum
Wave mode product correction for ocean altimetry
HSB (1 current)
89, 150, 183.31
Minimum
Moisture profile
AMSR-E (1 current)
6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 36.5, 89
6 and 10 GHz, land
Ocean wind speed, global SST, integrated water 
vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitation
AMSR (1 past)
6.9, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 50.3, 
52.8, 36.5, 89
6 and 10 GHz, land
Ocean wind speed, global SST, integrated water 
vapor, cloud liquid water, precipitation
WindSat (1 current)
6.8, 10.7, 18.8, 22, 37
6 GHz, land; 10 GHz, ocean 
and land; 18 GHz, ocean
Ocean wind vector, SST, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water, precipitation
SSM/IS (2 current)
19.35, 22.2, 37, 50-60, 91.6, 
150, 183.31
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Ocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and 
moisture profile, integrated water vapor, cloud 
liquid water, precipitation
MHS (2 current)
89, 150, 183.31
Minimum
Atmospheric moisture profile
MLS (1 current)
115.3-122.0, 177.2-206.2, 
221.4-240.5, 606.7-667.5, 
2481.9-2506.0
Minimum
Atmospheric trace species
Jason-2 AMR (1 current)
18.7, 23.8, 34
Minimum
Water vapor corrections for altimetry
Future Missions
Frequency (GHz)
RFI Susceptibility
Measurements
SMOS (MIRAS) (1)Šest. 2009
1.4
High impacts from out-of-
band (OOB) emissions
Soil moisture, sea surface salinity
Aquarius (1)Šest. 2010
1.4
High impacts from OOB 
emissions
Sea surface salinity
AMSR-2 (GCOM-W) (1)Šest. 
2011
6.9, 7.3, 10.7, 18.6, 23.8, 37
6 GHz RFI mitigation
Ocean wind speed, SST, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water, precipitation
GMI (GPM) (2)Šest. 2013
10.7, 23.8, 37, 89, 166, 
183.31
10 GHzŠEuropean Union
Ocean wind speed, precipitation, integrated water 
vapor, cloud liquid water, SST*
ATMS (NPOESS) (3)Šest. 2013
22.2, 31, 50-60, 89, 166, 
183.31
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Atmospheric temperature and moisture profile
SMAP (1)Šest. 2013
1.4
High impacts from OOB 
emissions 
Soil moisture and freeze-thaw for weather and 
water cycle processes
MIS (NPOESS) (3)Šest. 2016
6-7, 10.7, 18, 23, 37, 50-60, 
89, 166, 183.31
6 GHz, RFI mitigation; 10 
GHzŠEuropean Union
Ocean wind vector, SST, atmospheric moisture 
and temperature profile, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water
SSM/IS (3)Šest. 2009
19.35, 22.2, 37, 50-60, 91.6, 
150, 183.31
23 GHz RFI possible from 
vehicle anticollision radar
Ocean wind speed, atmospheric temperature and 
water profile, precipitation, integrated water vapor, 
cloud liquid water
continued
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 Proposed Missions
Frequency (GHz)
RFI Susceptibility
Measurements
PATH (1)
Microwave array spectrometer
Minimum
High-frequency, all-weather temperature and 
humidity sounds for weather forecasting and sea 
surface temperature
SCLP (1)
Ku- and X-band radars; K- 
and Ka-band radiometer
Possible RFI experience 
similar to that of WindSat
Snow accumulation for freshwater availability
NOTE: SST (*) indicates reduced capability in colder regions (less than about 12°C). The number of each type of EESS radiometer currently in operation, 
planned for operation, or proposed for operation is included in parentheses with the listing of its U.S.-based associated missions. Acronyms are defined in 
Appendix F. In the column ﬁRadio Frequency Interference (RFI) Experiences,ﬂ/ﬂRFI Susceptibility,ﬂ red indicates high RFI potential, yellow indicates moder
-ate RFI potential, and green indicates low RFI potential. The colors in between (red-yellow and yellow-green) indicate moderate-high and moderate-low RFI 
potential.
TABLE 2.2
 ContinuedSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
employed. Of particular note are the Soil Moisture Ocean Salinity (SMOS) (launch: 
2009) and Aquarius (estimated launch: 2010) missions, which will provide the 
˜rst demonstration of space-based sensing of sea salinity; the Soil Moisture Active 
Passive mission (estimated launch: 2013 or 2014) for the measurement of global 
soil moisture; and the NPOESS sensor suite (including the Advanced Technology 
Microwave Sounder [ATMS] and the Microwave Imager/Sounder system currently 
being designed) that will provide a wide range of EDR records. 
The ˜rst U.S. passive microwave radiometer missions date back to 1972. Since 
then, EESS has continued to ˚y passive microwave radiometers with ever-increasing 
capability and covering an expanding range of frequencies. Of note is the current 
interest in measurements of 1.4 GHz and 6.8 GHz brightness temperature to sup
-port sea surface salinity and soil moisture measurements, critical to the continued 
improvement of weather and climate measurements as described in §2.1, with 
additional background supplied in Appendix E. In Table 2.2, the number of each 
type of EESS radiometer currently in operation is included in parentheses with the 
listing of its U.S.-based associated missions. There is currently a total of 30 mis
-sions. Including international missions in which the United States is not involved, 
the total number is more than 44 missions. Planned and proposed missions include 
at least 18 more space-based passive radiometers. The complete list of missions 
represents substantial national and international investment in passive radiometry. 
Table 2.2 also indicates that several of these new and existing measurements are 
either currently being impacted by RFI or are highly likely to be impacted by RFI 
in the near future. A description of the RFI problem at each of the frequencies 
indicated in either red or yellow in Table 2.2 can be found in §2.5.
Finding:
 Scienti˜c advances have required increasing measurement precision by 
passive radio and microwave facilities in order to obtain more accurate and thus 
more useful data sets. This need for precision will continue to increase.
Finding:
 Large investments have been made in satellite sensors and sensor networks 
and in major radio observatories. New facilities costing billions of dollars are under 
construction or are being designed. 
Finding:
 Radio frequency interference threatens the scienti˜c understanding of key 
variables in Earth™s natural system, now and in the future.
2.4
 CURRENT AND FUTURE NON-SPACE-BASED 
 ACTIVITIES AND SPECTRUM USAGE
Although satellites are now the primary data source driving global numerical 
weather prediction models, over the United States, ground-based meteorological 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
60sensors and radiosondes launched at 12 hour intervals from 80 sites have long been 
the primary source. However, the ever-increasing power of computers leaves NWP 
models without data between radiosonde sites and launch times, thus limiting 
models™ forecasting capabilities. Moreover, the annual cost per radiosonde launch 
site is approximately $200,000. To address the problem of cost and sampling density 
in time and space, less-expensive, continuously operating autonomous ground-
based microwave sensors are being developed to augment or replace parts of the 
present U.S. radiosonde network and thereby to reduce the number of potentially 
serious unexpected meteorological events that can arise between sample times 
and places.
40
 Moreover, such cloud-penetrating sensors can help calibrate those 
spaceborne sensors observing water vapor and cloud water content, parameters 
that vary so rapidly in time and space that they are dif˜cult to validate. 
Because of their reliability, economy, and simplicity of deployment, as well as 
the value of their observations, ground-based radiometers are being implemented 
in networks in Korea, China, and Europe and are included in a current request 
for proposals by the National Weather Service. Operational installations are being 
considered for oil platforms in the Gulf of Mexico. Ground-based radiometers 
were also deployed around the 2008 Olympics site in Beijing to improve short-
term weather forecasts.
Ground-based radiometers can also continuously and locally generate valu
-able predictive meteorological parameters such as connective available potential 
energy (CAPE), K-index, total of totals index (TTI), lifted index (LI), and a dozen 
or so other indices, many of which are associated with severe and sudden-onset 
weather events. 
An example of a current program for the monitoring of global change is the 
U.S. Department of Energy™s Atmospheric Radiation Monitoring (ARM) program, 
which employs ground-based up-looking passive microwave sensors to characterize 
the global radiation budget and clouds. These unattended systems continuously 
measure water vapor pro˜les and cloud liquid water accurately and inexpensively, 
relative to radiosondes. Moreover, they provide an integrated measurement that is 
thought to be more representative of the large-scale behavior of the atmosphere 
than are the measurements returned by radiosondes. Tropospheric water vapor 
pro˜les are measured using a number of bands near the water vapor lines at 22.235 
or 183.310 GHz. Bands near the 22.235 GHz water vapor line yield integrated pre
-cipitable water vapor (PWV). For 15 years, ARM has used microwave radiometers 
installed in the tropical western Paci˜c and at locations up to 70 degrees north 
latitude for fundamental measurements of atmospheric water vapor. These obser
-40
 Knupp, R. Ware, P. Herzegh, F. Vandenberghe, J. Vivekanandan, and E. Westwater, ﬁGround-Based 
Radiometric Pro˜ling During Dynamic Weather Conditions,ﬂ 
Journal of Atmospheric and Oceanic 
Technology
, 26(6):1057-1073 (2009). 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
vations have also helped to calibrate radiosondes around the world for weather 
forecasting and the generation of climate records.
2.5
 THE IMPACT OF RADIO FREQUENCY INTERFERENCE ON 
 EARTH EXPLORATION-SATELLITE SERVICE OBSERVATIONS
Microwave radiometers are, by necessity, extremely sensitive radio receivers and 
are thus very sensitive to radiation from communications, navigation, and other 
active radio systems. Most radiometers measure total power (brightness tempera
-ture) and have no means for distinguishing between naturally emitted thermal 
noise and the noise-like signals produced by other sources. 
Interference can be detected if it is strong enough to be clearly distinguishable 
from the natural variations in scene brightness temperatures. Lower amounts of 
interference (i.e., comparable to the geophysical brightness variability) are much 
more dif˜cult to identify and separate and can therefore compromise the accuracy 
of the retrieved geophysical information. Although efforts are underway to enhance 
the abilities of radiometers to detect and suppress interference (as described in 
Chapter 4), such improvements generally increase costs, data rates, and power 
consumption while achieving only limited success because of the indistinguish
-able components of the interference. The following discussion details the process 
by which human-made sources interfere with radiometry. It presents both speci˜c 
examples of RFI impacts on Earth observations and justi˜ed concerns about future 
sources of interference.
Introduction to the Problem of Radio Frequency Interference: 
 Immediate Impacts on EESS
EESS radiometers measure the naturally generated background brightness 
temperature (noise power) of Earth. Since the received power is very small, these 
radiometers are, by necessity, extremely sensitive instruments. This complicates 
their design because the background noise temperature that is being measured 
is so faint that interference power levels of far less than even 10
Œ12
 W can cause 
signi˜cant measurement errors. Additionally, for spaceborne instruments, the spot 
size for each individual observation is typically between 12 and 100 km, although 
smaller spot sizes exist: AMSR-E™s spatial resolution is 5 km at 89 GHz. As a result 
of these spot sizes, pinpointing the precise location of interferers is extremely dif
-˜cult after launch.
Signals emitted from transmitters operating at frequencies within or adjacent 
to the passbands of EESS receivers (hereafter to include not only ground-based but 
also airborne radiometers for Earth observation) are the primary causes of radio 
frequency interference in EESS measurements. In many cases the interference is 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
62due to spurious or out-of-band (OOB) emissions from transmitters operating in 
bands allocated for other radio services rather than due to signals that are inten
-tionally transmitted in EESS bands. In yet other cases (for example, RFI observed 
within the 1400-1427 MHz EESS band), it is not always clear whether inadequate 
˜ltering within the EESS system or OOB or spurious emissions from active users 
are the cause, although it is noted that most EESS systems employ state-of-the-art 
˜ltering technology that cannot easily be improved. 
Spurious and OOB transmitter emissions from commercial devices typically 
are neither precisely controlled during manufacture nor essential to the devices™ 
intended purposes. The ultimate impact of such emissions on a speci˜c EESS 
geophysical measurement depends on the sensitivity of the geophysical parameter 
to changes in brightness temperature, as discussed in §2.2. The high radiometric 
accuracy and sensitivity achieved by current EESS systems result in commensu
-rately high sensitivity to RFI that can cause errors in the retrieved geophysical 
parameters. The maximum signal-power contamination that can exist without 
impacting the information contained in the EESS measurement has been derived 
by EESS scientists for each of the EESS allocated bands and is documented in Inter
-national Telecommunication Union-Radio (ITU-R) Recommendation RS.1029-2. 
Even when false measurements due to RFI are detected and eliminated, forecasts 
are degraded by the loss of data. Appendix C provides a derivation of the errors in 
EESS measurements of brightness temperature caused by a collection of anthro
-pogenic sources within the EESS radiometer antenna footprint and frequency 
passband. Tables 2.1 and 2.2 also provide qualitative assessments of the RFI threat 
at particular frequencies and for particular missions, respectively.
The RFI threat is especially serious at frequencies lower than 50 GHz, where 
the atmosphere is largely transparent to radio waves and where frequency bands 
are widely used by EESS to provide information about environmental parameters. 
In the ˜rst attempts at direct radiance assimilation,
41
 only oceanic observations 
at such transparent frequencies were assimilated into NWP models because the 
cold microwave background signature of the ocean strongly contrasts with that of 
the atmosphere. Assimilation of radiances over land at these frequencies was not 
attempted owing to the relatively poor geophysical signature caused by the high 
emissivity of land. Recently, though, it has been demonstrated that with increas
-41
 Direct radiance assimilation
 (sometimes just called radiance assimilation) involves the direct use of 
satellite brightness-temperature measurements to drive the internal state of an environmental model 
(e.g., a numerical weather prediction model). Now being widely adopted for forecasting purposes, 
this technique contrasts with the more established technique of performing a retrieval of an envi
-ronmental parameter using the data. It is generally preferable to retrievals because it uses all available 
data to achieve the highest forecast accuracy. See, for example, L. Phalippou, ﬁVariational Retrieval of 
Humidity Pro˜le, Wind Speed, and Cloud Liquid-Water Path with the SSM/I: Potential for Numerical 
Weather Prediction,ﬂ 
Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society,
 122: 327-355 (1996).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
ingly accurate land-surface emission models, radiance assimilation at 23.8 and 
31 GHz improves both forecasts and quality control of data from other bands. As a 
result, RFI as weak as 0.1 K or less can limit the use of these bands over land. A simi
-lar situation is anticipated with channels in the 1.4 GHz and 6 GHz bands, which 
are particularly sensitive to surface soil moisture. RFI below 10 GHz
 threatens to 
compromise or even eliminate the utility of these bands, which are unique in their 
ability to provide soil moisture information. 
Since ground-based microwave radiometers are valuable for obtaining region-
speci˜c temperature and humidity pro˜le data on the lower atmosphere for both 
nowcasting (typically out to 6 hours) and forecasting, and because they have the 
unique capability of obtaining low-resolution pro˜les of cloud liquid water, they are 
the instruments commonly used in urban areas and at airports where RFI is more 
likely. However, the tolerable interference levels are quite low for ground-based 
atmospheric sounding. For example, a 1 W isotropic transmitter at 1 km distance 
will contribute about 10 K of RFI to a typical uplooking microwave
 radiometer 
observing near the assemblage of oxygen lines centered at 60 GHz with a 15 cm 
antenna aperture, a 300 MHz bandpass ˜lter, and 50 dB antenna sidelobes near the 
horizon. For a ground-based radiometer, even a 1 K RFI-induced perturbation in 
a typical seven-channel oxygen band temperature-pro˜ling radiometer can yield 
an unacceptable 1.4 K error in the retrieved temperature pro˜le. In practice, root 
mean square (RMS) instrument errors in oxygen-band radiometer measurements 
are as low as 0.5 K (or lower), and the nominal tolerable RFI level for these systems 
is 0.05 K. Increasing the number of observation channels in this wave band can 
mitigate, but not remove, the effect of narrowband RFI.
Evidence of Impact of Radio Frequency Interference on EESS Observations
The corruption of EESS data products by radio frequency interference, includ
-ing impacts on EESS observations made solely within protected portions of the 
radio spectrum, has been extensively noted. Typical examples of interference within 
protected bands and nearby bands follow.
Protected Bands
L-Band (
1.400-
1.427
 GHz)
 Observations at 1.4 GHz over land by ground-based and airborne systems in 
support of remote soil moisture and sea surface salinity estimation are often com
-promised by what can be identi˜ed as OOB emissions from active systems. Total 
in-band emissions must remain below approximately Œ140 dBm from 1400-1427 
MHz to ensure that anthropogenic (i.e., human-made) emissions do not in˚uence 
SSS observations to more than a fraction of the necessary stability of 0.05 K that is 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
64required to obtain 0.2 psu (practical salinity unit) SSS measurement uncertainty.
42
 The RFI contamination that can be tolerated for SM measurement is greater than 
that for salinity by approximately an order of magnitude; however, the density of 
transmitters over land is far greater than over ocean. Accordingly, slightly higher 
RFI contamination levels can be tolerated for 1.4 GHz SM measurements. But in 
both cases, the maximum tolerable interference level is lower than typical in-band 
interference from OOB emissions by legal radar transmissions in adjacent spectrum 
(e.g., at 1.385 GHz). Normal OOB emission limitations determined by the appli
-cable OOB emission mask at 1 percent away from the center bandwidth (e.g., 1400 
vs. 1385 MHz) are only slightly below Œ40 dBc. Using this value, signals within the 
adjacent EESS band arising from radars within the radiometer antenna footprint 
can easily exceed the maximum allowed emission level (set at about Œ140 dBm; 
see Appendix D).
43
 While few space-based L-band observations have been obtained to date, air
-borne and ground-based sensors have provided evidence of RFI corruption at 
levels that prevent geophysical measurements. A recent summary of data measured 
within the 1400-1427 MHz protected band in April 2005 using the EMIRAD 
L-band
 radiometer of the Technical University of Denmark showed signi˜cant daily 
changes in the RFI environment. The percentage of EMIRAD ocean observations 
impacted by RFI were as low as 1 to 2 percent on most days, but reached 40 to 
50 percent in some cases. Repeated occurrences of RFI using the
 Electronically-
Scanned Thinned Array Radiometer (ESTAR) L-band airborne EESS hybrid 
synthetic-and-real aperture radiometer in the protected 1400-1427 MHz band 
have been noted in ˚ights over the Eastern Shore region of Virginia in 1999 and 
over Oklahoma City,
 Oklahoma, in 1997.
44
 These observations have shown clear 
instances of RFI (Figures 2.13 and 2.14). 
A key concern at L-band is the possible in˚uence of long-range air surveillance 
radar systems in nearby bands. Appendix D presents estimates for the RFI impact 
on future high-quality soil moisture measurements made by a space-based L-band 
42
 The stability ˜gure of 0.05 K cited here is a conservative estimate of what is needed to achieve 
0.2 psu based on cold water temperatures. D.M. Levine, ﬁAquarius: An Instrument to Monitor Sea 
Surface Salinity from Space,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
 45(7): 2040-2050 
(July 2007), proposes a somewhat higher stability ˜gure of 0.13 K based on measurements averaged 
over a 7 day window. 
43
 N. Skou, S. Misra, S. Sobjaerg, J. Balling, and S. Kristensen, ﬁRFI as Experienced During Prepara
-tions for the SMOS Mission,ﬂ 
Proceedings of 
200
8 URSI General Assembly,
 Chicago, Ill., August 9-16, 
2008.
44
 D. Le Vine, ﬁESTAR Experience with RFI at L-Band and Implications for Future Passive Microwave 
Remote Sensing from Space,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 
200
2 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium. (IGARSS),
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2002, pp. 847-849; D. Le Vine and M. Haken, ﬁRFI 
at L-Band in Synthetic Aperture Radiometers,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 
200
3 International Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS)
, Toulouse, France, 2003, pp. 1742-1744.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Figure 2-13aR01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFigure 2-13bR01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 2.13
 An example of interference to an airborne EESS radiometer system operating at 
1413 MHz from air-traf˚c radar operating in adjacent segments of spectrum that is possibly due to 
a combination of spurious emissions from the radar and limitations of adjacent signal rejection in 
the EESS radiometer. (A) Image from the Electronically-Scanned Thinned Array Radiometer (ESTAR) 
showing the effects of radio frequency interference (RFI) at 1413 MHz in the vicinity of Richmond, 
Virginia. The small vertical stripes are artifacts in the image due to strong RFI. (B) The signal is the 
output of the total power channel. These data were recorded at the location of the arrow in part (A). 
SOURCE: D. Le Vine, ﬁESTAR Experience with RFI at L-Band and Implications for Future Passive Micro
-wave Remote Sensing from Space,ﬂ in 
IEEE Int. Geosci. and Remote Sens. Symp. Proc. (IGARSS),
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2002, pp. 847-849, Figures 1 and 2. © 2002 IEEE.
ABSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
66Figure 2-14aR01628uneditable bitmapped imageFigure 2-14bR01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.14
 (A) Electronically-Scanned Thinned Array Radiometer (ESTAR) image at 1413 MHz from 
the Southern Great Plains experiment (SGP97). The vertical lines west of Oklahoma City are distortions 
due to radio frequency interference (RFI). (B) Example of RFI in the vicinity of Oklahoma City during 
SGP97. The signal represents total power and was recorded west of the arrow in part (A). SOURCE: 
D. Le Vine, ﬁESTAR Experience with RFI at L-Band and Implications for Future Passive Microwave 
Remote Sensing from Space,ﬂ in 
IEEE Int. Geosci. and Remote Sens. Symp. Proc. (IGARSS), 
Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada, 2002, pp. 847-849, Figures 3 and 4. © 2002 IEEE. 
ABSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
radiometer, assuming various spurious emission levels at the EESS radiometer at 
1413 MHz (the center of this EESS frequency allocation).
45
 The results indicate that 
over the United States where the density of radars is high, RFI would be a signi˜
-cant problem. Synthetic Aperture Interferometric Radiometers (SAIRs) have a wide 
˜eld of view that, relative to real aperture antennas, increases their vulnerability 
to strong interference from outside the synthesized antenna beam. Such persistent 
RFI is a cause for concern for planned space-based EESS systemsŠfor example, 
the European Space Agency™s SMOS sensor.
In both Figure 2.13 and Figure 2.14, it is unclear if the observed RFI was 
dominated by spurious emissions that fell within the EESS band or by limitations 
of the EESS passband ˜ltering of emissions in adjacent channels. Regardless, these 
data demonstrate the need for the mitigation of interference and/or the regula
-tion of OOB emissions radiated in adjacent bands, particularly in L-band. Since 
the rejection of high-power radar signals in adjacent spectrum is critical to EESS, 
high
-performance front-end ˜lters and other RFI mitigation schemes are essential 
and have been developed by the EESS community. However, the implementation 
of ˜ltering schemes, if they are able to suppress RFI to manageable levels, also 
increases the EESS measurement uncertainty, reduces system sensitivity, increases 
EESS system cost, and impacts the geophysical data availability. Accordingly, 
there are practical limitations to minimizing band separation between EESS and 
active services that need to be considered in developing spectrum usage policy. 
In addition, in order to design effective RFI mitigation for EESS or prescribe 
equitable spectrum policy, the interfering signal parameters need to be precisely 
known. However, only limited information about interfering signals is currently 
available.
X-Band (
10.
6-10.
7 GHz)
 Passive microwave observations at X-band are critical for measurements of sea 
surface winds (useful for weather prediction and storm tracking) and precipita
-tion (useful for climate and weather monitoring). They are also important for the 
correction of the effects of land cover on lower frequency (e.g., 1.4 GHz) measure
-ments of soil moisture (useful for climate and weather forecasting). Within X-band, 
only the sub-band from 10.68-10.70 GHz is protected in the United States and 
globally for EESS by the ITU, although the wider (and more useful) 10.6-10.7 GHz 
sub-band has a shared primary allocation within the United States and globally. 
In addition, observations are also often made including the adjacent sub-band 
10.7-10.8 GHz, or including even wider sub-bands on an as-available basis with 
active services. An example of the use of a wider total band is the Naval Research 
Laboratory™s WindSat sensor, which uses 10.55-10.85 GHz. 
45
 Ibid.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
68Currently, X-band passive microwave imagery over North America appears to 
be free of obvious RFI from anthropogenic emissions, as illustrated by the example 
in Figure 2.15 from AMSR-E. The EESS measurements in this band required the 
use of the full allocated bandwidth of 100 MHz (10.6-10.7 GHz). It is important 
to note that all but the top 20 MHz of the EESS allocated band is shared with the 
Fixed Service (FS; point-to-point transmissions, such as radio relay towers); thus, 
based on Figure 2.15, it appears that U.S. frequency assignments have avoided 
the 10.6-10.68 GHz segment, which has been bene˜cial to EESS. However, as the 
need for spectrum for active services continues to expand, there is concern that 
signi˜cant usage of the 10.6-10.68 GHz band (currently shared with FS) could 
lead to a scenario at X-band that would resemble the worsening RFI environment 
at C-band observed between 1987 and 2003 (depicted in Figure 2.23 later in this 
chapter). A comparable degradation at X-band would be highly detrimental to 
EESS measurements and their associated data products. Similar concerns also exist 
at K-band (18.6-18.8 GHz), wherein EESS measurements have begun to display 
occasional RFI, as can be observed in WindSat imagery (see Figures 2.19 and 2.20 
later in this chapter).
Figure 2-15R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.15
 Brightness temperature as measured by the Advanced Microwave Scanning
 Radiometer-
Earth (AMSR-E) at 10.6 GHz with horizontal polarization over the United States. This observation 
appears to be free from interference. (L. Li, E. Njoku, E. Im, P. Chang, and K. St. German, ﬁFrequency 
Interference over the U.S. in Aqua AMSR-E Data,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sens
-ing,
 42(2): 380-390 (February 2004), from Figure 1.) AMSR-E data are produced by Remote Sensing 
Systems and sponsored by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs DISCOVER Project and the AMSR-E 
Science Team. Data are available at www.remss.com.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
RFI in global 10.7 GHz brightness-temperature measurements was ˜rst detected 
by the TMI radiometer in 1997 during observations over both urban and remote 
locations of Japan. Subsequently, AMSR-E, launched in May 2002, showed sub
-stantial RFI in several European locations that were not observable by TMI due to 
its near-equatorial orbit (Figures 2.16 and 2.17). Currently, about 2 percent of the 
land area of Europe is unavailable to AMSR-E for measurements at 10.7 GHz, and 
an unknown, larger fraction may be adversely affected below the threshold of obvi
-ous detectability. However, the looming problem of RFI at X-band is not con˜ned 
to land areas. Data at 10.7 GHz, such as those provided by WindSat and AMSR-E 
for SST, ocean wind, and maritime precipitation measurements, often experience 
substantial RFI from geostationary transmitters operating immediately adjacent to 
the upper edge of the 10.7 GHz EESS band segment. This maritime RFI is caused 
by downward-propagating geosynchronous broadcast signals re˚ecting from the 
ocean surface into the antenna beam of the EESS sensor. The RFI results in areas 
of the Mediterranean Sea, the eastern Atlantic Ocean north of the equator, and 
FIGURE 2.16
 Passive microwave imagery from the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth 
(AMSR-E) on the NASA Earth Observing System Aqua at 10.7 GHz over Europe. Strong emissions 
over the United Kingdom and portions of Italy are seen as saturated brightness temperatures (black 
spots). These areas, and nearby yellow and red areas in this example, cannot be used for the retrieval 
of geophysical parameters such as soil moisture, precipitation, and cloud water. AMSR-E data are pro
-duced by Remote Sensing Systems and sponsored by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs DISCOVER 
Project and the AMSR-E Science Team. Data are available at www.remss.com.
Figure 2-16R01628uneditable bitmapped imageSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
70Figure 2-17R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.17
 Expanded region of Europe shown by the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-
Earth (AMSR-E) brightness temperatures at 10.65 GHz indicating the dependence of radio frequency 
interference (RFI) on political boundaries. RFI can be seen in England, Italy, and Belarus, whereas 
other countries appear to show none. These instances show the critical role of informed frequency 
managers and assigners within their respective jurisdictions for limiting impact between services of 
shared spectrum segments. AMSR-E data are produced by Remote Sensing Systems and sponsored 
by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs DISCOVER Project and the AMSR-E Science Team. Data are 
available at www.remss.com.
the western Atlantic off the coast of Brazil being unavailable for sea surface wind, 
temperature, and heavy rain measurements, as shown in Figure 2.18.
46
 Southerly 
views of upwelling microwave brightness temperatures are typically measured by 
polar-orbiting EESS satellites in the descending phases of their orbits, so such RFI is 
typically observed in half of all such data over the Mediterranean Sea. The problem 
also manifests itself as RFI-corrupted calibration views of what should otherwise 
be cold space during portions of the WindSat orbit. 
Analysis of the WindSat polarimetric channels has shown that signi˜cant RFI 
is occurring within the sub-band 10.55-10.85 GHz. Based on earlier measurements 
46
 Hotbird 4 channels 110 (10.71918 GHz), 111 (10.72713 GHz), and 112 (10.75754 GHz) are likely 
candidates.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Figure 2-18R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.18
 Example of radio frequency interference (RFI; areas in green and yellow) occurring at 
X-band from oceanic re˜ections of geosynchronous broadcasts in bands adjacent to those observed 
by the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth (AMSR-E). In this example AMSR-E is operat
-ing in the EESS band 10.6-10.7 GHz and is experiencing perturbations higher than 40 K in measured 
brightness temperature during its descending phase. This level of RFI is far greater than approximately 
0.2 K, the minimum level of perturbation that degrades environmental models that use sea surface 
temperature data derived from AMSR-E. AMSR-E data are produced by Remote Sensing Systems and 
sponsored by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs DISCOVER Project and the AMSR-E Science Team. 
Data are available at www.remss.com.
using SMMR compared with recent measurements using WindSat, strong X-band 
RFI in Europe and Japan appears to be increasing over time. The X-band
 channels 
of the airborne Polarimetric Scanning Radiometer (PSR) have also detected RFI 
over the United States, although to a lesser degree than at C-band. The high-
 
resolution PSR mapping capabilities permit pinpointing the location of sources 
of RFI, but only within limited data sets.
Finding:
 Whereas most frequency regulations for active services are de˜ned on 
local or regional bases, passive EESS observations are global by nature. As a result, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
72a high level of international cooperation is required to maintain and enforce pas
-sive allocations.
K-Band (
18
.6-18
.8 GHz)
 The 18.6-18.8 GHz band is a critical resource for EESS that supports many 
operational environmental products, such as snow cover, sea surface wind speed, 
and soil moisture measurements. Snow water equivalent measurements, which 
are increasingly important for water management, speci˜cally require the use of 
observations at a frequency near this band. Thus there is a global primary alloca
-tion for EESS at 18 GHz. 
Evidence of RFI has been found in 18 GHz WindSat space-based observations, 
as shown in Figure 2.19 for the Paris and London metropolitan areas. Sparse but 
recurring RFI at 18 GHz has been observed on nearly every continent, as shown in 
Figure 2.20. As a result, scientists are concerned that increasing use of the spectrum 
near 18 GHz will increase RFI for WindSat and other EESS radiometers. 
K-Band (
23
.6-24
.0 GHz)
 Space- and airborne radiometric observations of the weak water vapor reso
-nance near 22.235 GHz are at risk owing to recent rule changes that allow automo
-Figure 2-19R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.19
 Brightness-temperature data from the WindSat 18.7 ±45° channels (both left) and 18.7 
R/LCP channels (both right) showing strong radio frequency interference over Paris and London. 
Courtesy of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
Figure 2-20aR01628uneditable bitmapped imageFigure 2-20bR01628uneditable bitmapped imageFigure 2-20c&dR01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.20
 Cumulative analysis over a 5 year period of WindSat 18.6-18.8 GHz horizontally polar
-ized data indicates sparse occurrences of strong radio frequency interference impacting 18 GHz 
brightness-temperature measurements over land: (A) North America, (B) Europe, (C) Central Africa, 
and (D) Southeast Asia/Oceania. Courtesy of the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory.
ABCDSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
74tive anticollision radar to operate within the bands from 22 to 27 GHz, despite the 
allocation of the 23.6-24.0 GHz band to the passive services by both the Federal 
Communications Commission in the United States and ITU globally. Observations 
at 23.6-24.0 GHz and nearby bands provide the primary data used to estimate 
atmospheric integrated water vapor, an EDR that drives important atmospheric 
modes related to severe weather within NWP models (see §2.1). 
For a typical ˜ve-channel, 22 GHz ground-based upward-looking water vapor 
pro˜ling radiometer, 1 K of RFI in a channel near the center of the water vapor line 
can induce a 10 percent error in retrieved water vapor abundance in the lower and 
mid-level troposphere. This error is comparable to the current performance of such 
a current technology microwave pro˜ler, and the tolerable RFI level is therefore 
about 0.1 K. The tolerable RFI level near 31 GHz for total integrated (as opposed to 
pro˜les of) water vapor/cloud liquid measurements within the midlatitude coastal 
environment is about 0.6 K on humid days. Higher RFI levels of up to 1 K can be 
tolerated for observations of integrated liquid water in clouds and rain where the 
atmospheric signals are higher.
To date, only little evidence of the impact of RFI at 23.6-24.0 GHz has been 
documented, partly because automobile radars are still quite new and not yet 
widespread. In spite of the nascent state of automotive radar, ground-based mea
-surements within 23.6-24.0 GHz have shown the presence of such transmissions. 
This topic is discussed in further detail in the subsection below entitled ﬁPotential 
Future Radio Frequency Interference and Its Impact on EESS Observations.ﬂ 
Finding:
 The rules for out-of-band and spurious emissions in the primary allocated 
Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) bands (e.g., 1400-1427 MHz) do not 
provide adequate interference protection for EESS purposes.
The rules that pertain to the ˜nding above are given in Appendix D.
Unprotected Band 
C-Band (
6.2-7.5 GHz)
 Current space-based observations within C-band, speci˜cally near 6.8 GHz, 
are used to measure global sea surface temperature and soil moisture. In addition, 
airborne observations in C-band are used for high-resolution SM mapping for 
research purposes. Data from ˚ood-prone areas in Texas in 2007 have suggested 
that airborne mapping at C-band may also be useful for ˚ood forecasting in disaster 
management. Because there is no EESS allocation within C-band and this por
-tion of the spectrum is heavily used by the Fixed Service, brightness-temperature 
measur
ements at C-band over land are currently considered observations of oppor
-tunity. The observed area can contain many sources of RFI that require mitigation 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
in order for the data to be useful. Simulated data based on current active spectrum 
usage have shown that frequency diversity can facilitate effective RFI mitigation in 
this spectral region. The careful design of receivers and retrieval algorithms can also 
help facilitate mitigation, but mitigation techniques applied to data from current 
space-based radiometers are limited in their effectiveness. 
The NASA AMSR-E and the WindSat spaceborne radiometers have shown clear 
evidence of active use impacting C-band EESS measurements (see Figure 2.21) over 
large portions of global land area. However, the SMMR C-band channel that oper
-ated from June 1978 to August 1987 showed little to no evidence of transmissions 
over North America (Figure 2.22) in this EESS band of opportunity. While the 
precise bands for these three instruments differ slightly, it has also been qualitatively 
observed in repeated airborne observations over central Oklahoma in 1999 and 
2006 using the same instrument (the PSR/C airborne scanning radiometer) that 
obvious instances of RFI have tended to increase over time. The major increase in 
the active usage of C-band spectrum occurring from 1987 to 2003 has reduced the 
ability to perform EESS observations of opportunity over land. C-band measure
-ments from AMSR-E and WindSat currently provide critical SST products over 
ocean suf˜ciently far from the coasts. Ongoing improvements in maritime prod
-uct accuracies, particularly in near-shore sea surface temperature measurements 
improved to 0.1-0.2 K accuracy, may thus become limited in the near future by 
RFI, even far out at sea.
In the examples given in Figures 2.21 and 2.22, AMSR-E imagery illustrates 
the prevalence and growth of RFI to EESS at C-band. Shortly after the launch of 
AMSR-E aboard NASA™s Aqua satellite in May 2002, it was discovered that the 
6.9 GHz passes over land (both ascending and descending and in both V and 
H polarizations) exhibited anomalous brightness-temperature (
TB) ﬁhot-spotsﬂ 
exceeding 310-320 K that were clearly unrelated to natural surface emission. 
TB values also appeared elevated by several degrees over large areas relative to expected 
values. The RFI not only biased the soil moisture retrievals toward dryness, but 
caused the multiple-channel iterative algorithm used at launch to fail frequently. 
Several orbits of data were analyzed, focusing on the United States where the prob
-lem appeared to be worst, to see if a simple brightness-temperature index could be 
devised to detect RFI so that contaminated observations could be ignored. It was 
found that a simple RFI index could identify the major RFI locations, but low-level 
RFI covered very large areas and could not be unambiguously distinguished from 
natural geophysical signals. The AMSR-E RFI was later analyzed globally using a 
more sophisticated set of indices and statistics.
47
 RFI was found at 6.9 GHz over 
47
 E.G. Njoku, P. Ashcroft, T.K. Chan and L. Li, ﬁGlobal Survey and Statistics of Radio-Frequency 
Interference in AMSR-E Land Observations,ﬂ
 IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
 43(5): 938-947 (2005).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
76Figure 2-22R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFigure 2-21R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 2.21
 (Top panel) An example of interference to EESS observations of opportunity at 6.925 
GHz primarily from in-band signals arriving via the sidelobes of the main antenna beam of Fixed Ser
-vice transmitters in legal operation. Passive microwave imagery at 6.9 GHz from AMSR-E on the NASA 
EOS Aqua platform. The black spots represent high levels of anthropogenic emission that saturate the 
AMSR-E radiometer primarily over regions of California and Arizona. The red spots over most of the 
remaining areas of the United States represent contaminated brightness-temperature measurements. 
(Bottom panel) Radio frequency interference (RFI) is displayed as the perturbation from a zero mean 
(natural emission) level. Perturbations of up to 50 K are common across the United States, affecting 
more than 50 percent of the total land area with RFI greater than 5 K. The pervasive nature of the 
interference makes impossible the retrieval of soil moisture using AMSR-E 6.9 GHz data. SOURCE 
(top and bottom): L. Li, E. Njoku, E. Im, P. Chang, and K. St. German, ﬁFrequency Interference over the 
U.S. in Aqua AMSR-E Data,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
 42(2): 380-390 
(2004), from Figure 8. AMSR-E data are produced by Remote Sensing Systems and sponsored by the 
NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs DISCOVER Project and the AMSR-E Science Team. Data are available 
at www.remss.com.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
FIGURE 2.22
 An example of interference to EESS observations of opportunity at 6.6 GHz. Passive 
microwave imagery at 6.6 GHz from the Scanning Multi-channel Microwave Radiometer (SMMR) from 
(A) 1979 and (B) 1987, showing no noticeable brightness temperature from radio frequency interference 
(RFI). In contrast, passive microwave imagery from the Advanced Microwave Scanning
 Radiometer-
Earth (AMSR-E) on NASA Earth Observing System Aqua from 2003 (C) and 2004 (D) shows substan
-tial RFI. The black spots represent high levels of anthropogenic emission that saturate the AMSR-E 
radiometer, primarily over regions of California and Arizona. The red spots over most of the remaining 
areas of the United States represent contaminated brightness-temperature measurements. AMSR-E 
data are produced by Remote Sensing Systems and sponsored by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs 
DISCOVER Project and the AMSR-E Science Team. Data are available at www.remss.com.
Figure 2-23R01628uneditable bitmapped imageACDBlarge parts of the Middle East, Asia, and Japan, and even sophisticated statistical 
procedures could not adequately distinguish RFI from the background of natural 
brightness variability, nor ˜lter it out in post-processing of the data.
48
 Because the 
6.9 GHz RFI was so prevalent and dif˜cult to identify and mitigate over the United 
States, this instrument channel was subsequently ignored in the global AMSR-E 
algorithm used for the production processing and data archiving of SM data. Reli
-ance was instead placed on the higher-frequency AMSR-E channels that are less 
sensitive to SM. Over those parts of Europe and Japan where the 10.7 GHz channels 
were also affected by RFI, no AMSR-E soil moisture retrievals at all were possible. 
48
 Ibid.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
78On a research basis (separate from the global production algorithm), it is still pos
-sible to use the 6.9 GHz brightness data for soil moisture retrieval over signi˜cant 
RFI-free global areas such as most of Africa, South America, and Australia. 
Extensive analysis of AMSR-E and WindSat data provides a clear picture and 
plausible explanation for RFI at C-band, but not in other parts of the spectrum. 
Other RFI surveys have been inconclusive, tied to a single location, and/or have 
not been able to provide much insight regarding the global status of potential 
RFI to EESS. The duty cycle, waveforms, emitter spatial distribution, transmitter 
power, and spectral utilization of the RFI need to be measured to effectively and 
optimally design RFI mitigation strategies into EESS radiometer systems and to 
further develop equitable spectrum usage policies.
 49
 In short, inadequate data on 
spectrum usage exist. The Federal Communications Commission™s (FCC™s) 2002 
Spectrum Policy Task Force came to this same conclusion:
More information, however, is needed in order to quantify and characterize spectrum 
usage more accurately so that the Commission can adopt spectrum policies that take 
advantage of these spectrum white spaces. Currently, no federal agency or other organiza
-tion systematically measures temporal spectrum use.
50
Finding: 
Better utilization of the spectrum and reduced radio frequency inter
-ference for scienti˜c as well as commercial applications are possible with better 
knowledge of actual spectrum usage. 
Progress toward the goal of improved spectrum usage could be made by gather
-ing more information through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. 
Such monitoring would bene˜t both the scienti˜c community and commercial 
interests by allowing more ef˜cient use of the spectrum for communications. 
Interference mitigation at C-band has been demonstrated on a limited basis 
and for particularly strong (and therefore relatively obvious) interference in air
-borne images of thermal emission at C-band.
51 The radiometer and algorithm were 
designed to detect spectral variations that were not of natural origin by ˜tting the 
spectrum to a standard model, then rejecting channels that compromised the ˜t 
49
 J.R. Piepmeier, ﬁRadio Frequency Survey of the 21-cm Wavelength (1.4 GHz) Allocation for 
 
Passive Microwave Observing,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
200
3 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium (IGARSS)
, Toulouse, France, 2003, pp. 1739-1741; and presentation by Dennis Roberson, 
Illinois Institute of Technology, to the committee on September 29, 2007, in Irvine, California.
50
 Federal Communications Commission, 
Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force,
 November 2002, 
p. 10.
51
 A.J. Gasiewski, M. Klein, A.Yevgrafov, and V. Leuskiy, ﬁInterference Mitigation in Passive Micro
-wave Radiometry,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 
200
2 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 
(IGARSS),
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada, June 24-28, 2002.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.79THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
to this natural model. The techniques have proven effective at mitigating large-
amplitude interference (Figure 2.23). However, they provide no guarantee that 
interference of amplitudes on the order of the system noise level can be detected 
and mitigated. 
Finding:
 There is currently inadequate protected spectrum in C-band and X-band 
for operational passive microwave observations of sea surface temperature, soil 
moisture, and ocean surface wind speed and direction.
Finding:
 While unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a 
potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute 
for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.
Finding: 
Important scienti˜c inquiry and applications enabled by the EESS are 
signi˜cantly impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (RFI). Such RFI 
FIGURE 2.23
 Polarimetric Scanning Radiometer C-band maps from a swath segment observed during 
SP99 on July 14, 1999, over central Oklahoma: (A) raw calibrated brightness maps for front and back 
looks for four subbands and (B) interference-corrected maps using a spectral sub-band algorithm 
(A.J. Gasiewski, M. Klein, A.Yevgrafov, and V. Leuskiy, ﬁInterference Mitigation in Passive Microwave 
Radiometry,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 2002 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium 
[IGARSS],
 Toronto, Ontario, Canada, June 24-28, 2002). AMSR-E data are produced by Remote 
Sensing Systems and sponsored by the NASA Earth Science MEaSUREs DISCOVER Project and the 
AMSR-E Science Team. Data are available at www.remss.com. 
Figure 2-24R01628uneditable bitmapped imageBASpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
80has reduced the societal and scienti˜c return of EESS observatories and necessitates 
costly interference mitigation, which is often insuf˜cient to prevent RFI damage.
Potential Future Radio Frequency Interference and Its Impact on 
 EESS Observations
Ultrawideband Devices and Anticollision Radar (1-24 GHz)
A major concern for future EESS observations is the proliferation of ultrawide
-band (UWB) devices that radiate over wide bandwidths at low power, typically in 
the 2-10 GHz and 22-27 GHz ranges. Automotive collision-avoidance radars that 
employ the entire 22-27 GHz range have recently been included on new vehicles 
and are becoming widespread. In particular, the FCC™s 2002 approval of the use 
of UWB devices in the 3-10.6 GHz band and of anticollision radar operation as 
Part 15 devices near 24 GHz has alarmed the EESS community.
52
,53
 These sources 
produce broadband signals that resemble thermal noise, making them dif˜cult to 
distinguish from natural emissions. The potential for large-scale market penetra
-tion of such devices further exacerbates the problem, particularly if they are per
-mitted to radiate across protected frequency bands (particularly in the protected 
1.400-1.427 GHz and 23.6-24.0 GHz bands). Emissions from UWB sources in these 
protected spectral bands present a serious problem, and action will need to be taken 
to prevent such emissions and limit the numbers of such devices.
Scenarios involving RFI to EESS systems from multiple low-level emitters 
within the passband and footprint of EESS measurements must be analyzed on a 
cumulative basis as outlined in Appendix C. In these scenarios the maximum out
-put power of each transmitter and their number per square kilometer are critical 
factors in EESS compatibility studies. Examples include UWB at 6 GHz and point-
to-point transmitters near 57 GHz (see V-band scenarios later in this section). 
A study analyzing the impact of losing the protected 23.6-24.0 GHz channel 
suggests that although the ideal level of RFI in the band is zero, 0.03 K might be 
established as its maximum permissible value, which is equivalent to Œ126.84 dBm 
of RFI within a 500 MHz band.
54
 More serious is the fact that unless the RFI 
level is 10 K or more, the NWP applications cannot reliably ˚ag the data as 
52
 See the Glossary in this report for a de˜nition of a Part 15 device.
53
 FCC Press Release, ﬁNew Public Safety Applications and Broadband Internet Access Among Uses 
Envisioned by FCC Authorization of Ultra-Wideband Technology,ﬂ February 12, 2002, available at 
http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Engineering_Technology/News_Releases/2002/nret0203.html; accessed 
January 7, 2010.
54
 S. English, 
Assessment of the Requirement for 
23
.6-24
.0 GHz Obser
vations for Weather Forecasting,
 Forecasting Research Technical Report No. 440, Exeter, U.K.: Met Of˜ce, 2006.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
 
erroneous, thereby degrading forecasts within and downstream of any regions 
where
 intermediate-level RFI is present. Such intermediate-level interference is 
dif˜cult to detect with any con˜dence except in locations where its effects become 
extreme. Since automobiles are nearly ubiquitous over land and especially within 
populated regions where forecasts have the greatest economic value, the problem 
is endemic to users who rely the most on forecast data. This ˜nal point is suf˜cient 
to support the exclusion of all intended emissions near the protected EESS band, 
consistent with the intent of the original regulation. 
In addition, there is great concern for the future of EESS measurements of 
opportunity at C-band. This band covers much of the spectral region commonly 
used by EESS for measurements of sea surface temperature and soil moisture on an 
as-available basis. These measurements are critical for accurate weather forecasting, 
severe weather prediction, and drought prediction, among other applications. The 
wide proliferation of low-level UWB devices within C-band is a signi˜cant con
-cern of the EESS operational and scienti˜c communities (see Appendix C for the 
density of interferers analysis). Since RFI in EESS operations is cumulative, there 
is no protection from the impact of a high density of low-level emitters resulting 
from the strong market penetration of unlicensed products. In these scenarios, all 
mitigation techniques for AMSR-E and WindSat data would be rendered useless, 
and important future C-band observations would not be possible without manda
-tory bilateral mitigation strategies (as described in Chapter 4 of this report).
It is instructive to contrast the scenarios at C-band for EESS, where a large 
number of emitters contribute to RFI within a single pixel of AMSR-E and WindSat 
data (especially over populated areas), with the RFI scenario outlined in Appen
-dix D. In the latter case, the impact of RFI on EESS measurements from one or 
more radars is considered. For cases where only a few high-level emitters in adjacent 
bands are present (for example, in L-band radar RFI), the measured brightness 
temperatures are increased by spurious and/or OOB emissions. Such emissions 
contribute directly to the maximum allowed in-band emissions for EESS; however, 
the RFI is the result of a single emitter rather than the cumulative effect of many 
in-band emitters. Although current regulationsŠif enforcedŠcould preclude the 
effects of cumulative in-band emissions on EESS systems operating in allocated 
bands (e.g. 1.400-1.427 GHz and 10.6-10.7 GHz), they are largely ineffective in 
their present form in limiting OOB and spurious emissions. In considering these 
scenarios, it should be noted that the present speci˜cations on OOB and spurious 
emissions were established decades ago, before heavy use was made of bands adja
-cent to where critical EESS measurements are now conducted and prior to major 
advances in microwave signal processing and ˜ltering technology. Considerations 
of new technologies must be made in reassessing the effects of and in regulating 
OOB and spurious emissions.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
82Ground-Based Atmospheric Sounding (23.8 GHz, 31.5 GHz, 50-60 GHz, 
89 GHz, 183 GHz)
Ground-based microwave radiometers are being used increasingly for the 
temperature, humidity, and cloud liquid pro˜les in the lower troposphere for 
both nowcasting and forecasting. Thus, they are being incorporated into weather 
observing networks as a replacement and augmentation of the global radiosonde 
network. It is expected that RMS instrument errors in oxygen-band temperature 
pro˜ling radiometer measurements will be as low as 0.2 K (or lower) in the future 
and that the nominal tolerable RFI level for these systems will be 0.02 K. 
For a typical ˜ve-channel 22 GHz to 30 GHz upward-looking water vapor 
pro˜ling radiometer, 1 K of RFI in a channel near the center of the 22.235 GHz 
water vapor line can induce a 10 percent error in retrieved water vapor abundance 
in the lower and mid-level troposphere. This error is comparable to the current 
performance of such a pro˜ler, and the tolerable RFI level is therefore about 0.1 K. 
It is expected, however, that the absolute accuracy of ground-based systems will 
increase as the models and instruments improve, possibly attaining an absolute 
accuracy of 0.2 mm of precipitable water vapor (PWV). Since each millimeter of 
PWV produces approximately 1.4 K of signal at 23.8 GHz, RFI must be less than 
0.03 K, assuming a maximum tolerable interference of 10 percent of the sensitivity 
of the instrument. Higher RFI levels of up to 1 K can be tolerated for observations 
of integrated liquid water in clouds and rain. 
Wideband anticollision radars are being licensed and produced in the 22-26 GHz 
region of the 22-30 GHz wave band, which spans the radio astronomy reserved quiet 
band at 23.6-24 GHz. These active sources are dif˜cult to discriminate from thermal 
noise, even with elegant and costly detection methods, and are expected to be an 
ever-increasing problem to ground-based water vapor (humidity) pro˜ling.
Ground-based radiometers receiving around 89 GHz are important in that 
they are used to discriminate between cloud liquid water and ice. The transitions 
between the ice-liquid-vapor phases of water drive the thermodynamic energy 
transport cycles of the atmosphere and are therefore important for monitoring and 
predicting weather. Knowledge of these three phases is also critical to understand
-ing planetary albedo and planetary radiative transfer, and therefore climate change 
and global warming, as well. There is a protected primary radio astronomy band 
at 86-92 GHz, but as mentioned elsewhere in this report, it is dif˜cult to enforce 
against intrusions by spurious and out-of-band transmissions. Active technologies 
up to 110 GHz are being developed, in part due to military interest in and funding 
for active radars around 94 GHz. The growing availability of these high-frequency 
technologies in this wave band will undoubtedly result in problems from RFI for 
EESS observations.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
The strong water vapor line centered at 183 GHz is observed for water vapor 
pro˜ling in dry climates such as high-altitude astronomical observatories and 
arctic and desert regions. Because of the level of technology required at these high 
frequencies, little interference in this region is foreseen in the near future. 
Other Concerns
SST Measurements at C-Band and X-Band (
5-10 GHz)
 Of particular future concern is RFI affecting continuous all-weather microwave 
sea surface temperature measurements in littoral regions that are critical for severe 
storm forecasting and weather and climate studies (see Figure 2.8). These measure
-ments rely principally on observations at 5-10 GHz, which are generally sensitive 
to surface temperature changes while being insensitive to clouds. Active services 
using spectrum adjacent to and within the EESS allocation at 10.6-10.7 GHz can 
make SST measurements dif˜cult or impossible at this band. UWB devices that 
radiate in the 2-10 GHz range could be particularly problematic in the future. It is 
also important to note that 10.6-10.68 GHz is shared with the Fixed Service, and in 
several areas worldwide, signi˜cant interference has been measured and continues 
to increase. Several EESS satellites have improved on TMI™s 10 GHz measurements 
of SST by including observations of C-band microwave brightness temperatures, 
typically near 6.8 GHz. These measurements speci˜cally improve the accuracy of 
all-weather SST measurements in cold regions and are less prone to being affected 
by heavy clouds and precipitation. However, uncontaminated measurements of 
environmental parameters near 6 GHz are becoming more dif˜cult to obtain owing 
to the high usage of the C-band spectrum and the lack of any EESS allocation 
adequate to support SST measurements. While the problem of contamination of 
5-10 GHz SST measurements exists over all of the global oceans, it is particularly 
an issue in littoral regions where severe weather is economically important and 
population density (including ship traf˜c) is high (see also §2.1).
V-Band (
50-
64
 GHz)
 A number of currently operating space-based instruments use the atmospheric 
oxygen absorption band (50-64 GHz) to estimate pro˜les of atmospheric tempera
-ture and moisture. These measurements are central to NWP, severe weather fore
-casting, and climate analysis. International frequency allocations provide a shared 
ﬁprimaryﬂ status to EESS in the 57.0-59.3 GHz range, and these frequencies are 
currently used by several space-based radiometers, including the Advanced Micro
-wave Sounding Unit and the Special Sensor Microwave Imager/Sounder. Both of 
these sensors operate on multiple satellites to provide full global coverage every 
few hours (see Table 2.2). AMSU sensors operating in the 50-59 GHz band may 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
84be the single most important data source enabling useful global weather forecasts 
up to 7 days in advance. 
In response to a growing interest in the active use of this part of the spec
-trum, EESS scientists have begun analyzing the potential for future interference 
to remote sensing measurements at V-band. The wide bandwidth available and 
small device sizes that can be manufactured make this potentially fertile ground 
for commercial interests.
55
 A recent FCC notice of public rule making (NPRM) 
requested an allowance for increased power emission levels for sources operating 
within 57-64 GHz, which includes the ITU-protected 57.0-59.3 GHz portion used 
for weather-related sensing by many satellites and weather forecasting services.
56
 Unfortunately, the FCC NPRM included no analysis of the potential impact of 
these increased power levels on essential EESS passive measurements from AMSU 
or related instruments, even though it is currently envisioned that wireless systems 
operating near 60 GHz will become ubiquitous consumer devices for applications 
such as local DVD broadcasts and personal networking. While atmospheric absorp
-tion limits the range of active users™ transmissions, attenuation from the surface to 
the top of the atmosphere is not complete (as shown in Figure 1.2). A suf˜ciently 
high spatial density of low-power emitters on the ground can affect spaceborne 
microwave observations. Members of the EESS passive community raised this issue 
in comments ˜led in response to the FCC™s NPRM, and the FCC™s decision is still 
forthcoming as of the time of this writing.
57
 The community is also interacting 
with IEEE standards organizations to determine the possible impact of such wire
-less systems on future EESS observations.
58
It is clear that RFI degradation of EESS measurements and weather forecasting 
services appears to be likely if widespread unlicensed transmissions in these bands 
begin. Consideration should be given to limiting the strength and density of trans
-mitters in this band (see Appendix C) in order to address the concerns of EESS. 
It may well be that no practical limit exists if such devices are sold as unlicensed 
55
 B. Bosco, ﬁEmerging Commercial Applications Using the 60 GHz Band,ﬂ IEEE Wireless and Micro
-wave Technology conference (WAMICON) 2006, proceedings; B. Razavi, ﬁGadgets Gab at 60 GHz,ﬂ 
IEEE Spectrum,
 February 2008.
56
 In the Matter of Re
vision of the Commission™s Rules Regarding Operation in the 
57
-64
 GHz Band
, 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, 22 FCC Rcd 10505 (2007).
57
 IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society, ﬁComments to the proposed revision of the 
Commission™s Rules Regarding Operation in the 57-64 GHz Band,ﬂavailable at http://fjallfoss.fcc.
gov/prod/ecfs/retrieve.cgi?native_or_pdf=pdf&id_document=6519741794; accessed June 9, 2009.
58 It is noted that while considerable resources are often available to be applied toward legal
 ˜lings by 
active users of the spectrum, the nongovernmental scienti˜c community has had little or no ˜nancial 
support for pursuing such legal matters. Virtually all responses from the nongovernmental EESS 
and RAS communities to NPRMs are the result of either voluntary efforts (in the case of university 
personnel) or are in direct reaction to threats to the viability of the passive services (in the case of 
industry personnel).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.85THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
and thus potentially used without limit. However, there is no apparent technical 
reason why the wider band 59.3-64 GHz could not alternatively satisfy essentially 
all commercial requirements for ubiquitous devices since such bandwidths in a 
single device far exceed the capacities of most home ˜ber and cable systems that 
offer hundreds of television channels and other services.
High Frequencies (>
100 GHz)
 In order to improve the understanding of the chemistry associated with strato
-spheric ozone depletion, it is necessary to observe the global distributions of a 
wide array of trace gases.
59
 Measurements are made by observing narrow spectral 
line emissions. The frequency requirements of those measurements are dictated 
by molecular quantum transitions of the gases under consideration. Trace gases of 
particular interest include ozone, chlorine, hydrogen, bromine, and water vapor. 
NASA™s Microwave Limb Sounder (MLS) and associated follow-on instruments 
have been designed for trace gas observations.
60
 The EOS version of MLS oper
-ates in ˜ve primary spectral bands near 118, 190, 240, 640, and 2500 GHz.
61
 The 
speci˜c passbands and minimum detectable signals for MLS are listed in Table 2.3. 
RFI should be kept at or below one-tenth of the minimum detectable signals levels 
noted in the table. While no RFI has been reported to date, it is envisioned that 
the bands above 100 GHz may become commercially useful to the active services 
in the coming decades. 
In the near term, the Submillimeter Infrared Radiometer Ice Cloud Experi
-ment (SIRICE) mission is being designed to measure cloud ice water path using 
passive channels above 100 GHz. SIRICE is currently in pre-Phase A development 
at NASA. Design studies have identi˜ed three channels (including frequencies, 
bandwidths, and rms measurement errors) for SIRICE required to retrieve IWP 
with the necessary accuracy and precision. The spectral requirements are sum
-marized in Table 2.4. RFI contamination of SIRICE observations should be at or 
below one-tenth of the NE
T levels noted in the table if the scienti˜c integrity of 
the IWP retrievals is to be maintained.
59
 S. Solomon, ﬁStratospheric Ozone Depletion: A Review of Concepts and History,ﬂ 
Re
views of 
Geophysics,
 37(3): 275Œ316 (1999).
60
 J.W. Waters, W.G. Read, L. Froidevaux, and R.F Jarnot, ﬁThe UARS and EOS Microwave Limb 
Sounder (MLS) Experiments,ﬂ 
Journal of Atmospheric Science
, 56: 194-217 (1999).
61
 J.W. Waters et al., ﬁThe Earth Observing System Microwave Limb Sounder (EOS MLS) on the 
Aura Satellite,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
 44(5): 1075-1092 (2006).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
86TABLE 2.3
 EOS Microwave Limb Sounder Instrument Spectral Coverage and Sensitivity for Measurement of Trace Gases in the Upper Atmosphere
Passband (GHz)
Minimum Detectable Signal (K)
115.3-122.0
0.1
177.2-206.2
0.03
221.4-240.5
0.1
606.7-657.5
0.1
2481.9-2506.0
0.1
SOURCE: J. Waters, R.E. Cofield, M.J. Filipiak, D.A. Flower, N.J. Livesey, G.L. Manney, H.C. Pumphrey, 
M.L. Santee, P.H. Siegel, and D.L. Wu, ﬁAn Overview of the EOS MLS Experiment,ﬂ NASA EOS MLS DRL 
601 (part 1), ATBD-MLS-01, JPL D-15745/CL#04-2323, ver. 2.0, January 7, 2005.
TABLE 2.4
 Submillimeter Infrared Radiometer Ice Cloud Experiment (SIRICE) Instrument Spectral Coverage and Sensitivity Requirements for Measurement of Ice Water Path
Center Frequency ± Double Sideband Offset (GHz)
Bandwidth (GHz)
NE
T (K)
Polarization
183.31±1.5
1.4
0.7
Vertical
183.31±3.5
2.0
0.6
Vertical
183.31±7.0
3.0
0.5
Vertical
325.15±1.5
1.6
1.8
Vertical
325.15±3.5
2.4
1.4
Vertical
325.15±9.5
3.0
1.3
Vertical
448.00±1.4
1.2
2.3
Vertical
448.00±3.0
2.0
1.8
Vertical
448.00±7.2
3.0
1.5
Vertical
642.90±6.7
2.8
1.9
Vertical
642.90±6.7
2.8
1.9
Horizontal
874.40±4.5
6.0
1.9
Vertical
2.6
 SUMMARY OF THE IMPORTANCE OF AND RISKS 
TO CONTINUED CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE EARTH 
EXPLORATION-SATELLITE SERVICE IN THE FUTURE
The Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) provides critical and unique 
measurements that support (1) day-to-day weather and other environmental opera
-tions, (2) climate research, and (3) model development and other scienti˜c advances 
in Earth observation. EESS measurements are currently impacted by RFI at all key 
frequencies up to 19 GHz, and likely at 24 GHz and higher frequencies soon. There 
is also potential for signi˜cant future interference to EESS systems operating at 
50-60 GHz. This interference occurs whether the band of concern is assigned to the 
passive services exclusively, shared with other services, or not assigned to EESS but 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87THE
 EARTH
 EXPLORATION
-SATELLITE
 SERVICE
has unique physical properties that demand observation when interference is absent. 
Unless these issues are addressed in a timely manner, the effectiveness and utility of 
EESS will likely be increasingly compromised, particularly as wireless services and 
unlicensed devices proliferate. Most problematic are future ubiquitous unlicensed 
ultrawideband consumer devices that can proliferate without limit.
Box 2.3 illustrates a sporadic record of achievement in appropriately allocating 
spectrum and/or coordinating technology development between EESS and com
-peting active services. A technology advisory body, incorporating members from 
all relevant services, could help mitigate such failures. Such an entity would link 
EESS and other relevant active and passive communities in an early identi˜cation 
of issues and opportunities regarding competing spectral needs and shared stan
-dards development. Such a holistic body would supplement the more adversarial 
and segmented bodies that currently provide most such advice.
BOX 2.3
 Illustrative Examples of Successes and Failures in Frequency 
Coordination That Affect the Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS)
Successes
European and Japanese transition to 77 GHz band for automobile radar, avoiding 
23-24 GHz.
The development of airborne sub-band-based radio frequency interference (RFI) miti
-gation methods that delete single strong interference signals, although not weak or 
diffuse interference.
The International Telecommunication Union trade-off of allocations to obtain stronger 
protection at more important bands at 50-57 GHz.
The migration of new instrument speci˜cations toward protected bands (Advanced 
Technology Microwave Sounder, Special Sensor Microwave/Imager, Special Sensor 
Microwave/Imager Sounder, Conical Microwave Imager Sounder, and Microwave 
Imager/Sounder).FailuresThe lack of engagement between the auto radar community, Earth Exploration-Satellite 
Service (EESS), and regulators during the technology™s early development.
The lack of accepted remedies when unlicensed devices producing limited EESS inter
-ference multiply in numbers so as to collectively damage EESS and other services.
The lack of global exclusive EESS allocations at 18.7 and 10.65 GHz; critical bands 
experiencing RFI.
No allocation of a protected band at C-band.
The dif˜culty in effectively employing lower-frequency bands (e.g., 1400-1427 MHz) 
owing to RFI; apparent inadequate protection for EESS operation in the exclusively 
passive 1400-1427 MHz band.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
3The Radio Astronomy Service
Over the past 75 years, astronomical observations at radio frequencies have 
transformed the understanding of the universe. They have allowed fundamental 
scienti˜c issues to be addressedŠthese include the creation and ultimate fate of 
the universe, the distribution of matter and primordial energy in the universe, and 
the environment and manner in which stars and planets form. Many astronomi
-cal discoveries that have captured the imagination of astronomers and the public 
alike were made accidentally with radio telescopes; a list of such discoveries would 
include that of the primordial cosmic microwave background (CMB),
 celestial 
masers, and pulsarsŠthe latter being the dense, fast-rotating, radio
-emitting rem
-nants of massive stars. With powerful new facilities such as the Atacama Large 
Millimeter Array (ALMA), the potential for unexpected discoveries will grow 
substantially. As was ˜ttingly said in this context years ago by two famous radio 
astronomy pioneers, ﬁWe cannot discuss plans to discover the unsuspected . . . ,ﬂ
1 but the parade of new, unexpected discoveries has been continuous since the 
beginning of radio astronomy in the 1930s. With the unprecedented regimes of 
sensitivity that will arrive with new and planned instruments, one can expect that 
further remarkable discoveries will be made. 
Astronomical discoveries have been made possible by the steady and enormous 
improvement in sensitivity that is shown in Figure 3.1. In this graph the ordinate 
represents sensitivity and is on a logarithmic scale; there has been an improvement 
1 
Pawsey and Bracewell, 
Radio Astronomy
, Oxford, United Kingdom: Clarendon Press, 1955, 
p. 296.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.89THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Figure 3-1R01628uneditable bitmapped imageVLBIEVLA
Lo
g sensitivity (J
y)YearFIGURE 3.1
 The minimum detected or detectable signal in ˜ux density versus the year of mea
-surement. The sensitivity is proportional to the temperature of the receiver system and inversely 
proportional to the collecting area and the square root of both bandwidth and integration time. For 
measurements after year 1990, an integration time of 12 hours is assumed. The rapid improvement 
over time is due to system improvements, including the decrease in system temperature (solid-state 
technology), the increase in collecting area (cost and construction ef˚ciency), and the increase in 
bandwidth and integration time (electronic and digital technology). The improvement from 1933 to 
1983 is about 10 orders of magnitude, a halving time of less than 2 years: a performance improvement 
similar to that described by Moore™s law. Acronyms in the ˚gure are de˚ned in Appendix F. Figure 
adapted and updated from J.M. Moran, ﬁPeter Mezger and the Development of Radio Astronomy in 
the U.S. and Germany, and the Discovery of Radio Recombination Lines,ﬂ pp. 475-488 in 
The Nuclei 
of Normal Galaxies, Lessons from the Galactic Center, Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Research 
Workshop,
 NATO Advanced Science Institutes Series C, Vol. 445, A. Harris and R. Genzel, eds., Kluwer, 
Dordrecht (1994).
of 10 billion in 70 years, and there will be another improvement by a factor of 1,000 
from the Very Large Array (VLA) to the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) when it is 
built. (See Table 3.1 in §3.2, ﬁRadio Observatories and Radio Telescopes,ﬂ for the 
characteristics of the newer instruments.) 
The current scienti˜c questions that are motivating the construction of these 
new telescopes are no less exciting than those that were resolved in the past. Obvious 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
90examples include the exploration of planetary systems in formation around other 
stars, measurements of neutral hydrogen in the early universe, and the study of star 
formation in distant galaxies. Furthermore, it is through radio observations that the 
discovery of life-indicating molecules in other planetary systems might be made. 
The scienti˜c and technical advances of radio astronomy have been inter
-nationally recognized, as listed in Box 3.1. The Nobel Prize in physics has been 
awarded to eight radio astronomers in the past 40 years. 
3.1
 THE SCIENTIFIC IMPACT OF RADIO ASTRONOMY
What follows is a summary of the scienti˜c advances made possible in a few 
areas by radio astronomy. A discussion of some advances expected in the near 
future is also provided. 
Origin of Planets and the Solar System
Speculations concerning the origin of the solar system stretch far back in the 
science and philosophy of humans. During the coming decade, the capability of 
understanding the origins and evolution of other planetary systems and thereby 
coming to understand the origin of our own planetary system will exist: ALMA 
and the Expanded Very Large Array (EVLA), both coming online in a few years, 
BOX 3.1
 Nobel Prizes in Physics for Developments and 
Discoveries in Radio Astronomy
Radio astronomy has been internationally recognized for its fundamental contributions 
to knowledge. The Nobel Prize in physics has been awarded to eight radio astronomers. The 
names of the scientists who led the teams to these discoveries, the year of award, and a brief 
description of the prize-winning science, are listed below.
Sir Martin Ryle, 1974
, for the development of aperture synthesis, and 
Antony Hewish, 
1974, for the discovery of pulsars; 
Arno A. Penzias and Robert W. Wilson, 1978
, for the discovery of the cosmic micro
-wave background radiation; 
Russell A. Hulse and Joseph H. Taylor, Jr., 1993
, for establishing the emission of 
gravitational waves by close binary pulsar systems, as predicted by general relativity; 
and John C. Mather and George F. Smoot, 2006
, for demonstrating that the cosmic micro
-wave background radiation has a blackbody spectrum and for discovering spatial 
˚uctuations in the radiation. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
will make it possible to detect planets in formation around other stars. ALMA and 
EVLA will enable the study of the structure, dynamics, and temperature of the 
material from which planets are forming. The planned Square Kilometer Array  
will enable detailed studies of such disks. The key strengths of radio measurements 
that will enable these studies are their ability to trace the distribution of gas and 
dust throughout the disk, to study the dynamics and temperature of the material 
involved in planet formation, and to follow the accretion of material as it develops 
from the tiny, submicron dust particles characteristic of the interstellar medium 
to centimeter-sized clumps, the ˜rst critical step in the formation of terrestrial 
planets. These radio capabilities are unique in enabling scientists to learn about 
the physical and dynamical processes that govern the planet-formation process 
and its outcomeŠa planetary system. They will be able to ﬁseeﬂ the formation of 
giant planets through the gravitational and thermal in˚uence of these planets on 
the surrounding gas. Scientists will see disks with gaps and inner clearing zones 
that are caused by planets. They will be able to follow the orbits of the planets by 
how they sculpt the disk and to study characteristics of the planets by probing their 
interaction with the disk material.
At present, search techniques for extrasolar planets, or exoplanets, are strongly 
biased toward ˜nding large planets close to their host star; and correspondingly, the 
358 planetary systems known as of November 2009 are very different from our own 
solar system.
2 They typically contain one or more Jupiter-like giant planets in orbits 
closer than that of Earth, and with eccentricities exceeding those of any planet in 
our solar system. There is no well-accepted theory for how such planets form or 
why they should be common. Prior to the discovery of exoplanets, our solar system 
was thought to be typical, and a template for all planetary systems. This is now 
known not to be true, and our understanding of the diverse outcomes of forma
-tion is signi˜cantly incomplete. So that this formation problem can be properly 
addressed, observations of many young stars are needed. These observations will 
lay the groundwork for an understanding of the many possible outcomes of the 
planet-formation process and how terrestrial planets ˜t into the general picture. 
The new knowledge of the existence of other planetary systems gives rise to 
many intriguing questions. Does life exist elsewhere, or is it unique to the solar 
system? Could there be a common starting point for life? The abundant and 
complex chemistry of the interstellar medium and of protoplanetary systems pos
-sibly provides an answer. More than 140 molecules have been discovered in the 
interstellar medium. Those with more than four atoms are dominated by carbon, 
nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen. The 31 molecules with seven atoms or more are 
nearly all organic molecules. They include glycoaldehyde (a simple sugar), and 
urea and glycine (the latter being a simple amino acid common to life) may have 
2 
Data from http://exoplanets.org/, accessed November 24, 2009.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
92been detected. Clearly, the carbon-nitrogen-oxygen chemistry that dominates life 
on Earth also dominates the complex chemistry of space. 
The radio spectrum is the place to pursue a connection between astr
ochemistry 
and prebiotic terrestrial chemistry because it gives access to the wealth of spectral 
lines. With the sensitivity and resolution of the coming generation of radio tele
-scopes, it will be possible to search for sugars and amino acids and to follow the 
˚ow of chemistry from molecular clouds into protoplanetary systems. Is there a 
strong interstellar heritage to the chemical compounds that comets and other
 bodies 
delivered to early Earth? What is the dominant chemistry of a prot
oplanetary nebula 
and how does that change the chemical composition of the planet? Was life on Earth 
seeded by interstellar molecules?
In addition to these questions, others arise because the molecular composi
-tion of interstellar and protoplanetary material is strongly impacted by the physical 
processes that act on the gas. Selected molecules can act as tracers to follow speci˜c 
physical processes. For example, silicon monoxide (SiO) is commonly used as a tracer 
for strong shock waves associated with out˚ow activity, because silicon is heavily 
depleted onto dust grains, which are readily destroyed by shocks. That destruction 
liberates silicon into the gas phase, and this silicon is quickly incorporated into SiO. 
Methanol is a similar tracer for weak shocks, which evaporate ices. These tracers, 
and others presumably yet to be discovered, will provide important insights into the 
processes that shaped our solar system and that shape other planetary systems. 
Now that many planetary systems are being discovered, the search for signs of 
extraterrestrial life is becoming more compelling. The many planets that will be 
discovered in the ﬁhabitable zoneﬂ in the coming years are obvious targets. Search
-ing in the radio band is thought to be the optimum strategy, and some limited 
searches have already been made with the telescope at the Arecibo Observatory 
and with other smaller telescopes, but no results have yet been achieved. The Allen 
Telescope Array (ATA), a dedicated instrument for searching for extraterrestrial 
signals, is completing its ˜rst stage of construction as of this writing and will begin 
work soon. It will be a multibeam telescope, able to look at many stars simultane
-ously. This search for an extraterrestrial civilization, while a ﬁlong shot,ﬂ is seeking 
an answer to a basic and profound question: Are we alone in the Galaxy? 
Origin and Evolution of the Universe
In the past few decades, cosmology, the study of the origin and evolution 
of the universe, has been revolutionized. Whereas 30 years ago only a few broad 
facts in this ˜eld were known, today cosmology is a quantitative science with spe
-ci˜c, testable hypotheses. This revolution stemmed from advances in astronomical 
techniques that broadened astronomy from its origin in the optical wave band 
to the entire electromagnetic spectrum. This expansion across the spectrum was 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
pioneered by radio astronomy, which has been essential to the study of cosmology 
because radio astronomy alone can detect the bulk of the coldest matter in the 
universe, and can detect it at enormous distances and early times (see Box 3.2). 
We now know that the observable universe has expanded from its origin in a Big 
Bang some 14 billion years ago. It cooled as it expanded, and nuclei of hydrogen 
and helium were formed in dense opaque plasma. With further cooling, nuclei 
and electrons combined into atoms, and the universe became transparent but now 
dark, since as yet there were no stars. In subsequent evolution, the higher-density 
regions were able to collapse under their own gravity, giving rise to the ˜rst stars 
and galaxies (see Figure 3.2).
Fifty years ago the space density of bright radio galaxies was found to increase 
with distance faster than expected from the expansion, demonstrating the evolution 
of the universe and revealing a remarkable epoch of galaxy formation some 10 bil
-lion years ago. It was through this simple observation that radio astronomy ruled 
out the rival, steady-state theory of a non-evolving universe and favored evolution
-ary models in which the universe has expanded from a compact, hot origin.
Radio astronomy also provides the strongest evidence for the Big Bang through 
the discovery of the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation in 1965. 
This background radiation ˜lls space and has an accurately measured blackbody 
spectrum with a temperature of 2.725 K and a broad peak at about 100 GHz. This 
radiation was emitted some 400,000 years after the Big Bang, at a time when the 
universe had a temperature of about 3000 K and was becoming transparent. Since 
that time, the radiation has been stretched by a factor of about 1,000 through the 
expansion of the universe, and the temperature has decreased by the same factor. 
Because this radiation is so weak and so highly isotropic, it is dif˜cult to distin
-guish from local sources of noise. Only very careful observations have been able 
to demonstrate its existence. 
The CMB has proved to be a gold mine of information about the early universe. 
The radiation comes from early times when the universe was nearly homogeneous, 
BOX 3.2 
 Redshift
The continual expansion of the universe stretches electromagnetic waves so that they 
are received on Earth at a frequency lower than the frequency that they had when emitted. 
This effect is known as 
redshift, because light is shifted toward the red end of the spectrum 
as the distance is increased. Also, because the velocity of light is ˜nite, more-distant galaxies 
are seen as they had been at earlier times. Looking at distant galaxies, one sees the universe 
at an early epoch.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
94Figure 3-2R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.2
 Artist™s conception of the history of the universe. Time runs from left to right. The uni
-verse was born in an explosion popularly called the ﬁBig Bang,ﬂ which perhaps came from a ﬁquantum 
˜uctuation,ﬂ a phenomenon well known in physics. After a period of hyper-expansion (ﬁin˜ationﬂ), 
the universe settled to a nearly steady expansion rate. As the plasma became neutral, the afterglow 
died out, and the universe became dark. After hundreds of millions of years, gravitational contrac
-tion of the material in the original density ˜uctuations produced the ˚rst stars, which gave off light, 
and so the ﬁDark Agesﬂ ended. Further generations of stars formed, and galaxies and black holes 
coalesced from the stars. The universe became more complex and now is evolving rapidly, with many 
varieties of stars and galaxies and exotic objects, including a planet containing sentient beings who 
are able to contemplate this vast universe. Results from the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe 
(WMAP) satellite (shown in the ˚gure) were used to make the afterglow pattern. Image courtesy of 
NASA/WMAP Science Team.
but even then there were small density and temperature ˚uctuations that became 
the seeds of stars and galaxies. After extensive searches, the Cosmic Background 
Explorer (COBE) satellite found these ˚uctuations in 1992, at a level of 1 part in 
100,000 of the background temperature. The ˚uctuations appear to be random 
on the sky, but they have a characteristic angular scale of approximately 1 degree, 
which reveals properties of the plasma from which they were emitted. Measure
-ments of the angular power spectrum of the ˚uctuations have ˜xed the condi
-tions of the universe at the emission time, when the plasma changed to a neutral 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
gas of hydrogen and helium. Along with observations in other wave bands, radio 
observations of the CMB have revealed that most of the material in the universe 
cannot be ﬁnormal matterﬂ; it must be something that does not emit or absorb 
electromagnetic radiation: ﬁdark matter.ﬂ In addition, 70 percent of the density 
is made up of ﬁdark energy,ﬂ which has a repulsive antigravity effect, causing the 
expansion of the universe to accelerate.
3The ˚uctuations of the CMB have immense cosmological signi˜cance, and they 
are being studied with many instruments. The emission is broadband but peaks 
at a few hundred gigahertz, where atmospheric emission is a serious contaminant. 
Hence, the instruments are located on high mountain sites, on balloons, or on 
satellites. Very wide bandwidths are needed to detect the tiny signals. The CMB 
˚uctuations are linearly polarized at about the 10 percent level, and this provides 
further insights into the early universe. CMB studies provide a testing ground for 
theories of fundamental physics and theories on the nature of space and matter, 
at energies that cannot be reached by experiments on Earth. 
Between the epoch of recombination, when the universe became transparent 
and the CMB was emitted, and the epoch of galaxy formation, when stars ˜rst 
began to light up the universe, lies the ﬁDark Agesﬂ of the universe (see Figure 3.2). 
This period cannot be studied by optical astronomy, but radio provides a window 
by way of emission from neutral hydrogen. Over the next decade this study will 
be one of the major thrusts in radio astronomy. The emission, redshifted from 1.4 
GHz, will be detected at much lower frequencies, 200 MHz and below. It will be 
very faint, and radio interference will be a serious concern. Such observations will 
have to be made from remote sites and will require careful attention to the mitiga
-tion of radio frequency interference (RFI).
Pulsars and General Relativity
Pulsars are ultradense collapsed cores of heavy stars in the form of neutron 
stars that have completed their nuclear burning and exploded. Pulsars have a very 
strong magnetic ˜eld and generate a radio beam that, because the neutron star is 
spinning, produces radio ˚ashes in the same manner that a lighthouse generates 
optical ˚ashes. In some cases, the pulsar, remarkably, is spinning at about a thou
-sand times a second, leading to the term 
millisecond pulsars
. 
Because a pulsar is ultradense, its gravity is ultrastrong, and it provides a natural 
laboratory for the testing of Einstein™s theory of general relativity (GR). One predic
-3 
D.N. Spergel, L. Verde, H.V. Peiris, E. Komatsu, M.R. Nolta, C.L. Bennett, M. Halpern, G.
 Hinshaw, 
N. Jarosik, A. Kogut, M. Limon, S.S. Meyer, L. Page, G.S. Tucker, J.L. Weiland, E. Wollack, and 
E.L. Wright, ﬁFirst Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: Determina
-tion of Cosmological Parameters,ﬂ 
Astrophysical Journal Supplement
, 148: 175-194 (2003).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
96tion of GR is that the orbit of a pulsar in a binary stellar system slowly decays due 
to the emission of gravitational waves (Figure 3.3).
 The measurements accurately ˜t 
the prediction and prove that gravitational waves do exist. For this demonstration, 
Hulse and Taylor were awarded the Nobel Prize in physics in 1993 (see Box 3.1).
However, this orbital decay is a ﬁweak-˜eldﬂ effect, and GR has not yet been 
tested in the ﬁstrong-˜eldﬂ case. This leaves a fundamental question in
 physics: 
Is Einstein™s theory the ˜nal word in our understanding of gravity? Important 
questions are unanswered: Can GR correctly describe the ultrastrong ˜eld? Are 
its predictions for black holes correct? Is the cosmos ˜lled with a stochastic 
 
gravitational-wave background? Radio observations of pulsars now approach these 
questions, and the largest radio telescopes, including the Green Bank Telescope 
(GBT) and the Arecibo Observatory, and especially the SKA, should give some 
answers. These telescopes offer the possibility of probing the strong-˜eld realm of 
gravitational physics by ˜nding and timing many pulsars. The ultimate goal is to 
obtain extremely tight limits on deviations from GR, to a level a thousand times 
better than present solar-system limits. 
In the coming years, radio observations will identify hundreds of millisecond 
pulsars across the sky. Timed to high precision (~100 ns, the time that it takes light 
to travel 100 feet), these pulsars will act as multiple arms of a cosmic
 gravitational-
wave detector. This ﬁtelescopeﬂ will be sensitive to gravity waves at frequencies of 
nanohertz and will complement the much higher frequencies accessible to direct 
gravitational-wave detectors such as the Advanced Laser Interferometer Gravitational 
Wave Observatory (LIGO, ~100 Hz) and the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna 
(LISA, 1 mHz). The largest radio telescopes will be crucial for these observations. 
Galactic Nuclei and Black Holes
The ˜rst stars and galaxies formed out of the ˚uctuations in the early universe. 
A detailed understanding of how these processes unfolded will probably be one of 
the major achievements of astronomy in the coming decades. Astronomers have 
concluded that most galaxies have a giant black hole in their nuclei, with mass 
between a million and a billion times the mass of the Sun (see Box 3.3). It is not 
known whether the black holes formed ˜rst and galaxies of stars formed around 
them or the galaxies formed ˜rst and the black holes later condensed from the 
inner core. A remarkable correlation, however, has been found between the mass of 
black holes in galaxies and the mass of the halo of stars that surrounds them.
4 This 
relation implies the existence of some regulatory or feedback process linking the 
black hole and its halo of stars. Over cosmic time, a galaxy grows through mergers 
4 L. Ferrarese and D. Merritt, ﬁA Fundamental Relation between Supermassive Black Holes and Their 
Host Galaxies,ﬂ 
Astrophysical Journal
, 539(1): L9-L12 (2000).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Figure 3-3 alternateR01628editable vector imageGeneral relativity prediction˜25˜15˜10˜50˜35˜30˜20197519801985199520001990Ye
arCumulative time shift of periastron  (s)FIGURE 3.3
 The results of 30 years of observations at the Arecibo Observatory of the radio-emitting 
pulsar B1913+16. The pulsar is in orbit around a companion neutron star. General relativity (GR) 
predicts that the orbits of the two stars will shrink as orbital energy is lost to gravitational radiation. 
This ˚gure shows the ˚rst detection of this effect: measurements of the orbital phase (the data points) 
exactly match the prediction (solid line) calculated with GR. SOURCE: J.M. Weisberg and J.H. Taylor, 
ﬁThe Relativistic Binary Pulsar B1913+16: Thirty Years of Observations and Analysis,ﬂ Astronomical 
Society of the Paci˚c Conference Series, Vol. 328, F.A. Rasio and I.H. Stairs, eds., 2005.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
98BOX 3.3
 Black Holes
Einstein™s theory of gravity (general relativity) predicts that when matter is compressed suf
-˜ciently, it contracts into a region of space where gravity is so strong that nothing, not even light 
waves, can escape. Hence, this ultimate compression forms a dark region that is called a 
black hole. However, matter falling into a black hole must release some of its energy before it goes 
ﬁinside.ﬂ Thus there can be a bright region near the black hole. Further, the mass of the black 
hole still produces a gravitational effect. Radiation from infalling material and gravitational 
 
effects on the motions of nearby bodies can reveal the presence of a black hole and can give 
a measure of the mass that the black hole contains. In this way, black holes have been found 
with masses from a few times to a billion times the mass of the Sun. It has been shown that the 
center of the Milky Way contains a black hole with a mass of about 4 million solar masses.
11A.M. Ghez, S. Salim, S.D. Hornstein, A. Tanner, M. Morris, E.E. Becklin, and G. Duchene, 
ﬁStellarOrbits
ﬁStellar Orbits 
Around the Galactic Center Black Hole,ﬂ
 Astrophysical Journal
,, 620: 744-757 (2005).
with nearby galaxies, and the disruptive forces of these events trigger episodes of 
star formation. Meanwhile, the central black hole grows episodically by accreting 
material from the inner parts of the galaxy. The accretion disk that forms during 
such periods can sometimes produce more radiant energy than all the billions of 
stars in the galaxy combinedŠthe black hole and disk in this condition is called 
an active galactic nucleus, or AGN.
An early result from radio astronomy was the realization that most of the 
bright sources of radio radiation lie outside our own Galaxy, the Milky Way, and 
have high redshifts, so they must be at ﬁcosmologicalﬂ distances. These objects lie 
in the nuclei of galaxies and are created as material swirls into giant black holes at 
the centers of the galaxies. Much of the radiation is emitted anisotropically in two 
narrow jets along the rotation axis of the black hole (Figure 3.4). The brightest 
objectsŠquasarsŠare those in which the jets are pointed almost directly toward 
Earth. The discovery and study of these powerful ﬁradio galaxiesﬂ in the 1960s 
provided the ˜rst evidence for the existence of supermassive black holesŠevidence 
that was based on the energy conversion required. A major discovery from radio 
astronomy, made by the technique of very long baseline interferometry (VLBI), 
was that the jets are ˚owing at relativistic speedsŠclose to the speed of lightŠand 
that the radiation is beamed by the effects of special relativity. 
The best-studied supermassive black hole is the one in the center of the Milky 
Way; it has a mass of about 4 million times the mass of the Sun. Attention was ˜rst 
drawn to it as an important astronomical object in 1974, when radio emission from 
its envelope was seen. This radiation comes from relativistically excited gas that is 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Figure 3-4R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.4
 The remarkable nucleus, jets, and outer lobes of the radio galaxy Cygnus A. The nucleus 
contains a massive black hole that is accreting gas and dust, and some of the gravitational energy that 
is released is channeled into opposing jets. The jets contain a ˜ow of relativistic plasma that, when 
stopped by the extragalactic material far outside the galaxy, generates the huge lobes. This image was 
made with the Very Large Array at a frequency of 5 GHz and with an angular resolution of 0.5 arcsecond. 
Image courtesy of NRAO/AUI/NSF.
spiraling into the black hole. It cannot be seen with an optical telescope because 
the central region is so dusty, but the radio waves readily penetrate dust. 
The rate at which the black hole at the center of the Milky Way is growing has 
been measured by radio techniques. It currently is in a quiescent period, undergo
-ing low accretion. In more active galaxies, the central black holes are accreting mass 
thousands of times faster. 
Spectral line emission from water vapor at 22 GHz has turned out to be an 
 
unexpectedly important probe of the environments of supermassive black holes in 
the nuclei of galaxies. Water vapor appears as a trace constituent in the accretion 
disks that surround these black holes, and it emits radiation by the maser (micro
-wave ampli˜cation by stimulated emission of radiation) process. This causes the 
emitting condensations, called spots, to appear as spectacularly bright but very com
-pact sources of radiation whose positions and velocities can be measured precisely 
with a continental-scale radio telescope, called a VLBI array. In a stunning series of 
measurements, the orbital motions in the disk of one such galaxy, NGC4258, have 
been traced in detail (Figure 3.5). From these observations the mass of the black hole 
can be determined from Kepler™s laws of motion, and also the distance of the black 
hole from Earth can be determined by the comparison of the angular and linear 
velocities of the maser spots. The measurement of distance by this direct trigono
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
100Figure 3-5R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.5
 The galaxy NGC4258, shown in the top panel, is a relatively normal looking spiral galaxy, 
lying about 23,500 light-years from Earth. However, observations of the water line at 22 GHz show 
bright maser emission, as seen in the lower plot, whose scale is enlarged by a factor of 10,000 with 
respect to the upper plot. Each "spot" in the lower portion represents a separate maser whose velocity, 
derived from the Doppler shift, is color-coded: red = Œ500 km/s; blue = 1,500 km/s. The thin curved 
distribution of masers with the observed velocity distribution traces a thin disk of material in orbit 
around an unseen black hole with a mass of about 40 millions times that of our Sun. (Note: 1 pc 
3.3 light-years.) Adapted from T. Yang, B. Li, A.S. Wilson, and C.S. Reynolds, ﬁSpatially Resolved 
X-Ray Spectra of NGC4258,ﬂ 
Astrophysical Journal,
 660: 1106 (2007); and A.L. Argon, L.J. Greenhill, 
M.J. Reid, J.M. Moran, and E.M.L. Humphreys, ﬁTowards a New Geometric Distance to the Active 
Galaxy NGC4258: I. VLBI Monitoring of Water Maser Emission,ﬂ 
Astrophysical Journal
, 659: 1040 
(2007).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
metric technique has important implications for establishing the ﬁcosmic distance 
scale,ﬂ that is, calibrating the relation between redshift and distance.
5As interesting as the active black holes themselves are the kinds of galaxies that 
give rise to such activity. Studies of the ﬁhost galaxiesﬂ in which active black holes 
reside have been made over the past few decades. Radio telescopes have been and will 
continue to be a major contributor to such studies, through their
 ability to detect 
star-forming gas and feedback from supernovae in host galaxies and other objects 
(see the subsection on ﬁGalaxies,ﬂ below). Both ALMA and EVLA, with their high 
resolution and sensitivity, will push the studies of star formation in host galaxies 
closer to the nuclear region in which the active black hole resides, thus allowing for 
the interplay between the black hole and nuclear star formation to be assessed.
Galaxies
The study of star formation in our Galaxy and in others is one of the primary 
areas of science done at millimeter wavelengths (68-115 GHz). Stars form in giant 
molecular clouds composed primarily of diatomic hydrogen (H
2); however, H
2 is particularly dif˜cult to detect because it has no permanent dipole moment. As 
a result, astronomers use carbon monoxide (CO) as a proxy for H
2. CO is colli
-sionally excited by H
2, and the resultant emission from CO is observable at radio 
wavelengths. Hence the properties of star-forming gas are commonly measured 
with radio telescopes. An example of CO emission from a nearby galaxy is shown 
in Figure 3.6.
CO emission has been detected in many varieties of galaxies, including some 
with redshifts up to 6.4, so that the photons now observed were emitted when 
the universe was only a few percent of its present age. With radio telescopes, it is 
thus possible to study the properties of star formation in normal galaxies such as 
our own, in exotic galaxies with vigorous star formation accompanied by accre
-tion onto black holes (e.g., radio galaxies and quasar host), and in distant galaxies 
likely undergoing their ˜rst burst of star formation. An important fact about these 
observations is that, owing to the motions of nearby galaxies and the redshifts of 
more distant ones, CO emission is rarely observed at or even near the rest frequency. 
The 115 GHz line is observed in ﬁlocalﬂ galaxies (redshift <0.3) down to frequen
-cies of 88 GHz. Observations at high redshift (
z > 2) are becoming routine; this 
requires either looking at higher-level transitions of CO redshifted into the 3 mm 
(68-115 GHz) window or observing the ground-state (115 GHz) transition at much 
lower frequencies (22-50 GHz). 
5 
J.R. Herrnstein, J.M. Moran, L.J. Greenhill, P.J. Diamond, M. Inoue, N. Nakai, M. Miyoshi, 
C. Henkel, and A. Riess, ﬁA Geometric Distance to the Galaxy NGC4258 from Orbital Motions in a 
Nuclear Gas Disk,ﬂ 
Nature
, 400: 539 (1999).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
102Figure 3-6R01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 3.6
 (Left) An aperture synthesis map at 115 GHz of carbon monoxide (CO) spectral line emis
-sion from the Spiral Galaxy Messier 51 (the ﬁWhirlpoolﬂ Galaxy). The CO, which is tracing star-forming 
molecular gas, is observed to follow the spiral arms shown in the Hubble Space Telescope optical 
image of the galaxy (right). The image is approximately 40,000 light-years across. The CO image was 
made by combining 200 hours of observations at the Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-wave 
Astronomy with 40 hours of observations at the Nobeyama Radio Telescope in Japan. Image courtesy 
of Space Telescope Science Institute.
Solar Physics and Space Weather
The nearby Sun is the only star that there is a chance of studying in detail. 
Knowledge of the Sun illuminates the understanding of other stars and generally 
helps place the Sun and its attendant suite of planets into the context of stellar 
physics and the evolution of stars and planets. In addition, the Sun™s atmosphere 
is a remarkably active, even violent region, and it regularly impacts Earth with 
disturbances that can have technical and economic consequences. There currently 
is a proposal to build a powerful new instrument, the Frequency Agile Solar Radio
-telescope (FASR), that would greatly increase the capability of measuring the solar 
atmosphere over a wide frequency range, at high time and angular resolution. 
The Sun™s atmosphere emits strongly at all radio frequencies by a variety of 
emission mechanisms, allowing observers to probe the physical processes that 
are active on the Sun. Flares on the surface are explosions connected with the 
 
disappearance or reconnection of magnetic ˜elds (Figure 3.7). Strong bursts of 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.103THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
FIGURE 3.7
 A large eruptive prominence above a solar ˜are, seen in the ultraviolet light of ionized 
helium, with the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO) satellite, July 24, 1999. For size com
-parison, Earth is shown as the small blue circle. The ˜are started with an eruption of twisted magnetic 
˚eld through the surface. The magnetic ˚eld loop is rising rapidly through the corona and will separate 
from the Sun to form a coronal mass ejection (CME). This particular CME did not hit Earth, however, 
as it started in a direction perpendicular to Earth. The inset shows other active regions on the face of 
the Sun. Image courtesy of SOHO (ESA and NASA).
Figure 3-7R01628uneditable bitmapped imageSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
104radio noise are often associated with a ˚are, and indeed on December 6, 2006, the 
radio bursts were so intense that for 10 minutes they disrupted the Global Posi
-tioning System (GPS) reception on essentially the entire sunlit side of Earth.
6 An 
associated phenomenon, coronal mass ejections (CMEs), involves the eruption of 
mass and magnetic ˚ux from the Sun into interplanetary space. These can strongly 
disturb the near-Earth environment. There is general agreement that ˚ares and 
CMEs are magnetic phenomena, but the details are unclear. 
Space weather
 refers to the highly variable condition of the plasma that sur
-rounds Earth and extends from the Sun throughout the solar system. The solar 
wind is a continuous stream of plasma that blows out from the Sun, and it controls 
the shape of the outer regions of Earth™s magnetic ˜eld. Flares sometimes produce 
energetic particles that propagate to Earth in a matter of minutes.
7 Similarly, a CME 
can also produce energetic particles. These energetic particles can be a danger to 
the personnel and equipment in space vehicles. The CME itself takes 1 or 2 days to 
travel to 1 AU (astronomical unit; the Sun-Earth distance). If it hits Earth, it can 
cause serious communication disturbances and adversely affect satellites and long-
distance high-voltage transmission lines.
8 Because of these disruptive consequences, 
it is important that as much as possible be learned about ˚ares and CMEs and that 
the capability of predicting them be developed. Much of this study must be done 
at radio wavelengths, although the radio information is supplemented with data 
from other wave bandsŠfor example, x-rays measured from a satellite. 
Serendipity and the Transient Universe 
Throughout astronomy, in optical and other bands as well as radio, we are 
entering an era of intense surveillance, variously called transient source astronomy, 
time domain astronomy, and, more broadly, a new frontier in high energy astro
-physics. The objective is to capture transient phenomena, which currently are 
enjoying wide attention. Long-known transient phenomena include novae and 
supernovae, pulses from pulsars, and motions in quasars and galactic nuclei, in 
addition to solar system phenomena such as eclipses and solar ˚ares. 
New radio telescopes, such as the ATA, will be used in a repetitive survey 
mode to search for transient and variable events. These phenomena are of broad 
signi˜cance and will contribute to the understanding of the life and death cycle 
of stars; the nature of exotic compact objects such as neutron stars, white dwarfs, 
6 
R. Cowen, ﬁBig Broadcast,ﬂ 
Science News
, 171(23): 360 (June 9, 2007).
7 
See http://www.nasa.gov/home/hqnews/2005/may/HQ_05132_solar_˜reworks.html, accessed 
May 21, 2008; R.A. Mewaldt, ﬁSolar Energetic Particle Composition, Energy Spectra and Space 
Weather,ﬂ 
Space Science Re
views
, 124: 303-316 (2006).
8 
See http://ds9.ssl.berkeley.edu/solarweek/WEDNESDAY/spaceweather.html; accessed May 21, 
2008.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
and black holes; and the physics of magnetized, relativistic plasmas. Transient and 
variable phenomena are typically broadband, occurring at all radio frequencies and 
on timescales from nanoseconds to years. Multifrequency, repetitive observations 
are necessary to characterize the physics of these targets.
Among the projected science targets are phenomena connected with explosions 
of massive stars, which might produce short bursts of powerful radio emission. The 
discovery of such events could con˜rm the fundamental picture of what is called 
the gamma-ray burst phenomenon and provide an independent method for the 
discovery of distant star-forming galaxies. Radio studies of the propagation effects 
that these waves encounter will probe the very tenuous intergalactic medium that 
constitutes a signi˜cant fraction of the baryonic content of the universe. 
Neutron stars that emit sporadic pulses have been found very recently, and 
estimates have been made that such stars are abundant in the Galaxy. These 
objects are likely providing new insights into physical conditions in neutron star 
magnetospheres.
Magnetic activity on the surfaces of stellar and compact objects belongs to a 
continuum of activity that includes solar ˚ares. A comprehensive census of this 
activity and the detection of true solar-like events on other stars will provide 
important insights into the physics of solar ˚ares as well as identifying conditions 
suitable for life on extrasolar planets. 
Repetitive surveying at high time and frequency resolution is a new regime in 
astronomical 
phase space
Šthat is, the parameter space representing all possible 
observations. In the past, opening such a new regime generally has led to dramatic 
new, often unexpected, discoveries. Scientists cannot predict what will be found, but 
on the basis of past experience, they do expect to see new phenomena. The ability 
to distinguish between transients of cosmic origin and sporadic radio frequency 
interference will be a challenging enterprise.
Summary
Radio astronomy has provided astronomers a unique way to observe and 
analyze cosmological objects of interest, from Earth™s Sun, to galaxies, to the very 
beginning of the universe itself. The ˜eld has thus been responsible for some of 
the most important astronomical ˜ndings to date. As capabilities increase and 
new observatories come online, radio astronomy is poised to allow scientists to 
understand the universe in unprecedented ways. 
Finding:
 Radio astronomy has great potential for further fundamental discoveries, 
including the origins and evolution of the universe, the nature of matter, and life 
in other solar systems, which will have an enormous impact on our understanding 
of fundamental physics and the place of humanity in the universe.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
1063.2
 RADIO OBSERVATORIES AND RADIO TELESCOPES
Radio observatories contain a diverse group of scienti˜c instruments care
-fully designed and built to observe with the highest sensitivity selected aspects of 
the radio emission from the many varieties of objects in the universe. No single 
instrument, observatory, or even observing technique can encompass the broad 
frequency range (tens of MHz to hundreds of GHz), the wide range of angular 
scales (tens of micro-arcseconds to degrees), and the broad range of temporal 
variations (nanoseconds to many years) that are seen in the emission. Hence, radio 
observatories have a variety of telescopes and instruments with unique technical 
capabilities. Box 3.4 describes several current and future radio astronomy obser
-vatories (three are in operation and one is under construction).
At the lowest frequencies, telescopes consist of dipoles (simple lengths of wire 
or metal) or arrays of dipoles linked together. These structures are simple, cheap, 
and ef˜cient. Above 100 MHz, telescopes take on the classic parabolic shape but 
can be surfaced with wire mesh. The mesh saves money and weight in the tele
-scope; the radiation is ef˜ciently collected because the wavelength is much larger 
than the holes in the mesh. At about 1 GHz and higher, the telescopes need highly 
precise solid surfaces and stable guiding structures. Two telescope systems currently 
being designedŠFASR and SKAŠare examples of the design being matched to the 
 
frequency. The plan for both FASR and SKA is to use dipole arrays to cover frequen
-cies below 300 MHz, low-precision parabolic re˚ectors to cover from 300 MHz to 
3 GHz, and high-precision parabolic re˚ectors from 3 to 30 GHz. 
Techniques are different at the highest frequencies, 30-1,000 GHz, where quasi-
optical techniques are often used: that is, signals are directed through mirrors to the 
detectors rather than through waveguides. At the extreme high frequency end, the 
required surface accuracy of re˚ectors is about 15 microns, one-˜fth the diameter 
of a human hair. 
Angular resolution, the ability to image ˜ne structure, is a second factor driv
-ing telescope design. The resolution is determined by the ratio of the wavelength 
of observation to the diameter of the telescope. Depending on the science objec
-tives, it may be desirable to have arcminute or even sub-milli-arcsecond resolu
-tion; however, getting very high resolution by building an extremely large dish is 
impractical. For example, the Arecibo telescope, at 305 meters in diameter, is the 
largest dish-type telescope in the world (see Figure 3.4.3 in Box 3.4). Its highest 
operating frequency is 10 GHz, where it has a resolution of about 30 arcseconds. 
Getting more resolution at this frequency by building a larger dish would be much 
more expensive than building a linked array of smaller telescopes in which the 
resolution is controlled by the overall size of the array. The VLA in New Mexico 
has 27 telescopes that can form a baseline up to 35 kilometers, giving the VLA a 
resolution of 0.3 arcsecond at 10 GHz (see Figure 3.4.4 in Box 3.4). The Very Long 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.107THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
BOX 3.4
 Radio Astronomy Observatories
Figure 3-4-1R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.4.1
 The Robert C. Byrd Green Bank Telescope (GBT) at the National Radio 
Astronomy Observatory in Green Bank, West Virginia. With a diameter of 100 meters, the 
GBT is the world˛s largest fully steerable telescope. It operates from 300 MHz to 90 GHz 
and is predominantly used for radio spectroscopy and for studies of pulsars. It has an offset 
feed support system to eliminate radio shadows on the dish, which can be troublesome 
when sensitive measurements are being made. The GBT and Green Bank, West Virginia, 
are in the National Radio Quiet Zone (NRQZ); see §3.6 in this report. Image courtesy of 
NRAO/AUI/NSF.
continuedSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
108BOX 3.4 Continued
Figure 3-4-2R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.4.2
 Artist™s conception of the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) now 
being built in the Atacama desert in northern Chile. When completed, ALMA will have up to 
80 antennas, operating from 30 GHz to 960 GHz. ALMA is at an altitude of 5,000 meters, 
where the atmospheric water vapor is low enough that these high frequencies are useable. 
This project is a collaboration of the United States, Canada, the European Southern Observa
-tory, and Japan. Note in this ˚gure that the individual telescopes are not identical: the one 
on the left has a European design, and that on the right has an American design. Image 
courtesy of NRAO/AUI and Computer Graphics by ESO.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.109THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Figure 3-4-3R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.4.3
 The 305 meter Arecibo telescope at Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico. 
Built in 1963 and operated by the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center (NAIC), the 
Arecibo telescope still has the largest collecting area of any radio telescope in the world. It 
has undergone several major renovations, including the installation of a complex secondary 
feed system (inside the white enclosure) that corrects for the fact that the primary re˜ec
-tor is a section of a sphere, not a paraboloid. It operates from 300 MHz to 10 GHz, with 
continuous frequency coverage above 1.1 GHz. The large foreground building is the Angel 
Ramos Visitor Center, which receives more than 100,000 visitors per year. Image courtesy 
of the NAIC-Arecibo Observatory, a facility of the NSF.
continuedSpectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
110BOX 3.4 Continued
Figure 3-4-4R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 3.4.4
 The Very Large Array (VLA) near Socorro, New Mexico, consists of 
27 antennas, each 25 meters in diameter, connected as an interferometer to produce radio 
images at frequencies from 70 MHz to 43 GHz. The antennas are in a ﬁYﬂ pattern and can 
be
 repositioned to different con˚gurations, with a maximum baseline of 35 kilometers, to 
produce images of various angular resolutions. It currently is being upgraded to have more 
 
sensitivity and better image quality. In its new state, the Expanded Very Large Array, it will 
have continuous frequency coverage from 1 to 50 GHz. Image courtesy of NRAO/AUI/NSF.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Baseline Array (VLBA), with maximum baselines of 6,000 to 8,000 km, has an 
angular resolution of roughly 0.1 milli-arcsecond at 43 GHz. 
In practice, angular resolution, operating frequency, and total collecting area 
are considered jointly in optimizing the design of a telescope. Different possible 
solutions to the structure usually exist, and one is chosen according to the primary 
science goals for the observatory. Increasing the angular resolution can assist in 
reducing the potential for interference. However, the design process is quite com
-plex if the angular resolution is to be maximized while the sidelobes that capture 
interfering signals are to be minimized. 
Another key factor in optimizing the capability of an observatory is its loca
-tion, and the broad spread of the radio spectrum results in a number of factors 
that can be important. At frequencies below 30 GHz, radio frequency interference 
(RFI) is an important cause of noise and signal degradation. The National Radio 
Quiet Zone in West Virginia, where the GBT is located, is important because there 
is a legal and effective means of minimizing RFI there (see Figure 3.4.1 in Box 3.4). 
At high frequencies, water vapor in the atmosphere is an important source of 
noise and attenuation. ALMA and other telescopes are being built at an elevation 
of 5,000 m in the Atacama Desert in Chile to optimize their performance up to 
1000 GHz (see Figure 3.4.2 in Box 3.4).
A highly sensitive receiver, or radiometer, is coupled to the radio telescope. 
At frequencies below about 50 GHz this is a low-noise ampli˜er, usually contain
-ing a cooled transistor. Transistor technology continues to improve, however, 
and the upper frequency limit for transistors™ use has been rising steadily. Above 
50 GHz, more complicated devices are used, including superconductor
-insulator-
 
superconductor (SIS) junctions. In addition, above 100 GHz, bolometers are 
commonly used, especially for broadband continuum measurements. Focal plane 
arrays, both of bolometers and coherent devices, are coming into regular use. An 
array of detectors is essentially a radio camera, with from a few pixels to hundreds 
of pixelsŠfar fewer than a modern digital camera has but still, such a radio camera 
will operate 100 times faster than a conventional system with a single point feed. 
An interferometer system is automatically such an array, and its ability to form an 
image with many pixels is limited only by its computing power (and the primary 
beam of the antenna elements). 
The signal that comes from the radiometer can be used in various ways. It can 
be directly detected as a broadband signal to maximize sensitivity to thermal or 
synchrotron emission. It can be closely sampled in time to search for pulses from 
neutron stars or used to construct a spectrum for the study of molecular or atomic 
spectral lines. The astronomy signals are almost always a very small fraction of the 
internal noise in the receiver and can only be measured by using a long integration 
time, sometimes of many hours (see §3.4).
Table 3.1 highlights selected major radio observatories currently operating, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
112TABLE 3.1
 Selected Major U.S. Radio Observatories Around the World: 
 Operating, Under Construction, Being PlannedObservatory
Location
Frequency 
(GHz)
Collecting Area
a(m
2)Selected Operating Facilities
Allen Telescope Array (42 dishes)
Hat Creek, California
0.5-11.2
1,230
Arecibo Observatory
Arecibo, Puerto Rico
0.3-10
73,000
Arizona Radio Observatory
Tucson, Arizona
68-500
78 and 113
bAtacama Cosmology Telescope
Chile
150-270
28
Caltech Submillimeter Observatory
Mauna Kea, Hawaii
200-950
85
Combined Array for Research in 
Millimeter-Wave Astronomy
Owens Valley, California
70-260
770
Green Bank Telescope
Green Bank, West Virginia
0.3-100
7,850
Large Millimeter Telescope
Mexico
85-275
1,960
South Pole Telescope
South Pole
95-275
78
Submillimeter Array
Mauna Kea, Hawaii
180-900
226
Very Large Array
Socorro, New Mexico
0.07-50
13,250
Very Long Baseline Array
10 sites in United States
0.3-90
4,900
Selected Facilities Under Construction
Allen Telescope Array (350 dishes)
Hat Creek, California
0.5-11.2
10,220
Atacama Large Millimeter Array
Chile
30-960
6,000
Long Wavelength Array 1+
New Mexico
0.015-0.09
20,000 @ 15 MHz
Murchison Widefield Array
Murchison, Australia
0.08-0.3
8,000
Selected Facilities in Planning
Cornell Caltech Atacama Telescope
Chile
200-900
490
Square Kilometer Array
To be determined
To be 
determined
1,000,000
 a The collecting area listed in column 4 is the geometric area of the aperture for the dish-type telescopes. 
 b Two telescopes of 10 and 12 m diameter.
facilities under construction, and facilities being planned within the U.S. com
-munity. The operating observatories represent an investment of roughly $1 bil
-lion. Some of the newest observatories will be built in collaboration with other 
countries, a trend that will increase in the future. ALMA, a $1 billion observatory 
under construction in northern Chile, is a collaboration among institutions in 
North America, Europe, East Asia, and Chile. The Square Kilometer Array, a project 
currently being designed and prototype tested, is a world collaboration that is also 
expected to cost more than $1 billion to build.
Note that a third of the facilities listed in Table 3.1 are not located in the United 
States, although they are supported and operated in part or completely by U.S. 
public and private institutions. The Atacama Cosmology Telescope (ACT), Large 
Millimeter Telescope (LMT), Submillimeter Array (SMA), South Pole Telescope 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.113THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
(SPT), ALMA, and Cornell Caltech Atacama Telescope (CCAT) are at high altitude 
to minimize the dif˜culties produced by atmospheric water vapor. The
 Murchison 
Wide˜eld Array (MWA) is in Western Australia, where currently the RFI is excep
-tionally low. The Australian and South African governments have established a level 
of protection against RFI for the SKA in the event that it is built in their respective 
countries. The Chilean government has done this for ALMA, which is now under 
construction. 
Finding:
 Scienti˜c advances have required increasing measurement precision by 
passive radio and microwave facilities in order to obtain more accurate and thus 
more useful data sets. This need for precision will continue to increase.
Finding:
 Large investments have been made in satellite sensors and sensor networks 
and in major radio observatories. New facilities costing billions of dollars are under 
construction or are being designed. 
3.3
 SPECTRUM REQUIREMENTS AND USE
The spectral windows used to observe cosmic objects of interest are determined 
by the physics of the objects and the atmosphere through which the incoming 
radiation must pass. Using current spectrum allocations as well as many windows 
of opportunity, radio astronomers are able to learn fascinating information about 
the cosmos in which we live.
Continuum and Line Observations
Most radio astronomy observations fall into one of two categories: continuum 
observations and line observations. With respect to continuum observations, con
-tinuous spectrum from a radio source covers a wide frequency range, often a 
factor of about 1,000 in frequency, and the intensity commonly changes slowly 
with frequency. The spectrum often shows a maximum in some band, but some 
sources show a steady change, either increasing or decreasing, with frequency, 
over the entire available radio range. The sensitivity of continuum observations is 
proportional to the square root of the receiver™s bandwidth (see §3.4), so often the 
bandwidth is made as wide as is practical, limited by the technology of the receiver 
and by external interference. As an example of technology-limited bandwidth, con
-sider very long baseline interferometry. In this case, signals from multiple, separated 
antennas are recorded for later processing. In 1967 the ˜rst VLBI system used a 
330 kHz band because that was all that was available with computer tape drives. 
The bandwidth steadily increased as better recording systems became available, 
and now recordings at more than 1 GHz are made, on hard disks, at frequencies 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
114above 10 GHz. The objective has been increased sensitivity. Increased sensitivity 
translates into a larger portion of the universe that can be studied, because of the 
squared (r
2) distance effect. Improving the sensitivity will be a strong driver for 
radio astronomy equipment for a long time to come. 
Modern continuum observations cannot be restricted to the bands allocated 
to the Radio Astronomy Service (RAS); wider bands are needed for sensitivity. 
Meeting this need has another effect, however; it increases the exposure to RFI. 
This problem will worsen with time as transmissions increase and the sensitivity 
of radio systems continues to be improved.
Line obser
vations
 refer to the radiation in spectral lines from quantum transi
-tions of atoms or molecules. Different transitions give different linewidths, but 
they are well under 1 percent of the frequency. Hence specialized, narrowband 
receivers are used. The observations, however, must be made at the transition 
frequency regardless of what RFI is present there. The most famous spectral line, 
arguably the most important one for radio astronomy, is the atomic hydrogen line 
at 1420 MHz. This line is protected, with the 1400-1427 MHz band allocated to 
the RAS on an exclusive primary basis. Even so, RFI has been seen in this band. At 
high frequencies, especially above 100 GHz, broad bandwidths are often used in 
this application to encompass many spectral lines simultaneously.
While broad bandwidths are often used at millimeter-wave frequencies to 
encompass many spectral lines simultaneously, recently there has also been renewed 
interest in making wide-bandwidth spectral scans at lower frequencies.
9 Most of 
the frequency spectrum observed in these surveys has no protection against RFI. 
Of course, observations of spectral lines in external galaxies rarely fall in protected 
bands due to the redshift of the target, even when the rest frequency of the line is 
protected.
Pulsar observations are in a different category because they emit short pulses 
that can only be seen with a short integration time. These short pulses can be 
co-added with appropriate time shifts, like radar pulses, to enhance sensitivity. 
In addition, the pulses drift in frequency owing to intervening dispersive plasma. 
Multichannel observations are required to limit dispersive smearing, and voltage-
based signal processing is implemented to remove dispersion effects. 
9 
For example, the Prebiotic Interstellar Molecule Survey, a large-scale search for new organic 
 
molecules from the Sagittarius B2 region using the GBT between 300 MHz and 50 GHz; also, 
spectral scans with almost complete coverage from 1 to 10 GHz have been made on both galactic 
and extragalactic targets from Arecibo (C.J. Salter, T. Ghosh, B. Catinella, M. Lebron, M.S. Lerner, 
R. Minchin, and E. Momjian, ﬁThe Arecibo Arp 220 Spectral Census I: Discovery of the Pre-Biotic 
Molecule Methanimine and New Cm-wavelength Transitions of Other Molecules,ﬂ 
Astronomical 
Journal
, 136(1): 389-399 (2008)).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.115THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Atmospheric Windows and Absorption Features
The allocation of spectral bands for radio astronomy is based partly on the 
available atmospheric transmission windows, as shown in Figure 1.3 in Chapter 1. 
Ground-based telescopes can observe only in bands where the atmosphere does 
not absorb the radiation. Starting at the ionospheric cutoff near 15 MHz and 
extending to about 50 GHz is a relatively clear band. Above 50 GHz, radio
 windows 
occur approximately at 65-115 GHz, 125-180 GHz, and 200-300 GHz. At still 
higher frequencies the windows are less distinct, but they do exist at 330-370 GHz, 
460-500 GHz, 600-700 GHz, and 800-900 GHz, as well as in other, narrower 
windows. 
Current Radio Astronomy Service Allocations
Figure 3.8 shows the frequency bands that currently are allocated to the RAS. 
The U.S. and international spectrum allocation table and footnotes are available 
in the National Telecommunications and Information Administration™s (NTIA™s) 
Manual of Regulations and Procedures for Federal Radio Frequency Management 
(Redbook)
10
 and in the Federal Communications Commission™s (FCC™s) 
Frequency 
Allocation Table
.11
RAS has a narrow band approximately every octave across the radio
 spectrum, 
which allows the investigation of both the broadband and the spectral line emissions 
of celestial sources. Band allocations start at 13.4 MHz and extend to 275 GHz, as 
shown in Figure 3.8. 
Spectrum Use
The following subsections discuss the spectrum divided into ˜ve broad ranges: 
below 100 MHz, 100-1420 MHz, 1.4-30 GHz, 30-275 GHz, and 275-3000 GHz. A 
brief description of some of the current major scienti˜c investigations in each range 
is presented, and new uses expected in the coming decade are mentioned. 
Below 100 MHz 
In general, continuum sources will come under study in the spectrum range 
below 100 MHz. These sources include the Sun and Jupiter, as well as other 
stars and, possibly, Jupiter-like planets around other stars. Many extragalactic 
10
 Available at http://www.ntia.doc.gov/osmhome/redbook/redbook.html; accessed January 13, 
2010. 
11
 Available at http://www.fcc.gov/oet/spectrum/table/; accessed January 13, 2010.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
116SiO, HC
NC
OH2OCO3 MHz30 MHz30 MHz300 MHz300 MHz3 GHz3 GHz30 GHz30 GHz300 GHzExclusive Passive PrimaryShared PrimarySecondaryFootnoteRadio Astronomy Frequency Allocations in the United StatesHIOHNH3Figure 3-8R01628editable vectorsFIGURE 3.8
 Spectrum allocations to the Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) covering the range 3 MHz to 
300 GHz. Exclusive primary bands are in green, and shared primary bands are in yellow. The spectral 
region above 75 GHz is widely used by the passive services but little used by the active services for 
lack of suitable technology. That will change in the future. Some of the bands at lower frequencies are 
more threatened by radio frequency interference than others. For example, the band 23.6-24.0 GHz, 
along with several bands between 22.0 and 23.6 GHz (not shown), are used by the RAS and the Earth 
Exploration-Satellite Service because they contain the important water vapor and ammonia spectral 
lines. Automotive collision-avoidance radar, which will come into wide use in the next few years, will 
be in the band 22-27 GHz. The potential for interference is high. Image courtesy of Andrew Clegg, 
National Science Foundation.
sources have steep synchrotron spectra such that they are most powerful at low 
frequencies. 
A new radio telescope, the Long Wavelength Array (LWA), is now under con
-struction in New Mexico. LWA observations will complement those at higher 
frequencies. The observatory is planned to consist ultimately of 53 stations spread 
over 400 km; each station will contain 256 broadband dipoles operating from 
10 to 88 MHz. The angular resolution of the LWA will be a few seconds of arc, 
and the instantaneous ˜eld of view will be a few degrees. The high-resolution, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.117THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
low
-frequency possibilities that these capabilities open up represent a new regime 
in radio astronomy. Some plasma regions, including pulsar atmospheres, radiate 
coherently at low frequencies, and discovering these or other transient objects may 
give the most signi˜cant results from the early use of this instrument.
Interference is particularly severe at frequencies below 100 MHz, where there 
are many commercial and government services, both ˜xed and mobile. Although 
the beam-forming nature of the system will automatically reject some interfering 
signals, there remains the strong potential for RFI. The LWA design will implement 
a variety of RFI mitigation procedures.
100-1420 MHz 
Studies of hydrogen, the most abundant element in the universe, are par
-ticularly important in the 100-1420 MHz range. Pioneering efforts are underway 
using the 1420 MHz spectral line of hydrogen, to detect material that is heated 
by the ˜rst generation of stars in the early universe. That radiation now must be 
observed at much lower frequencies, owing to the large redshift. The radiation will 
be spread over a very broad band, and the signals will be particularly weak. Months 
of integration at remote sites, such as Western Australia and/or the back side of the 
Moon, will be required for reliable detections. A major instrument, the MWA, is 
now under construction in Western Australia for this purpose.
The hydrogen line at 1420 MHz is used to study the motions and dynamics in 
the Milky Way and in external galaxies out to great distances. ﬁDark galaxiesﬂ with 
much hydrogen but few stars are also expected to exist. They will form a new fron
-tier for observation, at frequencies from 1420 MHz down to about 300 MHz. 
The heavy isotope of hydrogen, deuterium, has an analog of the 1420 MHz 
line at 327 MHz. This line, ˜rst detected only a few years ago, will be an important 
subject of study in the coming decade. It will provide information related to the 
origin of the universe and the cosmological synthesis of the elements. 
One of the most interesting and signi˜cant discoveries in radio astronomy was 
the detection of pulsars. Their huge magnetic, electric, and gravitational ˜elds, 
impossible to reproduce in laboratories on Earth, allow observations of matter 
and radiation under extreme conditions. Pulsars generally emit most strongly at 
frequencies in the range from 50 to 600 MHz, but they are often observed up to a 
few gigahertz and, for a few objects, to 100 GHz. 
1.4-30 GHz
The study of the nuclei of galaxies, including that of the Milky Way, is an 
important and fundamental topic in astronomy; it is done to a large extent between 
1.4 and 30 GHz. Problems that can be studied in this range include the properties 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
118of massive black holes, explosive activities and the production of intense double 
radio sources from galactic nuclei, the collimation and acceleration of relativistic 
jets of plasma, the in˚uence of galactic nuclei on the morphological structure of 
galaxies, and the formation of galaxies and quasars.
The study of hydroxyl (OH) with primary bands at 1.6-1.7 GHz and also at 
4.7 GHz, 6.0 GHz, and other frequencies is of interest for investigating phenomena 
associated with the formation of protostars and the initial stages of star formation. 
OH is often seen in the form of masers in the atmospheres around stars. Exceed
-ingly strong emission from OH ﬁmegamasersﬂ is seen in some galaxies. It can be a 
million or more times stronger than the emission from masers in the Milky Way 
and so can be seen to great distances. These observations give information on 
magnetic ˜elds in other galaxies and on their evolution over cosmic time. 
30-275 GHz 
The spectral region above 30 GHz is crucial for the identi˜cation and study 
of interstellar molecules. Some astronomers and biologists think that interstellar 
chemistry may have supplied Earth with prebiotic compounds essential for ter
-restrial life. Consequently, establishing the inventory of molecules in interstellar 
gas is central to astrobiology and astrochemistry. In addition, molecules in the 
30-275 GHz frequency range provide essential diagnostics for star formation.
The band from 65 to 115 GHz has relatively little absorption from the atmo
-sphere and is one of the best for both continuum and spectral observations. More 
than 100 molecules, as well as 25 different isotopic species, have been detected here. 
These include complex molecules such as CH
3 CH
2 OH and CH
3 OCH
3. Some 
molecules have several isotopic species in this range, so that isotopic abundance 
ratios can be studied. As an example, the basic molecule HCN has the isotopic spe
-cies H
12
 C
14
 N, H
14
 CN, and H
12
 C
15
 N in the 86-92 GHz range, and all have been 
observed in the interstellar gas. The most important transitions in this frequency 
range, however, are generated by the CO molecule at 115 and 230 GHz. Emission 
from these lines is pervasive throughout our entire Galaxy and in other galaxies. 
Indeed, the bulk of the literature here is based on CO observations. CO™s millimeter 
transitions are widely used to trace star-forming molecular gas, and this is crucial 
for assessing star formation in the Milky Way and other galaxies. As the sensitivity 
of telescopes continues to improve, studies of star formation using the weaker lines 
of HCN and HCO+ are also becoming important. 
The band near 43 GHz is regularly used to study quasars and galactic nuclei with 
the VLBA. At this high frequency, extreme angular resolution is obtained, 0.1 milli-
arcsecond. This corresponds to a footprint on the Moon, as seen from Earth. 
The frequency band 217-231 GHz provides a window near the peak of the 
CMB spectrum. Because of its low intensity and the strong variable contaminating 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.119THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
emission from the atmosphere, accurate measurement of the CMB must be made 
in extreme environments, with high-altitude radio telescopes, at the South Pole, 
or with high-altitude aircraft, balloons, and spacecraft. 
This region of the spectrum has become increasingly important in the past two 
decades, and the emphasis placed on this band will continue to increase as new 
telescopes and new instrumentation proliferate.
275-3000 GHz
Exploration of the electromagnetic spectrum between 275 and 3000 GHz has 
only begun in earnest in the past decade, as a consequence of the great strides 
made in the development of quantum heterodyne mixers and high-precision 
large
-aperture antennas and the ability to make large arrays from them. Because 
the water vapor in the atmosphere is only partially transparent in selected por
-tions of this band (see Figure 1.3), observations must be done at extraordinarily 
dry sites, most of which are at elevations greater than 4,000 m. The peak of the 
entire electr
omagnetic spectrum of the universe occurs in the middle of this band, 
at about 1 THz. 
Extraordinary opportunities exist to study the universe in the early stages of 
its development, especially around redshifts of about 6-10 when the ˜rst stars 
 
reionized the universe at the end of the so-called Dark Ages. An important concept 
is that the intensity of thermal radiation from galaxies, which follows the Rayleigh-
Jeans law, is proportional to the square of the frequency, so that galaxies™ measured 
˚ux densities are essentially independent of distance, because the increasing red
-shift of the radiation due to the expansion of the universe exactly compensates for 
the inverse-square law loss suffered in propagation. The ˜rst deep images from the 
ALMA array (see Table 3.1), now under construction, are expected to be dominated 
by galaxies at great redshift that are not seen at all in the deep ˜eld images of the 
Hubble Space Telescope at optical wavelengths. 
The 275-3000 GHz band will be very important in the ˜eld of astrochemistry, 
which seeks to understand how various molecules form and build up in complex
-ity in regions of the interstellar medium where dense molecular clouds form and 
spawn new generations of stars. The importance of this band is due to the fact that 
the intrinsic strength of spectral lines from molecules and atoms increases as the 
fourth power of frequency. Hence the spectrum in this region is almost a ﬁforestﬂ 
of spectral lines in the direction of star-forming molecular clouds. Instruments 
such as ALMA will be able to image these regions with high angular resolution 
that will only be surpassed by infrared arrays in space, which are many decades 
from feasibility. 
A critical astronomical problem of our age is the question of how planets form 
from the debris disks left over after a star forms from it host molecular cloud. The 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
120emission strength of the dust in such disks increases as the square of the frequency 
and is most readily imaged at the highest radio frequencies, which are afforded in 
the 275-3000 GHz band. 
In addition, the radio source associated with the supermassive black hole in the 
center of the Milky Way has a peak in its emission spectrum at about 600 GHz. This 
source is obscured by plasma scattering at frequencies below 200 GHz, and it can 
only be studied directly at higher frequencies. The size of the source has recently 
been determined to be 37 micro-arcseconds from VLBI observations.
12
 Observa
-tions at higher frequencies with larger VLBI arrays will provide images that show 
how light is bent in the strong gravity regime close to the event horizon of a black 
hole, thereby providing greater understanding of the general theory of relativity 
and the behavior of matter in this environment. 
Finding: 
Radio wave bands (10 MHz to 3 THz) are indispensable for collecting 
information associated with speci˜c astronomical phenomena. Often the same 
bands are similarly indispensable for passive Earth remote sensing, and the passive 
nature of both services enables them to productively share the spectrum.
3.4
 SENSITIVITY REQUIREMENTS
Just as do Earth remote sensing researchers (see Chapter 2), radio astronomers 
use microwave radiometers to measure the total noise power received when an RAS 
telescope is pointed in a particular direction. The power received from an astronomi
-cal source is usually much less than that generated in the ampli˜ers and electronics 
or than stray radiation picked up from the ground (which emits at about 300 K). 
Radiometers and telescopes are carefully designed to minimize this contaminating 
signal and to keep it stable so that it can be subtracted to ˜nd the signal of interest. 
Radiometers may be broadband (with bandwidths from 10s of megahertz to sev
-eral gigahertz) to maximize sensitivity to continuum sources, or they may be opti
-mized for spectral-line observations, using a spectrometer that divides the radiation 
received over a broadband into many thousands of narrow channels.
 Radiometers 
may also be designed to be sensitive to the linear or circular polarization of the 
received radiation, which carries additional important information such as the 
direction of the magnetic ˜eld in a synchrotron-emitting plasma: radio astronomy 
is a very versatile and powerful probe of astronomical magnetic ˜elds. 
The power radiated by an extended source at frequency 
f is usually expressed 
as a ﬁbrightness temperatureﬂ 
Tb, which is the temperature of a blackbody that 
would emit the same amount of radiation, at that frequency. Brightness tempera
-12
 S.S. Doeleman et al., ﬁEvent-Horizon-Scale Structure in the Supermassive Black Hole Candidate 
at the Galactic Centre,ﬂ 
Nature
, 455: 78-80 (September 2008).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.121THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
tures range from 2.7 K for the CMB to more than 10
12
 K for energetic nonthermal 
sources (pulsars, masers, and quasars). Astronomers, however, are often interested 
in much smaller differences of brightness temperature: for example, the tiny varia
-tions in the CMB temperature from one direction to another, which are only a few 
microkelvin. 
The radio power incident on the antenna is called the ˚ux density and is 
usually 
denoted by 
Sf; it is also called the spectral power ˚ux density or spectral pfd. Flux 
density is measured in janskys (Jy, named after the pioneer radio astronomer 
Karl Jansky), where 1 Jy = 10
˛26
 W m
˛2
 Hz
Œ1
. To bring the small magnitude of a 
jansky ﬁdown to Earth,ﬂ consider that a garage-door opener on the Moon would 
produce about 5 Jy on Earth. A television transmitter on the planet Jupiter, more 
than 600 million kilometers away, would produce about 1 Jy on Earth. As another 
example, the Sun is a nearly ideal blackbody with temperature T 
 5,800 K. On 
Earth, its ˚ux density at 10 GHz is about 1.2 
 10
6 Jy. By the inverse-square law, 
˚ux density decreases with distance as 
r 
Œ2
. Currently, the weakest detectable cos
-mic radio sources have ˚ux densities about 1 microjansky, so a star like the Sun 
could be detected out to a million AU, or about one-tenth of a light-year. This is 
substantially less than the distance to the nearest star. Although the thermal radio 
emission from stars like the Sun cannot be detected at great distances, the thermal 
radio emission from other types of stars can be detected. More importantly, the 
more luminous sources in the universe, including quasars and gamma-ray bursts, 
can be detected at redshifts of 5 or more, corresponding to 90 percent of the way 
across the universe, or to the time when galaxies were ˜rst condensing from the 
primordial universe. 
The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) with which a source can be detected is approxi
-mately given by
SNR = 
Sf Aeff
 (
B 
 )
1/2
/2k 
Tsys
where k is Boltzmann™s constant (1.38 
 10
Œ23
 W Hz
Œ1 
KŒ1
), 
B is the bandwidth of 
the radiometer, 
 is the integration time, and 
Tsys
 is the system temperature, a mea
-sure of the radiometer noise. The SNR generally must be 3 or greater for a positive 
detection, but a statistically sound result usually requires SNR = 5 or more.
The system temperature 
Tsys
 expresses the total unwanted noise power enter
-ing the receiver or generated in it as an equivalent temperature and is measured 
in degrees kelvin; it includes contributions from the sky (including the CMB and 
emission from the Milky Way), from the atmosphere, from the ground around 
the telescope, from interference (RFI), and from the telescope and ampli˜ers. The 
relative strength of these components and their absolute magnitude vary widely 
with frequency. Except for solar bursts, the signal from the source under study is 
usually much smaller than the system noise. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
122Sensitivity Limits
Radio astronomers maximize the SNR in their studies by using antennas with 
large collecting areas, such as the 100 m Green Bank Telescope or the 305 m Arecibo 
dish. They now have a project, the Square Kilometer Array, that will have a collect
-ing area of about 1 km
2, or 10
6 m
2. The SKA is in the study and prototype phase; 
an optimum location for it should be selected within a few years™ time.
Using the widest possible bandwidth also maximizes the SNR for a con
-tinuum source. Some modern radiometers have fractional bandwidths as wide as 
f /
f = 20% or more. Broadband observations are essential for detecting the most 
distant known galaxies and the tiny ˚uctuations in the brightness of the CMB. The 
usable bandwidth is often limited by RFI.
Radio astronomers generally use very long integration times (hours or days) 
to maximize the SNR, but for some observations (pulsars and other transients), 
the integration time is limited by the duration of the signal itself. This can be a 
millisecond or less. The SNR can also be increased by reducing the system tempera
-ture, but current technology is close to the minimum possible 
Tsys
 for frequencies 
less than 100 GHz. The sensitivity of existing and proposed telescopes is shown 
in Figure 3.9.
A simple example will illustrate these ideas. Let the GBT look at a 10 microjansky 
source. Then the received spectral power is 4 
 10
Œ28
 watts per hertz, or, in common 
engineering units, Œ244 dBm Hz
Œ1
. If the receiver has a system temperature of 30 K, 
then the noise spectral power is 4 
 10
Œ22
 W Hz
Œ1
, or Œ184 dBm Hz
Œ1
, a million times 
larger than the signal power. To make a positive detection by smoothing the receiver 
output to SNR = 3 requires that the product 
B be 10
12
. This could be obtained, 
for example, with 
B = 100 MHz and 
 = 10
4 seconds. If a measurement of the ˚ux 
density to 10 percent accuracy is wanted on this source, then the product 
B must be 
increased by a factor of 100, requiring a bandwidth of 1,000 MHz and an integration 
time of 10
5 seconds, longer than a day.
Observations like this are already being done at gigahertz frequencies, and they 
will become more common as new broadband instrumentation spreads through
-out the radio community (Figure 3.9). Such observations are passive and cause no 
interference, but they use much more spectrum than is allocated to the RAS. The 
RAS bands, however, still are important for many narrowband observations that 
also are routinely doneŠfor example, on spectral linesŠand they are vital for 
the EESS. Note, however, that some extremely important astrophysical problems, 
such as studying redshifted HI with the 1420 MHz spectral line of HI, will need 
the entire range from 1420 MHz down to about 100 MHz. This broadband passive 
use by the RAS means that RFI outside the protected bands is of serious concern. It 
drives the observatory locations to remote sites such as Western Australia and will 
force consideration of the back side of the Moon as a possible radio observatory 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.123THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
Figure 3-13R01628uneditable bitmapped imageLog sensitivity (Jy)Log frequency (Hz)EVLAFIGURE 3.9
 The root-mean-square sensitivity of various high-angular-resolution arrays in radio 
 
astronomy as a function of frequency. The discrete symbols refer to instruments that are in operation 
now. They are generally tunable by about +/-20 percent of their indicated frequencies. The solid lines refer 
to instruments that are under construction and will be operational by 2012. Note that the instruments 
under construction are between one and three orders of magnitude more sensitive than the existing ones. 
The sensitivity is proportional to the system temperature of the receivers and inversely proportional to 
the collecting area and the square root of the bandwidth and integration time, which in all cases is taken 
as 12 hours. The sensitivities were calculated from the array speci˚cations on the Web sites of each 
instrument. LOFAR = Low Frequency Array (Netherlands); GMRT = Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope 
(India); EVLA = Expanded Very Large Array (New Mexico); VLA = Very Large Array (New Mexico); 
ALMA = Atacama Large Millimeter Array (Chile); CARMA = Combined Array for Research in Millimeter-
wave Astronomy (California); SMA = Submillimeter Array (Hawaii). See Table 3.1 in this chapter for more 
information. Image courtesy of James Moran, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics.
site. This RFI is also a strong driver for the development of mitigation studies and 
technologies within the RAS community. 
3.5
 INTERFERENCE AND ITS MITIGATION
Radio astronomy deals with exceedingly weak signals. As described in §3.4, they 
can be a million times smaller than the internal receiver noise, and their measure
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
124ment, or even just their detection, can require bandwidths of many gigahertz and 
integration times of a day or more. This requirement puts a premium on operating 
in a very low noise environment. It should be emphasized that serious interference 
can result from weak transmitters even when they are situated in the sidelobes 
of a radio astronomy antenna. This state of affairs has been recognized by the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) internationally and by the FCC in 
the United States, and various spectral bands have been allocated to the RAS for 
ﬁexclusiveﬂ or ﬁsharedﬂ use of these bands. However, ﬁexclusiveﬂ does not mean that 
there must be zero emission in the protected bands. It is a fundamental fact that 
any information-carrying signal must contain out-of-band emission, which spreads 
across a wide radio spectrum. The regulation of this necessary out-of-band emission 
from a licensed transmitter involves controlling the intensity of the emission, and 
the FCC de˜nition leads to an allowable level that, unfortunately, can cause serious 
interference with radio astronomy observations. It is likely that this situation will 
become worse in the future, as the RAS requirements become stricter with the study 
of weaker sources, and at the same time the active services are proliferating.
ITU-R Recommendation RA.769 discusses interference protection criteria for 
the Radio Astronomy Service and de˜nes threshold levels of emissions that cause 
interference detrimental to radio astronomy. However, for modern measurements 
these levels are unrealistic, because they are not based on the current state of the 
art. The levels are calculated as 10 percent of the noise ˚uctuations, but the noise 
is calculated with a bandwidth of the allocated channel. However, bandwidths hun
-dreds of times wider than this are routinely used. In fact, much of radio astronomy 
would no longer be possible if observations were restricted to the allocated chan
-nels. The other factor in the noise calculation, the integration time, is assumed 
to be 2,000 seconds, whereas in modern practice the integration times often are 
10 or 50 times longer. Again, if observations were limited to 2,000 seconds, much 
of radio astronomy, especially the new realms projected for the coming decade, 
would be impossible. Hence, the limits set by ITU-R Recommendation RA.769 
are inadequate today, and they will become more so in the future. This means that 
unwanted emissions that are legal can be damaging to the RAS measurements.
Another facet of the interference problem comes from emissions that essentially 
are unregulated. Cordless telephones, garage-door openers, and other unlicensed 
devices are allowed to have some low level of emissions, and at radio observatories 
an attempt is made to restrict the use of such consumer devices. But in fact they 
are powerful by RAS standards, as seen by the example of the garage-door opener 
on the Moon in §3.4, and will cause serious RFI if they are in the near sidelobes 
of a large antenna, even if they are far away. This problem also is worsening with 
the availability of new devices and their more widespread use. The incipient wide
-spread use of automotive anticollision radar, operating at K-band, is a cause for 
concern in this regard.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.125THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
A further cause of harmful RFI comes from transmitters that are operating 
illegally, either by producing excessive spurious or out-of-band transmissions or 
by operating at an unassigned frequency. The 1400-1427 MHz band is allocated 
to the RAS on an exclusive primary basis, but strong RFI has been seen in this 
band at many radio observatories around the world. Better monitoring of the 
radio spectrum and allocations would provide a better understanding of actual 
interference levels.
Radio observatories are located in remote sites, often behind mountains, to 
reduce human-made noise, which is roughly proportional to the local population 
density. But the problem is particularly severe with aircraft and satellite transmis
-sions, from which there is no escape. Observations of transient phenomena are 
especially vulnerable to RFI because of the highly variable nature of both the 
phenomenon and the RFI. 
Finding:
 The rules for out-of-band and spurious emissions in the primary allo
-cated Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) bands (e.g., 1400-1427 MHz) do not provide 
adequate interference protection for RAS purposes.
The FCC rules that pertain to the above ˜nding are given in Appendix D.
Finding:
 Geographical separation of radio telescopes from transmitters (e.g., 
through the establishment of radio quiet zones and the remote siting of observa
-tories) is currently effective in avoiding much radio frequency interference, but the 
proliferation of airborne and satellite transmissions and the widespread deploy
-ment of mobile, low-power personal devices threaten even the most remote sites.
Examples of Interference in a Protected Band
Figure 3.10 shows interference in the band 1610.6-1613.8 MHz, which is 
allocated to the RAS on a shared primary basisŠthe interference was received in 
a 12 m antenna when an Iridium satellite passed through the beam. The satellite 
operates in the Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) band 1618.25-1626.5 MHz and, as 
seen in the ˜gure, emits spurious radiation at 1612 MHz. During the measurement 
for Figure 3.10, careful attention was paid to ensure that the radiation was from 
the Iridium satellite itself and not from a GLONASS satellite, and that the RFI was 
not due to intermodulation in the receiver. Figure 3.11 shows the effect of similar 
satellite interference on an image made with the VLA in the same protected band, 
1610.6-1613.8 MHz. The image made in the presence of the RFI is useless.
The 1610.6-1613.8 MHz band is most commonly used by radio astronomers 
for studying the OH radical that exists in stellar atmospheres and in clouds in the 
Milky Way; the studies are conducted in a spectroscopic mode in which many 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
126Figure 3-10R01628uneditable bitmapped imagesFIGURE 3.10
 Showing radio frequency interference due to spurious emission from an Iridium satel
-lite in the band 1610.6-1613.8 MHz, which is allocated to the Radio Astronomy Service on a primary 
basis. This measurement was made in Leeheim, Germany, in November 2006, with a 12 meter para
-bolic antenna. Careful attention was paid to eliminating the possibility of unwanted interference from 
intermodulation products in the receiver. Time runs down in the graph, over a total of 14 minutes, 
and frequency is horizontal. The motion of the satellite can be seen in the changing Doppler shift 
of the signals as the satellite passes through the beam of the antenna. The peak is about Œ85 dBm, 
substantially higher than the value recommended by the International Telecommunication Union, 
when it is converted to the standard model using an isotropic antenna. When converted to standard 
radio astronomy units, the ˜ux density during the short bursts is about 2,500 Jy. Image courtesy of 
CEPT and BNetzA.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.127THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
ARC SECARC SEC151050-5-10-15151050-5-10-15ARC SECARC SEC151050-5-10-15151050-5-10-15Figure 3-11R01628editable vectortaken from Figure 4-1 in R00897FIGURE 3.11
 The effect of radio frequency interference (RFI) on an astronomical image made at the Very 
Large Array. (Left) Image of a faint ﬁOH/IR starﬂ made in a narrow band at 1612.22 MHz, within the band 
1610.6-1613.8 MHz that is allocated to the Radio Astronomy Service on a primary basis. (Right) The 
same ˚eld of observation of the image made when an Iridium satellite was 22 degrees from the star. This 
image is made useless by the RFI. Images courtesy of G.B. Taylor, University of New Mexico.
 
narrow bands are measured simultaneously. The RFI depicted in Figure 3.10 could 
adversely affect OH observations made when the satellite is well outside the main 
beam of the antenna, even for a large antenna like the GBT that has a forward gain 
of 63 dBi at 1612 MHz. The potential for harmful RFI is high, especially consider
-ing that the Iridium constellation contains 66 satellites. 
Mitigation
ﬁUnwantedﬂ emission is of two kinds: ﬁout-of-bandﬂ and ﬁspurious.ﬂ Out-of-
band emission is unwanted emission on a frequency or frequencies immediately 
outside the transmitter™s necessary bandwidth; it results from the modulation 
process. This type of emission is different from spurious emission, which results 
from harmonics or intermodulation products generated in the transmitter. When 
considering the regulation of signals that may spill into science service bands, 
account should be taken of how such signals will affect the scienti˜c instruments 
in question. 
Simple excision techniques, in both time and frequency, have long been used to 
mitigate the effects of interference. More sophisticated procedures using statistical 
methods are currently under investigation, as described in Chapter 4. The present 
period is one of increasing sensitivity in the radio astronomy systems and increas
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
128ing use of the spectrum by other users, particularly the low-power wireless applica
-tions. These needs are con˚icting, and the interference problem will undoubtedly 
increase. Focusing more attention on mitigation possibilities is important. At the 
same time, the radio astronomy enterprise must be protected by increased vigilance 
over its protected bands. 
The approach to reducing the impact of RFI at radio observatories occurs 
at several different levels, depending on the resources at each observatory. These 
approaches are brie˚y described in the following subsections. See Chapter 4 for 
additional discussion on this topic.
Regulatory and International Meetings
Only the largest observatories (e.g., the National Astronomy and Ionosphere 
Center [NAIC] and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory [NRAO]) are 
normally able to provide continuous staff attendance at international meetings, 
such as regular ITU Working Party 7D (WP7D) meetings and the World Radio
-communication Conference (WRC). However, smaller, university observatories 
are kept informed of events in the international arena by regular teleconferences 
among the observatories, and by attendance at the U.S. WP7D teleconferences. The 
NRAO has a spectrum manager, an astronomer who pursues his own astronomical 
research but who spends a signi˜cant fraction of his time on spectrum management 
activities, including responding to the FCC on NRAO™s behalf and contributing to 
and attending international ITU meetings. 
Quiet Zones Around Observatories
Only two observatories on U.S. soil bene˜t from Quiet Zone protection: NRAO 
(Green Bank, West Virginia) and NAIC (Arecibo, Puerto Rico). In addition, the 
United States is a major partner in the ALMA project being built in northern 
Chile. The Chilean authorities, through the Subsecretaría de Telecomunicaciones 
(SUBTEL), have agreed to a considerable level of protection from interference from 
other services around the ALMA site. 
The administration of these Quiet Zones requires resources. For example, in 
the case of the National Radio Quiet Zone (NRQZ) at Green Bank, West Virginia, 
all applications for ˜xed transmitters within the NRQZ are examined by NRAO 
staff, who make comments to the FCC on the basis of a technical analysis, usually 
including propagation predictions over the speci˜c path. Often, some compromise 
as to power, frequency, and, in particular, precise location of the new transmitter, 
is agreed to between the parties concerned. 
The administration of an NRQZ by a radio observatory requires a signi˜cant, 
continuing effort. However, this effort is usually very well rewarded. For example, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.129THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
at the Green Bank observatory in West Virginia during 2007, 538 requests for 
 
coordination within the Quiet Zone were processed. They involved 850 sites within 
the Quiet Zone and 872 transmission frequencies. In 13 cases, a site inspection was 
carried out. For about a dozen of the requests, a power restriction was eventually 
placed on the applicant™s FCC transmitter license. However, in a far greater number 
of cases, a solution agreeable to both parties, one that did not necessarily restrict the 
transmitter power, was negotiated. The negotiations usually resulted in alternative 
transmitter sites and/or directional antennas pointed away from the observatory, 
with a compromise in capability for the transmitter operator, while still providing 
adequate protection for the observatory.
Local Radio Frequency Interference 
The NRAO engineering staff at Green Bank includes a team that tracks down 
instances of RFI that appear at the observatory. The team™s equipment includes 
a portable interference system, which can trace interference originating within a 
few miles of the observatory. If it is possible technically to suppress the interfer
-ing source, by simple technical means or perhaps by negotiation with the relevant 
party, this is done. In very rare cases, where the aforementioned methods fail, the 
FCC may be called on to intercede. 
Local Engineering
The observatories themselves take all practical engineering precautions in 
the design and construction of equipment in order to provide adequate ˜ltering 
and dynamic range so as to make equipment as immune as possible to interfer
-ence from out-of-band signals. Special techniques are sometimes used, such as a 
dedicated antenna to monitor a particular source of interference; the data gathered 
by such monitoring can then be subtracted from the astronomical data by some 
means. This is more a research than an operational area at present, with few such 
systems currently in use. NRAO, for example, is investigating several mitigation 
possibilities, including active RFI cancellation, ways of extending dynamic range, 
and high-performance ˜ltering using the latest technology. 
Data Processing 
RFI mitigation using software processing techniques is in routine use at most 
observatories. This approach includes data excision based on time or frequency; it 
is often carried out automatically, with some manual input. Other techniques are 
active research areas at a number of observatories, as described elsewhere in this 
report. See Chapter 4, in particular. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
130Finding:
 While unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a 
potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute 
for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.
Finding: 
Important scienti˜c inquiry and applications enabled by the Radio 
Astronomy Service (RAS) are signi˜cantly impeded or precluded by radio fre
-quency interference (RFI). Such RFI has reduced the societal and scienti˜c return 
of RAS observatories and necessitates costly interference mitigation, which is often 
insuf˜cient to prevent RFI damage.
3.6
 IMPORTANCE OF RADIO ASTRONOMY TO THE NATION
The science of radio astronomy started in 1932, with the accidental discovery of 
radio waves from the Milky Way by Karl Jansky. Little happened in this ˜eld during 
the 1930s, but during World War II the United States mobilized a huge development 
effort in radar technology. The instrumentation and techniques resulting from this 
work fueled modern research in radio astronomy.
13
 Since then radio astronomy has 
continuously bene˜ted from new technological developments; many of these have 
come from government and commercial sources, but some have been forthcoming 
from the development laboratories within radio astronomy itself. This section out
-lines some of the important bene˜ts to the nation provided by radio astronomy.
Radio Interferometry
The development of interferometry has had widespread applications in ˜elds 
in addition to radio astronomy and provides attendant bene˜ts to society. The 
underlying principle of interferometry is the measurement of the relative time of 
arrival of signals from a radio source, among a group of antennas called an array. 
Triangulation then gives the direction of arrival of the radiation, meaning that 
the angular position of the radio source can be measured precisely. Furthermore, 
comparison of the arriving signals provides a method of imaging the sourceŠthat 
is, of determining the angular structure of the emission, which reveals the struc
-ture and dynamics of the source. These two applicationsŠprecise positioning 
and
 imagingŠare important, as noted above, in ˜elds beyond radio astronomy. 
For example, the radio technique of combining observations from different con
-˜gurations of an array of antennas has formed the underlying principle of back 
projections, which is mathematically very closely related to all the techniques of 
medical imaging, such at computed axial tomography (CAT) and magnetic reso
-13
 R. Buderi, ﬁThe Invention That Changed the World: How a Small Group of Radar Pioneers Won 
the Second World War and Launched a Technological Revolution,ﬂ 
Touchstone
 (March 1998).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.131THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
nance imaging (MRI). There has been much cross-fertilization in the development 
of these techniques.
14
 The highest angular precision by radio interferometers has been achieved 
through the use of networks of telescopes distributed around the world and linked 
through a technique called very long baseline interferometry. To provide the time-
of-arrival information, receiving stations must be equipped with precise clocks. 
The best technology for this purpose is the hydrogen maser frequency standard, 
developed originally at Harvard University and since perfected primarily for VLBI, 
radar astronomy, and space tracking needs. The positions of a set of very distant 
radio sources have been determined with VLBI networks, providing a stable, precise 
reference frame for a wide variety of applications. For example, with this established 
reference frame the relative motions of antennas on Earth can be tracked to an 
accuracy of a few millimeters per year. This capability led to the ˜rst measurement 
of the contemporary motions of tectonic plates. Fluctuations in the rotation rate of 
Earth and the orientation of its spin axis are continuously monitored this way and 
provide information useful to the understanding of the composition and motions 
of Earth™s molten core and the annual changes in polar-ice loading. 
These techniques of radio surveying based on triangulation formed the intel
-lectual and technical basis for the development of the GPS and other terrestrial 
navigation systems. In the radio astronomy case, a distant radio source acts as a 
transmitter whose signal is received by a number of antennas, so that its position 
can be determined by relative time-of-arrival methods. In the GPS case, a user at 
an unknown location on Earth receives signals from an array of satellites, from 
which the user ˜nds his or her position through triangulation based on a similar 
time-of-arrival analysis. GPS thus is highly analogous to the earlier VLBI, even to 
their both using atomic frequency standards as clocks. 
Communications Disruptions
Energetic particles from the Sun, released in bursts called coronal mass
 ejections, 
arrive at Earth and can cause a disruption in radio communications, interference 
with GPS operation, surges on power grids, damage to Earth-orbiting satellites, 
and hazards to astronauts. The prediction of such events is important so that mea
-sures can be taken to ameliorate their effects. Amelioration, for example, might be 
achieved by shifting communications to less-affected frequencies and by placing 
satellites in standby mode. Hence the advance knowledge of the onset of these 
disruptive events is bene˜cial, just as the prediction of the arrival of meteorological 
events is important to the reduction of property damage and loss of life. 
14
 National Research Council, 
The Decade of Disco
very in Astronomy and Astrophysics
, Washington, 
D.C.: National Academy Press, 1991, pp. 129-130.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
132Coronal mass ejections originate from disturbances on the Sun, generally in 
the form of prominences and ˚ares. Because CMEs consist of charged particles, 
they continuously emit radio emission as they travel outward from the Sun, and 
they can be tracked by radio telescopes, allowing 1 to 2 days of warning. Flares 
often are associated with huge bursts of radio emission, which have been known 
to seriously interfere with GPS operations, as described in §3.1. One of the goals 
of solar physics is to make long-term predictions of ˚ares and CMEs by studying 
the emissions from the Sun (see Figure 3.7).
Fundamental Physics
The recent discovery, based on astronomical observations, that normal matter 
(baryonic matter) constitutes only 4 percent of the mass of the universe, while the 
rest is in the form of dark matter and dark energy, is transforming the understand
-ing of physics. Radio astronomical observations of the rotation of galaxies have 
proved to be an excellent way to trace the distribution of dark matter. Meanwhile, 
laboratory experiments are underway in an attempt to identify the particle nature 
of dark matter. This combined effort in astronomy and laboratory physics can be 
expected to lead to a major step forward in the understanding of the universe. 
The measurement by radio astronomers of the timing of the rotations of 
pulsars in tight binary orbits about companion neutron stars, with exquisite preci
-sion, has been providing physicists with the strongest af˜rmative answer yet to the 
century-long question, ﬁWas Einstein right?ﬂ (see Figure 3.3).
Technology Development
Radio astronomy has advanced the limits of technology as it has opened up 
spectral bands at progressively higher frequencies. For example, the best technology 
for low-noise receivers at frequencies above 100 GHz and into the terahertz range 
is based on quantum devices known as superconductor-insulator-superconductor 
(SIS) mixers. These devices were ˜rst developed by radio astronomers at the Uni
-versity of California in the 1980s and independently at AT&T Bell Laboratories. 
They have now been perfected, primarily for use in radio astronomy, to operate 
with noise levels at a few times the quantum limit. As military and telecommuni
-cations applications move into this band, they will undoubtedly make use of this 
technology. 
Precision Antennas
The need for high sensitivity has led radio astronomers to develop the tech
-nology of building highly ef˜cient, large, parabolic antennas, which have extensive 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.133THE
 RADIO
 ASTRONOMY
 SERVICE
application in the telecommunications and military communities. Radio astrono
-mers ˜rst developed the theory of how to design large, fully steerable antennas 
that maintain high surface accuracy in the presence of gravitational deforma
-tions. They invented an electronic surveying technique, known colloquially as 
radio
 holography, which enables re˚ector surfaces to be set to an accuracy of a 
few microns. Methods that they developed for measuring antenna ef˜ciency from 
observations of standard radio sources and solar system bodies are in wide use.
Distributed Network Computing
The Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence (SETI) project, a search carried out 
in radio bands, was faced with an enormous computational problem in analyzing 
its voluminous data to ˜nd nonrandom signals that might be of extraterrestrial 
origin. The computing resources needed to sort through the collected data were far 
beyond those available to the SETI researchers. The solution was to enlist the aid of 
interested people, who would download an analysis program and a section of data 
and would do the analysis in their computer™s background. More than 5 million 
people in 226 countries responded and are part of the SETI@home project. The 
SETI@home researchers went on to develop the Berkeley Open Infrastructure for 
Network Computing (BOINC). BOINC™s open-source volunteer computing plat
-form currently engages the public in 42 scienti˜c supercomputing projects, includ
-ing climate modeling and global warming studies (ClimatePrediction.net); drug 
research for HIV, malaria and cancer, and protein folding (Predictor@home);
 gravity 
waves (Einstein@home); particle physics (LHC@home); as well as SETI@home. 
BOINC volunteers provide about 2 peta˚ops of computing power to the various 
projects, more than the world™s most powerful supercomputer.
Education and Public Outreach
Radio astronomy requires a broad spectrum of technically trained people, 
from theorists and observers with doctoral degrees to technicians with much less 
education, perhaps even trained primarily on the job. Theory, observations, and 
analysis are usually done by small teams consisting of one person or several senior 
people along with junior people, students, and postdoctoral researchers. Only a 
small fraction of the people trained for this ˜eld actually stay in radio astronomy; 
the majority go into other ˜elds, usually still in a technical capacity. They form a 
valuable pool of people with a wide range of skills who readily ˜nd technical jobs 
in industry or government laboratories. 
The general public is greatly interested in astronomy, perhaps more than in 
other sciences. There is a steady stream of astronomy stories and images in the 
press. At the nation™s colleges and universities, it is the most common subject taken 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
134as a science requirement, with thousands of students per year in elementary astron
-omy classes at the larger universities. All the major radio observatories have well-
attended visitor programs, with the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico drawing 
120,000 visitors annually, of whom 30 percent are children. This interest translates 
into an appreciation of science and technology, and draws students into technical 
subjects, helping to provide the personnel resources needed in today™s world. 
Finding:
 In addition to the intellectual bene˜ts that they provide, radio astronomy 
studies provide many technological bene˜ts to American society. 
Finding: 
Radio astronomy provides a diverse and valuable set of educational 
opportunities.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.135
4Technology and Opportunities 
for the Mitigation of 
 Radio Frequency Interference
The capacity to address interference issues is a key element in any system 
using the radio frequency (RF) spectrum. This is especially true for passive sens
-ing systemsŠthose that do not transmit but only receive naturally occurring 
 
emissionsŠdue to the level of sensitivity required for these systems to extract 
useful environmental and scienti˜c data. Interference can be caused by a variety of 
sources: other valid users of the RF spectrum, improperly functioning consumer 
and commercial equipment, and improper or disallowed use of the spectrum. As the 
use of the RF spectrum for commercial, industrial, government, and scienti˜c uses 
continues to increase, the number of potentially interfering sources will increase 
as well. Mitigation techniques are a limited but critical element in efforts aimed at 
extracting scienti˜c value from an increasingly dif˜cult RF environment.
The Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) and Radio Astronomy Ser
-vice (RAS) have classically limited the impact of interference by using mitiga
-tion techniques. However, there are physical limits to the capacity of the ﬁunilateralﬂ 
techniques that typically have been used, and they often do not provide adequate 
protection from interference. Recently, new techniques have been suggested, in 
which the active and passive users of the RF spectrum collaborate in order to share 
the spectrum. These ﬁcooperativeﬂ mitigation techniques may provide a potential 
for meeting the expanding spectral needs of the passive-sensing community.
This chapter is divided into ˜ve sections: §4.1 addresses the expected trends in 
RF spectrum use that may call for increasing mitigation; §4.2, the drivers of spec
-trum use; §4.3, the capacity for unilateral mitigation technology; §4.4, the potential 
for mitigation through cooperative use; and §4.5, the costs of mitigation.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
1364.1 TRENDS IN ACTIVE SPECTRUM USAGE
One of the primary concerns for passive sensing systems is the explosive 
growth in industrial, commercial, and consumer devices. This growth is fueled by 
user demand, investment capital, and the reallocation of underutilized spectral 
bands. The need for mitigation and the appropriate mitigation technique will vary 
depending on the type of equipment that will be permitted by the regulatory agen
-cies, the technology being deployed, the time line for the deployment of systems, 
and the intensity of spectrum usage. This section and the next present a review 
of current spectrum usage and of the drivers for future spectrum usage, which 
provides the requisite basis for the development of the appropriate technical and 
regulatory mitigation strategies. 
Current Allocations
Access to spectrum in the United States is assigned by the Federal Communica
-tions Commission (FCC) and the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA). The process is described in useful detail in Chapter 1 of 
the National Research Council™s 2007 report 
Handbook of Frequency Allocations 
and Spectrum Protection for Scienti˜c Uses
.1 To summarize, spectrum is typically 
assigned to 
ser
vices
 (classes of users) on a primary basis or a secondary basis, and 
allocations include details on permitted transmission power levels and operation 
times. The difference between a primary allocation and a secondary allocation is 
essentially that the users of a secondary allocation must accept interference from 
the users of a primary allocation and conversely must not interfere with the users 
of the primary service. The International Telecommunication Union (ITU), an 
agency of the United Nations, periodically updates its allocation table to coordinate 
international spectrum usage and prevent problems due to interference. The ITU 
Radio Regulations (ITU-RR) are not binding on the United States in totoŠthe real 
treaty obligation of the U.S. government is that it will not assign transmitter licenses 
in such a way that will cause interference to stations licensed by other governments 
that are in accordance with the ITU-RR. Within this framework, national govern
-ments create and enforce additional regulations, typically to include additional 
details and to elaborate on permitted uses of the spectrum. In the United States, 
federal use of spectrum is managed by the NTIA, whereas nonfederal (i.e., com
-mercial, amateur, and passive scienti˜c) use of spectrum is managed by the FCC. 
The authority of the FCC and NTIA are parallel in this respect. FCC regulations 
1 
National Research Council, 
Handbook of Frequency Allocations and Spectrum Protection for Scienti˜c 
Uses
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.137TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
concerning the use of the spectrum are codi˜ed in Title 47 of the 
Code of Federal 
Regulations
 (47 C.F.R.). 
The radio astronomy community is represented in this process as the ﬁRadio 
Astronomy Service,ﬂ and the Earth remote sensing community is represented in this 
process as the ﬁEarth Exploration-Satellite Service.ﬂ A useful synopsis of 47 C.F.R. 
in terms relevant to the RAS and EESS, including tables of relevant spectral allo
-cations, is given in the 
Handbook
.2 For example, this reference text shows that 
2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 GHz is allocated to the RAS and EESS on a 
primary basis and that 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary basis (measured 
in hertz).
From a regulatory perspective, the RAS and EESS are comparable to all other 
services, despite the fact that that they do not transmit. Thus, the allocation of 
 
spectrum to the RAS and EESS on a primary basis results nominally (but not 
 
actuallyŠsee below) in clear spectrum. The allocation of spectrum to the RAS and 
EESS on a secondary basis is useful mainly in the sense that it offers these services 
a legal basis for providing input into the use of these allocations. It should also be 
noted that the allocation of a frequency band to the RAS and/or EESS does not 
prevent interference even if the allocation is on a primary basis. This is because 
the effective bandwidth of any transmission is essentially unlimited when observed 
with a suf˜ciently sensitive instrument. So, for example, the far out-of-band (side
-band) emission of a transmission whose center frequency is properly in a band in 
which it has a primary allocation may, at some level, appear in nearby bands 
in which the RAS and/or EESS has a primary allocation. This has historically been a 
severe problem, particularly with respect to interference from services transmitting 
from satellites in L-band. (See §3.5 for a discussion of radio frequency interfer
-ence [RFI] from Iridium satellites.) In contrast to active uses of the spectrum, the 
work of RAS and EESS users can be severely affected when the interference power 
level is far below the internal noise power level of the detection device, since long 
integration times are usually used in RAS and EESS measurements to reduce the 
root-mean-square ˚uctuations in the internal noise. Thus, this issue affects the 
RAS and EESS in a way that is fundamentally different from the way that it affects 
active users of the radio spectrum.
The spectrum in which the RAS and/or EESS has a primary or secondary allo
-cation is relatively small (see Table 4.1). The spectrum in which the RAS and/or 
EESS has a secondary allocation has diminished usefulness, since there is no pro
-tection from the primary users of these bands. As noted in Chapters 2 and 3, the 
spectrum requirements of the radio astronomy and Earth exploration radio science 
community currently far exceed the spectrum available to the RAS and EESS on 
2 
National Research Council, 
Handbook of Frequency Allocations and Spectrum Protection for Scienti˜c 
Uses
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
138TABLE 4.1
 Total Spectrum Allocated to the Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) and the Earth 
Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) Within 9 kHz to 3 GHz
Total Bandwidth Allocation (MHz)
Percent of Bandwidth Allocated (%)
EESS only (9 kHz-3 GHz)
 Primary
37 
1.23
 Secondary
122 
4.07
 RAS only (9 kHz-3 GHz)
 Primary
62.12 
2.07
 Secondary
35.5 
1.18
RAS + EESS (9 kHz-3 GHz)
 Primary
62.12 
2.07
 Secondary
122.5 
4.08
NOTE: The percentage and bandwidth allocated to the RAS and EESS between 9 kHz and 3 GHz as of this 
writing is given in the table above. Note that ﬁRAS + EESSﬂ is much less than the sum of RAS and EESS, 
particularly in primary bands, showing that the two services are able to share spectrum efficiently.
either a primary or a secondary basis. For this reason, these users must routinely 
observe in bands in which the RAS and/or EESS has neither primary nor second
-ary allocations. This is authorized since passive (receive-only) scienti˜c use of the 
radio spectrum is not prohibited in any part of the electromagnetic spectrum. This 
is also often technically possible because some parts of the spectrum are sparsely 
utilized, and services that transmit typically do so with poor spectral ef˜ciency in 
both frequency and time (although current trends are in the direction of increased 
usage and improved spectral ef˜ciency; see §4.2). 
Finding:
 Owing to their receive-only nature, the passive Earth Exploration
-Satellite 
Service and Radio Astronomy Service, operating from 10 MHz to 3 THz, are 
 
incapable of interfering with other services.
Finding: 
Currently, 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 GHz is allocated to the 
RAS and EESS on a primary basis, and 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary 
basis (measured in hertz).
Current Utilization Studies
The allocation of spectrum to a service does not necessarily imply that the allo
-cated spectrum is always used for transmission; neither does it imply that the allocated 
spectrum cannot be used by others for passive scienti˜c observations. In fact, there 
are a number of ways in which allocated spectrum might remain free of detectable 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.139TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
transmissions and available for passive scienti˜c observations. For example, in rural 
areas with low population density, some services may not be used to any detectable 
degree; that is, transmissions associated with the active services are typically fewer 
and weaker in these areas (see further discussion later in this section). If the area is 
remote enough, transmissions may be suf˜ciently weak so as not to interfere with 
radio science observations (although such remote areas are reached by satellite and 
airborne radio sources). More often, however, the situation is intermediate in the 
sense that signi˜cant interference is observed but can sometimes be managed through 
a combination of interference mitigation techniques (see §4.3 and §4.4). 
The ﬁchannelizationﬂ of frequencies within a given allocation, typically speci
-˜ed either in 47 C.F.R. or as the result of the adoption of an industry standard 
(e.g., IEEE 802.11), is inherently inef˜cient. For example, a typical user of the Land 
Mobile Radio Service might use only a small number of widely spaced channels 
within the allocated band and may transmit on them only a tiny fraction of the 
time. Thus even if an active user is received with suf˜cient strength to prevent 
the scienti˜c use of some section of the spectrum while that user is transmitting, it 
is sometimes possible to exploit the sparse ﬁtime-frequencyﬂ utilization of spectrum 
by means of the techniques described in §4.3 and §4.4 to observe effectively when 
the active user is not transmitting. Given the existing trend toward more ef˜cient 
channelization and increased utilization, however, interference mitigation methods 
that rely on this property are in danger of becoming less effective over time.
The modulation employed by a transmitter may be inherently inef˜cient, in 
the sense that it requires a large swath of spectrum but unevenly distributes the 
power over the channel. An example is the use of the National Television System 
Committee (NTSC) standard for analog television (TV), which requires a 6 MHz 
channel but places the vast majority of the transmitted power into just two car
-riers constituting only a few hundred kilohertz of bandwidth within this channel 
(see Figure 4.1). Radio astronomers have been able to observe within active NTSC 
channels in areas where NTSC transmissions are relatively weak (e.g., deep in the 
National Radio Quiet Zone [NRQZ]) by observing only within those portions of 
the channel where relatively little power is present and ˜ltering out those parts 
of the channel where most of the power is located. However, the introduction 
of the new digital TV broadcast standard, known as ATSC, makes this technique 
impossible. This is because the Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC) 
˜lls the entire 6 MHz channel with a uniform distribution of power, leaving no 
ﬁholeﬂ through which to observe (see Figure 4.1). 
The preceding comments can be summarized as follows: (1) The ﬁallocationﬂ 
of spectrum historically has not implied the ﬁutilizationﬂ of spectrum, which has 
bene˜ted the passive scienti˜c users of the radio spectrum. (2) Technology trends 
are moving toward more ef˜cient utilization of allocations, in both time and 
frequency, which is beginning to severely impact the ability to use some bands 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
140Figure 4-1R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 4.1
 A comparison of the digital (Channel 10) and analog (Channel 11) television signals. 
The digital signal is essentially uniform in power across the entire channel, whereas the analog signal 
transmits most of its information in two narrow bands, leaving holes through which radio astronomers 
can sometimes observe relatively strong natural sources. Image courtesy of Andrew Clegg, National 
Science Foundation.
for scienti˜c uses, despite the importance of these uses. As explained later in this 
chapter, this is true even when taking into account the capabilities of existing and 
emerging techniques for the mitigation of interference.
For these reasons, passive-sensing scienti˜c users of the radio spectrum are 
greatly concerned with the utilization of spectrum both within the bands allocated 
to the RAS and EESS and in all other bands accessible to current and planned 
instruments. Furthermore, radio astronomers are concerned not only with spec
-tral occupancy at frequencies at which they wish to observe, but they also monitor 
transmissions in nearby bands that have the potential to create interference through 
receiver compressionŠa condition in which an instrument is desensitized because 
a signal in a nearby band is present with such great strength that the receiver goes 
nonlinear. In this case the ability to mitigate the interference through ˜ltering, while 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
retaining sensitivity, is beyond existing technology. The reason for this is that ˜lters 
must be placed before the saturable active components, and because ˜lters have 
losses, the system sensitivity is thereby reduced.
The largest radio observatories routinely monitor the RF spectrum and typi
-cally maintain continuous monitoring programs of some sort. The results of moni
-toring campaigns are usually freely available for inspection onlineŠfor example, at 
the interference-monitoring Web sites maintained by the NRAO™s Very Large Array 
(VLA),
3 by NRAO at the Green Bank Telescope,
4 and by the National Atmosphere 
and Ionosphere Center (NAIC) at Arecibo Observatory.
5 Unfortunately, these 
efforts are technically dif˜cult and expensive to maintain and thus often have lim
-ited sensitivity and/or restricted time-frequency coverage. As a result, interference 
that is strong enough to be harmful to radio astronomy may escape detection by 
existing monitors. With regard to the EESS community, the monitoring of spectral 
utilization is made even more dif˜cult by the limitations of operations aboard air
-craft and satellites and by the coarse spectral resolution of total power radiometers. 
However, some anecdotal results have been published (see Figures 2.13 through 
2.21, 3.10, and 4.2).
6The actual utilization of the radio frequency spectrum has recently become a 
topic of increasing interest to active users of the spectrum as well. This has resulted 
in a number of studies reporting measurements of the utilization of the spectrum.
7 Typically, the results of such studies report results in terms of 
spectral occupancy, 
3 
See ﬁVLA Radio Frequency Interferenceﬂ at http://www.vla.nrao.edu/cgi-bin/r˜.cgi; accessed Janu
-ary 13, 2009.
4 
See ﬁGreen Bank Interference Protection Groupﬂ at http://www.gb.nrao.edu/IPG/; accessed Janu
-ary 13, 2009.
5 
See National Atmosphere and Ionosphere Center, Arecibo RFI Web site, at http://www.naic.
edu/~r˜user/; accessed January 13, 2009.
6 
S.W. Ellingson, G.A. Hampson, and J.T. Johnson, ﬁCharacterization of L-Band RFI and Implica
-tions for Mitigation Techniques,ﬂ
 Proc. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symp. (IGARSS 
200
3), 
Vol. 3, pp. 1745-1747, July 21-25, 2003.
7 
Federal Communications Commission Spectrum Policy Task Force, 
Report of the Spectrum Ef˜
-ciency Working Group
, November 2002, available at http://www.fcc.gov/sptf/reports.html, accessed 
January 14, 2010; Frank H. Sanders and Vince S. Lawrence, 
Broadband Spectrum Sur
vey at Den
ver, 
Colorado
, NTIA Report 95-321, September 1995; Frank H. Sanders, Bradley J. Ramsey, and Vincent S. 
Lawrence, 
Broadband Spectrum Sur
vey at San Francisco, CA
, NTIA Report 99-367, May-June 1999; S.W. 
Ellingson, ﬁSpectral Occupancy at VHF: Implications for Frequency-Agile Cognitive Radios,ﬂ 
Proc. 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf. 
200
5 FallŠDallas
, Vol. 2, pp. 1379-1382 (September 2005); A.E.E. 
Rogers, J.E. Salah, D.L. Smythe, P. Pratap, J.C. Carter, and M. Derome, ﬁInterference Temperature Mea
-surements from 70 to 1500 MHz in Suburban and Rural Environments of the Northeast,ﬂ 
Proc. First 
Int™l Symp. on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN 
200
5), November 8-11, 
2005, pp. 119-123; Mark A. McHenry and Dan McCloskey, ﬁMulti-Band, Multi
-Location Spectrum 
Occupancy Measurements,ﬂ 
Proc. 
200
6 ISART Conference, Boulder, Colorado
 (March 2006), available 
at http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov/pub/ntia-rpt/06-438, accessed January 14, 2010.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
142which can be de˜ned as the fraction of time that a transmission can be detected at 
a given frequency, for a given sensitivity and a given time-frequency resolution.
However, the perception of what constitutes occupancy can be different 
depending on the measurement and the interests of the person interpreting the 
results. For example, a recent study performed by the Shared Spectrum Corpora
-tion reported 13.1 percent occupancy for New York City and 1 percent at Green 
Bank, West Virginia, inside the NRQZ.
8 By contrast, a study of occupancies in terms 
somewhat more relevant to radio astronomy applications ˜nds occupancy greater 
than 30 percent even in the relatively rural areas of Westford, Massachusetts, and 
Hancock, New Hampshire.
9 Both studies are probably internally consistent but 
cannot be compared because of their different assumptions about the appropriate 
time-frequency resolutions, thresholds of detection, and tolerable levels of out-
of-band (OOB) interference. Measurements are also being made that attempt to 
bridge this gap by reporting results in terms of cumulative distribution functions 
(CDFs), which resolve ﬁoccupancyﬂ as a function of threshold of detection, and 
by also quantifying the fragmentation of unoccupied bandwidth. This activity is 
important, because often in both active and passive uses of the spectrum a mini
-mum bandwidth must be available for the channel to be useful.
10
While the various efforts of the active and passive user communities have been 
useful in con˜rming the sparse time-frequency utilization of the spectrum, most 
existing studies are of limited help in understanding in detail the potential for 
interference and for cooperative spectrum use as described later in this chapter. 
This is due to limited sensitivity (i.e., the inability to detect weak signals that still 
are suf˜ciently strong to constitute ﬁoccupancyﬂ to a typical user of that band), 
time resolution that is too coarse to be useful (for example, monitoring a frequency 
for only a few milliseconds every few seconds, thereby potentially missing strong 
signals), and frequency resolution that is too coarse to be useful (for example, 
monitoring bandwidths on the order of hundreds of kilohertz when the signals 
themselves have bandwidths on the order of kilohertz, thereby desensitizing the 
measurements) (see Figure 4.2). This is essentially the same problem experienced 
by the monitoring programs of radio observatories, as mentioned above. Thus, 
8 
Mark A. McHenry and Dan McCloskey, ﬁMulti-Band, Multi-Location Spectrum Occupancy Mea
-surements,ﬂ 
Proc. 
200
6 ISART Conference, Boulder, Colorado 
(March 2006), available at http://www.
its.bldrdoc.gov/pub/ntia-rpt/06-438/; accessed January 14, 2010.
9 
A.E.E. Rogers, J.E. Salah, D.L. Smythe, P. Pratap, J.C. Carter, and M. Derome, ﬁInterference Tem
-perature Measurements from 70 to 1500 MHz in Suburban and Rural Environments of the
 Northeast,ﬂ 
Proc. First Int™l Symp. on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN 
200
5), 
November 8-11, 2005, pp. 119-123.
10
 S.W. Ellingson, ﬁSpectral Occupancy at VHF: Implications for Frequency-Agile Cognitive Radios,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference 
200
5 FallŠDallas
, Vol. 2, pp. 1379-1382 
(September 2005).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.143TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
Figure 4-2R01628uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 4.2
 An example of radio frequency interference measurements made at the Arecibo radio 
observatory in Puerto Rico on May 26, 2008. The scan from a single location and a single instance 
in time is from a few megahertz to 1.45 GHz indicating the large number of commercial, government, 
and consumer uses of the spectrum. Detailed, real-time characterization of the spectrum uses provides 
an opportunity to prevent unauthorized uses of the spectrum from potentially causing catastrophic 
interference, as well as the capacity for opportunistically using unused spectrum for enhancing mea
-surements. The Arecibo Observatory is part of the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, which is 
operated by Cornell University under a cooperative agreement with the National Science Foundation.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
144the passive and active user communities have a common interest in improving the 
ability to measure the utilization of the radio frequency spectrum. 
A time resolution of 1 ms would be able to resolve and potentially classify 
transmit bursts in most mobile radio communications systems using time-division 
multiplexing (TDM) duplexing or channelization. Such systems use bursts/packets/
frames in lengths of 10 ms to 40 ms due to a trade-off between accuracy in tracking 
propagation channels and throughput ef˜ciency (payload/header ratio).
11
 However, a 1 millisecond time resolution would not resolve radar pulses, as 
these pulses are typically in the 2 to 400 microseconds range.
12
 Furthermore, if 
pulses cannot be resolved, it would be more dif˜cult to positively identify the source 
as radar, as opposed to intermodulation from other things that just happen to be 
emitting into that frequency. If the pulses are resolved, however, it becomes very 
easy to identify the source and also to determine whether the sources are ﬁsplat
-tering,ﬂ ﬁjabbering,ﬂ or exhibiting other illicit behaviors. For the purposes of the 
RAS and EESS, and conceivably for many other applications as well, the activity of 
these radar pulses is of great interest. Even the multipath from these radars can be 
problematic to sensitive systems.
13
 To resolve these radar pulses, a time resolution 
on the order of 1 microsecond would be needed, which would not be technologi
-cally dif˜cult to achieve.
The bandwidth resolution needed for such a spectrum survey could reasonably 
be 1 kHz; 1 kHz is roughly an order of magnitude less than the minimum standard 
bandwidth for any communications system above 30 MHz. A bandwidth resolu
-tion of 1 kHz would also resolve most communications below 30 MHz. Also, since 
much RFI comes in the form of unmodulated carriers (e.g., spurious products from 
transmitters, stuck microphones, etc.), the bandwidth is lower-bounded only by trans
-mitter phase noise and so can be very narrow. A higher bandwidth resolution of, say, 
10 kHz, would be too coarse, since most Land Mobile Radio Systems (two-way radios 
below 1 GHz) are migrating to 6.25 kHz channelization over the next decade.
Spatial resolution is the hardest parameter of the space to ﬁsaturateﬂ with a 
monitoring system. Modern cellular systems use cell sizes ranging from building 
size to tens of kilometers. Satellite- and HAP-based cell systems can have cells 
hundreds of kilometers in extent. For terrestrial systems, this is highly frequency-, 
11
 T.S. Rappaport, 
Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice
, 2nd Ed., Prentice Hall, 2002.
12
 Frank H. Sanders, ﬁDetection and Measurement of Radar Signals: A Tutorial,ﬂ 7th Annual Inter
-national Symposium on Advanced Radio Technologies, March 1, 2005; S.W. Ellingson and G.A. 
Hampson, ﬁMitigation of Radar Interference in 
L-Band Radio Astronomy,ﬂ 
Astrophysical Journal 
Supplement Series
, 147: 167-176 (July 2003); G. Miaris, T. Kaifas, Z. Zaharis, D. Babas, E. Va˜adis, T. 
Samaras, and J.N. Sahalos, ﬁDesign of Radiation-Emission Measurements of an Air-Traf˜c Surveil
-lance Radar,ﬂ
 IEEE Antennas and Propagation Magazine
, Vol. 45, No. 4 (August 2003).
13
 S.W. Ellingson and G.A. Hampson, ﬁMitigation of Radar Interference in L-Band Radio Astron
-omy,ﬂ 
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series
, 147: 167-176 (July 2003).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.145TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
terrain-, and protocol-dependent: different systems have different transmitter den
-sities and different typical transmitting powers. Any justi˜able angular resolution 
requirement would be frequency-dependent, such that the survey would achieve 
lower resolution at lower frequencies and higher resolution at higher frequencies. 
This relationship has to do with the nature of multipath scattering versus frequency 
as well as with fundamental limitations in angular resolutionŠresolution improves 
with increasing aperture in wavelengths. The ability to locate emitters with suf
-˜cient accuracy to facilitate the identi˜cation of sources would be the goal of the 
survey, and given the dependencies mentioned above, the necessary spatial resolu
-tion would depend on the frequency and on what can be afforded. 
Finding: 
Greater efforts to collect and analyze radio emission data are needed to 
support the enforcement of existing allocations and to support the discussion and 
planning of spectrum use.
Finding: 
Better utilization of the spectrum and reduced RFI for scienti˜c as well 
as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum 
usage. Progress toward these goals would be made by gathering more information 
through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. This would be bene˜cial 
to both the commercial and the scienti˜c communities.
4.2
 MAJOR DRIVERS OF SPECTRUM USE
Current measurements of spectral utilization and its impact on passive systems 
may not be indicative of future spectral use. The drivers for additional spectral 
bands for intensive use, the allocation of additional bands, and the development of 
ﬁsmartﬂ ˚exible radio technology will have a profound impact on future use. The 
following assessment for the time period 2008-2015 is based on well-established 
drivers, currently allocated spectral bands, and technology that is under develop
-ment. This assessment has a high-to-moderate level of con˜dence. That said, the 
impact from regulatory changes can be profoundŠfor example, increases in power 
levels or emission levels permitted outside the primary transmission band could 
create an RF environment much less useful for passive systems.
Assessment of Trends in Spectrum Use for 2008-2015
The current trend toward more intensive use of the RF spectrum will continue 
unabated for both commercial and government uses. Within the United States, the 
continued desire for higher levels of access to the Internet (Figure 4.3), coupled 
with the increased desire for mobility, will incite the development of new commer
-cial systems. Technology is also a major driver for more intensive use. New mobile 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
146  0      20      40      60      80      100      120    20002001200220032004200520062007Ye
arUnited States Broadband Use(millions of high-speed lines)Figure 4-3R01628editable vectorsFIGURE 4.3
 Broadband services usage in the United States from 2000 through 2007, as indicated by 
the number of high-speed lines (or wireless channels) over 200 kbps in at least one direction. SOURCE: 
Federal Communications Commission, 
High-Speed Services for Internet Access Report, 
March 2008, 
p. 6, available at http://hraunfoss.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DOC-280906A1.pdf.
devices can integrate the use of multiple modes and bands within a single handset, 
and they use ever-wider-band RF components that allow for higher data rates. Such 
devices will drive the continued desire for more spectrum for commercial activi
-ties. The combination of mobility and integration has a strongly deleterious effect 
with respect to passive systems, because it will create a more pervasive use of the 
spectrum not only in spectral extent but in geographic extent as well.
The greater impact on the EESS community from more intensive use of the 
spectrum will come from what is occurring in developing nations. Fixed-line 
infrastructure including copper and ˜ber is available in highly developed coun
-tries except in low-population-density regions. This infrastructure is not available 
in developing nations, but unused radio spectrum is readily available. Therefore, 
most commercial deployments, including backhaul, are made entirely out of wire
-less systems. Economic development in these nations will produce a much higher 
reliance on wireless systems and will see a much higher growth rate in the use of 
wireless transmission systems. One example is that in 2006, China had more new 
cellular subscribers than the total number of U.S. subscribers (see Figure 4.4). The 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.147TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
050100150200250300350400200220032004200520062007Mobile Subscribers in China(millions)Figure 4-4R01628editable vectorsFIGURE 4.4
 The number of cellular subscribers in China grew by more than 250 million between 2002 
and 2007. SOURCE: 
China Mobile Ltd. Annual Reports.
ITU has indicated that the number of mobile cellular users worldwide at the end 
of 2007 was in excess of 3.3 billion.
14
Lastly, the mechanism by which spectrum licenses are obtained has a large 
impact on what is optimized for system deployment. For example, in 2006 the FCC 
auctioned 90 MHz of spectrum for Advanced Wireless Services (AWS; also known 
as Third Generation cellular). The auction netted the U.S. Treasury $13.7 billion, 
which is equivalent to $0.50 MHz-pop.
15
 This cost is usually called the opportu
-nity cost for the spectrum. High opportunity costs motivate the licensee to use the 
spectrum quite ef˜ciently to leverage the already-ﬁsunk costs.ﬂ This is why cellular 
operators are very conscious of their spectral ef˜ciency and thus exploit spectral 
14
 ﬁGlobal Mobile Phone Users Top 3.3 Billion by End-2007ŠStudy,ﬂ 
Cellular News,
 May 24, 2008, 
available at http://www.cellular-news.com/story/31352.php; accessed January 14, 2010.
15
 The ˜gure ﬁ$0.50 per MHz-popﬂ indicates that the licenses, if amortized across the entire U.S. 
population, would be worth $0.50 for every megahertz of bandwidth (it would be somewhat higher if 
one takes into account the effective population of subscribers). However, with 200 million subscribers 
and a maximum market penetration of approximately 30 percent, it would yield a value of $2.53 per 
megahertz per active subscriber.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
148reuse techniques by using the same frequency bands at each tower. However, access 
to spectrum without any opportunity costs tends to motivate the use very differ
-ently. For example, the spectrum for public-safety users is provided as a direct 
grant. These users usually deploy high-site, high-power transmitters to reduce the 
cost of the infrastructure. The public-safety services are less ef˜cient spectrum 
users than are the cellular telephone services, since the technology of the former 
lacks any spectral reuse. 
Third-Generation and Fourth-Generation Systems
The 2008-2015 period will see the deployment of new cellular-based services 
in bands that were allocated in the 2002-2007 period: the 700 MHz band, the 
AWS bands, and the Broadband Radio Service and Educational Broadband Service 
(BRS/EBS) bands. These bands were reallocated by the FCC in recognition of the 
rapid growth in demand made by mobile data services.
700 MHz
The digital TV transition that took place in June 2009 recaptured the spec
-trum now allocated as channels 52-69 (698-806 MHz). The propagation charac
-teristics of these bands, as well as the lack of incumbents within the band, make 
this piece of the spectrum highly prized. The band has allocations for Public 
Safety (763-775 MHz and 793-805 MHz), moderate-power
16 
cellular operations 
(746-763 MHz and 776-793 MHz), and high-power
17
 operations (698-743 MHz). 
Much of the band was yet to be licensed as of December 2008. In March 2008, an 
auction took place in which $19.6 billion was bid for the licenses within this band. 
However, licenses that do not meet the build-out requirements to provide cover
-age to a required percentage of the U.S. population will be remanded to the FCC, 
leading to expectations that these bands will be intensively used.
Advanced Wireless Services 1, 2, and 3
The Advanced Wireless Services (AWS) bands include 1710-1755 MHz, 
1915-1920 MHz, 1995-2000 MHz, 2020-2025 MHz, and 2110-2180 MHz. In 
September 2006, the FCC auctioned the 1710-1755 MHz band paired with the 
2110-2155 MHz band and denoted it the AWS-1 block. The AWS band is generally 
called the ﬁ3-Gﬂ (Third Generation) band and is denoted for mobile voice and data 
services. The build-out requirements for AWS-1 are not as cumbersome as those 
16
 Up to 2,000 W/MHz in rural deployments.
17
 Up to 50 kW for cellular broadcast deployments.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.149TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
for the 700 MHz band. Additional auctions have been proposed for the AWS-2 
and AWS-3 bands.
2.5 GHz: Broadband Radio Service and Educational Broadband Service
The Multipoint Distribution System (MDS); Multi-channel, Multipoint Distri
-bution System (MMDS); and Instructional Television Fixed Service (ITFS) bands 
that formerly occupied the 2.1 GHz spectrum were reallocated to the 2495-2690 MHz 
band. The transition also included a name change to the BRS and EBS. Wireless 
Internet access is the primary use of these bands, which have rules that permit tech
-nical ˚exibility to deploy any technology that meets the emission rules. However, 
WiMAX (also known as IEEE 802.16) technology is generally the technology that 
is deployed. 
Unlicensed Uses of the Radio Frequency Spectrum
There has been a phenomenal proliferation of unlicensed devices over the past 
decade, to the great bene˜t of society.
18
 Over the past 5 years there have also been 
signi˜cant additions to the types of unlicensed devices and spectral bands available 
for unlicensed uses. The ultrawideband types of unlicensed devices, the expansion 
of unlicensed use in the Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (U-NII) 
band, and the allocation for 70, 80, and 90 GHz bands are noteworthy. 
Unlicensed devices operate at a low enough power to be deemed not harm
-ful to the primary licensee in the band. Unlicensed devices can also operate on a 
co-primary basis in certain bands. The 900 MHz, 2.4 GHz, and 5.8 GHz bands are 
three such bands. The 900 MHz band has been popularly used by baby-monitoring 
device and wireless phone manufacturers. The 2.4 GHz band is the most popular 
one and is heavily used by wireless local-area networks (also known as Wi-Fi), 
cordless telephones, security systems, and personal-area networks (also known 
as Bluetooth) manufacturers. Indeed, unlicensed devices have many societal and 
commercial bene˜ts.
Ultrawideband
Ultrawideband (UWB) is a technology for transmitting information using a 
large bandwidth (>500 MHz), which can cross many spectrum-allocation bound
-aries. UWB was originally accepted as pulse radio, but the FCC and ITU-Radio 
(ITU-R) now de˜ne UWB in terms of a transmission from an antenna for which 
18
 Unlicensed de
vices
 are those that are allowed to operate without a speci˜c license for a particular 
spectral band. They are also sometimes called license-free devices. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
150the emitted signal bandwidth exceeds the lesser of 500 MHz or 20 percent of 
the center frequency. The FCC authorizes the unlicensed use of UWB in the 
3.1-10.6 GHz band, and the FCC power spectral density emission limit for UWB 
emitters operating in the UWB band is Œ41.3 dBm/MHz. These emission limits 
are consistent with those granted by the FCC for personal computer emissions and 
intentional emissions for unlicensed devices.
Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure at 5 GHz
The FCC established a schedule for new unlicensed devices that are dynamic 
frequency selection (DFS)-compliant in the 5.25-5.35 GHz (UNII-2) band and in 
a new spectral region between 5.470 and 5.725 GHz (UNII-3).
 19
 The new DFS rule 
is required in order to allow the coexistence of unlicensed devices with existing 
military and weather radar systems in the 5 GHz band. The new FCC rule requires 
that unlicensed devices must comply with DFS to prevent the devices from inter
-fering with incumbent military and weather radar systems. The DFS system must 
continuously monitor the selected frequency channel during use and if a radar 
signal is detected, the DFS system must stop and jump to another available channel 
that has gone through the same selection process.
Millimeter Wave: 70, 80, 90 GHz
In October 2003, the FCC opened 13 GHz of previously unused spectrum at 
71-76 GHz, 81-86 GHz, and 92-95 GHz, for high-density ˜xed wireless.
20
 Although 
not explicitly used for unlicensed devices, millimeter-wave communications have 
many of the characteristics of unlicensed use: many of the requirements in obtain
-ing licenses are minor and would essentially allow a great deal of proliferation of 
those devices. The FCC will issue an unlimited number of non-exclusive nationwide 
licenses to non-federal government entities for the 13 GHz of spectrum allocated 
for commercial use. These licenses will serve as a prerequisite for registering indi
-vidual point-to-point links. The 71-95 GHz bands are allocated on a shared basis 
with federal government users. Therefore, a licensee will not be authorized to oper
-ate a link under its non-exclusive nationwide license until the link is coordinated 
with the NTIA with respect to federal government operations and is registered as 
an approved link with a third-party database manager.
19
 See, 47 C.F.R. Sec. 15.407. See also,
 In the Matter of Re
vision of Parts 
2 and 
15
 of the Commission™s 
Rules to Permit Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (U-NII) De
vices in the 
5 GHz Band,
 Memorandum Opinion and Order, 21 FCC Rcd 7672 (2006).
20
 In the Matter of Allocations and Ser
vice Rules for the 
71
-76
 GHz, 
81
-86
 GHz and 
92
-95
 GHz Bands; 
Loea Communications Corporation Petition for Rulemaking
, Report and Order, 18 FCC Rcd 23318 
(2003).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
Regulatory Changes That Impact Use
As previously described, the regulatory agencies (NTIA, FCC) determine the 
appropriate technical parameters for operation in each spectral band. These rules 
are in constant ˚ux in order to keep current with technological changes and 
national needs. Since 2005, the regulatory agencies have been moving away from 
explicit emissions parameters. This change is in recognition of the fact that it is 
not power but power spectral density and power ˚ux density that better represent 
proper operating parameters:
Power spectral density:
 In 2007, the FCC changed emission rules for AWS 
and 700 MHz from 1640 W equivalent isotropically radiated power (EIRP) 
to 1640 W/MHz EIRP. This change was in response to the penalty to broad
-band systems.
21
 The transmitter power of broadband systems was regulated 
regardless of bandwidth, so these systems would be afforded a lower trans
-mitter power spectral density than that for narrowband systems.
Power ˚ux density:
 The FCC has begun to use power ˚ux density (e.g., 
Wm
Œ2
) as the key emission parameter. This is in response to the
 previous 
lack of incentive for using elevation beam shaping to control the interfer
-ence at ground level and to allow higher power emission limits for more 
cost-effective commercial deployments. The technical rules for the 700 MHz 
spectral band allow a transmission power up to 50 kW in portions of the 
band, but the power ˚ux density must be less than 3,000 microwatts per 
square meter on the ground.
22
These rule changes represent an opportunity to use more sophisticated interfer
-ence metrics for interference control. The recent changes increased sophistication 
with both spectral and spatial characterization. It may also be possible to extend 
regulations to include temporal characterizations that will be useful for developing 
new interference mitigation techniques.
The regulatory environment has investigated but has yet to address three addi
-tional means for interference mitigation:
Interference metrics:
 Metrics have been investigated to clarify what is con
-sidered to be harmful interference. Currently the regulators primarily 
quantify transmitter characteristics in lieu of explicit interference control. 
One proposal, called Interference Temperature, was closely related to noise 
21
 Using a power-only metric versus a power spectral density metric essentially allowed smaller 
bands (e.g., 5 MHz wide) to have twice the power of a 10-MHz-wide band.
22
 47 C.F.R., Vol. 2, Sec. 27.55 (b).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
152temperature, which is used extensively by the RAS community.
23
 An engi
-neering-based metric would provide clarity for system developers and for 
policy makers in determining the relative value of systems. The metric could 
be different for different bands and applications. 
Regulatory enforcement:
 Current means of enforcement are primarily by 
licensee self-enforcement or by the FCC™s use of a limited number of 
mobile interference-monitoring laboratories (seven in the United States). 
The proliferation of mobile wireless transmitters within consumer, com
-mercial, and government systems requires new monitoring and enforce
-ment technologies. 
Inclusion of passi
ve systems in regulatory databases:
 Current FCC databases 
include all transmission equipment for site-speci˜c licenses but do not 
include passive systems such as those used in the EESS and RAS. These 
databases are used by licensees to determine the potential for interference 
between systems and to communicate with other licensees on a case-by-
case basis. Since the passive systems are not included in the FCC databases, 
they are not considered in these discussions. Knowledge of the location and 
operational characteristics of the passive systems would be very useful to 
licensees for determining impact and possible mutual interference mitiga
-tion techniques.
The new techniques for interference control have been investigated by regula
-tors but have not been acted on. These techniques include interference metrics 
(e.g., interference temperature), improving enforcement technology to provide new 
23
 (1) Federal Communications Commission (FCC), ﬁSpectrum Policy Task Force,ﬂ 2002; FCC, 
Docket 03-237, Notice of Inquiry and Notice of Proposed Rulemaking on the Establishment of an 
Interference Temperature Metric to Quantify and Manage Interference and to Expand Available 
Unlicensed Operation in Certain Fixed, Mobile, and Satellite Frequency Bands; (2) P.J. Kolodzy, 
ﬁInterference Temperature: A Metric for Dynamic Spectrum Utilization,ﬂ 
Int. J. Netw. Manag.
, 16(2): 
103-113 (2006); (3) T.C. Clancy, ﬁAchievable Capacity Under the Interference Temperature Model,ﬂ 
INFOCOM 
200
7 26
th IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications, 
May 6-12, 2007; 
(4) Joe Bater, Hwee-Pink Tan, Kenneth N. Brown, and Linda Doyle, ﬂMaximising Access to a Spectrum 
Commons Using Interference Temperature Constraints,ﬂ 
Cogniti
ve Radio Oriented Wireless Networks 
and Communications 
200
7, 
2nd International Conference
, pp. 441-447, Aug. 1-3, 2007; (5) Yiping Xing, 
C.N. Mathur, M.A. Haleem, R. Chandramouli, and K.P. Subbalakshmi, ﬁPriority Based Dynamic 
Spectrum Access with QoS and Interference Temperature Constraints,ﬂ 
IEEE International Confer
-ence on Communications
, 10: 4420-4425 (June 2006); (6) J.A. Stine, ﬁSpectrum Management: The 
Killer Application of Ad Hoc and Mesh Networking,ﬂ 
First IEEE International Symposium on New 
Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
, pp.184-193 (November 8-11, 2005); (7) A.E.E. 
Rogers, J.E. Salah, D.L. Smythe, P. Pratap, J.C. Carter, and M. Derome, ﬂInterference Temperature 
Measurements from 70 to 1500 MHz in Suburban and Rural Environments of the Northeast,ﬂ 
First 
IEEE International Symposium on New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks
, pp. 119-123, 
(November 8-11, 2005).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.153TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
tools for the regulators to ensure compliance with emission rules (e.g., commer
-cial devices used for enforcement measurements, additional mobile measurement 
systems, etc), and the inclusion of passive systems in regulators™ databases (e.g., the 
FCC™s Universal Licensing System).
Finding:
 Current regulatory structure and support infrastructure (such as data
-bases, etc.) are transmitter-centric. Methodologies to incorporate passive systems 
need to be developed. 
Technology Changes That Impact Use
Software-De˜ned Radios and Cognitive Radios
The development of wideband power ampli˜ers, synthesizers, and analog
/digital (A/D) converters is providing for a new class of communication radios 
de˜ned by software: the software-de˜ned radio (SDR) and cognitive radio (CR). 
Although at the early stages of development, this new class of radio ushers in new 
possibilities as well as possible pitfalls for technology policy. The ˚exibility provided 
by the CR class of radio allows for more dynamics within radio operations. The 
technology also makes possible dynamic collaboration between CR and science 
users. The same ˚exibility poses challenges for certi˜cation and the associated 
liability through potential misuse.
SDR provides software control of a variety of modulation techniques, wideband 
and narrowband operation, communications security functions (such as hopping), 
and waveform requirements. In essence, components can be under digital control 
and thus de˜ned by software. The advantage of an SDR is that a single system 
can operate under multiple con˜gurations, providing interoperability, bridging, 
and tailoring of the waveforms to meet the localized requirements. SDR technol
-ogy and systems have been developed for the military. The digital modular radio 
(DMR) system was one of the ˜rst SDR systems. Recently the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency developed the Small Unit Operations Situational Aware
-ness Systems, a portable SDR operating from 20 MHz to 2.5 GHz. The success of 
these programs has led to the Joint Tactical Radio System initiative to develop and 
procure SDR systems throughout the U.S. military.
SDRs exhibit software control over a variety of modulation techniques and 
waveforms. Software radios can speci˜cally implement the signal processing in 
software and use digital-to-analog converters to translate from the digital domain 
to the RF domain. This additional capability essentially has the radio being con
-structed with an RF front end, a down-converter to an intermediate frequency or 
baseband, an A/D converter, and a processor. The processing capacity limits the 
complexity of the waveforms that can be accommodated. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
154A cognitive radio adds both a sensing and an adaptation element to the soft
-ware de˜ned radios and software radios. Four new capabilities embodied in cog
-nitive radios will help enable dynamic use of the spectrum: ˚exibility, agility, RF 
sensing, and networking.
24
 Flexibility
 is the ability to change the waveform and the con˜guration of a 
device; 
Agility
 is the ability to change the spectral band in which a device will 
operate;
Sensing
 is the ability to observe the state of the system, which includes both 
the radio unit and more importantly, the RF environment; and
Networking
 is the ability to communicate between multiple nodes and thus 
facilitate the combining of the sensing and control capacity of those nodes. 
These new technologies and radio classes, albeit in their nascent stages of 
development, are providing many new tools to the system developer while allow
-ing for more intensive use of the spectrum. However, an important characteristic 
of each of these technologies is the ability to change con˜guration to meet new 
requirements. This capacity to react to system dynamics will forever change how 
new uses of the RF spectrum are addressed.
Microelectromechanical Systems Filters
Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) involve the integration of mechani
-cal elements, sensors, actuators, and electronics on a common silicon substrate 
through microfabrication technology. 
Recent technology developments have demonstrated the potential to create 
high-performance MEMS acoustic resonators. Other MEMS ˜lter technologies 
under development include tunable resonators and multi-pole tunable ˜lters, the 
integration of ˜lter arrays with switch arrays to create large ˜lter banks, and the 
integration of ˜lter banks with active RF devices to form complete RF front ends. 
MEMS-based mechanical resonators and ˜lters have shown promising character
-istics in achieving high-Q values and good stability.
Digital Modulation and High-Ef˜ciency Modulation Schemes
The signals received by radio astronomy and passive Earth remote sensing 
are random. The signals follow Gaussian statistics within a given bandwidth and 
24
 International Telecommunication Union, ﬁTechniques for Mitigation of Radio Frequency Inter
-ference in Radio Astronomy,ﬂ Document 7D/142-E, January 23, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.155TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
usually have a ˚at, featureless spectrum. Until recently, these characteristics dis
-tinguished natural signals from human-made signals, and this fact could be used 
as a tool to distinguish between the wanted natural signals and interference from 
human-made emissions.
The move to digital modulation, and in particular to high-ef˜ciency digital 
modulation schemes, has the effect of making the human-made signals indistinguish
-able from the wanted natural signals. The statistical ˚uctuations with time, and the 
˚at, featureless power spectrum displayed by such signals are nearly the same as the 
characteristics of the wanted natural signals that are the subject of the research. This 
situation has two detrimental effects:
One of the distinguishing characteristics of human-made interference, the 
presence of distinct and discrete carrier waves, has disappeared. The mitiga
-tion of interference is now made more dif˜cult.
The higher spectral ef˜ciency of modern modulation schemes is generally 
a very good thing. However, passive use-based research has often taken 
advantage of the inef˜cient modulation schemes by, for example, making 
use of small gaps between carriers in spectrum used by the active services. 
The greater ef˜ciency of current spectrum use by the active services as 
enabled by higher-order digital modulations has unfortunately made pas
-sive use dif˜cult or impossible. 
Finding:
 The emergence of practices for the dynamic use of the spectrum will 
result in more devices with greater variability in active spectrum usage, and the 
EESS and RAS communities could be impacted with more unintentional radio 
interfering devices.
Finding:
 New cooperative spectrum management techniques that could be bene˜
-cial for enhanced interference management and increased spectral utilization have 
been investigated by regulators but have not been implemented.
Summary
The RAS and EESS have current spectrum allocations between 9 kHz and 3 GHz 
of approximately 62.12 MHz on a primary basis and 122.5 MHz on a secondary basis. 
However, the spectrum that the radio astronomy and Earth exploration radio science 
community currently use far exceeds these allocations. The use of new techniques 
requiring other spectral bands or additional spectrum is driven by the scienti˜c 
requirements and made possible by continual technical developments, as discussed in 
Chapters 2 and 3. Since the RAS and EESS are passive services, they operate outside 
their allocations on a non-interference basis when the RFI is weak enough.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
156The strong increase in the number of devices and systems deployed for con
-sumer, commercial, and industrial uses has fueled an interest in learning how the 
radio spectrum is actually used. While the various efforts of the active and
 passive 
user communities have been useful in con˜rming the sparse time-frequency uti
-lization of the spectrum, most existing studies are of limited usefulness because 
of their limited sensitivity, time resolution, and frequency resolution. Useful 
spectral monitoring for RAS applications requires continuous time-frequency 
resolution on the order of 1 kHz and 1 microsecond, with sensitivity suf˜cient to 
detect signals approaching the levels already known to be potentially harmful to 
radio astronomy as determined in ITU-R Recommendation RA.769. For air- and 
spaceborne EESS applications, an adequate spatial resolution would be critical, 
as discussed in §4.1. 
The major drivers for more intensive spectral use will come from newly 
deployed 3G and 4G cellular systems, new technologies for unlicensed devices 
(Wi-Fi, etc.), changes to the regulations, and the availability of advanced technolo
-gies such as cognitive radios. It should be expected that the use of the 700 MHz, 
1710-1755 MHz, 2110-2180 MHz, and 2495-2690 MHz spectral bands will be 
greatly increased due to 3G and 4G cellular deployments. Unlicensed devices will 
continue to proliferate in the 5 GHz, 70-90 GHz, and 3.1-10.6 GHz (ultrawide
-band) spectral bands. The onset of agile, frequency-hopping radio technology 
will create challenges: the prediction of open spectral bands will become more 
dif˜cult. Regulatory agencies determine the appropriate technical parameters for 
operation in each spectral band, but these rules are in constant ˚ux. The agencies 
need to enhance their role with respect to the passive services to include interfer
-ence
 metrics, an extension of enforcement technology, and the inclusion of passive 
systems in their databases (e.g., the FCC™s Universal Licensing System).
4.3
 UNILATERAL MITIGATION TECHNIQUES
A variety of techniques have been developed to reduce the impact of RFI on 
EESS and RAS observations. This section presents a review of unilateral methods. 
These methods apply to situations in which the EESS or RAS operator has no abil
-ity to in˚uence the behavior of the sources producing the interference. This is the 
most common situation, but at present the performance achieved by the majority 
of the unilateral methods has been documented only anecdotally and so remains 
to be completely quanti˜ed.
25
 Following the review of speci˜c unilateral mitigation 
25
 International Telecommunication Union, ﬁTechniques for Mitigation of Radio Frequency Inter
-ference in Radio Astronomy,ﬂ Document 7D/142-E, January 23, 2007; A.J. Boonstra, ﬁRadio Frequency 
Interference Mitigation in Radio Astronomy,ﬂ PhD Thesis, Delft University of Technology, Dept. 
EEMCS, June 2005, ISBN 90-805434-3-8. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.157TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
technologies is a summary (in Table 4.2) of the successes that have been achieved 
as well as the inherent limitations of particular approaches. 
Before proceeding further, it is important to distinguish among the various RFI 
environments and observational situations encountered by EESS and RAS systems. 
Both services are subject to variations in the RFI environment caused by changes in 
RFI source behaviors as well as by changes in the position of these sources (includ
-ing the orbital motions of spaceborne RFI sources). However, EESS use is both 
ground- and space-based and needs access to areas on a global basis. Space-based 
radiometers operate in a conically scanning con˜guration in which the portion of 
Earth™s surface observed (and associated RFI sources) varies within the timescale 
of a few millisecondsŠthe duty factor for a given area observed. In contrast, RAS 
antennas typically operate at a ˜xed position on the ground and in a viewing con
-˜guration that is stable over timescales of several minutes to many hours in order 
to receive extremely weak signals. 
The ﬁdownlookingﬂ nature of EESS measurements makes the probability of 
ground-based RFI sources being within the main beam of the antenna a
 common 
occurrence, while the primary concern for main-beam corruption in RAS applica
-tions is spaceborne sources, which are encountered less frequently. The
 ﬁuplookingﬂ 
RAS systems are inherently more sensitive to RFI, owing both to the cold back
-ground sky (relative to the hot ground emission in EESS sensing) and to the 
typically long integration times. Main-beam corruption of EESS measurements, 
due to a re˚ection of space-based sources, has also been observed.
26
 Both systems 
are subject to the in˚uence of ground- and space-based sources received through 
antenna sidelobes. RAS measurements are often interferometric, using antennas 
separated over distances that span continents and are millions of wavelengths in 
extent, whereas EESS radiometers typically use only a single antenna, and even 
interferometric systems in EESS are limited to maximum spatial separations on 
the order of meters (up to a few thousand wavelengths) due to the limited spatial 
extent available on a space- or airborne platform. Finally, systems operating in 
space are subject to restrictions on the output data rate not usually encountered 
by systems operating on the ground.
Technologies for Unilateral Mitigation
Unilateral mitigation methods involve two primary components: detection and 
suppression. The former involves the determination that a particular observation 
contains RFI, whereas the latter attempts to utilize information from the detection 
26
 L. Li, P.W. Gaiser, M.H. Bettenhausen, and W. Johnston, ﬁWindSat Radio-Frequency Interference 
Signature and Its Identi˜cation over Land and Ocean,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing
, 44(3): 530-539 (March 2006).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
158stage in order to correct observed data by removing RFI contributions. The study of 
techniques both for detecting and suppressing RFI has been a topic of heightened 
interest in recent years, spurred by technological advances that enable real-time 
signal-processing approaches. Strong RFI sources that produce excessively high 
observed powers tend to be easily distinguished from astronomical or
 geophysical 
signals. In those cases, the detection problem is relatively straightforward. The 
detection of weak RFI sources that produce power levels comparable with those 
associated with geophysical or astronomical variability is much more dif˜cult. This 
is problematic because, if not suppressed, weak RFI can still introduce signi˜cant 
errors into the scienti˜c conclusions that are drawn from the measurements, often 
without warning.
It is very important to note that unilateral mitigation techniques do not and 
cannot solve the RFI problem. However, they can serve several important purposes. 
They can provide a means of limiting the introduction of corrupted observations 
into the scienti˜c user community. They can provide signi˜cant relief from the labor-
intensive task of manually identifying the effects of RFI on science data
 products. 
And they can permit some limited scienti˜c uses of very noisy,
 interference-laden 
portions of the spectrum that would otherwise not be possible. But in most scienti˜c 
applications, RFI mitigation techniques cannot actually remove the interference 
from those portions of the spectrum where it is present. Thus it can be expected that 
as RFI becomes more prevalent, the need for interference mitigation in order to do 
useful science will increase, but at the same time the ef˜cacy of mitigation efforts 
will decrease and the quality of the resulting science will suffer accordingly. 
Detection Techniques
Various RFI detection techniques are available, with each typically oriented 
toward a particular class of RFI sources. A classical detection algorithm takes 
observed data as input and provides a binary ﬁyes/noﬂ output as to whether RFI 
is present. The input data can range from Nyquist sampled received voltages to 
˜nal output powers integrated over millisecond or longer timescales. Detection 
algorithms involve a trade-off between the probability of detecting a speci˜ed 
type of RFI and the probability of obtaining a ﬁfalse alarmﬂ in which RFI-free data 
are erroneously classi˜ed as corrupted. An excessive false-alarm rate can lead to 
a reduction of measurement sensitivity; this can be addressed by modifying the 
detector, but typically at the cost of a reduced probability of detecting true RFI. 
Speci˜c classes of detection techniques are described below.
Matched Filtering for Known Sources
 The problem of detecting a speci˜ed signal in additive Gaussian noise (i.e., 
thermal noise) is well de˜ned and has a long history of investigation in the
 signal-
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.159TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
processing literature. The best detection performance that can be achieved is 
obtained through a ﬁmatched ˜lterﬂ approach, in which the detector is a ˜lter 
designed to have a frequency response conjugate to that of the signal of interest. 
This approach is the standard method for use in communications applications, but 
it has limited applicability in radio science applications because the RFI sources 
encountered are not always known a priori.
Tests for Gaussianity
 Instead of attempting to detect particular RFI signals, it is possible to detect 
whether observed voltage appears to have originated from a thermal noise (i.e., 
Gaussian) ˜eld distribution. This is a classical problem in statistics, and numerous 
tests are available, with no particular test having been shown clearly superior for 
EESS and RAS systems. One example of this technique is a ﬁkurtosis test,ﬂ which 
compares the normalized fourth moment of the observed voltage to that expected 
for thermal noise ˜elds. This method has been shown to provide good perfor
-mance in tests using ground-based EESS instruments, and the expected detection 
performance for pulsed-sinusoidal RFI interference has been analyzed in detail.
27
 However, the performance of this approach for other RFI source types remains to 
be quanti˜ed. An analog implementation of the kurtosis detector has also been 
described,
28
 as has a kurtosis method combined with multiple frequency chan
-nels for RAS applications.
29
 It should be expected that the modulation-insensitive 
nature of Gaussianity tests will result in a detection performance that is at best 
equal to that of detection algorithms designed for a priori known RFI source types. 
It is often the case that the nature of the RFI is not known beforehand. In these 
cases, tests for Gaussianity have been found to be a robust RFI detector.
Pulse Detectors
 This is perhaps the oldest and best-known strategy for the detection of RFI, 
whether at timescales of the Nyquist sampled receiver bandwidth or at that of the 
˜nal output data product. Typically, an ﬁacceptableﬂ range for the received data 
amplitude as a function of time is de˜ned, and points outside this range are deemed 
27
 C.S. Ruf, S.M. Gross, S. Misra, ﬁRFI detection and mitigation for microwave radiometry with an 
agile digital detector,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 44(3): 694-706, (March 
2006); and R.D. De Roo, S. Misra, C.S. Ruf, ﬁSensitivity of the Kurtosis Statistic as a Detector of Pulsed 
Sinusoidal RFI,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 45(7, Part 1): 1938-1946 (July 
2007).
28
 Jeffrey Piepmeier, Priscilla Mohammed, and Joseph Knuble, ﬁA Double Detector for RFI Mitiga
-tion in Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 46(2): 458-465 
(2007).
29
 G. Nita, D.E. Gary, Z. Liu, G. Hurford, and S.M. White, ﬁRadio Frequency Interference Excision 
Using Spectral Domain Statistics,ﬂ 
Publ. 
Astron.Soc.Paci˜c
Astron. Soc. Paci˜c
, 119: 805-827 (2007).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
160as corrupted. The acceptable range can be de˜ned in either an absolute sense (i.e., 
˜xed thresholds) or a relative sense (i.e., as a number of standard deviations around 
a local mean value). Pulse detectors operating at high sample rates are well suited 
for the detection of low-duty-cycle radar emissions; such sources typically trans
-mit pulsed ˜xed-frequency or chirped sinusoidal waveforms with pulse lengths of 
2-400 microseconds, 1-27 ms between transmitted pulses, and bandwidths on the 
order of 1 MHz. For low-duty-cycle pulsed interferers, the sensitivity of the detec
-tor depends on the relationship between the timescales of the pulsed RFI and the 
input data (i.e., the sample rate). Good detection performance can be achieved 
in cases where the individual pulses are resolved by the input data sample rate. A 
number of pulse detection techniques have been proposed and developed to vari
-ous degrees. Pulse detection is, however, not at all appropriate for RFI sources that 
are continuous in nature. 
Passive receiver blanking has been attempted using a special receiver and per
-haps also a special antenna directed at the source of interference. This might, for 
example, mitigate interference from a pulsed radar transmitter. When the pulses 
from the radar are received, the radio astronomy receiver electronically triggers a 
data masking or data ˚agging process. The limitations of this method are primarily 
that it requires excellent sensitivity on the unwanted transmission, and secondly 
that it may be hard to accommodate transmissions arriving with different delays 
from different directions, such as multipath propagation with multiple re˚ec
-tions from surrounding mountains.
30
 In this case active receiver blanking using a 
 
beacon transmission on some carefully chosen frequency could be used at the radio 
astronomy site to blank the radio astronomy receiver. Note that the above scheme 
would not be effective for EESS due to the need for full global coverage.
Narrowband Source Detectors 
Narrowband detectors are analogous to pulse detection methods but are better 
suited to signals that can be resolved in frequencyŠthat is, searching for
 ﬁoutliersﬂ 
among data in multiple frequency channels. Such approaches are designed to detect 
interference that is localized in frequency (i.e., narrowband), and performance is 
improved by matching the frequency resolution of the radiometer channels to 
that of expected RFI sources. Narrowband detectors record data in multiple fre
-quency channels; these frequency channels can be achieved either by analog means 
(through use of a tuning receiver, a ˜lter ﬁbank,ﬂ or a spectroscopy method to create 
a set of channels) or digitally (using either an internal Fourier transform or a set 
of digital ˜lters). Example algorithms for detecting narrowband interference in 
30
 J.R. Fisher, Q. Zhang, Y. Zheng, S.G. Wilson, and R.F. Bradley, ﬁMitigation of Pulsed Interference 
to Redshifted H I and OH Observations between 960 and 1215 MHz,ﬂ 
Astronomical Journal
, 129: 
2940-2949 (June 2005).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.161TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
a set of channel measurements have been described
31
 and ﬁspectral differencingﬂ 
techniques have also been applied to detect RFI with the Advanced Microwave 
Scanning Radiometer-Earth (AMSR-E)
32
 and WindSat radiometers
33
 currently in 
orbit. If narrowband detection strategies are applied in postprocessing (i.e., not 
performed in real time by the radiometer), their use implies that the data rate of 
the radiometer is multiplied by the number of channels used; the resulting data 
rate can easily become prohibitive for space-based systems. 
Narrowband detection algorithms are best for narrowband sources of large 
amplitude; however, the contribution of these sources to the total observed noise 
power can remain small due to the small ratio of the source bandwidth to that 
of the total radiometer channel. Performance is degraded for lower-amplitude 
RFI sources occupying bandwidths that are appreciable compared to the total 
radiometer channel bandwidth. RAS science requires the narrowband detection 
of spectral line emissions from atoms and molecules with Doppler shifts owing 
to the relative motion of Earth and object as well as Doppler spreading owing to 
kinematics internal to the object. Weak narrowband RFI can preclude, or at least 
corrupt, such measurements. Combinations of pulse and narrowband detection 
strategies are also possible.
34
Polarization-Based Algorithms
 The polarization properties of received radio waves also provide an opportu
-nity for RFI detection. Geophysical and astronomical sources have polarization 
properties that, in many cases, can be predicted a priori to within a reasonable 
uncertainty. RFI sources that are highly polarized can create power differences 
among polarizations that can be recognized as anthropogenic. The success of 
such approaches depends on the extent to which the RFI source emissions appear 
polarized to the radiometer (which depends on RFI source properties, the orienta
-31
 A.J. Gasiewski, M. Klein, A. Yevgrafov, and V. Leuski, ﬁInterference Mitigation in Passive Microwave 
Radiometry,ﬂ 
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium
, 
Conference Proceedings
, 3: 1682-1684 
(2002); and B. Guner, J.T. Johnson, and N. Niamswaun, ﬁTime and Frequency Blanking for Radio 
Frequency Interference Mitigation in Microwave Radiometry,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing
, 45: 3672-3679 (2007).
32
 E.G. Njoku, P. Ashcroft, T.K. Chan, and Li Li, ﬁGlobal Survey and Statistics of Radio-Frequency 
Interference in AMSR-E Land Observations,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 
43(5): 938-947 (May 2005).
33
 Li Li, P.W. Gaiser, M.H. Bettenhausen, and W. Johnston, ﬁWindSat Radio-Frequency Interference 
Signature and Its Identi˜cation over Land and Ocean,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing
, 44(3): 530-539 (March 2006); and S.W. Ellingson and J.T. Johnson, ﬁA Polarimetric Survey 
of Radio-Frequency Interference in C- and X-Bands in the Continental United States Using WindSat 
Radiometry,ﬂ
 IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 44(3): 540-548 (March 2006).
34
 S.M. Kay, 
Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing: Volume II, Detection Theory
, Upper Saddle 
Creek, New Jersey: Prentice Hall (1998).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
162tion of both the source and receiver antennas, and the in˚uence of multipath and 
other propagation effects), as well as the level of natural variations in polarization 
signatures for the medium observed. A polarization detection strategy has been 
used to detect interference in data generated by the EESS satellite AMSR-E,
35
 but 
the strategy was found less sensitive to low-level interference than the spectral dif
-ferencing method. An alternate polarization-based detection strategy based on the 
polarimetric channels in the radiometer of the EESS satellite WindSat was found to 
yield improved performance, because the small, geophysically expected polarized 
returns are readily exceeded by RFI sources.
36
 However, such detection strategies 
remain dependent on antenna orientation and observation geometry issues, as well 
as on RFI source polarization properties. To date, polarization-based methods have 
generally received less attention than that given to other detection strategies.
Multiple-Antenna Algorithms
 For instruments using multiple antennas, RFI detection algorithms can be devel
-oped on the basis of the relationships among the waves received at the
 antennas. A 
useful concept in searches for astronomical transients is anticoincidence,
37
 in which 
the criterion for detection of astrophysical signals is that they appear in multiple, 
widely separated antennas, whereas terrestrial RFI should be relatively ﬁlocalﬂ and 
appear only in one or a subset of antennas. An inversion of this technique is used 
in an antenna with an array feed: the desired celestial signal is received in one of 
the many array feeds, but RFI is received in all of them. RAS synthesis imaging 
arrays such as the VLA and the Very Long Baseline Array have reduced sensitivity 
to RFI due to a lack of coherence of the RFI in the observed direction. However, 
RFI still has a deleterious effect, and strong RFI can ruin an observation even when 
it is received in only one of the array antennas. Other detection techniques for 
interferometric systems use the fact that interferometric radiometer observations 
produce a spatial covariance matrix whose elements consist of correlation prod
-ucts (ﬁvisibilitiesﬂ) between all pairs of antennas in the interferometer. Estimates 
of the number of RFI sources and their locations can, under certain conditions, 
35
 Li Li, E.G. Njoku, E. Im, P.S. Chang, and K. St. Germain, ﬁA Preliminary Survey of Radio-
 
Frequency Interference over the U.S. in Aqua AMSR-E Data,ﬂ
 IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing
, 42(2): 380-390 (February 2004).
36
 S.W. Ellingson and J.T. Johnson, ﬁA Polarimetric Survey of Radio-Frequency Interference in 
C- and X-Bands in the Continental United States Using WindSat Radiometry,ﬂ
 IEEE Transactions on 
Geoscience and Remote Sensing
, 44(3): 540-548 (March 2006).
37
 C.A. Katz, J.N. Hewitt, B.E. Corey, and C.B. Moore, ﬁA Survey for Transient Astronomical Radio 
Emission at 611 MHz,ﬂ 
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paci˜c
, 115: 675-687 (June 
2003); and N.D.R. Bhat, J.M. Cordes, S. Chatterjee, and T.J.W. Lazio, ﬁRadio Frequency Interference 
Identi˜cation and Mitigation Using Simultaneous Dual Frequency Observations,ﬂ 
Radio Science
, 
40(5): 1-11 (June 2005).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.163TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
be obtained from an eigenanalysis of this matrix. For example, strong RFI sources 
producing large eigenvalues can be detected in a manner analogous to the pulse 
detection process. Weaker RFI sources can be more dif˜cult to detect, however. 
Interferometric detection strategies can be combined with the spatial excision 
suppression techniques discussed below. 
Suppression Techniques
Suppression techniques can be divided into three categories: (1) 
Filtering
 is 
the simple process of designing receiver ˜lters so that corruption from RFI sources 
outside a band of interest is minimized. (2) 
Excision
 is the removal of data in which 
RFI has been detected. A common property of all excision techniques is a partial 
loss of radiometry data as well as a possible distortion of non-excised
 radiometry 
data due to artifacts of the detection and excision process. (3) 
Cancell
ation
 is 
the subtraction of RFI from the radiometer output. Cancellation is potentially 
superior to excision in the sense that the RFI is ideally removed with no impact 
on
 radiometry, providing a ﬁlook throughﬂ capability that is nominally free of the 
artifacts associated with the simple ﬁcutting outﬂ of data. However, as discussed 
below, the trade-off with respect to excision is usually that suppression is limited. 
A further limitation of canceling techniques is that they tend to degrade into 
 
excision-type behavior when conditions are not optimalŠfor example, in low-
interference-to-noise-ratio scenarios.
Filtering
 While ˜ltering is not necessarily a suppression strategy based on a detection 
process, its importance nevertheless motivates a brief discussion. All radiometry 
observations occur in a limited portion of the spectrum that is of interest for par
-ticular measurement purposes. Radiometer receivers are designed to include ˜lter 
components to suppress the contributions of any emission sources outside the 
frequency range of interest. The performance of these ˜lters can have a signi˜cant 
impact on the degree to which RFI corruption can occur. The bandpass ˜lters 
used in radiometry ideally have a transfer function that is unity within the band of 
interest and zero outside this band, but such ˜lters are not achievable in practice. 
Instead, the suppression of OOB power achieved by the ˜lter ﬁtailsﬂ must be traded 
against other ˜lter performance properties. Strong RFI sources located outside the 
band of interest can make measurable contributions to radiometry measurements 
if ˜lter performance is insuf˜cient.
In terms of mitigation performance, it is desirable to place band-de˜ning ˜lter 
components as close to the antenna as possible, in order to reduce the tendency 
for strong out-of-band RFI to drive the receiver into nonlinear operation, result
-ing in compression or unacceptable intermodulation products. Unfortunately, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
164analog ˜lters are inherently lossy, so using such a ˜lter degrades the sensitivity of 
a radiometer, presenting a dif˜cult trade-off between basic performance and the 
ability to tolerate nearby out-of-band RFI. 
Excision
 Excision refers to the deletion of data that are believed to be contaminated by 
RFI. The use of excision implies that a data set is available from which some data 
are removed through a detection process and the remainder are used in estimat
-ing astronomical or geophysical information. Excision algorithms that have been 
explored to date utilize data sets based on measurements as a function of time, 
frequency, or space.
Temporal excision is the most common process. It is based on removing 
detected observations from a time series of measurements (in EESS applications, 
time-domain excision leads unavoidably to the excision of data corresponding to 
distinct locations as well). Temporal excision can be performed in conjunction with 
any of the detection algorithms described previously, and at time resolutions rang
-ing from the Nyquist sample rate (i.e., nano- or microseconds) to post-integration 
timescales of seconds or larger. Temporal excision ensures that detected RFI makes 
no contribution to scienti˜c analysis but at the same time reduces the amount of 
data available for the same analysis and potentially introduces artifacts that can 
compromise the value of the remaining data. The best case is that a reduction 
in the amount of available data merely reduces the sensitivity of the radiometer 
observation. Thus, it is desirable to implement temporal excision at a timescale 
that is comparable to that of any pulsed interference sources in order to retain 
the maximum amount of data. Temporal excision is best suited for sources that 
are localized in time and is often used with a pulse detection strategy. Numerous 
examples of temporal excision exist in the literature, and recent works have dem
-onstrated real-time onboard temporal detection and excision. The performance of 
temporal excision in suppressing RFI source contributions is limited solely by the 
performance of the associated detection algorithm, which determines the false-
alarm probability and probability of detection for speci˜c RFI types.
When measurements in multiple frequency subchannels are available, RFI 
contributions detected in a particular subchannel can be removed by discarding 
data from that subchannel in computations of average powers or other averages 
across frequency. Frequency excision is limited to narrowband RFI, but it has the 
advantage (with respect to temporal excision) of being effective against persistent 
interference. In total power radiometry (most EESS observations and ﬁcontinuumﬂ 
RAS measurements), discarding data in a particular subchannel again has the 
effect of decreasing the sensitivity of the radiometer measurement when total 
channel quantities are of interest. This method is typically not acceptable in high-
 
sensitivity spectroscopy, which is a commonly used mode in the RAS, although it 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.165TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
is sometimes effective in imaging observations when the visibilities are computed 
on a narrowband basis. It is desirable to perform frequency excision at a frequency 
resolution that is comparable to that of observed RFI sources, so that a maximum 
portion of the noncorrupted spectrum can be retained. Given the fact that numer
-ous RFI sources exist with bandwidths of 1 MHz or less, frequency resolutions 
below 1 MHz are desirable, but come at the cost of a greatly increased data rate if 
frequency excision is performed in postprocessing. Frequency excision has been 
demonstrated in combination with kurtosis, pulse, and narrowband detection 
strategies. Performance again is strongly dependent on the performance of the 
associated detection algorithm.
Spatial excision refers to the use of the beam-forming capabilities of compact 
antenna arraysŠthat is, arrays with maximum baselines on the order of wave
-lengths. One approach is based on synthesizing directly an antenna pattern null in 
the direction of a known RFI source; this is believed to be effective against RFI from 
satellites in RAS observations, although quite expensive and complex to implement. 
Sophisticated algorithms have been developed for this process in the RAS litera
-ture, and one of the key dif˜culties identi˜ed has been to minimize the impact of 
spatial excision on the main antenna lobe properties so as not to confound image 
calibration.
38
 Spatial excision is further limited by the degree to which the array 
geometry and individual antenna patterns are able to generate deep nulls, and the 
number of such nulls that can be formed without unacceptable mainlobe and side
-lobe distortion. While this technique is used frequently in military antijamming 
applications, the problem is more challenging for RAS observations due to the low 
signal-to-noise ratios of the astronomical signals of interest. 
Suppression methods other than simple excision of RFI-contaminated data 
are not widely used in the EESS and RAS, mainly because they are not easy to 
devise or implement and may require the development of extensive special hard
-ware, software, or instrument modi˜cations that potentially degrade performance. 
Furthermore, cancellation techniques typically lead to signi˜cant increases in the 
required computing power relative to that needed in interference-free conditions. 
However, recent studies have developed and demonstrated cancellation approaches 
for RFI mitigation in RAS applications. Cancellation requires a detailed knowl
-edge of the RFI signalŠfor example, a priori information about the modulation 
type, or a copy of the signal obtained by other meansŠin order to estimate and 
subtract its contributions to the data. Obtaining a precise description of source 
properties is dif˜cult when the corrupting sources are observed at low instanta
-neous
 interference-to-noise ratios, as is the case for ground-based sources in the 
sidelobes of an upward-looking RAS antenna. Two strategies for improving RFI 
38
 A.J. Boonstra, ﬁRadio Frequency Interference Mitigation in Radio Astronomy,ﬂ PhD Thesis, Delft 
University of Technology, Dept. EEMCS, June 2005, ISBN 90-805434-3-8.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
166TABLE 4.2
 Successes and Limitations of the Unilateral Mitigation Methods Employed to Date by the Earth Exploration-Satellite Service
Type of 
 Radio 
Frequency 
Interference 
(RFI)
Reference
RFI Details
Center 
Frequency 
(GHz)/
Bandwidth 
(MHz)
Detector 
Type
Detector Time/ 
Frequency 
Resolution
Mitigation 
Type
Mitigation 
Time/
Frequency 
Resolution
Performance Achieved
Comments
Pulsed
[1]
Out-of-band emissions 
from an ARSR system 
observed at close 
range
1.413/20
Kurtosis
36 ms/3 MHz
Frequency 
subchannels
36 ms/ 
 3 MHz
Pulsed RFI ranging between 
1-13 K in 20 MHz detected 
and removed
(post-processing)
Pulsed
[2]
Out-of-band emissions 
from an ARSR system 
observed at close 
range
1.413/20
Pulse 
detection
10 ns/20 MHz
Time 
blanking
40 microsec/
 20 MHz
Real-time removal of pulsed 
RFI ranging between 1-20 K 
in 20 MHz
Pulsed
[3]
Unknown source of 
presumably out-of-
band pulses
1.413/20
Analog 
pseudo-
kurtosis
0.5 s/20 MHz
Time 
blanking
0.5 s/ 
 20 MHz
Pulsed RFI ranging between 
1 K and 10-15 K in 20 
MHz detected and removed 
(post-processing)
Pulsed
[5]
Airborne flight 
encountering many 
source types
1.413/20
Kurtosis
8 ms/20 MHz
Time 
blanking
8 ms/
 20 MHz
Pulsed RFI ranging from 
0.1 to 45 K detected and 
removed (post-processing)
Narrowband
[2]
Airborne test flight 
encountering many 
narrowband
source types
5.5-7.7/100
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/0.1 MHz
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/
 0.1 MHz
Narrowband RFI ranging 
from 1-45 K in 100 MHz 
detected and removed 
Wideband
[2]
[4]
Airborne test flight 
encountering many 
wideband source types
5.5-7.7/100
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/0.1 MHz
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/
 0.1 MHz
Wideband RFI ranging from 
10-100 K detected and 
removed
Removal of wideband RFI eliminates 
large portions of usable radiometer 
bandwidth; detection possible only when 
RFI power/MHz substantially exceeds 
that of noise.
Wideband
[5]
Airborne test flights 
encountering many 
wideband source types
6, 6.4, 6.9, 
7.3/400
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/400 MHz
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/
 400 MHz
Wideband RFI ranging from 
~5-300 K removed
Removal of wideband RFI eliminates 
large portions of usable radiometer 
bandwidth; detection possible only when 
RFI power/MHz substantially exceeds 
that of noise.
Gaussian-like
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Not possible to detect RFI that 
resembles thermal noise.
[1] C.S. Ruf, S.M. Gross, and S. Misra, ﬁRFI Detection and Mitigation for Microwave Radiometry with an 
Agile Digital Detector,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
44(3): 694-706 (March 
2006).
[2] B. Guner, J.T. Johnson, and N. Niamswaun, ﬁTime and Frequency Blanking for Radio Frequency Inter
-ference Mitigation in Microwave Radiometry,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
45: 3672-3679 (2007).
[3] Jeffrey Piepmeier, Priscilla Mohammed, and Joseph Knuble, ﬁA Double Detector for RFI Mitigation in 
Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
46(2): 458-465 (2007).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.167TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
TABLE 4.2
 Successes and Limitations of the Unilateral Mitigation Methods Employed to Date by the Earth Exploration-Satellite Service
Type of 
 Radio 
Frequency 
Interference 
(RFI)
Reference
RFI Details
Center 
Frequency 
(GHz)/
Bandwidth 
(MHz)
Detector 
Type
Detector Time/ 
Frequency 
Resolution
Mitigation 
Type
Mitigation 
Time/
Frequency 
Resolution
Performance Achieved
Comments
Pulsed
[1]
Out-of-band emissions 
from an ARSR system 
observed at close 
range
1.413/20
Kurtosis
36 ms/3 MHz
Frequency 
subchannels
36 ms/ 
 3 MHz
Pulsed RFI ranging between 
1-13 K in 20 MHz detected 
and removed
(post-processing)
Pulsed
[2]
Out-of-band emissions 
from an ARSR system 
observed at close 
range
1.413/20
Pulse 
detection
10 ns/20 MHz
Time 
blanking
40 microsec/
 20 MHz
Real-time removal of pulsed 
RFI ranging between 1-20 K 
in 20 MHz
Pulsed
[3]
Unknown source of 
presumably out-of-
band pulses
1.413/20
Analog 
pseudo-
kurtosis
0.5 s/20 MHz
Time 
blanking
0.5 s/ 
 20 MHz
Pulsed RFI ranging between 
1 K and 10-15 K in 20 
MHz detected and removed 
(post-processing)
Pulsed
[5]
Airborne flight 
encountering many 
source types
1.413/20
Kurtosis
8 ms/20 MHz
Time 
blanking
8 ms/
 20 MHz
Pulsed RFI ranging from 
0.1 to 45 K detected and 
removed (post-processing)
Narrowband
[2]
Airborne test flight 
encountering many 
narrowband
source types
5.5-7.7/100
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/0.1 MHz
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/
 0.1 MHz
Narrowband RFI ranging 
from 1-45 K in 100 MHz 
detected and removed 
Wideband
[2]
[4]
Airborne test flight 
encountering many 
wideband source types
5.5-7.7/100
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/0.1 MHz
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/
 0.1 MHz
Wideband RFI ranging from 
10-100 K detected and 
removed
Removal of wideband RFI eliminates 
large portions of usable radiometer 
bandwidth; detection possible only when 
RFI power/MHz substantially exceeds 
that of noise.
Wideband
[5]
Airborne test flights 
encountering many 
wideband source types
6, 6.4, 6.9, 
7.3/400
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/400 MHz
Cross-
frequency
26 ms/
 400 MHz
Wideband RFI ranging from 
~5-300 K removed
Removal of wideband RFI eliminates 
large portions of usable radiometer 
bandwidth; detection possible only when 
RFI power/MHz substantially exceeds 
that of noise.
Gaussian-like
None
None
None
None
None
None
None
Not possible to detect RFI that 
resembles thermal noise.
[1] C.S. Ruf, S.M. Gross, and S. Misra, ﬁRFI Detection and Mitigation for Microwave Radiometry with an 
Agile Digital Detector,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
44(3): 694-706 (March 
2006).
[2] B. Guner, J.T. Johnson, and N. Niamswaun, ﬁTime and Frequency Blanking for Radio Frequency Inter
-ference Mitigation in Microwave Radiometry,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
45: 3672-3679 (2007).
[3] Jeffrey Piepmeier, Priscilla Mohammed, and Joseph Knuble, ﬁA Double Detector for RFI Mitigation in 
Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
46(2): 458-465 (2007).
[4] J.T. Johnson, A.J. Gasiewski, B. Guner, G.A. Hampson, S.W. Ellingson, R. Krishnamachari, N.
 Niamsuwan, 
E. McIntyre, M. Klein, and V.Y. Leuski, ﬁAirborne Radio-Frequency Interference Studies at C-Band Using a 
Digital Receiver,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 
44(7, Part 2): 1974-1985 (July 
2006). 
[5] A.J. Gasiewski, M. Klein, A.Yevgrafov, and V. Leuskiy, ﬁInterference Mitigation in Passive Micro
-wave Radiometry,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 2002 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, June 24-28, 2002.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
168source knowledge are utilized. In the ˜rst, the upward-looking measurements of 
the RAS antenna are augmented with measurements from a ﬁreference antennaﬂ 
directed toward the source. This latter antenna observes RFI sources at a higher 
signal-to-noise ratio, which allows better estimation of RFI source properties in 
the cancellation process. A second approach is utilized for RFI sources with known 
modulations, for which a demodulation process can increase the signal-to-noise 
ratio. Given either a demodulation or second antenna measurement, cancellation 
then involves an estimation and subtraction of RFI source contributions to the data. 
The latter can be performed either ﬁprecorrelationﬂ or ﬁpostcorrelationﬂŠthat is, 
either before or after the spatial covariance matrix is formed in an interferometric 
system. Cancellation performance is limited by the extent to which RFI sources can 
be detected and successfully estimated (a function of the signal-to-noise ratio at 
which the RFI sources are observed) as well as by the complexity and any temporal 
evolution of the RFI environment in which the observations occur.
Unilateral Mitigation Successes and Limitations
Table 4.2 above provides a short summary of the successes and limitations of 
the unilateral mitigation methods that have been employed to date by the EESS. 
Finding:
 While unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a 
potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute 
for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.
4.4
 MITIGATION THROUGH COOPERATIVE SPECTRUM USAGE
The unilateral mitigation techniques described in §4.3 are at best a short-term 
solution to the RFI problem, which can be effective only when spectral occupancy 
is low and the RFI is easily distinguished from the background. This approach is 
otherwise inherently limited by the lack of coordination with the active services, 
and using only this approach, science users would perpetually be ﬁguessingﬂ how 
to work around RFI. This tactic will soon ˜nd its limits given the trends described 
in §4.1. A far more effective and ef˜cient approach would be bilateral, or coopera
-tive, mitigation.
Cooperative mitigation techniques would coordinate the timing and regional 
use of the radio spectrum in a far more dynamic manner than has existed with 
past technologies and regulatory structures. This is a new approach by which active 
services cooperate with passive (science) services within shared spectral bands by 
brie˚y interrupting or synchronizing radio transmissions to accommodate the 
science measurements. Such accommodations would occur only when and where 
those science observations are needed (e.g., during a satellite overpass), so the 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.169TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
impact on spectrum availability for active services would be very low. The intel
-ligence of modern devices makes this approach attractive, and there will likely be 
many instances where the costs of this mitigation technology would be readily 
accepted by users eager to gain access to large portions of the spectrum. Indeed, 
many devices will need to possess the necessary technologies and standards to 
negotiate spectrum use automatically among competing users, so the extension of 
these standards to accommodate science users could, in principle, be accomplished 
with very low costs and with a very low impact on functionality.
Cellular telephones provide a familiar example and some insight as to how this 
technology could work: cell phone networks automatically coordinate spectrum 
use among large quantities of transmitting devices. These systems provide a very 
dynamic command-and-control authority to assign frequency, or to interrupt or 
deny service, or to give priority (e.g., when a user dials 911) for each device within 
and among cellular regions. Conceivably, these systems already represent mostŠif 
not allŠof the needed infrastructure for cooperative mitigation. The only miss
-ing elements are the agreed-on standards and the software that would allow these 
systems to momentarily relinquish assigned spectral bands in response to science 
requests. These could be communicated either directly from EESS satellites, for 
example, or from a networked database.
Consider the following scenario for cooperative mitigation. For this example, 
it is assumed that 30 spaceborne microwave radiometers are engaged in Earth 
observations for operational and research-oriented scienti˜c purposes. This ˚eet 
of EESS satellites passes over a speci˜c area several times per day but for only 
very brief intervals during each satellite™s pass. The typical spot size of an EESS 
observation on Earth is about 30 km in diameter. Fixed or mobile transmitters 
operating within or near a receiving band used by the EESS could operate nearly 
full time if the transmitters were responsive to a blanking request signal or other 
preprogrammed transmitter time-off period that is coordinated with the over
-pass of each EESS sensor. Due to the brief time of footprint passage, this strategy 
would permit EESS receivers to measure microwave brightness temperatures while 
negligibly impacting active service performance. This would be especially helpful 
to EESS observations in bands that are not allocated to the service.
To determine the impact on active services, consider the fractional coverage 
of the ˚eet of EESS satellites. A ﬁkeep-out zoneﬂ of 10 times the footprint size, 
or 300 km in diameter, would generally ensure that the interfering source is well 
outside the near-sidelobes of the satellite instrument where it is most susceptible 
to interference. The total keep-out area on Earth for all spaceborne radiometers 
would then be of order 20
(150)
2 = 1.4 million km
2, or an area of approximately 
0.3 percent of Earth™s total surface. If a random distribution of satellite locations 
is assumed, this fractional aerial coverage can, to ˜rst order, be equated with the 
fractional probability of occurrence of a satellite observation being made at a 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
170particular location on Earth. Put another way, an active user could, on average, 
transmit 99.7 percent of the time within the detection band of a passive satellite 
sensor without causing any EESS interference. 
Another cooperative arrangement is illustrated by a hypothetical situation 
in which all Air Route Surveillance Radars (ARSR), which operate at L-band, 
would be synchronized to a time standard that allows them to be blanked for the 
approximately 20 milliseconds for several times per day that the radar transmitter 
is located within the moving antenna footprint of an overhead EESS sensor oper
-ating in L-band. The loss of information to the radar service would be minuscule, 
and given the ubiquity of modern Global Positioning System (GPS)-based time 
synchronization and Internet-accessible ephemeris data, the cost of the hardware 
and software necessary to perform blanking would also be small. However, the value 
of interference-free data to environmental monitoring and forecasting services at 
several critical EESS bands, speci˜cally L-band, would be immense. Similar syn
-chronization signals could be made available from registered transmitters (both 
˜xed and mobile) to ˜xed RAS and EESS users or to other users of the spectrum 
who could then use them to blank their own observations or raise data quality ˚ags. 
Blanking regions, in certain cases of strong transmitters, could need to be extended 
to take into account re˚ections from geographical features.
The above arguments and statistics strongly suggest that better time manage
-ment of the available spectrum could result in signi˜cantly more time-bandwidth 
product being made available to passive services without impacting active services 
to any appreciable degree. To simplify the implementation, cooperative strategies 
are best implemented in bands used by ˜xed, registered transmittersŠrather than 
unlicensed devicesŠalthough most new Internet-connected and GPS, cellular, or 
Wi-Fi devices could readily be required to contain simple software for cooperative 
mitigation. Cooperative mitigation techniques have been proposed over the past 
decade for commercial and consumer devices such as commonly used cordless tele
-phones and devices for use in TV white spaces.
39
 The extension of these techniques 
to the passive scienti˜c community might provide many bene˜ts. The committee 
anticipates that the active services could be viable partners in such an arrangement 
and could bene˜t from better usage of the active bands as well as from not
eworthy 
public relations through their support of the EESS and RAS. It is conceivable, 
given appropriate management policy, that the passive spectrum could be ﬁrentedﬂ 
to commercial interests when not needed, with revenues being used to support 
improved spectral usage studies and/or passive spectrum management needs. 
Coordination between RAS ground stations and satellites containing trans
-39
 P. Kolodzy, M. Marcus, D. DePardo, J.B. Evans, J.A. Roberts, V.R. Petty, and A.M. Wyglinski, 
ﬁQuantifying the Impact of Unlicensed Devices on Digital TV Receivers,ﬂ Technical Report ITTC-
FY2007-44910-01, University of Kansas, January 31, 2007.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.171TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
mitters is critical for the present and future viability of the RAS, but it is much 
more dif˜cult than ground-to-ground coordination, as is discussed in the next two 
paragraphs. For example, the coordination process between the RAS and Iridium, 
as discussed in §3.5, shows that coordination is not always successful at reducing 
RFI to needed levels.
As an example of successful collaboration, passive users of the spectrum and the 
Wireless Medical Telemetry Service (WMTS) were able to ˜nd a successful coopera
-tive agreement in the 608-614 MHz in which both services still operate. In 1999, 
the U.S. Committee on Radio Frequencies (CORF) supported the FCC™s proposal 
for RAS and WMTS to share this band as long as the proposal was enacted in its 
entirety to include ﬁservice rules on eligibility, frequency coordination with RAS 
facilities, the necessity to protect RAS observations from interference, and technical 
standards (including ˜eld strength, separation distance from the radio observatory, 
and out-of-band emission limitations).ﬂ
40
 The proposal was enacted as supported by 
CORF, and the agreement between the services is seen by both parties as an excellent 
pairing of interests and one that has bene˜ted them both substantially.
Similarly, a successful arrangement was made between the Arecibo Observatory 
and a nearby military radar station. The Puerto Rico Air National Guard operates 
a frequency-hopping radar with channels between 1220 and 1400 MHz at Punta 
Salinas, about 75 km from the telescope. Arecibo Observatory staff and the authori
-ties at Punta Salinas devised a coexistence arrangement that involves blanking the 
transmitter when it is aimed at the observatory.
This is not meant to say that cooperative mitigation can replace the need for 
radio quiet areas or for restricted, passive-only bands. Indeed, since the develop
-ment of passive techniques often occurs on unscheduled bases and in arbitrary 
regions, the need for emission restrictions within the small exclusively allocated 
spectrum and speci˜c geographical zones remains. Many airborne and ground-
based EESS experiments require continuous operation within a given zone and 
would not be able to yield effectively to active systems over time intervals exceeding 
even a few tens of percents. Such activity requires the use of restricted spectrum. 
Similarly, for the RAS, transmissions in geographical areas around radio telescopes 
must be avoided, and in order to maintain existing capabilities it should still be 
required that the RAS be given a chance to comment on all license applications 
for ˜xed and mobile transmitters within prescribed geographical zones around 
radio telescopes. However (and for example), in a shared time-of-day cooperative 
scheme, commercial traf˜c on certain shared bands of RAS frequencies might be 
40
 National Academy of Sciences, ﬁComments on Docket No. ET 99-255, Amendment of Parts 2 and 
95 of the Commission™s Rules to Create a Wireless Medical Telemetry Service,ﬂ ˜led with the Federal 
Communications Commission on September 30, 1999. Available at http://sites.nationalacademies.
org/BPA/BPA_048830; accessed January 14, 2010.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
172acceptable in exchange for cooperative active access to other bands at suitable times, 
thus permitting effective radio astronomical observations to take place during 
transmission-free windows.
Finding:
 Nascent technologies exist for cooperative spectrum usage, but the stan
-dards and protocols do not.
The above ˜nding is one of the key points of this section: the smart, inexpen
-sive, portable, and highly networked electronics that are incorporated into many 
devices now have the capabilities needed for intelligent spectral sharing, but the 
organization of the manufacturing sector and the regulatory impetus needed to 
implement such sharing need to be developed jointly between the scienti˜c and 
the industrial communities. It is likely that if such coordination can be developed, 
there will be additional spinoff bene˜ts that will further facilitate spectral sharing 
within the purely active community as well. 
4.5
 MITIGATION COSTS, LIMITATIONS, AND BENEFITS
As the previous chapters and sections have illustrated, the nature of the costs 
of the interference problem for the EESS and RAS is wide ranging. The costs are 
manifested as impaired or even unusable data; costs are also incurred when the EESS 
and RAS programs must engineer technical or other ˜xes to mitigate the effects of 
interference on their operations. 
Few of these costs can be monetized easily. The reason is that most of the value 
provided by the EESS and RAS is embodied in public goodsŠthese include the host 
of environmental bene˜ts and the improved ability to manage natural resources 
enabled by the EESS, and the enhanced or wholly new science understanding 
brought by the RAS. By de˜nition, the societal bene˜t derived from public goods 
is dif˜cult to express in dollar values. For example, even though improved forecasts 
are linked to reductions in weather-related loss of life and property, backing out 
the contribution of EEES data to this outcome is complex and dif˜cult. It is even 
more complicated to back out from such a calculation the degradation associated 
with RFI. 
This very problem is at the heart of spectrum allocation decisions when com
-mercial services such as cellular telephones have an easily demonstrated market 
value, but scienti˜c and other public uses of spectrum do not. As is well known 
from the literature on the value of public goods, however, simply because these 
goods are hard to monetize does not lessen their importance to society. Nor does 
this dif˜culty reduce the burden on decision makers to accord high importance 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.173TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
to public uses in making resource allocation decisions such as those involving 
spectrum. In this chapter the committee has sought to inform these decisions by 
highlighting the costs of the interference problem for the EESS and RAS. 
Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS)
The challenge to the EESS below about 10 GHz is from interference arising 
from high-speed electronics that incidentally radiate isotropically (e.g., electronic 
cameras and computers), and from short-range wireless services such as Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth, and cellular telephones. Interference above about 10 GHz arises from 
poorly ˜ltered or directed communications, radar, and related services in bands in 
or near passive bands, or in bands with harmonics in passive bands (see Tables 2.1 
and 2.2 and Figure 3.10). Equipment radiating above 10 GHz is mostly sold to large 
entities at prices well above consumer levels, and mitigating ˜lters or other RFI 
suppression devices could readily be added to that equipment. One exception is 
automobile anticollision radar being developed for large-scale consumer sales for 
use in the 23 GHz band, despite that band™s current worldwide exclusive ITU and 
FCC passive allocation (see also the discussion in §§2.5, 3.5, and 4.1). A potential 
future problem could arise if standards for widely used consumer equipment do 
not preclude incidental emissions above 10 GHz, which generally can be avoided 
with minor design changes at little cost.
Radio Astronomy Service (RAS)
The RAS is currently dominated by relatively few large radio observatories 
located in remote areas that nonetheless are beset by increasing levels of inci
-dental interference from proliferating consumer-level electronics such as cellular 
telephones, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth systems, computers, and so on; from emissions 
from aircraft and satellites; and from over-the-horizon signals arising hundreds of 
miles away, well outside most protected areas but re˚ected by aircraft, the tropo
-sphere, and other means. Explicit expenditures for RAS mitigation research and 
implementation are modest because mitigation for the next generation of radio 
telescopes will be achieved primarily by the indirect costs of locating the observa
-tories in extremely remote locations that are therefore more expensive to develop 
and operate (e.g., the Western Australian desert or the Chilean Andes). RAS costs 
are thus arguably already strongly affected by such remote-site mitigation costs, so 
little mitigation budget is left. Nonetheless, using horizon sensors to detect RFI of 
terrestrial origin is being pursued. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
174Nature of the Costs of Radio Frequency Interference to the EESS and the RAS
The discussion above illustrates that the costs of RFI to the EESS and RAS take 
several forms. One cost is the direct loss of information when RFI renders data 
and observations less useful or, in some cases, wholly unusable. This direct loss of 
information greatly reduces the societal value of the billions of dollars invested in 
the nation™s EESS and RAS physical infrastructure. 
Another cost is that of actions that must taken to accommodate RFI, provided 
accommodation is even possible. As discussed in Chapters 2 and 3, these actions 
include alterations in sensor deployment and operations, changes in scheduling, 
and other technical and engineering adjustments. 
Examples of lost information content include many examples in the cases of 
both the EESS and RAS. In the case of the EESS these include the following: 

In some cases, despite extensive quality checking of EESS data, there are no 
good means of tracking the impact of a single observation that may be cor
-rupted by noise. In the case of radiance assimilation for numerical weather 
prediction models, a single passive microwave satellite measurement that is 
contaminated with RFI at a level comparable to the satellite noise is unable 
to be distinguished from an uncorrupted measurement. The use of such a 
measurement can cause errors in an entire forecast. 

The direct measurement of water vapor and cloud water can be provided 
only by microwave radiometers. These measurements are commonly made 
in the 22-24 GHz frequency range, but microwave point-to-point com
-munications and automobile anticollision radars operating in this spectral 
band are a source of signi˜cant RFI that will increase as automotive radar 
becomes more common. 

Another example is sea surface temperature, for which measurements are 
made at 10 GHz. Microwave brightness in littoral regions is impaired by 
contamination from the use of X-band spectrum adjacent to and within 
this spectrum allocation. 

The 10.7 GHz channels of AMSR-E are RFI contaminated over parts of 
Europe and Japan and are not used in these locations. (On a research basis, 
it is still possible to use the 6.9 GHz band for soil moisture retrieval over 
large regions.) 

RFI in bands below 10 GHz can compromise or even render unusable the 
unique soil moisture information obtained at 1.4 and 6 GHz.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.175TECHNOLOGY
 AND
 OPP
ORTUNITIES
 FOR
 THE
 MITIGATION
 OF
 RADIO
 FREQUENCY
 INTERFERENCE
In the case of the RAS, examples include the following:

The detection of deuterium formed during the Big Bang and now found 
in interstellar gas was for many decades impeded by RFI. Detection was 
possible only after extensive shielding and the use of RFI monitors. 

To date, efforts to detect the redshifted (into the VHF-band) 1420 MHz 
emission of the epoch of reionization have been defeated by RFI; examples 
include experiments at Arecibo and at the VLA.
41,42 

1612 MHz imaging by the VLA was crippled by legal emissions from the 
Iridium satellite system until new ˜lters were installed in the VLA. See 
Figures 3.10 and 3.11. 
Characterizing these examples of lost information in ˜nancial terms is extremely 
dif˜cult, given the public-good nature of the EESS and RAS. If a loss in the value 
of the information could be easily monetized, spectrum regulators would have 
some basis by which to compare the value of spectrum allocations to the EESS and 
RAS with allocations for consumer products that create many RFI problems. The 
methodological challenge posed by the comparison of public goods with consumer 
goods in deciding how best to allocate and manage spectrum among competing 
uses is well known.
43
 Another approach to characterizing the costs of RFI involves estimating the 
costs of the activities undertaken to mitigate or avoid RFI damage. In the case of 
the RAS, Box 4.1 describes some examples of mitigation costs. By asking what it 
costs to avoid or mitigate damage, regulators could compare the cost to the EESS 
and the RAS of avoiding damages with the cost to sources of RFI of mitigating their 
RFI (such as using ˜lters or other means of RFI suppression). Whichever services 
face the least cost, either to avoid damage from RFI or to mitigate the creation of 
RFI, could be asked to bear the ˜nancial burden of taking the action. This approach 
of comparing costs can be useful to spectrum managers. However, because it only 
looks at costs, and not at bene˜ts to society, of the information provided by the 
EESS and the RAS, the avoided-cost-based approach is inferior as a means of guid
-ing spectrum management. 
41
 J. Weintroub, P. Horowitz, I.M. Avruch, and B.F. Burke, ﬁA Transit Search for Highly Redshifted 
HI,ﬂ Astronomy Society of the Paci˜c Conference Series, Vol. 156 (1999).
42
 Greenhill, L., et al., ﬁMapping HI Structures Present During the Epoch of Reionization,ﬂ IR&D 
Report, Center for Astrophysics, Harvard University.
43
 Harvey J. Levin, 
The In
visible Resource: Use and Regulation of the Radio Spectrum
, Baltimore: 
Resources for the Future and Johns Hopkins University Press, 1971.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
176Summary
Increasing levels of incidental interference from proliferating consumer elec
-tronics and other sources threaten the EESS and RAS. The primary current EESS 
problem is active services in passively allocated bands where the atmosphere is 
suf˜ciently transparent that EESS instruments see Earth™s surface. The RAS is 
strongly affected by emissions from aircraft, satellites, and over-the-horizon signals, 
necessitating the siting of sensitive observatories in remote locations. All RFI poses 
the potential for loss of information in EESS and RAS observations and data, thus 
undermining realization of the full societal bene˜t of Earth and radio astronomy 
science.
BOX 4.1
 Illustrations of Radio Astronomy Actions and Costs 
for Radio Frequency Interference Mitigation
Example 1: Using knowledge of the local environment. 
Experts use patterns such as 
the time of day or year to identify local sources of radio frequency interference (RFI), 
which can range from a lawn mower to an Iridium-based aerostat used by police for 
surveillance. In these cases, RFI is solved by coordination. Tracking down the RFI 
source typically uses about 1 full-time-equivalent (FTE) day to solve.
Example 2: Sleuthing with radio direction ˜nding equipment. 
This procedure requires 
an RFI van equipped with receivers, ampli˜ers, a spectrum analyzer, and a directional 
antennaŠequipment that costs approximately $20,000. In these cases, which are 
infrequent, RFI is solved by coordination. Here, tracking down RFI may require 2 to 
3 FTE days. 
Example 3: Tracking ambiguous external RFI.
 Tracing RFI to a speci˜c satellite source 
can be time-consuming and dif˜cult. It may also have legal rami˜cations. These prob
-lems can take an FTE month and require archive work, software development, and 
detailed knowledge of the satellite (system speci˜cations, operating parameters) that 
may be the source of interference.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.177
5Findings and Recommendations
The allocation and use of radio frequencies constitute a complex issue at the 
center of many different ˜elds of inquiry, from engineering to economics. The 
committee was tasked to ﬁprepare a report exploring the scienti˜c uses of the radio 
spectrum which will:

Portray the science that is currently being conducted using the radio 
spectrum;

Identify the spectrum requirements necessary to conduct research;

Identify the anticipated future spectrum requirements for at least the next 
10 years; and

Advise spectrum policy-makers on the value to the nation of accommodat
-ing scienti˜c uses of the spectrum, recognizing the need to balance multiple 
communities.ﬂ
The committee chose to focus its efforts on the passive uses of the spectrum, 
primarily in Earth remote sensing and radio astronomy. The committee recognizes 
that there are many other scienti˜c uses of the spectrum, but it focused on the 
 
passive uses because these activities pose unique challenges to the nation™s spectrum 
allocation and management policies. 
During the course of the study, the committee identi˜ed a number of key 
˜ndings and formulated recommendations concerning passive uses of the radio 
spectrum for scienti˜c purposes over the next two decades. The ˜ndings identify 
the operational and educational value of these uses to the broader society as well 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
178as describe the rapidly developing threats to the viability of some areas of this sci
-ence as a result of increasing use of the spectrum by active systems. Active use of 
the spectrum has in and of itself generated unprecedented degrees of economic 
prosperity, enlightenment, and security. Although the pressure for active use of the 
spectrum cannot and should not be reduced, the committee nonetheless identi˜ed 
a number of measures that can be taken to help ensure the viability of the passive 
uses. The recommendations stemming from the committee™s study and the ˜ndings 
on which they are based are presented in this chapter.
1 5.1
 SOCIETAL VALUE OF THE PASSIVE SERVICES
In addressing the ˜rst and fourth bulleted items in its statement of task, the 
committee focused on the purpose of the various passive applications within 
the Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) and the Radio Astronomy Service 
(RAS), and on how these purposes align with societal needs. A wide range of pas
-sive applications exist in Earth remote sensing and radio astronomy that facilitate 
day-to-day environmental services, scienti˜c inquiry into basic physics and envi
-ronmental processes, and both formal and outreach education. The committee 
expects that the societal value of the passive services will grow in importance over 
the next two decades.
Passive microwave remote sensing observations provide a valuable and impor
-tant set of tools that contribute to the monitoring, understanding, and predicting 
of the many key components of Earth™s natural system and that are essential for the 
understanding of the interaction of these components so that weather and climate 
can be analyzed and predicted. Passive EESS measurements are increasingly used 
directly in numerical environmental models that help predict weather and analyze 
global climate change. These observations represent the only viable means by which 
certain key environmental parameters can be measured. They are a cornerstone of 
the ability of the United States to maintain its preeminence in Earth science and 
are critical to the economic vitality and health and safety of the nation™s people. 
Finding:
 Passive remote sensing observations are essential for monitoring Earth™s 
natural systems and are therefore critical to human safety, the day-to-day opera
-tions of the government and the private sector, and the policy-making processes 
governing many sectors of the U.S. economy.
While Earth scientists study the natural radiation from Earth and the atmo
-sphere, radio astronomers use similar techniques to study the natural radiation 
1 
The committee™s ˜ndings, as originally presented in the context of the discussion in Chapters 1 
through 4, are reiterated here.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.179FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
of sources in space. Radio astronomy has made fundamental contributions to the 
understanding of the nature, origin, and evolution of the universe, galaxies, stars, 
and planets.
Finding:
 Radio astronomy has great potential for further fundamental discoveries, 
including the origins and evolution of the universe, the nature of matter, and life 
in other solar systems, which will have an enormous impact on our understanding 
of fundamental physics and the place of humanity in the universe.
Radio astronomers and remote sensing scientists often push the state of the 
art in system design, leading to new developments in advanced signal processing, 
low-noise receivers, and novel antenna designs, among other areas. Computer 
algorithms developed for the RAS and EESS have also found routine application 
in medical imaging. 
Finding:
 In addition to the intellectual bene˜ts that they provide, radio astronomy 
and passive microwave remote sensing studies provide many technological bene˜ts 
to American society.
Radio astronomers have produced many opportunities for scienti˜c and engi
-neering education, ranging from the K-12 through graduate levels. Scienti˜c results 
from radio astronomy and Earth remote sensing continue to capture the imagina
-tion of the public, which is excited and awed by new discoveries about the universe 
and concerned about extreme weather events and possible climate change. Public 
interest is re˚ected in the large numbers of people who visit radio observatories 
every year and regularly follow weather and climate forecasts. The development of 
passive microwave sensors for both the EESS and RAS also provides an important 
training ground for the next generation of radio scientists and engineers. 
Finding: 
Radio astronomy and passive microwave Earth remote sensing provide a 
diverse and valuable set of educational opportunities.
The federal government has historically recognized the importance of both of 
these ˜elds to the nation. One measure of that recognition is the level of resources 
that the nation has invested in these endeavors. Ful˜lling the scienti˜c promise of 
radio astronomy and Earth remote sensing has required investment in a diverse 
group of observatories, sensors, and instrumental capabilities. Further progress in 
environmental modeling and forecasting, astronomy, and related areas of physics 
depends on continual improvements in the sensitivity of radio telescopes and pas
-sive microwave sensors on surface-based, airborne, and spaceborne platforms.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
180Finding: 
Scienti˜c advances have required increasing measurement precision by 
passive radio and microwave facilities in order to obtain more accurate and thus 
more useful data sets. This need for precision will continue to increase.
Finding:
 Large investments have been made in satellite sensors and sensor networks 
and in major radio observatories. New facilities costing billions of dollars are under 
construction or are being designed. 
Recommendation 1:
 Recognizing that the national investment in passive radio 
astronomy and Earth remote sensing is dependent on access to the radio spectrum, 
the committee recommends that the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
and the National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) 
ensure that access to spectrum for passive radio and microwave observations of 
Earth environmental variables and radio astronomical observations of the sky is 
protected in the development of future spectrum policy.
5.2
 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PASSIVE SPECTRUM SERVICES
The committee noted the following broad characteristics of passive EESS and 
RAS activities and applications. RAS and passive EESS equipment receive natural 
radio emissions from space or Earth (respectively) and use no transmissions. 
Accordingly, they do not cause radio frequency interference (RFI) to any other 
service. The signals received from cosmic or natural terrestrial sources are typically 
far weaker than the internal noise levels of the receivers. The required sensitivity of 
RAS and EESS systems is determined by the natural, minute level of radio emis
-sions. Spectral band needs are determined by basic physical processes, and many 
measurements require spectrum at speci˜c frequencies set by the spectral lines 
from the quantum transitions of atoms and molecules. These characteristics of 
RAS and EESS systems are likely to remain true over the next two decades, as they 
are intrinsic to the conduct of these activities. However, unmet spectral allocation 
requirements exist. 
Finding:
 Effective passive microwave band allocations are necessary for the perfor
-mance of environmental and radio astronomy observations.
Finding:
 Owing to their receive-only nature, the passive Earth Exploration-
 
Satellite Service and Radio Astronomy Service, operating from 10 MHz to 3 THz, 
are
 incapable of interfering with other services.
Finding:
 Radio wave bands (10 MHz to 3 THz) are indispensable for collecting 
information associated with speci˜c astronomical and environmental phenomena. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.181FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
Often the same bands are similarly indispensable for both passive Earth remote 
sensing and radio astronomy, and the passive nature of both services enables them 
to share the spectrum productively.
The preceding ˜ndings have a number of important implications with respect 
to how radio astronomy and Earth remote sensing are currently conducted. 
Since the science requirements drive the need for additional bands and band
-width beyond those allocated to the services, the RAS and EESS communities 
routinely use spectrum beyond these allocations on a non-interference basis, 
and with varying degrees of success. Such opportunistic sharing is essential for 
certain scienti˜c measurements; it requires the careful design of experiments to 
avoid RFI.
Whereas technological advances have rapidly increased the channel capacity of 
spectrum available to active users, the same cannot be said for the passive services: 
they cannot use their allocated spectrum more ef˜ciently. For instance, the passive 
services cannot use coding and compression techniques to expand the capacity 
of this bandwidth. Passive microwave sensors rely on their entire allocated band
-widths, and often much more, to achieve required measurement precisions. 
Finding:
 Currently, 2.07 percent of the spectrum below 3 GHz is allocated to the 
RAS and EESS on a primary basis, and 4.08 percent is allocated on a secondary 
basis (measured in hertz). 
Debilitating postlaunch RFI occurred in one major international passive envi
-ronmental sensor mission at C-band (Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-
Earth [AMSR-E]), rendering soil moisture measurement impossible over several 
populated areas. Such RFI also occurred at C-band in a non-mission-critical 
manner in another U.S. passive microwave military sensor (WindSat). A spectral 
allocation at C-band is currently required for observations of soil moisture and 
sea surface temperature, and a wider allocation at X-band would be valuable for 
observing ocean wind direction. While, the spectral band from 10.6 to 10.8 GHz 
is still relatively free of RFI over the United States, growth in use of this band and 
C-band by active applications is anticipated.
Finding:
 There is currently inadequate protected spectrum in C-band and X-band 
for operational passive microwave observations of sea surface temperature, soil 
moisture, and ocean surface wind speed and direction. 
A further characteristic of EESS measurements is that they are made on a con
-tinuous and global basis. Passive microwave and millimeter-wave sensor beams pass 
approximately 20 times per day over a typical location in the United States.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
182Because there is no EESS allocation within C-band and this portion of the spec
-trum is heavily utilized, measurements of brightness temperature at C-band over 
land are currently only considered observations of opportunity. RFI in this band 
not only biases measurements but causes observation failure. Global protection is 
needed due to the band™s wide application in observing sea surface temperature, 
soil moisture, and ocean surface wind directionŠelements critical to the under
-standing and predicting of Earth™s environment.
Recommendation 2:
 The FCC and NTIA should move toward developing a pas
-sive EESS reference band allocation within 6-8 GHz to facilitate unilateral RFI 
mitigation. To be effective, this band should be at least 20 MHz wide and should 
be established on a global basis. 
Such a reference band allocation would bene˜t radio astronomy as well. It 
would be advantageous for the RAS if this band included the methanol transition 
line, for example, which provides strong maser emission from star-forming regions 
in the Milky Way.
Finding:
 Whereas most frequency regulations for active services are de˜ned on 
local or regional bases, passive EESS observations are global by nature. As a result, a 
high level of international cooperation is required to maintain and enforce
 passive 
allocations.
Recommendation 3: 
The United States should actively engage the international 
community on passive EESS and RAS frequency allocations in order to improve 
the availability of global measurements of environmental variables and radio 
astronomy observations. 
5.3
 THREATS TO THE EESS AND THE RAS FROM UNINTENTIONAL 
RADIO FREQUENCY INTERFERENCE
The radio environment in the United States and around the globe is rapidly 
changing due to the proliferation of active devices. This trend is likely to continue 
in the foreseeable future. It threatens the ability to use the spectrum for passive 
scienti˜c purposes through inadvertent radio frequency interference. The commit
-tee assessed both the current state of the occurrence of RFI to the passive services 
(Chapters 2 and 3) and trends in spectrum usage (Chapter 4). 
The most salient change in the use of the radio spectrum over the past 20 years 
has been the explosive growth in commercial use of the spectrum. Active commer
-cial use of the spectrum will continue to grow in the number of links (2 billion 
or more cellular telephone users plus many additional data networks), the modes 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.183FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
of usage (including data, voice, and active sensing applications), and geographic 
deployment (including near-rural and rural environs). These devices will be highly 
mobile, will use more of the spectrum, and will extend to geographic locations 
previously considered to be radio-quiet.
Finding:
 Radio frequency interference threatens the scienti˜c understanding of key 
variables in Earth™s natural system, now and in the future.
Weak cosmic signals of fundamental importance to radio astronomy are easily 
masked by human-made radio emissions. Even signals far below the sensitivity of 
high-quality receivers used by the active services can interfere with routine astro
-nomical observations.
Finding:
 The emergence of practices for the dynamic use of the spectrum will 
result in more active devices with greater variability in active spectrum usage, and 
the EESS and RAS communities could be impacted with more unintentional radio 
interfering devices.
The proliferation of wireless devices and high-speed digital radio technology 
around the globe diminishes the value of Earth observations from remote sensing 
platforms, leading to an irrevocable loss of environmental data. When affected by 
RFI, EESS observations have increased potential for introducing errors in environ
-mental forecasts on both local and regional bases.
Finding:
 Geographical separation of radio telescopes from transmitters (e.g., 
through the establishment of radio quiet zones and the remote siting of observa
-tories) is currently effective in avoiding much radio frequency interference, but the 
proliferation of airborne and satellite transmissions and the widespread deploy
-ment of mobile, low-power personal devices threaten even the most remote sites.
Unlike Earth remote sensing applications, which require global coverage, radio 
astronomy has historically taken advantage of the bene˜ts provided by geographi
-cal separation; large observatories have been built in remote, largely radio-quiet 
areas.
 Finding:
 Important scienti˜c inquiry and applications enabled by the Earth 
 
Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) and the Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) are 
signi˜cantly impeded or precluded by radio frequency interference (RFI). Such RFI 
has reduced the societal and scienti˜c return of EESS and RAS observatories and 
necessitates costly interference mitigation, which is often insuf˜cient to prevent 
RFI damage.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
184Despite these ˜ndings, the current knowledge of actual spectrum usage is 
 
inadequate to address RFI threats to the EESS and RAS. The federal government 
collects more information about many other economic variables than it does for 
the current usage of the radio spectrum. A monitoring capability would aid in both 
mitigation and instrument design and in the identi˜cation of dynamic sharing 
opportunities. This information would also aid in enhancing current passive radio 
science as well as aiding the expansion of current EESS and RAS capabilities.
Finding:
 Greater efforts to collect and analyze radio emission data are needed to 
support the enforcement of existing allocations and to support the discussion and 
planning of spectrum use.
Finding:
 Better utilization of the spectrum and reduced RFI for scienti˜c as well 
as commercial applications are possible with better knowledge of actual spectrum 
usage. Progress toward these goals would be made by gathering more information 
through improved and continuous spectral monitoring. This would be bene˜cial 
to both the commercial and the scienti˜c communities.
Recommendation 4:
 The Department of Commerce/National Telecommunica
-tions and Information Administration (NTIA), in collaboration with the National 
Science Foundation (NSF), NASA, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), should spearhead the development of a national spec
-trum assessment system that measures the radio frequency (RF) environment 
with appropriately high resolution in time, space, and frequency for purposes of 
spectrum development and management, based on the spectral and spatial density 
of emitters.
The assessment of spectrum usage needs to occur at time, space, and fre
-quency scales commensurate with actual usage. To this end, 1 microsecond (µs) 
would resolve many pulsed radar applications, and 1 kHz would be suf˜cient 
to separate and identify almost all individual signals in bands above and below 
30 MHz for both voice and data. Spatial and angular resolution requirements are 
more dif˜cult to identify. The necessary angular resolution would be frequency-
dependent, such that the survey would achieve lower resolution at lower frequen
-cies and higher resolution at higher frequencies. Since different communications 
systems use a very wide variety of spatial scales, ˜nding a single spatial resolution 
necessary to conduct a useful survey is impossible; it comes down to what can be 
afforded. Crucially, however, all of these measurements should be of suf˜cient 
resolution to determine the adverse impact of most radio transmissions on the 
RAS and EESS. Spectrum monitoring with these guidelines would provide both 
statistical and operational information for the RAS and EESS, as well as providing 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.185FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
many ancillary bene˜ts to other scienti˜c, commercial, and government applica
-tions and services. 
5.4
 TECHNOLOGY FOR MITIGATION OF 
 RADIO FREQUENCY INTERFERENCE
Given the increasing threat to the passive uses of the spectrum posed by 
human-made transmissions, the RAS and EESS communities have studied the 
potential for the mitigation of unintentional RFI on both unilateral and cooperative 
bases. Bilateral mitigation technologies could potentially lead to effective spectral 
sharing between the active and passive services and could be particularly valuable 
for facilitating passive observations in non-allocated bands. The following ˜nd
-ings and recommendations pertain to the current and projected future status of 
unilateral and cooperative RFI mitigation strategies suitable for maintaining the 
ability to use the spectrum for passive scienti˜c purposes. 
Finding:
 While unilateral radio frequency interference mitigation techniques are a 
potentially valuable means of facilitating spectrum sharing, they are not a substitute 
for primary allocated passive spectrum and the enforcement of regulations.
Techniques for the excision or subtraction of RFI continue to be developed, 
but they are only partially successful. For example, unilateral RFI mitigation tech
-niques for passive EESS systems have been and continue to be explored. Only 
limited reports of success are available, however, especially with regard to levels of 
RFI comparable to the system sensitivity. Radio astronomy currently makes use 
of bands allocated to other services but sometimes is faced with the need for RFI 
mitigation. No set of universally effective techniques has been identi˜ed. Unilateral 
RFI mitigation could be facilitated by improved a priori information (e.g., time-
space-frequency-angle structure) on spectrum usage, as recommended in Recom
-mendation 4 in the preceding section. 
Recommendation 5:
 The National Telecommunications and Information Adminis
-tration (NTIA) and the appropriate National Science Foundation (NSF) and NASA 
units should promote the development of inexpensive out-of-band interference 
mitigation technology and testing capabilities (e.g., ˜lters, modulation techniques, 
etc.) that could be added to and required for type-approved consumer devices for 
the protection of EESS and RAS bands. As these technologies become affordable, 
the technical regulatory rules should re˚ect these new capabilities. 
Supporting the development of mitigation technology for application to the 
appropriate future radiating devices could preempt much interference to the pas
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
186sive services. As the technology matures and cost falls, the ef˜cacy and availability 
of the technology should be re˚ected in regulations moderating spectrum use.
Recommendation 6:
 Investment in the development of mitigation technology 
should be increased so that it is commensurate with the costs of data denial that 
result from the use of systems without mitigation. To this end, NSF and NASA 
should support research and development for unilateral
2 RFI mitigation technol
-ogy in both EESS and RAS systems. NASA, NOAA, and the Department of Defense 
should require that appropriate RFI analyses and tests and practical RFI mitigation 
techniques be applied to all future satellite systems carrying passive microwave 
sensors.
A secondary bene˜t of such research would be to quantify the qualitative and 
limited documentation of unilateral RFI mitigation capabilities and their ultimate 
utility, as well as to help quantify spectrum usage. The committee believes that an 
effort of several million dollars per year over 5 years could yield substantial results 
in this area. 
Finding:
 Nascent technologies exist for cooperative spectrum usage, but the stan
-dards and protocols do not. 
Cooperative spectrum usage is potentially more useful than is unilateral RFI 
mitigation, but the requisite ability to assign spectrum usage dynamically is cur
-rently undeveloped. Anticipating that the commercial, military, and scienti˜c uses 
of the spectrum will continue to grow, there will be a commensurately growing 
need to cooperate on the usage of spectrum. Spectrum is underutilized over time, 
space, frequency, and angle, and cooperative spectrum usage offers a means of 
taking advantage of this underutilization.
One example of cooperative spectrum usage is time-domain multiplexing of 
spectrum over broad bandwidths. In such a scheme, the EESS or RAS would have 
exclusive use of spectrum for certain intervals, while tolerating transmissions from 
active services during the remaining time. This technique would be one way in which 
the anticipated evolution of spectrum utilization and management could result in a 
mutually successful scenario for both passive and active services, albeit with some 
increase in the complexity of equipment. The anticipated technical requirement is 
similar to proven existing technology that facilitates the time
-division-multiplexed 
use of spectrum in cellular telephone systems such as the Global System for Mobile 
communications (GSM). However, since RAS experiments usually require a ˜xed 
integration time to achieve statistical accuracy, a time-domain multiplexing sys
-2 
As discussed in Chapter 4.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.187FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
tem would increase the actual time per experiment and further strain the heavy 
demands on all of the world™s large radio telescopes.
Recommendation 7:
 The NSF, NASA, and NTIA should jointly support research 
and development for cooperative RFI mitigation techniques and the associated 
forums and outreach necessary to enable the development of standards for greater 
spectral utilization and interference avoidance.
The committee believes that an effort of several million dollars per year over 
3 years would be suf˜cient to demonstrate core technologies and to develop an 
implementation roadmap for these technologies. One end goal of these efforts 
would be to enable dynamic spectrum-sharing technology that would facilitate 
the observation of astrophysical phenomena which require measurements over 
large fractional bandwidths, such as observation of the redshifted 21 cm emission 
from the universe™s Dark Ages and the epoch of reionization, pulsars, single pulses 
hypothesized to be associated with prompt emission from gamma-ray bursts 
and other extreme astrophysical phenomena. Such measurements are extremely 
dif˜cult to make at this time and would provide effective benchmarks for the 
success of cooperative spectrum-sharing techniques. A moderate portion of this 
investment should justi˜ably be spent on informing the public and the relevant 
scienti˜c and technical communities about EESS and RAS requirements, mitiga
-tion needs, and capabilities, and on the development of standards. 
Recommendation 8:
 As cooperative spectrum-sharing techniques come into use, 
NSF and NASA spectrum managers should work with the regulatory agencies to 
enable
 observations that require an extremely wide spectral range. Such observa
-tions would provide a useful metric for the effectiveness of spectrum-sharing 
techniques for the passive services.
5.5
 PROTECTION OF THE EESS AND THE RAS 
The committee discussed at length actions that should be undertaken by U.S. 
agencies to ensure the continued bene˜ts to the public of the passive services. 
Some of these actions can be undertaken solely within the United States and 
others would require international collaboration. The committee considered 
the costs and complexity versus expected bene˜ts to the passive services care
-fully. In some cases, the committee identi˜ed existing ambiguities in rulemaking 
that could lead to an eventual loss of utility of the primary passive bands, thus 
warranting a clari˜cation of existing regulations. In other cases, more complex 
regulatory measures must be undertaken to ensure the viability of the passive 
services. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
188One example of such an ambiguity involves the differences between the Inter
-national Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the Federal Communications Com
-mission (FCC) regulations in out-of-band and spurious emissions. In some cases, 
emissions that create harmful levels of interference are currently permitted in EESS 
and RAS primary bands, although the ITU regulations state that ﬁall emissions are 
prohibited.ﬂ The FCC regulations do not allow any primary emission, but out-of-
band and/or spurious emissions from other bands are permissible. Thus, a device 
can meet the speci˜c emission requirements and emit into the protected EESS and 
RAS primary bands. In order to protect primary EESS and RAS bands adequately, 
it should be required that out-of-band and spurious emissions be signi˜cantly 
attenuated when they fall within EESS or RAS primary bands. This may require the 
reconsideration of many of the emission limits of bands that are spectrally close 
to the EESS and RAS primary bands, for modi˜cation of the permitted OOB and 
spurious emission levels.
Finding:
 The rules for out-of-band and spurious emissions in the primary allo
-cated Earth Exploration-Satellite Service (EESS) and Radio Astronomy Service 
(RAS) bands (e.g., 1400-1427 MHz) do not provide adequate interference protec
-tion for EESS and RAS purposes.
The rules that pertain to the above ˜nding are given in Appendix D.
Recommendation 9:
 The NTIA and FCC, with the support of the NASA and NSF 
spectrum managers, should study rulemaking changes that require aggregate emis
-sion protection and out-of-band and spurious noise protection in primary EESS 
and RAS bands. 
More complex methods of understanding and managing spectrum usage may 
also be required to enable more ef˜cient spectrum usage.
Finding:
 Current regulatory structure and support infrastructure (such as data
-bases, etc.) are transmitter-centric. Methodologies to incorporate passive systems 
need to be developed. 
Finding:
 New cooperative spectrum management techniques that could be bene˜
-cial for enhanced interference management and increased spectral utilization have 
been investigated by regulators but have not been implemented.
The current regulatory structure inhibits the distribution of critical informa
-tion on how active systems can impact passive systems, and it also limits promotion 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.189FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
of the communications needed between active and passive users to enhance channel 
capabilities and limit inadvertent RFI.
Bene˜cial cooperative spectrum management techniques include the use of 
interference metrics (e.g., interference temperature), the extension of enforcement 
technology (e.g., the development of commercial devices used for enforcement mea
-surements and additional mobile measurement systems), and the inclusion of pas
-sive systems in regulators™ databases (e.g., the FCC™s Universal Licensing System).
Recommendation 10:
 FCC and NTIA regulators should actively de˜ne interference 
metrics, expand enforcement technology, and include descriptions of passive EESS 
and RAS systems in regulators™ databases. 
However, many of the current gaps in the regulatory system stem from a lack 
of communication betweenŠor even withinŠthe various user communities. For 
example, there is currently no forum in the United States for identifying EESS 
frequency allocation needs and vetting the merits of alternative allocations within 
the context of all competing services (both public and private). To engender the 
requisite communication, the committee makes the following recommendations.
Recommendation 11:
 The EESS and RAS communities should be provided addi
-tional support through NSF, NASA, and NOAA to increase their participation in 
spectrum management forums within the International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU), FCC, NTIA, and other organizations. The goal of such participation is to 
foster outreach, advance the understanding of interference and regulation issues, 
and initiate mutual cooperation in interference mitigation.
For example, NASA and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra
-tion (NOAA) could jointly sponsor a workshop to explore alternative means of 
addressing RFI, seeking participation from the FCC, NTIA, industry, vendors, and 
the university community. This workshop could focus on the development of satel
-lite and aircraft payloads and ground-based systems that characterize spectrum use. 
Such an endeavor would help determine the need for modi˜ed and/or tightened 
regulations and would increase the general level of understanding about interfer
-ence. The planning of this workshop could be facilitated by professional societies 
already engaged in similar activities. 
Recommendation 12:
 The Of˜ce of Science and Technology Policy should create 
a new, permanent, representative technology advisory body to identify technical 
and regulatory opportunities for improving spectrum sharing among all active and 
passive users, both government and nongovernment.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
190The advisory body recommended here should include representatives from 
all user and regulatory sectors. In a common forum, these representatives could 
bring to bear the technical and regulatory creativity, breadth, and depth necessary 
to identify and ensure that new opportunities for improving spectrum sharing 
and utilization are brought in a timely way to the attention of the many existing, 
relevant, government and private bodies that now separately address more limited 
and immediate spectrum issues.
In addition to expanding communication, it is important to adjust the regula
-tory process in such a manner as to discourage new instances of unintentional RFI 
from arising in the future.
Recommendation 13:
 The FCC and NTIA should require active service users to 
use their allocated portions of the spectrum more effectively. Spectral ef˜ciency 
requirements should be built into FCC and NTIA licensing policies for future 
spectral assignments. 
Although out-of-band emissions restrictions apply to individual devices and 
these restrictions generally preclude RFI by an individual device, there is currently 
no way to ensure that when such devices are sold, the aggregate emissions from a 
large number of them will not cause harmful RFI. Limitations on aggregate emis
-sions may be dif˜cult to enforce, but the likelihood of RFI can be minimized prior 
to the sale of devices by considering assessments of realistic market penetration and 
usage concentration when emissions standards are being developed.
Recommendation 14:
 NASA, NOAA, NSF, and other agencies with interests in the 
EESS and RAS should oppose all type-approval licenses for equipment without 
source mitigation that impacts EESS and RAS bands. 
Recommendation 15:
 A combination of radio impact statements and/or statements 
of compliance with interference mitigation standards and emission standards 
should be mandated to accompany all proposals to federal agencies for the research 
and development of active service technology. 
Recommendation 16:
 The FCC and NTIA should follow up on speci˜c recom
-mendations of the U.S. Spectrum Policy Task Force (November 2002) to encourage 
spectral ef˜ciency, maintain EESS and RAS spectral allocations, and be prepared 
to enforce spectrum protection. 
In its ˜nal report, the FCC™s Spectrum Policy Task Force made speci˜c rec
-ommendations including the following: (1) ensure that the FCC has suf˜cient 
resources to independently monitor and enforce spectrum management rules, 
 Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.191FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
(2) improve the out-of-band interference performance of transmitters and receiv
-ers, (3) adopt a standard method for measuring the noise ˚oor, (4) create a 
public/private partnership for a long-term noise-monitoring network and for 
the archiving of data for use by the FCC and the public, (5) promote transmitter 
enhancements for interference control, (6) study the tightening of out-of-band 
emission limits, (7) accompany a clearer de˜nition of interference with effective 
enforcement, (8) develop technical bulletins that explain interference rules for all 
radio services, and (9) develop the opportunistic or dynamic use of existing bands 
through either cognitive radio techniques to ˜nd white space in existing bands or 
use protocols to relinquish bands to primary users.
35.6
 THE PATH FORWARD
The radio spectrum is a ˜nite resource that has been managed as such for the 
past 70 years by the federal government. This management enabled the growth of 
strong commercial and scienti˜c communities. The pursuit of better techniques to 
leverage the unique characteristics of the radio spectrum has led to discoveries and 
innovations of enormous scienti˜c and societal value. Over the past 20 years, rapid 
technological improvements have increased the capabilities of both the scienti˜c 
uses and commercial uses of the radio spectrum exponentially. The current regu
-latory regime is struggling to enable the capabilities and desires of either of these 
communities, let alone both. A new path is needed to maintain the vital engines 
both for the scienti˜c discoveries that lead to societal bene˜t and for the commerce 
that is straining to meet the demands of a mobile society.
Technological innovations continue to increase the utility of the radio spec
-trum. The onset of new technologies designed to exploit the diversity of the radio 
spectrum in space, frequency, polarization, and time will increase the ef˜ciency of 
its use. However, the current means of managing spectrum use must be changed, 
as the current policies threaten to thwart scienti˜c discovery, diminish the utility 
of important environmental observations, and limit economic growth. Therefore, 
new spectrum management policies need to be explored to foster these critical 
national capabilities.
The next generation of spectrum management policies must enable better shar
-ing of the spectrum as well as contribute to a full understanding of the actual use 
of the RF spectrum. This can be done by exploiting currently available technolo
-gies and hastening the development of nascent technologies. New policies should 
encourage the following: 
3 
Federal Communications Commission, 
Report of the Spectrum Policy Task Force
, Washington, 
D.C., November 2002.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
192
The de
velopment of the means for direct interaction between the acti
ve and 
passi
ve spectrum users in order to protect current and future scienti˜c uses of 
the spectrum.
 The nation needs to provide the policies to strike a balance 
between pursuing advanced technology to decrease the cost of communica
-tions on the one hand and, on the other, to make the spectrum more usable 
and less noisy for all users; 

A regulatory en
vironment that enables sharing the spectrum in both space and 
time.
 This is a ﬁwin-winﬂ scenario that will enable additional scienti˜c uses 
without impacting commercial development; and

In
vestment in technology to enable spectrum sharing between acti
ve and pas
-si
ve users, o
ver the entire radio spectrum. 
This investment should become 
commensurate with the investment made in remote sensing technology.
In one sense, the management of the spectrum for passive purposes can be lik
-ened to the management of U.S. public parklands. While monetization of the spec
-trum by the free market may be one value metric, the true societal value of EESS 
and RAS spectrum should more properly be assessed in a manner consistent with 
how public parklands have been valued. As history continues to show, parklands 
reserved for public enjoyment, with limited to no development being permitted, 
have a high intrinsic community value. Humankind has ultimately found a com
-pelling need for such land, and this need has resulted in the preservation of parcels 
even within the most crowded urban areas where these parcels would otherwise sell 
on the open market at a premium price. There is a balance between development 
and preservation that recognizes the intrinsic value of parklands.
More often than not, the very presence of such public land increases the value 
of adjacent private land beyond the value that it would otherwise have. In a similar 
manner, the EESS and RAS studies performed using passive spectrum often lead 
to improved communications technologies and scienti˜c insights that engender 
ef˜ciencies and hence enhance pro˜ts and improve services within the private and 
public sectors.
The new initiatives necessary for spectrum management and sharing will not 
be easy to design and implement, nor will they make successful management and 
sharing a certainty. It will likely take a national effort to understand clearly the 
needs of both communities, the scienti˜c and the commercial, and to motivate 
each to make the choices necessary to enable greater access for each to the radio 
spectrum. That said, it should be clear that the next generation of scienti˜c users 
of the radio spectrum needs to be afforded the capacity to develop the technology 
that will open new horizons. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.193FINDINGS
 AND
 RECOMMENDATIONS
5.7
 CONCLUSION
The passive services both provide a critical return to society through operations 
in support of environmental prediction and offer scienti˜c intellectual value. The 
impact of the latter is dif˜cult to quantify, but it has been seen to make unique 
contributions to our nation™s progress. It would thus be in the strongest interests 
of the nation to see that access to spectrum for scienti˜c purposes is maintained 
during the coming decades. The committee™s recommendations provide a pathway 
for putting in place the regulatory mechanisms and associated supporting research 
activities necessary to accomplish this important task. The committee believes that 
such a pathway will also lead to greater ef˜ciency in the active use of the spectrum, 
which should bene˜t all direct and indirect consumers of wireless telecommunica
-tions and data services. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.197
Appendix A
Statement of Task
The current system of allocating bands in the radio spectrum was developed 
more than 50 years ago, and a review of the needs of scienti˜c users is in order. In 
recent years, the explosion of new wireless technologies has signi˜cantly increased 
the demand for access to the radio spectrum. The increased demand has led to 
discussions in both government and industry with respect to new ways of thinking 
about spectrum allocation and use. Scienti˜c users of the radio spectrum (such 
as radio astronomers and earth scientists using remotely sensed data) have an 
important stake in the policies that will result from this activity. It is proposed that 
a survey of the scienti˜c uses of the spectrum be conducted to identify the needs 
of today™s scienti˜c activities and to assist spectrum managers in balancing the 
requirements of the scienti˜c users of the spectrum with those of other interests. 
The survey will be carried out by a National Research Council (NRC) committee 
over a period of 18 months.
A balanced committee of 15 people will be formed to prepare an NRC report 
surveying scienti˜c uses of the spectrum. Following is the committee™s statement 
of task:
 The committee will prepare a report exploring the scienti˜c uses of the radio spectrum 
which will:

Portray the science that is currently being conducted using the radio spectrum; 

Identify the spectrum requirements necessary to conduct research; 

Identify the anticipated future spectrum requirements for at least the next 10 years; 
and 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
198
Advise spectrum policy-makers on the value to the nation of accommodating scien
-ti˜c uses of the spectrum, recognizing the need to balance multiple communities.
 The committee will comment on the spectrum use by the relevant scienti˜c communi
-ties but will not make recommendations on the allocation of speci˜c frequencies.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.199
Marshall H. Cohen, 
Co-Chair,
 received his Ph.D. in physics from Ohio State 
University in 1952. He is a professor emeritus in the Astronomy Department at 
the California Institute of Technology (Caltech). Before going to Caltech, he was 
a professor of electrical engineering and then a professor of astronomy at Cornell 
University, spent 2 years as a professor of applied electrophysics at the University 
of California at San Diego, and then went to Caltech in 1968. Dr. Cohen has con
-ducted radio astronomy research in solar physics and active galactic nuclei (AGN) 
and optical research on magnetic white dwarfs and on AGN. He was also involved 
with commissioning the Arecibo telescope and in developing Very Long Baseline 
Interferometry (VLBI) and the network that was set up to manage VLBI observa
-tions in the 1970s. Currently, he uses the Very Long Baseline Array to study the 
statistics of superluminal sources. Using the large telescopes at the Palomar and the 
W.M. Keck Observatories, he conducts polarization observations of the spectrum 
to study the relations among the different classes of objects and their evolution. 
Dr. Cohen has been very involved with activities of the National Research Council, 
having been a member of the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; the 
Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Applications; the 
Proceed
-ings of the National Academy of Sciences
 Editorial Board; the National Academy of 
Sciences (NAS) Class I Membership Committee; the United States National Com
-mittee for the International Union of Radio Science (USNC-URSI); chair of NAS 
Section 12: Astronomy; and chair of the 1980s Astronomy Survey Committee. He 
was also on panels of the 1970s and 1990s astronomy survey study.
Appendix B
Biosketches of 
 Committee Members
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
200Albin J. Gasiewski, 
Co-Chair,
 received his Ph.D. degree in electrical engineer
-ing and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 
1989. Previously, he had received M.S. and B.S. degrees in electrical engineering 
and he received a B.S. degree in mathematics from Case Western Reserve Uni
-versity in 1983. From 1989 to 1997 Dr. Gasiewski was a faculty member within 
the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Georgia Institute of 
Technology. As an associate professor there, he developed and taught courses on 
electromagnetics, remote sensing, instrumentation, and wave propagation theory. 
From 1997 through 2005 he worked at the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration™s (NOAA™s) Earth System Research Laboratory (ESRL) in Boulder, 
Colorado, where he was chief of the Microwave Systems Development Branch of 
the ESRL
 Physical Science Division. In 2006 he joined the Department of Electri
-cal and Computer Engineering of the University of Colorado at Boulder, where 
he directs the NOAA-CU Center for Environmental Technology. His technical 
interests include passive and active remote sensing, radiative transfer theory and 
applications, electromagnetics, antennas and microwave circuits, electronic instru
-mentation, airborne sensors, meteorology, and oceanography. Dr. Gasiewski was 
the 2005-2006 president of the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society and 
was the General Co-chair of IGARSS 2006 in Denver, Colorado. He is also a mem
-ber of the International Union of Radio Science (URSI), where he currently serves 
as vice chair of the United States National Committee for the International Union 
of Radio Science (USNC-URSI) Commission F. He served on the U.S. National 
Research Council™s Committee on Radio Frequencies (CORF) from 1989 to 1995 
and on the USNC-URSI from 1996 to 1997. 
Donald C. Backer 
is a professor of astronomy and chair of the Astronomy Depart
-ment at the University of California, Berkeley. Professor Backer received a bachelor 
of engineering physics degree from Cornell University in 1966, a Master of
 Science 
degree in radio astronomy from Manchester University in 1968, and a Ph.D. in 
astronomy from Cornell University in 1971. He spent 2 years as a pos
tdoctoral 
research assistant at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO) in 
 
Charlottesville, Virginia, and 2 years as a National Research Council (NRC) Fellow 
at NASA™s Goddard Space Flight Center. Since 1975 he has been at the University of 
California, Berkeley. His past duties have included serving as executive of˜cer, and 
later chair, of the U.S. Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) network. More 
recently he has served on the board of the Berkeley-Illinois-Maryland Association 
and the visiting committees of the NRAO and the Haystack Observatory and is 
currently on the visiting committee of the Arecibo Observatory serving as chair. 
He chaired Commission J of the U.S. National Committee for the International 
Union of Radio Science from 1997 to 1999 and was an NRC ex of˜cio member. 
 
Professor Backer™s research interests have focused on pulsars and active galactic 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.201APP
ENDIX
 B
nuclei. One research effort involves the timing of an array of millisecond pulsars for 
use as celestial clocks. The long-term goal is setting limits on the gravitational wave 
background that may result from the coalescence of massive black holes in distant 
galaxies. His short-term goals include the investigation of small-scale turbulence in 
the interstellar plasma. He is involved with instrumentation for pulsar data acquisi
-tion at the Arecibo, Green Bank, Effelsberg, and Nançay Observatories. Another of 
Professor Backer™s activities is focused on a deeper understanding of an enigmatic 
object in our galactic center, which may be the site of a massive black hole. VLBI 
observations at millimeter wavelengths are being pursued as well as proper motion 
measurements and also circular polarization. Professor Backer is a past member 
of the NRC™s Committee on Radio Frequencies (former chair), the Atacama Large 
Millimeter Array Review Committee, and the 1980s Astronomy Survey Commit
-tee. He currently serves on the Committee on Astronomy and Astrophysics and the 
United States National Committee for the International Union of Radio Science.
Roberta Balstad 
(formerly Roberta Balstad Miller) is a senior research scientist at 
Columbia University and a senior fellow with the Center for International Earth 
Sciences Information Network (CIESIN). Dr. Balstad has published extensively on 
science policy, information technology and scienti˜c research, remote sensing appli
-cations and policy, and the role of the social sciences in understanding global envi
-ronmental change. She is the author of numerous articles and books, including 
City 
and Hinterland: A Case Study of Urban Growth and Regional De
velopment
 (1979), 
and editor, with Harriet Zuckerman, of 
Science Indicators: Implications for Research 
and Policy
 (1980). Dr. Balstad received her Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota 
in 1974. She was a senior fellow at Oxford University in 1991 to 1992 and a guest 
scholar at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in 1994. She is 
currently chair of the U.S. National Committee on Science and Technology Data 
(CODATA) and chaired the Priority Area Assessment Panel on Scienti˜c Data and 
Information of the International Council for Science (ICSU). She is a member of 
the board of directors of the Open Geospatial Consortium and of the U.S. National 
Committee for the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis. Before 
 
joining Columbia University, Dr. Balstad had been the director of the Division of 
Social and Economic Sciences at the National Science Foundation, the founder and 
˜rst executive director of the Consortium of Social Science Associations (COSSA), 
and president/chief executive of˜cer of CIESIN. In 1998, she led CIESIN™s transi
-tion from Saginaw, Michigan, to become part of the Earth Institute at Columbia 
University, where she served as CIESIN™s director through April 2006. Dr. Balstad 
has lectured widely, both in the United States and abroad. From 1992 to 1994, she 
was vice president of the International Social Science Council and has also served 
as chair of the NRC Steering Committee on Space Applications and Commercial
-ization, of the NATO Advisory Panel on Advanced Scienti˜c
 Workshops/Advanced 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
202Research Institutes, of the American Association for the Advancement of Science™s 
Committee on Science, Engineering and Public Policy, and of the Advisory Commit
-tee of the Luxembourg Income Study. She currently serves as chair of St. Antony™s 
College Trust (Oxford University) in North America. 
Steven W. Ellingson 
is an associate professor in the Bradley Department of 
 
Electrical and Computer Engineering at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University. Dr. Ellingson received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Ohio 
State University in 2000. Before going to Virginia Tech, he held research positions 
at Ohio State University, Raytheon, and Booz Allen Hamilton, Inc. Dr. Ellingson 
was previously a captain in the U.S. Army, on active duty between 1989 and 
1993. His research interests are in the general areas of electr
omagnetics, applied 
signal processing, and instrumentation. He is speci˜cally interested in direction 
˜nding, interference mitigation, wireless communications, radio astronomy, and 
the design of antennas and receivers. He has been working closely with the Long 
Wavelength Array. Dr. Ellingson is a member of the NRC™s Committee on Radio 
Frequencies and is a senior member of the Institute for Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers. 
Darrel Emerson 
was an assistant director of the National Radio Astronomy 
Observatory (NRAO), responsible for Arizona Operations, in Tucson, Arizona. 
His responsibilities included the operation of the NRAO 12-meter telescope at 
Kitt Peak, which undertakes fundamental astronomical research in the range 
67-300 GHz. He is heavily involved in the Atacama Large Millimeter Array project. 
Dr. Emerson received his Ph.D. in radio astronomy in 1973 from the Cavendish 
Laboratory at the University of Cambridge, England. Before joining the NRAO, 
he worked for several years with the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy 
100-meter radio telescope at Effelsberg, near Bonn, Germany, and then with the 
Institute for Radio Astronomy in Millimeter-waves in Grenoble, France. His cur
-rent research interests include spectral line studies of nearby normal galaxies and 
the development of millimeter-wave observational techniques. 
Aaron S. Evans
 is an associate professor of astronomy at the University of
 Virginia 
and an associate astronomer at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory. He 
received his Ph.D. in astronomy from the Institute for Astronomy, University of 
Hawaii, in 1996. His current research primarily deals with observations of col
-liding galaxies and their associated phenomena (starbursts and active galactic 
nuclei). The study of these galaxies requires a multi-wavelength approach, which 
to date has included optical to mid-infrared imaging, as well as near-infrared 
and submillimeter spectroscopy. The observing facilities at which he carries out 
these programs are the Mauna Kea Observatories in Hawaii (University of Hawaii 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.203APP
ENDIX
 B
2.2-meter, United Kingdom Infra-Red Telescope, James Clerk Maxwell Telescope, 
W.M. Keck Observatory); the Hubble Space Telescope; the Owens Valley
 Millimeter 
Array in California; the Steward Observatory 12-meter telescope at Kitt Peak, 
Arizona; and the IRAM 30-meter telescope in Spain. Dr. Evans received a NASA/ 
American Society for Engineering Education Faculty Fellowship Award in 2002, 
and chaired the National Science Foundation™s NRAO 5-Year Proposal Panel. He 
also served on the NRC™s Committee to Review the Science Requirements for the 
Atacama Large Millimeter Array.
Joel T. Johnson
 is a professor of electrical and computer engineering in the Depart
-ment of Electrical Engineering at the Ohio State University. He received his Ph.D. 
in 1996 from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Johnson™s research 
interests include microwave remote sensing of geophysical media, both active and 
passive; the application of numerical techniques in electromagnetics to remote 
sensing problems; and the design of systems for radio frequency interference 
mitigation. He served from 2005 to 2009 as chair of the Frequency Allocations in 
Remote Sensing (FARS) Committee of the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Society; the FARS Committee™s mission is to provide technical assessments, guid
-ance, and recommendations regarding matters of frequency sharing and interfer
-ence between remote sensing and other uses of the radio spectrum. 
Paul Kolodzy
 is a private consultant with Kolodzy Consulting, LLC. He received his 
Ph.D. and M.S. in chemical engineering from Case Western Reserve University and 
his B.S. in chemical engineering from Purdue University. Prior to his work as a pri
-vate consultant, he was the senior technology adviser and consultant to M2Z Net
-works. Before joining M2Z Networks he was the director of the Center for Wireless 
Network Security (WiNSeC) at the Stevens Institute of Technology. Prior to serving 
there, he was the senior spectrum policy adviser at the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) and the director of the Spectrum Policy Task Force charged 
with developing the next-generation spectrum policy. Dr. Kolodzy has also been 
a program manager in the Advanced Technology Of˜ce at the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), managing research and development for com
-munications programs developing generation-after-next capabilities. Before serv
-ing at DARPA, he had been the director of Signal Processing and Strategic Initiatives 
at Sanders (now BAE Systems), a premier electronic warfare company. Dr. Kolodzy 
got his start as the group leader and staff member at the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology™s Lincoln Laboratory, working on optical systems for laser radars, 
signal processing, and target recognition for acoustics, radio frequency (synthetic 
aperture radar), and optical signatures. Dr. Kolodzy has 20 years of experience in 
technology development for advanced communications, networking, electronic 
warfare, and spectrum policy for government, privateŒsector, and academic groups. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
204He participated in the NRC Computer Science and Telecommunications Board™s 
Forum on Spectrum Management Policy Reform. 
David B. Kunkee
 conducts microwave remote sensing research at Aerospace Cor
-poration. This research is related to the development of the National Polar-orbiting 
Operational Environmental Satellite System, the Defense Meteorological Satellite 
Program, and NASA™s Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer. Dr. Kunkee is 
active in radio science applications and is an amateur radio hobbyist. He is a member 
of Commission F of the International Union of Radio Science and is a member of 
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers™ Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Society, Antennas and Propagation Society, and Microwave Theory and Techniques 
Society. He received his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the Georgia Institute 
of Technology in 1995. 
Molly K. Macauley
 is a senior fellow and director of academic programs at 
Resources for the Future, Inc. (RFF). Dr. Macauley™s research at RFF has included 
public ˜nance, energy economics, the value of information, and economics and 
policy issues of outer space. She has been a visiting professor in the Department of 
Economics at the Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Macauley has testi˜ed before Con
-gress on numerous occasions on topics including space commercialization, remote 
sensing, and legislative and regulatory space policy. She has served on many com
-mittees, including the congressionally mandated Economic Study of Space Solar 
Power for which she was chair. She currently serves on the Space Studies Board of 
the NRC, the Applied Sciences Advisory Group for NASA™s Earth Sciences, and the 
Climate Working Group of NOAA™s Science Advisory Board. 
James M. Moran
 is a professor and senior radio astronomer at the Harvard-
Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and chair of the Department of Astronomy 
at Harvard University. He has made fundamental and far-ranging contributions 
to astronomy through his key developments of radio spectroscopy combined 
with interferometry. He has used these techniques to study cosmic masers and 
has obtained, among other important results, direct and de˜nitive evidence for 
the existence of a supermassive black hole. Dr. Moran observes molecular masers 
to study the dynamics of gas surrounding putative black holes in nearby galaxies. 
These masers can be tracked precisely in position and velocity with intercontinental 
arrays of radio telescopes operating as very long baseline interferometers. With the 
high angular resolution provided by these interferometers, he is able to measure the 
orbital characteristics of the gas as well as the mass and location of the black hole. 
Dr. Moran was principal investigator of the Sub
-millimeter Array, an eight
-element 
linked interferometric array, built near the summit of Mauna Kea in Hawaii and 
used to study planetary atmospheres, star formation, quasars, dust and gas distribu
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.205APP
ENDIX
 B
tion in nearby galaxies, and spectral lines from highly redshifted
 galaxies. Dr. Moran 
served on the U.S. National Committee for the International Astronomical Union 
(member, January 2000 through December 2002), the Astronomy and
 Astrophysics 
Survey Committee (member, August 1998 through June 2002) and its Panel on 
Radio and Sub-millimeter-wave Astronomy (vice chair, November 1998 through 
December 2001), the U.S. National Committee for the International Union of 
Radio Science (ex of˜cio member, January 1991 through December 1993), and 
CORF™s Subcommittee on Radio Astronomy (member, July 1984 through June 
1987). Dr. Moran is a member of the National Academy of Sciences. 
Lee G. Mundy
 is a professor and chair of the Department of Astronomy at the 
University of Maryland at College Park. He received his Ph.D. in astronomy in 
1984 from the University of Texas at Austin. Dr. Mundy studies the dense inter
-stellar medium, star formation, and the initial stages of planet formation utiliz
-ing observations at centimeter through near-infrared wavelengths and radiative 
transfer modeling tools. The observations are mainly acquired with the Very Large 
Array and Berkeley Illinois Maryland Association/Combined Array for Research in 
 
Millimeter-wave Astronomy, and through a Space Infrared Telescope Facility legacy 
project that is mapping ˜ve major molecular clouds and more than 100 compact 
cores. Dr. Mundy is also collaborating with the NASA Goddard Space Flight Center 
in studies of a number of mission concepts for submillimeter through near-infrared 
wavelength space interferometers. Dr. Mundy has published extensively. 
Timothy J. Pearson
 is a senior research associate at the California Institute of 
Technology. He received his Ph.D. from the University of Cambridge in 1977, after 
which he held a postdoctoral position at Caltech and has been at Caltech since then. 
Dr. Pearson™s research interests include the statistics of radio sources, and radio 
interferometry and its application to observations of active galactic nuclei and the 
cosmic microwave background radiation. He uses radio telescopes at Cambridge, 
the Owens Valley Radio Observatory, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, 
and the Cosmic Background Imager in Chile. Currently he is an associate editor 
for the 
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.
Christopher S. Ruf
 is a professor in the Department of Atmospheric, Oceanic, and 
Space Sciences and in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Sciences at the University of Michigan. He is also director of the Space Physics 
Research Laboratory. He received his Ph.D. in electrical and computer engineer
-ing from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Dr. Ruf works in microwave 
radiometry, an important area of remote sensing and radio frequency protection 
issues. His research interests include Earth environmental remote sensing, syn
-thetic thinned aperture radiometry, the mitigation of radio frequency interference, 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
206self-contained end-to-end radiometer calibration systems, the use of stationary 
statistical properties of upwelling radiances to constrain absolute accuracy and the 
long-term stability of satellite measurements, and the pro˜ling of the lower, middle, 
and upper atmosphere using multispectral, multisensor, and climatological data
-bases. Before assuming his position at the University of Michigan, Dr. Ruf had been 
an instrument scientist for the NASA TOPEX and Jason-I microwave radiometers, 
and he is currently a science team member for the NASA Juno, Aquarius, and Global 
Precipitation Measurement (GPM) Microwave Imager microwave radiometers. 
Dr. Ruf has received numerous awards, including the International Geoscience and 
Remote Sensing Symposium Prize Paper Award. He is the editor in chief of the 
IEEE 
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
 a member of URSI Commission F, 
and a past member of the NRC™s Committee on Radio Frequencies.
Frederick S. Solheim
 is the president of Radiometrics Corporation, where he devel
-ops ground-based microwave radiometers for atmospheric and terrestrial remote 
sensing. Dr. Solheim was heavily involved with the development of the patented 
frequency-agile design that allows ˚exibility for a variety of atmospheric remote 
sensing applications used in the company™s radiometers. His research interests 
include microwave radiometry and radiosonding for pro˜les of temperature, water 
vapor, and cloud liquid. Dr. Solheim also conducts research in signal propagation. 
Previously he worked with the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research 
in Boulder, Colorado. 
David H. Staelin
 is a professor of electrical engineering in the Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science (EECS) at the Massachusetts Insti
-tute of Technology (MIT). He has been a member of the EECS faculty and the 
Research Laboratory of Electronics since 1965. He also was the assistant director, 
MIT Lincoln Laboratory (1990-2001); co-founder, MIT Venture Mentoring Service 
(2000); chair, MIT™s EECS Graduate Area in Electronics, Computers, and Systems 
(1976-1990); and a faculty member of MIT™s Leaders for Manufacturing Program 
(1985-1998). He was a director of Environmental Research and Technology, Inc. 
(1969-1978) and a co-founder and chair of PictureTel Corp. (1984-1987). His 
research interests include remote sensing, wireless communications, signal pro
-cessing, estimation, environmental sensing, microwave atmospheric sounding, and 
meteorological satellites. Dr. Staelin was a member of the President™s Information 
Technology Advisory Committee (2003-2005), chair of the NRC™s Committee 
on Radio Frequencies (1983-1986), and a member of several NASA committees 
and working groups, including the Space Applications Advisory Committee, the 
Advanced Microwave Sounder Working Group, the Geostationary PlatformŠEarth 
Science Steering Committee; and the Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission Science 
Steering Group. He was the principal investigator for the NASA Nimbus-E Micro
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.207APP
ENDIX
 B
wave Spectrometer (launched in 1972 on Nimbus-5) and the Scanning Microwave 
Spectrometer (launched in 1975 on Nimbus-6). He was a co-investigator of the 
Scanning Multichannel Microwave Spectrometer (launched in 1977 on Nimbus 7) 
and the Voyager Planetary Radio Astronomy Experiment (launched in 1977 on 
Voyagers 1 and 2). Additionally, he is a member of the NASA Atmospheric Infrared 
Sounder team (Aqua launched in 2002), the NPOESS Preparatory Project Science 
Team (to be launched in about 2010), the NOAA International Program Of˜ce 
Sounder Operational Algorithm Team, and the NASA Precipitation Mapping Mis
-sion Science Team. Dr. Staelin is a fellow of the IEEE and American Association 
for the Advancement of Science and received the 1996 Distinguished Achievement 
Award from the IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Society. 
Alan B. Tanner
 is an engineer at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory. He received 
his Ph.D. in electrical engineering in 1989 from the University of
 Massachusetts at 
Amherst. His research interests include propagation, aperture synthesis,
 radiometers, 
and sounding. Dr. Tanner is involved in GeoSTAR, a microwave sounder intended 
for geosynchronous orbit. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208Appendix C
Density of Interferers Equation
The power received at a radiometer due to the emission of 
PT watts from a 
particular interferer at distance 
R can be predicted using the Friis formula:
 PPG
RAe
RTT
ef
f42 (C.1)
where 
PR is the power received at the radiometer in watts, 
GT is the transmitter 
antenna gain in the direction of the radiometer (dimensionless), 
Aeff
 is the effective 
aperture of the receive antenna (square meters), and 
eŒ describes the attenuation 
of the transmitted power by atmospheric gases, clouds, and rain along the path 
from the transmitter to the receiver. The product 
PTGT when using the maximum of 
the transmitter antenna gain is also referred to as the equivalent isotropic radiated 
power (EIRP) of a source. For multiple uncorrelated radio frequency interference 
(RFI) sources within a radiometer footprint, the EIRP of the interference is usually 
approximated as the sum of that of all the individual sources. 
The received power 
PR produces a brightness-temperature perturbation of 
 TPkB
R
K (C.2)
where 
k is Boltzmann™s constant (1.38 × 10
Œ23
 W Œ Hz
Œ1
KŒ1
) and 
B is the radiometer 
bandwidth (Hz). Combining Equations C.1 and C.2 and using the property that 
the radiometer beamwidth (and hence footprint size) is related to the antenna size 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.209APP
ENDIX
 C(and hence to the square root of the effective aperture area), the density (in W/m
2) of the EIRP within the radiometer ˜eld of view can be related to the maximum 
tolerable brightness perturbation:
 PG
ATkB
eTT

2264
Wm
 (C.3)
where 
A is the radiometer footprint area (m
2); Equation C.3 shows that it is the 
density of EIRP per area (computed over the radiometer footprint) that determines 
the interference to the radiometer. EIRP limits on individual transmitters must 
be combined with information on the expected number of transmitters within a 
speci˜c area in order to predict or interpret observed interference levels 
T.As an example, a 6.9 GHz Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth 
(AMSR-E) observation (2,500 km
2 footprint area) with a bandwidth of 350 MHz 
will experience a brightness increase of 1 K if even a single interferer having a 130 
milliwatt EIRP (in the direction of the radiometer antenna) is included in the 
footprint area. That such low radiated interference powers can perturb observed 
brightness temperatures demonstrates the high sensitivity of Earth Exploration-
Satellite Service observations to interference. The fact that multiple interference 
sources may reside within any radiometer footprint substantially exacerbates the 
problem. The impact of a speci˜c interference level on a particular geophysical 
measurement depends on the sensitivity of the measurement to changes in bright
-ness temperature, as discussed in §2.2 in Chapter 2 of this report. The accuracy 
achieved in current radiometer systems typically makes even small changes in 
brightness caused by radio frequency interference to have a signi˜cant impact on 
measured products.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21
0Appendix D
Analysis of Out-of-Band 
Emission Impacts to the EESS 
from §27.53 of the FCC Rules
The general analysis presented here is applicable both to Earth Explora
-tion-Satellite Service (EESS) radiometers and to Radio Astronomy Service (RAS) 
 
radiometers. EESS and RAS radiometers are governed by the same technical prin
-ciples, and for both, a source of radio frequency interference (RFI) operating in 
compliance with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules can delete
-riously affect a radiometer operating in a primary protected band, as described 
below.
Parameters of two Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Air Route Surveil
-lance Radars (ARSRs) are given in Table D.1, from Piepmeier and Pellerano.
1According to FCC rules, 47 C.F.R., §27.53, Part (j) (page 387) out-of-band (OOB) 
emission limits for the class of radars speci˜ed in Table D.1 are as follows:
For operations in the unpaired 1390-1392 MHz band and the paired 1392-1395 MHz 
and 1432-1435 MHz bands, the power of any emission outside the licensee™s frequency 
band(s) of operation shall be attenuated below the transmitter power (P, in Watts) by at 
least (43 + 10 log (P)) dB.
2 Note that the ﬁlogﬂ function refers here to the base 10 logarithm. In order to 
determine if the speci˜ed attenuation is achieved, measurement of the out-of-band 
1 
J.R. Piepmeier and F. A. Pellerano, ﬁMitigation of Terrestrial Radar Interference in L-Band Space
-borne Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
200
6 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium (IGARSS), 
Denver, Colorado, 2006, pp. 2292-2296, DOI 10.1109/IGARSS.2006.593. 
2 
See 47 C.F.R., §27.53, Part (j), available at http://ecfr.gpoaccess.gov/; accessed January 15, 2010.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.211APP
ENDIX
 Dradiated power in a 1 MHz bandwidth is speci˜ed by the FCC. It is therefore pos
-sible to radiate larger out-of-band total powers in bandwidths larger than 1 MHz. 
These regulations specify for the ARSR-4 radar, for example, that the allowed OOB 
emission is 
Pt_OOB
 = 10 log(6 · 10
4 W) Œ (43 + 10 log(6 · 10
4 W)) = Œ43 dBW (peak) 
in a 1 MHz bandwidth.
The Friis formula speci˜es the power received by an EESS radiometer from a 
transmitting source:
 PLPG
GRRF
IFD
Rtt
rr
rt
t

142

,,
 where 
LFDR
 is the frequency dependent rejection (FDR) factor, 
Pt is the transmit 
power of the radar, 
Gt 
(t, 
t) is the gain of the radar transmitting antenna in the 
direction of the radiometer, 
Gr 
(r, 
r) is the gain of the radiometer antenna in the 
direction of the radar, 
 is the wavelength of the radar frequency, and 
R is the range 
between the radar and the radiometer. Using this equation to test the permissible 
spurious and OOB power levels according to §27.53, set 
LFDR
 = 1.0, since it is 
assumed that the OOB emissions occur within the radiometer bandwidth. 
Assume that 
Gt (
t, 
t) 
 20 dBi ( ~ Œ15 dB from maximum gain due to 
elevation differences in the line-of-sight [LOS] to the space-based radiometer), 
Gr 
(r, 
r) of the Aquarius (or similar) radiometer is ~25 dB, 
 = 0.21 m, and 
R  1 
 10
6 m LOS from a low Earth orbit (LEO) of altitude ~700 km. These values 
result in: 
PRFI_OOB
 ~ (Œ43 dBW) + (20 dBi) + (25 dBi) + (Œ155.5 dB) = Œ153.5 dBW 
for an ARSR-4 radar system. This is a peak power level whose impact would be 
reduced when integrated over a longer integration period; the most conservative 
(i.e., shortest) relevant ratio of the radar pulse width to the radiometer integration 
time is ~(6 
 10
Œ5
)/(1 
 10
Œ3
) = 6 
 10
Œ2
  Œ12.2 dB. However, the OOB received 
TABLE D.1
 Parameters of Two Federal Aviation Administration Air Route Surveillance 
RadarsName
Frequency 
(MHz)
Peak 
Power 
(kW)
Antenna 
Gain 
 (dBi)
Azimuth 
Beamwidth
 (degrees)
Scan 
Rate 
 (rpm)
Pulse 
Width 
(µsec)
Pulse 
Repetition 
Frequency 
(PRF) 
 (Hz)
ARSR-3
1250-1350
5000
34
1.25
52310-365
ARSR-4
1215-1400
60
35
1.4
59/60
216/72
SOURCE: J.R. Piepmeier and F.A. Pellerano, ﬁMitigation of Terrestrial Radar Interference in L-Band Space
-borne Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 2006 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium (IGARSS),
 Denver, Colorado, 2006, pp. 2292-2296, DOI 10.1109/IGARSS.2006.593.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
212power is increased by the fact that the EESS radiometer passband is ~27 MHz, 
compared to the 1 MHz bandwidth speci˜ed in §27.53(a)4; the case of OOB 
emissions at the permitted level throughout the entire 27 MHz bandwidth adds 
14.3 dB to 
Pt_OOB
 . 
Therefore, for a single integration time of 1 ms, the spurious power received by 
the EESS radiometer from a single radar may be ~ Œ153.5 Œ 12.2 + 14.3 = Œ151.4 
dBW. In contrast, the single sample sensitivity of an L-band EESS radiometer with 
a 1 ms integration time can be derived using similar parameters: 
 TTT
TRE
CNF
SY
SR
EC
AN
T

290
10
12
010
K100
K for H-polarization over the ocean. Therefore the sensitivity is 
 TBW
RM
S


100
100
11
02
71
006
136
in
t.K
.The minimum detectable change in power of the EESS radiometer with a factor 
of 10 safety margin for a single sample is as follows:
 kT
B





13
81
02
71
00
06
166
23
16
1..JK
sK
..
5d
BW
. In this scenario there is safety margin of ~10 in the impact from a single radar. 
This means that the OOB emission requirements are inadequate to protect EESS, 
and they do not even closely meet the expectations of International Telecommuni
-cation Union-Radio (ITU-R) RS.1029 that interfering signal levels should be below 
Œ171 dBW within a 27 MHz bandwidth at 1.4 GHz by roughly 5 dB. Note that this 
analysis is for a single radar within the footprint of the radiometer. More than one 
radar in the radiometer ˜eld of view results in further reduction of the safety fac
-tor and errors in the data that are virtually impossible to detect without auxiliary 
information. Unfortunately, it appears that limits of the adjacent signal rejection of 
the EESS radiometer (due to ˜lter limitations) result in additional contamination 
of the EESS radiometer ˜eld as detailed in Piepmeier and Pellerano.
33 
J.R. Piepmeier and F.A. Pellerano, ﬁMitigation of Terrestrial Radar Interference in L-Band Space
-borne Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
200
6 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium (IGARSS), 
Denver, Colorado, 2006, pp. 2292-2296, DOI 10.1109/IGARSS.2006.593. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.213APP
ENDIX
 DIn EESS radiometer systems, RFI levels are cumulative. Therefore, impacts from 
adjacent signals described by Piepmeier and Pellerano,
4 coupled with the additional 
impacts from spurious and OOB emissions in the above analysis, suggest that a 
single ARSR-type radar operating in full compliance with FCC §27.53 can impact 
the operation of EESS radiometers operating in the 1.4 GHz protected region.
This analysis has assumed that the OOB emissions from the radar are at 
the maximum allowable level (Œ43 dBW/MHz) throughout the entire 27 MHz 
 
radiometer bandwidth; that the radar transmits its peak power over its pulse width, 
which lies entirely within the radiometer integration period; and that the antennas 
are oriented so that 15 dB below maximum antenna coupling occurs.
4 
J.R. Piepmeier and F.A. Pellerano, ﬁMitigation of Terrestrial Radar Interference in L-Band Space
-borne Microwave Radiometers,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
200
6 International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Symposium (IGARSS), 
Denver, Colorado, 2006, pp. 2292-2296, DOI 10.1109/IGARSS.2006.593. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214
Appendix E
Descriptions of Earth 
Exploration-Satellite Service 
Parameters Related to Table 2.1
AIR TEMPERATURE PROFILES
Global air temperature pro˜les are critical to numerical weather predictions 
(NPWs) because temperature is inversely related to air density and therefore to 
the differential gravitational forces on air that help drive local and global winds. 
Temperature also serves as a tracer of atmospheric motion. Although satelliteborne 
infrared imaging spectrometers can measure these pro˜les, clouds often introduce 
signi˜cant errors, particularly in the lower troposphere, in certain polar seasons, 
and in ﬁbaroclinicﬂ regions, that commonly exert a disproportionate in˚uence on 
future weather events. Current operational weather satellites combine both micro
-wave and infrared spectrometer data to take advantage of the relative strengths of 
each; this sensor combination probably makes the single most important contribu
-tion of weather satellite data to the dramatic improvements achieved in providing 
useful global weather predictions up to a week in advance. Although the 50-60 GHz 
oxygen absorption bands provide most such data, they are generally supplemented 
by other bands that help correct the results for precipitation, humidity, and surface 
effects, discussed below in this appendix. In addition, it has been found that the 
original operational temperature sounding microwave instruments (microwave 
sounding units, or MSUs) can be calibrated across satellites to yield a very sensi
-tive indicator of global warming in the middle troposphere with accuracies on the 
order of 0.1 K per decade. These observations are being continued using successor 
instruments such as advanced MSUs (AMSUs). Systematic radio frequency interfer
-Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.215APP
ENDIX
 Eence (RFI) at levels too low to be otherwise detected could, in principle, introduce 
errors in such measurements.
PRECIPITATION RATE
Observations of global precipitation are important to both weather forecasts 
and climate studies. They are particularly useful in monitoring severe storms 
such as hurricanes and damaging fronts. Precipitation is important not only to 
safety, agriculture, and commerce, but also to hydrology and predictions of ˚oods, 
soil moisture, and sea surface salinity (SSS). Since the locations of convective 
precipitating cells cannot be predicted well, and because they sometimes reside 
under higher cloud shields such as those obscuring hurricanes and other severe 
storms, only microwave sensors can reveal their intensities and locations. Precipi
-tation is generally observed using the same sensors as those used for water vapor, 
which include (1) window-channel sensors at frequencies such as 18.7, 22, 23.8, 
31.4, 37, and 89 GHz that observe raindrop emission against colder backgrounds 
such as ocean and low-emissivity soil (e.g., Special Sensor Microwave/Imager 
[SSM/I], Special Sensor Microwave Imager/Sounder [SSMI/S], Advanced Micro
-wave Scanning Radiometer-Earth [AMSR-E]), and (2) the opaque water vapor 
resonance 176-191 GHz in combination with lower frequencies such as 89, 150, and 
164-168 GHz; glaciated cell tops are particularly visible and sensitive to convective 
strength. In addition, the opaque oxygen bands 50-56 GHz are useful because they 
are sensitive to ice particle size distributions and therefore to the heavier precipita
-tion rates (e.g., AMSU, SSMI/S).
SEA SURFACE SALINITY
Sea surface salinity is a critical missing parameter that scientists need in order 
to meet climate research goals. Measuring global SSS over time will contribute to 
scientists™ understanding of change in the global Earth system and how the system 
responds to natural and human-induced change. Global measurements of SSS can 
be achieved to ~0.2 practical salinity units using space-based passive microwave 
radiometry at 1.4 GHz and radar scatterometry at 1.26 GHz.
1 These measurements 
can provide signi˜cant new information about how global precipitation, evapora
-tion, and the water cycle are changing. Global SSS variability provides key insight 
regarding freshwater ˚ow into and out of the ocean associated with precipitation, 
evaporation, ice melting, and river runoff. Global SSS measurements will also pro
-vide important background about how climate variation induces changes in global 
ocean circulation. The combination of global SSS and sea surface temperature 
1 
See http://aquarius.nasa.gov/science.php; accessed on January 15, 2010.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
216(SST) measurements can be used to determine seawater density, which regulates 
ocean circulation and the formation of water masses. 
SEA SURFACE TEMPERATURE
Global all-weather sea surface temperature data are critical for NWP and cli
-mate research. SST measurements are important for understanding heat exchange 
and
 coupling between the ocean and atmosphere, and SST data are required by 
operational ocean analyses in order to properly constrain upper-ocean circulation 
and thermal structure.
2 SST measurements in clear air can be obtained using
 electro-
optical (traditional) instruments; however, clouds prevent these measurements, so 
passive microwave measurements within the 5 to 6 GHz region are critical for 
obtaining coverage in areas that are seasonally cloud-covered. For example, areas in 
the U.S. Exclusive Economic Zone off the coast of Washington and Oregon are not 
imaged with traditional satellite SST sensors for weeks at a time owing to persistent 
stratus cloud cover, necessitating an all-weather solution. The standard SST mea
-surement uncertainty for space-based SST measurements is 0.5 K at 50 km (passive 
microwave, all-weather capability). To achieve this standard for microwave measure
-ments, interfering signal power within a (typical) receiving bandwidth of 350 MHz 
(e.g., AMSR-E) must be below approximately Œ126 dBm
3 using a factor of 10 power 
margin. For reference, this power level is effectively 3 dB higher than recommended 
levels from International Telecommunication Union-Radio (ITU-R) RS.1029, but 
still far below the level of interference that would be considered acceptable for nearly 
all other communication and signal systems. Space-based SST measurements near 
6 GHz near land are impacted primarily by land-based emitters operating in the 
˜xed service within full compliance of their regulations. Less pervasive RFI impacts 
are encountered from shipboard radar. For SST measurements using 10.7 GHz such 
as TRMM™s TMI and AMSR-E, substantive RFI is incurred from geostationary trans
-mitters operating immediately adjacent to the upper edge of the 10.7 GHz EESS band 
segment as depicted in Figure 2.16 in Chapter 2 in this report. 
SOIL MOISTURE
Global, high-quality soil moisture measurements are expected to advance 
weather forecasting and Earth hydrology studies signi˜cantly. A proposed NASA 
2 
C.J. Donlon, P.J. Minnett, C. Gentmann, T.J. Nightingale, I.J. Barton, B. Ward, and M.J. Murray, 
ﬁToward Improved Validation of Satellite Sea Surface Skin Temperature Measurements for Climate 
Researchﬂ 
Journal of Climate,
 15: 353-369 (February 2002).
3 
With a factor of 0.5 sensitivity, this value is (1.38 
 10
Œ23
 J 
Ł 
KŒ1
)(0.05 K)(350 
 10
6 Hz) = 
2.42 
 10
Œ16
 W.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.217APP
ENDIX
 Emission, Soil Moisture Active Passive (SMAP), would provide measurements of 
soil moisture using 1.4 GHz passive microwave radiometry and 1.26 GHz radar 
scatterometer to measure soil moisture to approximately 4 percent uncertainty 
with about 1.5 kg/m
2 surface vegetation water content. Soil moisture measure
-ments at higher frequencies, such as those planned for the National Polar-orbiting 
Operational Environmental Satellite System (NPOESS) near 6 and 10 GHz, will also 
provide additional data refresh reducing data latency and measurements capable of 
producing soil moisture estimates to approximately 8 percent uncertainty at 50 km 
horizontal spatial resolution. 
A National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP) Scienti˜c Assess
-ment has determined that the NCEP Eta model requires soil moisture to prop
-erly calculate the energy ˚uxes at the surface. To support the model, the U.S. 
Department of Commerce requires measurements at the surface with a horizontal 
resolution of 50 km, mapping uncertainty of 3 km, and measurement accuracy of 
approximately 10 cm of water per 1 meter column of soil.
4SEA SURFACE WIND VECTOR
Space-based remote sensing of sea surface winds (SSWs) depends on precision 
measurements of polarimetric upwelling microwave emissions from the ocean 
surface at 10.7-37.0 GHz. High-quality SST measurements based on 6 GHz region 
brightness temperatures are also required to produce the best SSW direction 
product. Global SSW data are critical for high-quality NWP forecasts, developing 
tropical cyclone warnings, aircraft and ship operations, ship routing, and other 
civil and military operations. SSW data constitute one of the most important 
parameters (Environmental Data Records, or EDRs) in operational meteorological 
remote sensing. The accuracy of the wind vector products obtained from WindSat 
retrievals to date has reached or exceeded that available from active scatterometer 
systems such as QuikScat at moderate to high wind speeds, and the ability of 
microwave
 radiometers to simultaneously measure atmospheric and sea tem
-perature properties motivates attempts to improve the accuracy of the radiometer 
products further. 
SEA ICE
One of the ˜rst applications of space-based passive microwave imagery was for 
monitoring sea ice characteristics. The Electrical Scanning Microwave
 Radiometer 
(ESMR) data set provides the earliest all-weather, all-season imagery of polar 
4 
NPOESS Integrated Operational Requirements Document (IORD), Acquisition Decision Memo
-randum 01-xxx, March 16, 2001. 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
218sea ice. Some satellite data of sea ice in the visible and infrared wavelengths were 
available in the late 1960s and early 1970s (before the introduction of space-based 
passive microwave observations), but since the polar regions are either dark or 
cloud-covered for much of the year, the generation of consistent, long-term data 
records from visible and infrared sensing was not practical.
Passive microwave data introduced a major advance in the usefulness of satel
-lite sea ice imaging. The value of passive microwave data for sea ice studies derives 
from the large contrast in microwave emissivities between sea ice and open water. 
At 19.35 GHz, open water has an emissivity of approximately 0.44, whereas vari
-ous sea ice types have emissivities ranging from approximately 0.8 to 0.97. The 
resulting contrast in microwave brightness temperatures allows accurate estimates 
of sea ice concentrations (percentages of ocean area covered by sea ice) and hence 
the identi˜cation of sea ice distributions throughout the region of observation, as 
well as temporal variations of these distributions throughout the time period of 
observation.
5WATER VAPOR PROFILES
Global water vapor pro˜les are essential to the NWP of rainfall and drought, 
and they help constrain such predictions in general. As in the case of temperature 
pro˜le measurements, combined microwave and infrared spectral data can yield 
near-all-weather global performance despite most clouds. Two different types of 
microwave observations are used, those in transparent bands within which the 
water vapor absorption stands out against the colder ocean background (ocean 
partially re˚ects the extremely cold cosmic background radiation), or against that 
of cold low-emissivity land. No pro˜le information is usually retrieved, only an 
estimate of the column-integrated abundance. The frequencies most often used 
for this purpose include 18.7, 22, 23.8, 31.4, 37, and 89 GHz. To improve retrieval 
accuracies, these channels are often dual-polarized (horizontal and vertical) and 
scanned at a constant angle of incidence (e.g., SSM/I, SSM/IS, and AMSR-E). In 
addition, the opaque water vapor resonance near 183 GHz is often used in combi
-nation with some of the lower frequencies; these frequencies generally include 89, 
150, 164-168, and 176-191 GHz, but must be used in combination with tempera
-ture pro˜le information to yield the most accurate results (e.g., AMSU, SSM/IS). 
Instruments retrieving water vapor pro˜les are generally used to retrieve other 
parameters simultaneously, such as cloud water content, precipitation rate, ice and 
snow information, and so on.
5 
T.T. Wilheit, 
Nimbus-
5 User™s Guide,
 NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center,
Greenbelt, Maryland, 
pp. 59-105.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.219APP
ENDIX
 ECLOUD WATER
The ability of microwave radiometers to measure water vapor and cloud water 
directly is a signi˜cant capability, provided by no other remote sensing system. 
Radars measure cloud re˚ectivity, which has a strong dependence on water droplet 
size. Uncertainty in the cloud droplet size distribution makes radar measurements 
of cloud water inaccurate. Because liquid water is a strong absorber (and hence 
emitter) of microwave energy, the volume of cloud water can be more accurately 
measured with microwave radiometers. The microwave technique is also far more 
accurate than infrared or optical methods owing to the high re˚ectance, or albedo, 
of clouds at these wavelengths.
NUMERICAL WEATHER PREDICTION
In general NWP models such as the European Centre for Medium-Range 
Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), Navy NoGAPS use a full range of passive microwave 
data: 19.35, 22.235, 23.6-24.0, 31.3-31.8, 37, 50.3-57.3, 85.5, 89, 150, 176-190 GHz 
operationally. Although space-based global microwave observations have their 
largest impact where other data sources are sparse, signi˜cant positive impact is 
also identi˜ed in data-rich areas. It is estimated that in the Southern Hemisphere, 
microwave observations provide 60 to 70 percent of the impact of all satellite data 
in the ECMWF model. The total proportional impact, that is, the relative reduc
-tion if a particular band is lost, is over 50 percent for the band 54-57 GHz alone. 
Similarly, a loss of 24 GHz data would represent 30 percent of the total impact 
from microwave measurements. Note that these estimates assume that all other data 
remain intact, so the loss of more than one channel is more serious than a linear 
combination of losses would suggest. Other bands at a similar level of importance 
are 31.3-31.8, 57-59, 89, and 183.31 GHz.
6TRACE GASES
Although the protective stratospheric ozone layer is indeed recovering, the need 
for passive millimeter- and submillimeter-wave monitoring continues today. The 
ability to monitor the individual abundance, spatial distribution, and temporal 
trend of each of the trace species that contributes to the depletion process allows the 
ef˜cacy of the Montreal Protocol to be directly veri˜ed. More importantly, recent, 
large-scale changes in the stratospheric makeup suggest that the rate of recovery 
of the ozone layer may be slowing.
6 
S. English, 
The Value of Passi
ve Microwa
ve Satellite Obser
vations to NWP,
 Forecasting Research 
Technical Report No. 484, Exeter, U.K.: Met Of˜ce, 2006.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
220Millimeter- and submillimeter-wave frequencies distributed from approxi
-mately 183 to 916 GHz are ideally suited for observing ice clouds.
7 These high 
frequencies are necessary in order for scattering to be the dominant interaction 
mechanism. The wide range of frequencies accommodates the large dynamic range 
of ice water path that occurs in nature and is incorporated in the Submillimeter 
Infrared Radiometer Ice Cloud Experiment (SIRICE) mission that is currently in 
pre-Phase A development at NASA. See Table 2.4 in Chapter 2 of this report. 
7 
A.J. Gasiewski, ﬁNumerical Sensitivity Analysis of Passive EHF and SMMW Channels to Tropo
-spheric Water Vapor, Clouds, and Precipitation,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
 30: 859-870 (1992); K.F. Evans and G.L. Stephens, ﬁMicrowave Radiative Transfer Through Clouds 
Composed of Realistically Shaped Ice Crystals. Part II: Remote Sensing of Ice Clouds,ﬂ 
Journal of the 
Atmospheric Sciences,
 52: 2058-2072 (1995); K.F. Evans, S.J. Walter, A.J. Heyms˜eld, and M.N. Deeter, 
ﬁModeling of Submillimeter Passive Remote Sensing of Cirrus Clouds,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied Meteorol
-ogy,
 Vol. 37 (1998); K.F. Evans, A.H. Evans, I.G. Nolt, and B.T. Marshall, ﬁThe Prospect for Remote 
Sensing of Cirrus Clouds with a Submillimeter-wave Spectrometer,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied Meteorology,
 38: 514-525 (1999).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.221
ACT
 Atacama Cosmology Telescope 
AGN 
 active galactic nucleus
ALMA
 Atacama Large Millimeter Array
AMSR-E
 Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-Earth
AMSU 
 Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit 
ARM
 Atmospheric Radiation Monitoring
ARSR 
 Air Route Surveillance Radars
ATA 
 The Allen Telescope Array
ATMS
 Advanced Technology Microwave Sounder
AUI
 Associated Universities, Inc.
AVHRR
 Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer
AWS 
 Advanced Wireless Services
BOINC 
 Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing
BRS/EBS
 Broadband Radio Service and Educational Broadband Service
CAPE
 connective available potential energy
CCAT
 Cornell Caltech Atacama Telescope
CFC
 chloro˚uorocarbon
CMB
 cosmic microwave background
CME
 coronal mass ejection
CMIS
 Compact Microscope Imaging System
COBE
 Cosmic Background Explorer
Appendix F
Acronyms and Abbreviations
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
222CORF
 Committee on Radio Frequencies
CR
 cognitive radio
DDA
 direct data assimilation
DFS
 dynamic frequency selection
DIA
 Denver International Airport
DMSP
 Defense Meteorological Satellite Program
DOD
 Department of Defense
ECV
 essential climate variable
EDR
 Environmental Data Record
EESS 
 Earth Exploration-Satellite Service 
EIRP 
 equivalent isotropically radiated power
EOS 
 Earth Observing System
ESMR
 Electrical Scanning Microwave Radiometer
ESTAR
 Electronically-Scanned Thinned Array Radiometer
EVLA
 Expanded Very Large Array
FASR
 Frequency Agile Solar Radiotelescope
FCC
 Federal Communications Commission
FS 
 Fixed Service 
GBT
 Green Bank Telescope
GCOM-W
 Global Change Observation Mission-Water 
GCOS
 Global Climate Observing System
GEO
 geostationary orbit (satellite); Group on Earth Observations
GEOSS
 Global Earth Observation System of Systems
GFSC
 Goddard Space Flight Center
GMI 
 Global Precipitation Measurement-Microwave Imager
GOES
 Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellites
GPM
 Global Precipitation Measurement (mission)
GPS
 Global Positioning System
GR 
 Einstein™s theory of general relativity
HCFC 
 hydrochloro˚uorocarbon
HFC
 hydro˚uorocarbon
HOMER
 Hybrid Optimization Model for Electric Renewables
HSB
 Humidity Sounder for Brazil
IPCC
 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ITU 
 International Telecommunication Union 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.223APP
ENDIX
 FITU-R
 ITU Radiocommunication Sector
ITU-RR
 ITU Radio Regulations
IUCAF 
 Scienti˜c Committee on Frequency Allocations for Radio 
Astronomy and Space Science
IWP
 ice water path
JMR
 JASON Microwave Radiometer
LEO
 low Earth orbit
LI
 lifted index
LIGO
 Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory
LISA
 Laser Interferometer Space Antenna
LMS
 Land Mobile Service
LMSS 
 Land Mobile Satellite Service
LMT
 Large Millimeter Telescope
LWA
 Long Wavelength Array
MEMS 
 microelectromechanical systems
MHS
 Microwave Humidity Sounder
MIRAS
 Microwave Imaging Radiometer using Aperture Synthesis
MIS
 Microwave Imager/Sounder
MLS
 Microwave Limb Sounder
MODIS
 Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
MSU
 microwave sounding unit
MWA
 Murchison Wide˜eld Array
NAIC
 National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center
NASA
 National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NEMS 
 Nimbus-E Microwave Spectrometer
NOAA
 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
NPOESS
 National Polar-orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite 
System
NPRM 
 notice of public rule making
NRAO
 National Radio Astronomy Observatory
NRC
 National Research Council
NRQZ 
 National Radio Quiet Zone
NSF
 National Science Foundation
NTIA
 National Telecommunications and Information Administration
NWP
 numerical weather prediction
OOB 
 out-of-band (emissions)
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
224PATH 
 Precipitation and All-Weather Temperature and Humidity
PECAD/CADRE
 Production Estimate and Crop Assessment Division™s Crop 
Condition Data Retrieval and Evaluation
pfd 
 power ˚ux density (usually measured in Wm
Œ2
)PSR 
 Polarimetric Scanning Radiometer 
PSU
 practical salinity unit
PWV
 precipitable water vapor
RAS 
 Radio Astronomy Service 
RF
 radio frequency
RFI
 radio frequency interference
RMS 
 root-mean-square
RNSS 
 Radionavigation Satellite Service
RR
 Radio Regulations (the international treaty governing 
spectrum use)
SAIR
 Synthetic Aperture Interferometric Radiometer
SAR 
 synthetic aperture radar
SCLP
 Snow and Cold Land Processes
SDR
 software-de˜ned radio
SETI
 Search For Extraterrestrial Intelligence
SFMR
 Stepped Frequency Microwave Radiometer
SIRICE 
 Submillimeter Infrared Radiometer Ice Cloud Experiment
SKA
 Square Kilometer Array
SM
 soil moisture
SMAP
 Soil Moisture Active Passive
SMMR
 Scanning Multi-Channel Microwave Radiometer
SMOS
 Soil Moisture Ocean Salinity
SNR 
 signal-to-noise ratio
spfd
 spectral power ˚ux density (measured in Wm
Œ2 
Hz
Œ1
)SPT
 South Pole Telescope
SPTF
 Spectrum Policy Task Force
SRS 
 Space Research Service 
SSM/I 
 Special Sensor Microwave Imager 
SSMI/S
 Special Sensor Microwave Imager/Sounder
SSM/T 
 Special Sensor Microwave/Temperature
SSS
 sea surface salinity
SST
 sea surface temperature
SUBTEL 
 Subsecretaría de Telecomunicaciones
SSWV
 sea surface wind vector
SWE
 snow water equivalent
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.225APP
ENDIX
 FTDM 
 time-division multiplexing
TDRSS 
 Tracking and Data Relay Satellite System
TIROS
 Television Infrared Observation Satellite
TMI
 TRMM Microwave Imager
TOPEX
 Topography Experiment
TOVS
 TIROS Operational Vertical Sounder
TRMM 
 Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission 
TTI
 total of totals index
UAL
 United Airlines
UWB 
 ultrawideband
VLA
 Very Large Array
VLBA
 Very Long Baseline Array
VLBI
 very long baseline interferometry
WMTS
 Wireless Medical Telemetry Service
WP7D
 ITU Working Party 7D 
WRC 
 World Radiocommunication Conference 
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226
altimetry:
 The measurement of altitude, possibly by using radar.
anisotropic:
 Having different physical properties along different axes.
anomaly correlation:
 A common measure of forecast accuracy, with values above 
0.6 generally considered to be signi˜cant.
antenna main beam:
 The part of an antenna™s radiation pattern (transmit and 
receive properties) that contains the maximum power and ˜eld strength. Synony
-mous with ﬁbeam lobe.ﬂ 
antenna sidelobe:
 The part of an antenna™s radiation pattern (transmit and receive 
properties) that is not part of the main beam.
array:
 An interferometric observational scheme that employs multiple linked 
antennas or dishes to mimic the capabilities of a much larger, single dish.
backhaul:
 In telecommunications, the intermediate communication link(s) 
between the end user and the core communications network. For example, for 
cellular transmissions, the backhaul is the link(s) between the cellular tower and 
the core communications system.
Appendix G
Glossary
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.227APP
ENDIX
 Gbeam/radiation pattern:
 The directional dependence of radiation power from the 
antenna (transmit) or as received by the antenna (receive).
bolometer:
 An instrument that measures incident electromagnetic radiation.
cross-frequency mitigation:
 The process of measuring a particular band by split
-ting it into sub-bands (spectral analysis) and then looking ﬁacross the frequenciesﬂ 
for outlier channels. These outliers are presumed to be contaminated with RFI 
because they have more power in them than would be expected.
direct data assimilation (DDA):
 A powerful technique developed during the 
past two decades. DDA optimally uses all available data from satellites, balloons, 
radars, and surface stations to steer numerical weather prediction (NWP) models. 
DDA applied to satellite data is known as direct radiance assimilation (DRA) and 
accounts for most of the improvements in the performance of NWP models in the 
Southern Hemisphere where other
 sensors are scarce.
downwelling:
 Natural radiation that radiates down from the sky.
Environmental Data Record (EDR):
 Characteristic information regarding an envi
-ronment that has been observed: once an Earth remote sensing observatory collects 
incident radiation and it is sent to researchers for processing, the
 researchers organize 
the data and interpret them to produce EDRs. EDRs include sea and land wind 
speed, sea and air temperature, precipitation, sea salinity, and soil moisture. See 
Table 2.1 in Chapter 2 for a complete list.
Gaussian:
 A frequency distribution of a variable that exhibits normality and is 
useful for identifying noise in an instrument.
Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS):
 A radio-based Russian geo
-navigation satellite constellation operated by the Russian Space Forces that is 
similar to the United States™ Global Positioning System.
interference:
 The effect of unwanted energy due to one or a combination of 
emission(s), radiation(s), or induction(s) on reception in a radiocommunications 
system, manifested by any performance degradation, misinterpretation, or loss of 
information that could be extracted in the absence of such unwanted energy.
interference mitigation:
 The process of preempting, identifying, and excising radio 
or microwave interference from observational data. It can be either unilateral (in 
the case of excising) or multilateral (in the case of coordination agreements).
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
228interferometry:
 An observational technique that achieves a large angular resolu
-tion by combining the collected radiation from numerous dispersed, linked dishes 
and examines the resulting interference pattern. The use of interferometry, for 
which multiple smaller dishes are built, can be more cost-effective than building 
one enormous dish.
interstellar medium:
 The physical space between stars that consists of gas, dust, 
atomic particles, and magnetic ˜elds.
Iridium:
 A radio-based communications satellite constellation operated by
 Iridium, 
Inc., that provides global, handheld, satellite telephone service.
isotropic:
 Having equal physical properties along different axes.
nowcasting:
 The practice of forecasting the next 6 hours of weather using obser
-vational data. Nowcasting is more precise than forecasting because it has better 
information on small-scale weather structures.
numerical weather prediction (NWP) models:
 Computer simulations that fore
-cast future conditions based on information on current weather conditions. A 
signi˜cant limitation of any forecasting model is the reliability and availability of 
data input.
out-of-band emission:
 A type of emission that causes interference on a frequency 
or frequencies immediately outside the necessary bandwidth and that results from 
the modulation process, but excluding spurious emissions.
Part 15 device:
 A device that is regulated by Section 15 of Title 47 of the 
Code of 
Federal Regulations
 and therefore is not subject to licensing before radiating on an 
intentional or unintentional basis.
passband/bandpass:
 The range of frequencies that can pass through a ˜lter.
passive radio/microwave observations:
 Observations of the natural radio or 
microwave environment that are made on a receive-only basisŠthat is, there are 
no transmissions involved.
polarimetry:
 The measurement of the polarization of incident radiation that has 
been re˚ected and thus provides information on the object off of which the radia
-tion was re˚ected.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.229APP
ENDIX
 Gpower ˚ux density (pfd):
 The radio power incident on the antenna, called the ˚ux 
density or spectral power ˚ux density. Flux density is measured in janskys, where 
1 Jy = 10
˛26
 Wm
˛2
 Hz
Œ1
.quantum transition:
 The change of an atom or molecule from one quantum state 
to another.
radio and microwave bands of relevance:
L-band (1-2 GHz)
C-band (4-8 GHz)
X-band (8-10 GHz)
K-band (20-40 GHz)
V-band (50-75 GHz)
radiometry:
 The study of the measurement of electromagnetic radiation.
radio science:
 Any scienti˜c endeavor that employs the use of radio or microwave 
radiation to explore the fundamental characteristics of natural phenomena.
radiosonde:
 An instrument ˚own aboard a weather balloon to measure localized, 
current atmospheric parameters. Radiosonde observations are important inputs 
to numerical weather prediction models.
Recommendation ITU-R RS.1029:
 This International Telecommunication Union 
(ITU) document recommends Œ134 dBm with a 100 MHz reference bandwidth. 
The equivalent recommended maximum level using 100 MHz reference band
-width is Œ131 dBm.
scatterometry:
 The measurement of a normalized radar cross section of pulses 
re˚ected off a surface. This technique has been particularly useful for the measure
-ment of ocean surface winds.
signal modulation:
 Varying a periodic waveform.
spectral ef˜ciency:
 The degree to which a given portion of the spectrum is actually 
used, compared with the maximum theoretical possible use of that portion. 
spectral occupancy:
 The fraction of time that a transmission can be detected at a 
given frequency, for a given sensitivity and a given time-frequency resolution.
Spectrum Management for Science in the 21st CenturyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SPECTRUM
 MANAGEMENT
 FOR
 SCIENCE
 IN
 THE
 21
ST
 CENTURY
230spectrometer:
 An instrument that analyzes incident radiation to allow the mea
-surement of individual spectral lines that are characteristic of speci˜c atoms or 
molecules.
spectroscopy:
 A technique that analyzes incident radiation to allow the mea
-surement of individual spectral lines that are characteristic of speci˜c atoms or 
molecules.
spurious emission:
 Emission that causes interference on a frequency or frequencies 
that are outside the necessary bandwidth and the level of which may be reduced 
without affecting the corresponding transmission of information. Spurious emis
-sions include harmonic emissions, parasitic emissions, intermodulation products, 
and frequency conversion products but exclude out-of-band emissions. 
sub-band:
 A smaller piece of a speci˜ed band.
synthetic aperture:
 A technique that uses the combined collecting area of numer
-ous dispersed dishes to mimic the capabilities of a much larger, single dish.
type-approved device:
 An emitting device that is approved by the Federal Com
-munications Commission by its type under the 
Code of Federal Regulations
.unwanted emission:
 Emissions consisting of spurious emissions and out-of-band 
emissions. 
upwelling:
 Natural radiation that radiates up from Earth.
