DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/12942Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing,Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and Biodata124 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-15706-3 | DOI 10.17226/12942Robert M. Hauser, Maxine Weinstein, Robert Pool, and Barney Cohen, Editors;Panel on Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biological Specimensand Biodata in Social Surveys; Committee on National Statistics; Committee onPopulation; Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education; NationalResearch CouncilConducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYSCollecting, Storing, Accessing,  and Protecting Biospecimensand BiodataRobert M. Hauser, Maxine Weinstein, 
 Robert Pool, and Barney Cohen, 
Editors
Panel on Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biological 
Specimens and Biodata in Social Surveys 
Committee on National Statistics
Committee on Population
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS  500 Fifth Street, N.W.  Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils 
of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the 
Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were 
chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract No. N01-OD-4-2139 between the National 
Academy of Sciences and the National Institutes of Health. Support for the work of 
the Committee on National Statistics is provided by a consortium of federal agencies 
through a grant from the National Science Foundation (award number SES-0453930). 
Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusion, or recommendations expressed in this publication 
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organization or 
agencies that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-15706-3
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-15706-4
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 
Fifth Street, NW, Lockbox 285, Washington, DC 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-
3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2010 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Suggested citation: National Research Council. (2010). 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: 
Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and Biodata.
 Robert M. 
Hauser, Maxine Weinstein, Robert Pool, and Barney Cohen, Eds. Panel on Collecting, 
Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biological Specimens and Biodata in Social Surveys. 
Committee on National Statistics and Committee on Population, Division of Behavioral 
and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon 
the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a 
mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c and technical 
matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is 
autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the 
National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. 
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at 
meeting national needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy 
of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examina
-tion of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the 
responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to 
be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues 
of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the 
Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 
1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s 
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in 
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become 
the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the 
National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, 
and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by 
both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. 
Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPANEL
 ON
 C
OLLECTIN
G, S
TORIN
G, A
CCESSIN
G, 
AND
 PROTECTIN
G B
IOLO
GICAL
 S
PECIMENS
 AND
  BIODATA
 IN
 S
OCIAL
 SU
RVEYSROBERT M. HAUSER (
Chair), Department of Sociology, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison
GEORGE M. CHURCH, Department of Genetics, Harvard UniversityGEORGE T. DUNCAN, H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and 
Management, Carnegie MellonHENRY T. GREELY, Stanford Law School, Stanford University 
MYRON P. GUTMANN, Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic 
Sciences, National Science Foundation ROBERT J. LEVINE, Interdisciplinary Center for Bioethics Institution for 
Social and Policy Studies, Yale University
JOHN QUACKENBUSH, Department of Biostatistics, Harvard UniversityJEROME P. REITER, Department of Statistical Science, Duke University
ROBERT B. WALLACE, Department of Epidemiology, University of Iowa
MAXINE WEINSTEIN, Center for Population and Health, Georgetown UniversityBARNEY COHEN, Study Director
ROBERT POOL, 
ConsultantULYANA VJUGINA DESIDERIO, 
Christine Mirzayan FellowJACQUELINE R. SOVDE, Program AssociateConducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
WILLIAM F. EDDY (
Chair), Department of Statistics, Carnegie Mellon UniversityKATHARINE G. ABRAHAM, Department of Economics, University of 
Maryland, and Joint Program in Survey MethodologyALICA CARRIQUIRY, Department of Statistics, Iowa State University
WILLIAM DuMOUCHEL, Phase Forward, Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts
JOHN HALTIWANGER, Department of Economics, University of Maryland
V. JOSEPH HOTZ, Department of Economics, Duke University
KAREN KAFADAR, Department of Statistics, Indiana University
SALLIE KELLER, George R. Brown School of Engineering, Rice UniversityLISA LYNCH, Heller School for Social Policy and Management, Brandeis 
UniversityDOUGLAS MASSEY, Department of Sociology, Princeton University
SALLY C. MORTON, Statistics and Epidemiology, RTI International, 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
JOSEPH NEWHOUSE, Division of Health Policy Research and Education, Harvard UniversitySAMUEL H. PRESTON, Population Studies Center, University of 
PennsylvaniaHAL STERN, Department of Statistics, University of California, IrvineROGER TOURANGEAU, Joint Program in Survey Methodology, University 
of Maryland, and Survey Research Center, University of Michigan
ALAN ZASLAVSKY, Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical 
School CONSTANCE F. CITRO, 
Director
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
COMMITTEE ON POP
ULATION
LINDA J. WAITE (Chair), Department of Sociology, University of Chicago 
CHRISTINE BACHRACH, Social Science Research Institute, Duke University, and School of Behavioral and Social Sciences, University of 
Maryland EILEEN M. CRIMMINS, Department of Sociology, University of Southern 
California PETER J. DONALDSON, Population Council, New York, New York
BARBARA ENTWISLE, Department of Sociology, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel HillJOSHUA R. GOLDSTEIN, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock, GermanyCHARLES HIRSCHMAN, Department of Sociology, University of 
Washington 
BARTH
ÉLÉMY KUATE
-DEFO, Department of Demography, University of 
Montreal WOLFGANG LUTZ, World Population Program, International Institute for 
Applied Systems Analysis, Laxenburg, AustriaDUNCAN THOMAS, Economics Department, Duke Global Health Institute, Duke UniversityBARBARA B. TORREY, Independent Consultant, Washington, DC
MAXINE WEINSTEIN, Center for Population and Health, Georgetown University BARNEY COHEN, Director
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Acknowledgments
This report re˚ects the efforts of many people, each of whom has contrib
-uted their time and expertise.
 In November 2008, the committee orga
-nized a public workshop and bene˜ted greatly from the assistance and 
insight of many colleagues including: John Abowd, Cornell University; Paul S. 
Appelbaum, Columbia University; Ellen Wright Clayton, Vanderbilt University; 
Jennifer Harris, The Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo; Kathie Mullan 
Harris, University of North Carolina; Murat Kantarcioglu, University of Texas; 
Alan F. Karr, National Institute of Statistical Sciences; Bartha M. Knoppers, 
University of Montreal; Barbara A. Koenig, Mayo College of Medicine; Karen 
J. Maschke, Hastings Center; Leslie Shaw, University of
 Pennsylvania; Kathi 
Shea, SeraCare, Inc.; Mary Fran Sowers, University of Michigan; Barbara 
Stanley, Columbia University; Holly Taylor, The Johns Hopkins University; 
Alan
 Westin, Columbia University (emeritus).
The project was undertaken at the request of the Division of Behavioral 
and Social Research at the National Institute on Aging (NIA) and funding from 
the NIA has made this report possible. Particular thanks go to Dr. Richard 
 
Suzman who was a catalyst for this report, both intellectually and ˜nancially, 
and we are grateful to him and the NIA for their support.
 Several members of the staff of the National Academies made signi˜cant 
contributions to the report. The committee was established under the auspices 
of the Committee on National Statistics, directed by Connie Citro, who was 
instrumental in developing the study and provided guidance and support to 
the staff throughout the project. Particular thanks are due to Barney Cohen, 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
who served as the study director, Robert Pool for research and writing assis
-tance, Ulyana Vjugina Desiderio for research assistance, and Jacqui Sovde for 
logistical support, Kirsten Sampson Snyder for help guiding the report through 
review, Rona Briere and Eugenia Grohman for skilful editing, and Yvonne Wise 
for managing the production process. 
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures 
approved by the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Report Review Commit
-tee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical 
comments that assist the institution in making its report as sound as possible, and 
to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, 
and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manu
-script remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process.
The committee wishes to thank that following individuals for their review 
of this report: Kathleen Mullan Harris, National Longitudinal Study of Adoles
-cent Health (Add Health), University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill; Meena 
Kumari, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University Col
-lege London; Nancy A. Mathiowetz, Public Opinion Quarterly, University of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee; Thomas McDade, The Center on Social Disparities 
and Health, Institute for Policy Research, Northwestern University; Eleanor 
Singer, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan; Richard L. Sprott, 
Of˜ce of the Executive Director, The Ellison Medical Foundation, Bethesda, 
 
Maryland; James W. Vaupel, Of˜ce of the Executive Director, Max Planck 
Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock, Germany; and Kenneth M. 
Weiss, Department of Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive com
-ments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the report™s conclusions or 
recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. 
The review of this report was overseen by Richard A. Kulka, Survey Research, 
Abt Associates Inc., Durham, North Carolina. Appointed by the NRC, he was 
responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this report 
was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all review 
comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this 
report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
I close by expressing my great appreciation to my fellow committee mem
-bers. This report results from the exceptional efforts of the members of the 
committee, all of whom had many other responsibilities but who nonetheless 
generously gave much of their time and their expertise to the project.
Robert M. Hauser, 
Chair
Panel on Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting 
 Biological Specimens and Biodata in Social Surveys
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents
Summary
 11 Introduction
 72 Collecting, Storing, Using, and Distributing Biospecimens
 19
3  
Protecting Privacy and Con˜dentiality: Sharing Digital 
 Representations of Biological and Social Data 
 41
4 Informed Consent
 55
5 Findings, Conclusions, and Recommendations
 73
References
 87
Appendixes 
A 
  
Agenda for the Workshop on Collecting, Storing, Protecting, and 
Accessing Biological Data Collected in Social Surveys 
 93
B 
  
Participants in the Workshop on Collecting, Storing, Protecting, 
 and Accessing Biological Data Collected in Social Surveys
 97
C BiographicalSketchesofPanelMembersandStaff
99
Biographical Sketches of Panel Members and Staff
 99
D 
 Acronyms
 105
xi
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary
R ecent years have seen a growing tendency for social scientists to collect 
biological specimens, such as blood, urine, and saliva as part of large-
scale household surveys. By combining biological and social data, 
scientists are opening up new ˜elds of inquiry and are able for the ˜rst time 
to address many new questions and connections. But including biospecimens 
in social surveys also adds a great deal of complexity and cost to the investi
-gator™s task. Along with the usual concerns about informed consent, privacy 
issues, and the best ways to collect, store, and share data, researchers now face 
a variety of issues that are much less familiar or that appear in a new light.
In particular, collecting and storing human biological materials for use in 
social science research raises additional legal, ethical, and social issues, as well 
as practical issues related to the storage, retrieval, and sharing of data. For 
example, acquiring biological data and linking them to social science databases 
requires a more complex informed consent process, the development of a 
biorepository, the establishment of data sharing policies, and the creation of a 
process for deciding how the data are going to be shared and used for second
-ary analysisŠall of which add cost to a survey and require additional time and 
attention from the investigators. These issues also are likely to be unfamiliar 
to social scientists who have not worked with biological specimens in the past. 
Adding to the attraction of collecting biospecimens but also to the complexity 
of sharing and protecting the data is the fact that this is an era of incredibly 
rapid gains in our understanding of complex biological and physiological phe
-nomena. Thus the trade-offs between the risks and opportunities of expanding 
access to research data are constantly changing. 
11Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
This report, which was funded by the National Institute on Aging (NIA), 
offers ˜ndings and recommendations concerning the best approaches to the 
collection, storage, use, and sharing of biospecimens gathered in social science 
surveys and the digital representations of biological data derived therefrom. It 
is aimed at researchers interested in carrying out such surveys, their institutions, 
and their funding agencies. 
COLLECTIN
G, STORIN
G, 
USIN
G, AND 
DISTRIB
UTIN
G BIOSPECIMENS
This report™s initial message to social scientists undertaking the collection 
of biospecimens is that there is no need to reinvent the wheel. Although work
-ing in this emerging area may be new and unfamiliar, they will ˜nd available a 
number of existing documents from the biomedical ˜eld that offer advice and 
describe recommended procedures and laboratory practices for dealing with 
biospecimens. 
The panel recommends that social scientists who are planning 
to add biological specimens to their survey research familiarize themselves 
with existing best practices for the collection, storage, use, and distribution 
of biospecimens. First and foremost, the design of the protocol for collection 
must ensure the safety of both participants and survey staff. 
At the same time, 
many issues arise when biospecimens are collected as part of a social science 
survey that are not encountered in biomedical research. Thus it is often neces
-sary to move beyond the biomedical model to ˜nd answers and best approaches 
for the social science context.
The panel notes that there is a growing tendency among social scientists to 
propose the collection of biospecimens in surveys regardless of whether they 
are needed to test a speci˜c hypothesis. Yet many social scientists who decide 
to add biospecimens to their surveys are not fully prepared to provide for the 
storage and distribution of the specimens they collect. Indeed, the panel con
-cluded that the issues involved in the storage and distribution of biospecimens 
are too complex and involve too many hidden costs to assume that social sci
-entists without suitable experience can deal with them unassisted. Therefore, 
the panel recommends that NIA and other relevant funding agencies support 
at least one central facility for the storage and distribution of biospecimens 
collected as part of the research they support.
The collection of biological specimens along with the traditional social and 
behavioral data promises a number of bene˜ts that are likely to extend beyond 
the original research team. However, advances are continually being made in 
genetic analysis and the ability to identify individuals through their social and 
biological data, and the sharing of biospecimens implies the depletion of a 
nonrenewable scienti˜c resource. For these reasons, sharing biospecimens with 
other investigators is highly complex, and best practices in this area have yet to 
be established. Thus 
the panel recommends that early in the planning process, 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3principal investigators who will be collecting biospecimens as part of a social 
science survey develop a complete data sharing plan.
 In general, there is no 
one best plan for the use and reuse of specimens, but the plan should include a 
discussion of the adequacy of the storage and retrieval protocols. It should spell 
out criteria for allowing other researchers to use (and therefore deplete) the 
available stock of specimens, as well as to gain access to any derived data. The 
plan should also specify the procedures for accessing the specimens and data. It 
should include provision for the storage and retrieval of specimens and clarify 
how the succession of responsibility for and control of the specimens will be 
managed at the conclusion of the project. Finally, the plan should contain infor
-mation on how specimens and data derived from them are to be documented 
and provide for public access to that documentation.
 To ensure the inclusion 
of all essential information, 
the panel recommends that NIA (or preferably the 
National Institutes of Health [NIH]) publish guidelines for principal investiga
-tors containing a list of points that need to be considered for an acceptable data 
sharing plan. In addition to staff review, Scienti˜c Review Panels should read 
and comment on all proposed data sharing plans. In much the same way as an 
unacceptable human subjects plan, an inadequate data sharing plan should hold 
up an otherwise acceptable proposal.
  
SHARIN
G DI
GITAL REPRESENTATIONS OF 
BIOLO
GICAL AND SOCIAL DATA 
Once a survey has been conducted and biospecimens have been collected 
and analyzed, the survey team is left with a large amount of valuable social and 
biological data in digital form. Yet given the above-noted advances in genetic 
analysis and the ability to identify individuals through their social and biological 
data, a dif˜cult issue facing the ˜eld is how to share the digital representations 
of these data as widely as possible while ensuring the protection of con˜dential
-ity. This issue is especially acute when detailed genetic information is generated 
from survey participants™ biological samples and linked to social science data, 
which may be as sensitive or even more sensitive in their own right. At present, 
no data restriction strategy has been demonstrated to protect con˜dentiality 
while preserving the usefulness of the data for drawing inferences involving 
multidimensional interactions among genomic and social variables, which are 
increasingly the target of research.
For these reasons,
 the panel recommends that both rich genomic data 
acquired for research and sensitive and potentially identi˜able social sci
-ence data that do not change (or change very little) with time be shared only 
under restricted circumstances, such as licensing and (actual or virtual) data 
enclaves. 
Making con˜dential genomic data available for unrestricted public 
use would require such intense data masking to protect con˜dentiality that it 
would distort genomic analyses and sharply limit their usefulness. 
As a security 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
measure, the panel recommends that genomic data and other individual-level 
data containing uniquely identifying variables that are stored or in active use 
by investigators on their institutional or personal computers be encrypted at 
all times.
At the same time, some digital biosocial data can be shared if ˜rst subjected 
to procedures that alter the original data; restricted access should not be the 
only mode of data protection. Yet evaluating the speci˜c risks of sharing data 
and devising ways to protect data from breaches are complex and specialized 
tasks requiring an expertise in disclosure protection methods not possessed 
by most principal investigators and their institutions. Currently, not enough is 
known to be able to represent these risks either fully or accurately. Determining 
the best protection schemes for the sharing of sensitive social and biological 
datasets also requires a signi˜cant investment of resources, and it would be 
wasteful for individual investigators to expend their resources on such efforts 
rather than on collecting and analyzing the data. Instead, 
the panel recom
-mends that NIA (or preferably NIH) develop new standards and procedures 
for licensing con˜dential data in ways that will maximize timely access while 
maintaining security and that can be used by data repositories and by projects 
that distribute data. The panel also recommends that NIA and other funding 
agencies assess the strength of con˜dentiality protections through periodic 
expert audits of con˜dentiality and computer security. Willingness to partici
-pate in such audits should be a condition for receipt of NIA support. Beyond 
enforcement, the purpose of such audits would be to identify challenges and 
solutions.
Further, NIH should consider funding Centers of Excellence to explore 
new ways of protecting digital representations of data and to assist princi
-pal investigators wishing to share data with others. NIH should also support 
research on disclosure risks and limitations.
OBTAININ
G INFORMED CONSENT 
If participants are to provide truly informed consent to taking part in any 
study, they must be given a certain minimum amount of information. They 
should be told, for example, what the purpose of the study is, how it is to be 
carried out, and what participants™ roles are. In addition, because of the unique 
risks associated with providing biospecimens, participants in a social science 
survey that involves the collection of such specimens should be provided with 
other types of information as well. In particular, they should be given detail on 
the storage and use of the specimens that relates to those risks and can assist 
them in determining whether to take part in the study. To this end, 
the panel 
recommends that, in designing a consent form for the collection of biospeci
-mens, in addition to those elements that are common to social and biomedical 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5research, investigators ensure that certain other information is provided to 
participants:
Ł  
how long researchers intend to retain their biospecimens and the 
genomic and other biodata that may be derived from them;
Ł  
both the risks associated with genomic data and the limits of what they 
can reveal;
Ł  
which other researchers will have access to their specimens, to the 
data derived therefrom, and to information collected in a survey 
questionnaire;
Ł the limits on researchers™ ability to maintain con˜dentiality;
Ł  
any potential limits on their ability to withdraw their specimens or data 
from the research;
Ł  
the penalties (such as the elimination of research support) that may be 
imposed on researchers for various types of breaches of con˜dentiality; 
and
Ł  
what plans have been put in place to return to them any medically 
relevant ˜ndings.
Additionally,
 the panel recommends that NIA locate and publicize positive 
examples of the documentation of consent processes for the collection of 
biospecimens. In particular, these examples should take into account the 
special needs of certain individuals, such as those with sensory problems, the 
cognitively impaired, or children.
The panel also notes that participants in biosocial surveys are likely to 
have different levels of comfort with how their biospecimens and data are 
used. Some may be willing to provide only answers to questions and others to 
provide specimens as well. Some may be willing for their specimens and data 
to be used only for the current study, while others may consent to their use in 
future studies. One effective way to deal with these different comfort levels is 
to offer a tiered approach to consent, allowing the participant to determine 
just how his or her specimens and data may be used. Accordingly, 
the panel 
recommends that researchers consider adopting a tiered approach to obtaining 
consent.
 Tiers might include participating in the survey, providing specimens 
for genetic and/or nongenetic analysis in a particular study, and allowing the 
specimens and data (genetic and/or nongenetic) to be stored for future use. 
Additionally,
 participants who are willing to have their specimens and data 
used in future studies should be informed about the process that will be used 
to obtain approval for such uses. 
As part of the informed consent process, 
the panel also recommends that 
NIA direct investigators to formulate a plan in advance concerning the return 
of any medically relevant ˜ndings to survey participants and to implement 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
that plan in the design and conduct of their informed consent procedures.
 In 
addition, 
the panel recommends that NIA, the Of˜ce of Human Resource 
Protections (OHRP), and other appropriate organizations sponsor training 
programs, create training modules, and hold informational workshops on 
informed consent for investigators, staff of survey organizations, including 
˜eld staff, administrators, and members of Institutional Review Boards (IRBs) 
who oversee surveys that collect social science data and biospecimens.
A ˜nal issue facing social science researchers who include biospecimens in 
their surveys is obtaining approval from IRBs. A number of challenges exist, 
including the fact that few IRBs are familiar with both social and biological 
science; thus investigators may ˜nd themselves trying to justify standard social 
science protocols to a biologically savvy IRB or explaining standard biological 
protocols to an IRB that is used to dealing with social science. Another issue is 
that institutional IRBs are increasingly busy, and they are particularly demand
-ing whenever potential risk to human subjects is at issue. Therefore, 
the panel 
recommends that investigators considering collecting biomarkers consult with 
their IRBs early and often.
 CONCL
USION
The panel believes that, by following the above recommendations and sev
-eral others offered in the full report, it should be possible to overcome many 
of the practical issues related to the collection, storage, retrieval, and sharing 
of biospecimens and derived biodata. The result should be improved access 
to research data without compromise to appropriate protection for research 
participants. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Introduction
R apidly developing technology has made it increasingly feasible and 
attractive for researchers to collect blood and other biological specimens 
in nonclinical settings. As a result, those who conduct multipurpose 
household surveys have become increasingly interested in collecting various 
types of biospecimens along with responses to the more familiar social and 
behavioral questions (see, for example, National Research Council, 2008). 
Doing so enables researchers to extend their standard analyses of social and 
behavioral measures by integrating various biomarkers into their theoretical 
frameworks and empirical models. This practice of collecting biological speci
-mens along with the traditional social and behavioral data promises a variety 
of bene˜ts with respect to the sorts of questions that can be answered and 
the types of connections that can be explored, but it also adds a great deal of 
complexityŠand costŠto the investigator™s task. Although social scientists 
have long had to be concerned about such things as informed consent, privacy, 
collection and storage issues, and data sharing, the addition of biospecimens to 
their studies creates new issues and casts old issues in a new light.
Social science researchers wishing to collect biospecimens must address a 
wide variety of additional legal, ethical, and social issues, as well as a number 
of practical issues related to the storage, retrieval, and sharing of data. For 
example, deriving biological data from biospecimens and linking them to social 
science databases adds considerable effort and costs associated with developing 
a biorepository, establishing data sharing policies, implementing an increas
-ingly complex informed consent process, establishing an additional process 
for reviewing how the biodata are going to be shared and used for secondary 
7Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
analysis, executing material transfer agreements, dealing with intellectual prop
-erty issues, and navigating a more complex process for obtaining Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) approval that encompasses both human subjects protection 
and biosafety compliance (Box 1-1 presents the panel™s de˜nitions of some key 
terms used in this report that need to be clearly distinguished in the context of 
this study). Researchers also must consider what steps are necessary to protect 
the con˜dentiality of participants, especially when data obtained from biospeci
-mens are uniquely identifying. Finally, a number of questions must be answered 
about what happens to the biospecimens beyond the life of the particular 
investigation: Will the biospecimens be stored? If so, who will be allowed to use 
them? What permissions will be necessary? Who owns the biospecimens? Who 
can discard them? How long will they be retained? Can subjects demand their 
destruction? Does this include destruction of any biodata derived from them? 
Can the specimens and data be used for purposes other than those speci˜ed in 
the subjects™ original consent? Will the investigator report back to subjects on 
BOX 1-1
 A Note on Terminology Used in This Report
The terms ﬁbiospecimens,ﬂ ﬁbiomarkers,ﬂ and ﬁbiodataﬂ are sometimes used 
interchangeably, and researchers should be aware that these terms can have 
different meanings in different ˜elds of study. In this report, the term ﬁbiological 
specimensﬂ or ﬁbiospecimensﬂ
 refers to the actual biological material that is col
-lected from a study participant, such as blood, urine, or saliva. A ﬁbiomarker,ﬂ 
often derived from a biospecimen, is a measurable factor that is associated with 
a particular medical condition. In population-based research, biomarkers are 
used to identify such things as cardiovascular risk factors, metabolic process 
measures, immune system activity, and nervous system activity. Examples in
-clude levels of cortisol (a stress hormone), C-reactive protein (a marker of acute 
in˚ammation), Epstein-Barr virus antibodies (a marker for immune function), total 
and HDL cholesterol (indicators of cardiovascular risk), and hemoglobin A1c (a 
marker of glucose intolerance). Biomarkers can also consist of gene alleles that 
are associated with a higher probability of a particular medical condition (e.g., 
ApoE-
4 and Alzheimer™s disease). In population-based research, biomarkers are 
often obtained by collecting biological specimens in nonclinical settings, but they 
can also be derived from, for example, anthropometric measures; accelerometry-
based activity monitors; spirometry; or other measures of functional capacity, 
heart rate, blood pressure, and grip. ﬁBiodataﬂ refers to the digital data derived 
from biospecimens. 
Two additional terms used in this report need to be distinguished. The term 
ﬁbiorepositoryﬂ refers to a facility used to store human specimens for research 
purposes, while ﬁbiobankﬂ denotes a facility used to store biodata. The contents of 
biorepositories range from large multinational collections of thousands of speci
-mens to several dozen specimens in an individual researcher™s freezer.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 9˜ndings with health implications for them or their family? Will the investigator 
contact other family members? What are the limits on the investigator™s ability 
to maintain con˜dentiality? Are there circumstances in which biological speci
-mens may be acquired for research purposes without consent? 
THE
 V
AL
UE OF
 BIOSPECIMENS
The ability to collect biospecimens along with social survey data opens 
up a wide range of research opportunities. It becomes possible, for example, 
to estimate the distribution of a particular genetic variant within a representa
-tive sample of the general population and to correlate genetic variations with 
differences in human phenotypes. It also becomes possible to use the biodata 
derived from biospecimens to verify certain responses to survey questions, 
such as in˚uenza exposure or infection with a sexually transmitted disease. But 
the potentially most far-reaching applications result from combining genetic 
and other biological data with data on social and environmental factors. The 
collection of biological specimens in population surveys that also collect data 
on socioeconomic, demographic, behavioral, physical health, and psychosocial 
factors opens up new avenues for research and may allow researchers to build 
integrated biosocial models of various biological and social phenomena.
For example, by combining biological and social survey data, it may be 
possible to document the linkages among social, behavioral, and biological 
processes that affect health and various other measures of well-being. To the 
extent that biomarkers re˚ect health, one can examine the effects of social fac
-tors on health or look at how health affects social status and social inequality. 
The ability to examine genetic data in conjunction with environmental and 
phenotypic data offers an important opportunity to study geneŒenvironment 
interactions. It is now widely recognized that phenotypes are generally the 
product of an interplay between genetic and environmental factors; the avail
-ability of individual-level genetic and environmental information should make it 
possible to study this interplay in much greater detail than has previously been 
possible. Researchers could use such surveys to study the genetic determinants 
of longevity, for example, or to examine the association between genetically 
determined low monoamine oxidase levels and violent behavior and to learn 
whether that association is affected by whether the subjects were abused as 
children (Huizinga et al., 2006; Widom and Brzustowicz, 2006). Researchers 
could also examine the relationship between measures of life stress and the 
length of telomeres at the ends of chromosomes that serve as a biomarker of a 
cell™s biological (versus chronological) age (Epel et al., 2004).
1 1Telomeres are repetitive DNA-protein complexes at the ends of chromosomes that protect the 
chromosomes from deterioration. Recent research points to the crucial role of telomeres in cellular 
aging. See Aubert and Lansdorp (2008) for a recent review. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
At the same time, not every social science survey will bene˜t from collect
-ing biospecimens, and the signi˜cant costs involved must be weighed against 
the bene˜ts in deciding whether to do so. The collection of biospecimens 
should be integral to the study design and the hypotheses being tested, rather 
than being tacked on to the study just because it can be done. Indeed, the col
-lection of biospecimens may even detract from the principal mission of a survey. 
It might, for example, be so expensive and time-consuming that it would lessen 
the survey™s effectiveness. Certainly, as noted above, the collection of biological 
samples will necessitate the expenditure of resources for storage, data sharing, 
and other purposes. Furthermore, the collection of biospecimens imposes a 
burden on participants as well as investigators and could conceivably affect 
contemporaneous and subsequent response rates. It is important to recognize, 
moreover, that in many cases, the potential bene˜ts of biodataŠparticularly 
genetic dataŠare not altogether clear. This point is illustrated by genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs) focused on the linkages between single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs)
2 and common diseases such as diabetes and cancer. The 
high level of enthusiasm for such studies has been tempered by the ˜nding that 
SNPs account for only a small percentage of the genetic risk for these diseases 
(Dickson et al., 2010; Wade, 2010). On the other hand, biobankingŠthe col
-lection, storage, processing, and distribution of biological specimensŠmakes it 
more likely that biospecimens collected as part of a survey will have a valuable 
payoff, even if it is one that cannot be predicted when the specimens are col
-lected. And while the specimens themselves are depletable, the biodata derived 
from them have potentially limitless uses. The trade-offs remain complex here 
as well, however, since the use of biospecimens and biodata for purposes 
other than the original research raises issues related to informed consent (see 
Chapter 4). 
CURRENT
 S
TAT
USToday many surveys sponsored by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) 
and other federal agencies either collect biological specimens such as blood, 
saliva, urine, and buccal swabs or plan to do so in the near future. As discussed 
above, these data provide population-representative data from nonclinical sam
-ples that can be used for a variety of purposes including the calibration of 
self-reports of health and as a way to explore new pathways and causal linkages 
between biological and social variables. Some of this data is also being banked 
with the intention of using it in the future, for as yet unspeci˜ed purposes. 
Surveys that have collected or that currently collect biospecimens include the 
Dynamics of Health, Aging, and Body Composition Study (blood and saliva), 
2A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) is a single-base variation in the genetic code, the most 
common form of polymorphism. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 11
the Framingham Heart Study (blood), the Health and Retirement Study (blood 
specimens and buccal swabs), the National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (NHANES) (blood, urine, hair, and buccal swabs, although there is 
some variation year to year), the National Longitudinal Survey of Adolescent 
Health (blood, saliva, and urine specimens), the National Long-Term Care 
Study (blood and buccal specimens), the NIA Alzheimer™s Initiative (blood 
specimens and autopsy tissues), the Study of Women™s Health Across the 
Nation (SWAN) (blood and urine specimens), and the Wisconsin Longitudinal 
Study (DNA). DNA ampli˜cation has been carried out on the biological speci
-mens collected in some of these surveys, such as NHANES and SWAN, and 
could be performed on specimens collected in some of the other surveys as well. 
As a result of these efforts, a great deal of work has been done to develop poli
-cies and guidelines for the acquisition, collection, storage, and use of biological 
specimens, and this report draws on that experience. At the same time, these 
are complex subjects, and many questions remain unanswered. Even when the 
challenges are similar to those familiar to biomedical researchers, they will be 
new to most social scientists engaging in biosocial research. 
PUBLIC
 ATTIT
UDES
, 
PERCEPTIONS
, AND 
RATES OF PARTICIPATION
Public Attitudes Toward the Collection of Biospecimens
Because the collection of biospecimens as part of social surveys depends on 
the willingness of individuals to contribute them, public attitudes and percep
-tions play an important role in the success of such efforts, and researchers must 
take these attitudes into account. Some authors claim that the public perceives 
biospecimens and the data derived therefrom to be signi˜cantly different from 
the traditional demographic, social, and economic data collected in surveys 
(see, for example, Greely, 2009). The former can sometimes be seen as more 
ﬁobjectiveﬂ or ﬁrealﬂ and thus potentially more powerful. They can also be 
perceived as being more hidden or secret because they can reveal things that 
cannot be known in any other wayŠthings that those contributing the speci
-mens may themselves not know, such as whether they possess a biomarker that 
is related to the probability of developing a certain disease. Thus they can be 
seen as more worthy of being protected or kept secret, in line with the strong 
tradition of keeping health information private (Greely, 2009). 
Whether any of these public perceptions are well grounded in reality is 
another matter. A great deal depends on the types of biospecimens being col
-lected. For example, survey participants may be more sensitive about sharing 
their earnings history than about providing a saliva sample. It is clear, however, 
that survey participants have less control over what is revealed through bio
-specimens than through traditional survey responses. A participant can refuse 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
to answerŠor lie aboutŠinquiries concerning, say, sexual history or income, 
but cannot prevent a blood sample from revealing the presence of a sexually 
transmitted disease or a DNA sample from indicating the existence of a genetic 
condition or predisposition.
In discussing public attitudes and perceptions toward the collection of 
biospecimens, it may be useful to talk about a gradient of sensitivity with 
respect to con˜dentiality. Some biological measures derived from biospecimens 
vary suf˜ciently across time that they do not raise the risk of reidenti˜cation. 
Some biological measures derived from biospecimens, such as cholesterol level, 
pose no more (or less) of a problem for con˜dentiality protection than many 
socioeconomic measures, while others, such as indications of illicit drug use or 
HIV or other disease status or genetic measures (such as a DNA sequence), 
may raise far more dif˜cult issues of con˜dentiality and privacy protection. 
The potential harms from a con˜dentiality breach are signi˜cant because such 
measures, once associated with a speci˜c person, may not only stigmatize the 
individual but also be used against him or her with regard to employment or in 
some other way. Moreover, genetic measures on one individual in a family may 
reveal characteristics of other family members. Additionally, the development 
of databases of genetic specimens that are stored for long periods increases not 
only the research potential but also the potential risks as new knowledge is dis
-covered about genetic associations with health and behavior. Further increasing 
both the potential for innovative research and the potential for breach of con˜
-dentiality is the growing practice of linking survey records with administrative 
records, such as Social Security bene˜ts and Medicare claim ˜les.
It is also worth noting that people™s attitudes and behaviors with regard 
to biospecimens are often inconsistent. People frequently report, for example, 
that they worry about the release of their genetic information because insurance 
companies might use it to discriminate, even though this has been expressly 
prohibited by law since the passage of the 2008 Genetic Information Non
-discrimination Act (GINA). At the same time, some measures that people do 
not consider sensitive and share readily, such as cholesterol levels, are at least 
as determinative of future serious disease as are genes given the present state 
of knowledge.
Findings from Opinion Surveys 
Americans differ in their attitudes toward the collection of biospecimens 
and their willingness to participate in surveys that collect them (Westin, 2008). 
Greater knowledge generally leads to more favorable attitudes, and people are 
more likely to participate when they understand the importance of the research. 
Westin (2008) argues that the general public can be categorized as falling into 
one of three groupsŠ(1) ﬁprivacy intense,ﬂ (2) ﬁprivacy unconcerned,ﬂ or (3) 
ﬁprivacy pragmatists.ﬂ He argues that approximately 25 to 35 percent of the 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 13
population can be characterized as ﬁprivacy intenseﬂ: they are skeptical about 
the motives and interests of government and business, they consider privacy 
to be extraordinarily important, they believe that the risks of their information 
being disclosed are very high, and they tend to be skeptical of the bene˜ts.
In surveys, Americans consistently express the view that medical and health 
information is the most sensitive personal information. Furthermore, although 
Americans tend to trust doctors and health care providers with this informa
-tion, they worry about third parties, such as insurance companies or employ
-ers, obtaining it. Not surprisingly, people with health problems are the most 
sensitive in this regard.
A large majority of the publicŠ78 percent in a survey Westin performed 
for the Institute of Medicine (Westin, 2007)Šsay they are interested in health 
research, and three-quarters of the public believe health research is very impor
-tant for society. As part of the survey, respondents were asked about participat
-ing in research that would require access to their medical records and other 
health information: How willing would they be to participate in such a study, 
and would they demand full disclosure of the study before they gave consent? 
Thirteen percent of respondents said they would not want to be contacted 
under any circumstances, and they would not even want to talk with somebody 
about participating. One percent said that they would always be willing to take 
part in any such study and that they did not even have to be asked for their 
consent. Eight percent said they would be willing to give general consent in 
advance if they were asked by the institution that held their medical records 
or health information. Another 19
 percent said they would agree if they were 
given assurance that their identity would not be revealed and that an IRB would 
administer the study. And 38 percentŠthe largest single groupŠsaid they 
would have to have the research described to them each time so they could 
decide whether to participate. Thus a total of 57 percent would agree to having 
their information used if certain privacy-oriented conditions were met.
Observed Participation Rates in Social Surveys Collecting Biospecimens
Evidence from a number of different social surveys provides a sounder 
basis than opinion surveys for assessing people™s willingness to participate in 
social science research that includes the collection of biospecimens. Most social 
surveys report higher rates of willingness to participate in such research than are 
perhaps suggested by opinion surveys, although these rates vary depending on 
the method of data collection and the health, age, and social characteristics of 
the subjects. Marmot and Steptoe (2008), for example, report on the experience 
of the Whitehall II and the English Longitudinal Study of Aging (ELSA) in the 
United Kingdom. Data collection in these surveys involved both face-to-face 
contact with participants and the assessment of physical measures, including 
blood sampling, and the authors were concerned that participants might ˜nd 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
the test sessions too long or burdensome. On the other hand, participants could 
bene˜t from the periodic medical screening sessions, which might reveal health 
problems that would otherwise have gone undetected. The authors report only 
a 16
 percent loss of participants between the baseline survey and the ˜rst clini
-cal follow-up. Involving participants in more intensive investigations did not 
deter them from taking part or lead to widespread sample attrition. Rather, 
participants in the more intensively studied group were more likely to remain 
involved in the study. The authors hypothesize that many participants found 
these more intensive studies to be intrinsically interesting and that they derived 
from the study detailed clinical information that would help them monitor their 
health status (Marmot and Steptoe, 2008). 
Lindau and colleagues (2009) report participation rates in a nationally rep
-resentative probability survey of 1,550 community-residing women aged 57
85 
conducted in 2005 and 2006. All 1,550 female respondents in the study were 
asked to provide a self-administered vaginal swab specimen midway through 
the interview; 1,028 agreed to do so. Hauser and Weir (in press) report a similar 
response rate (approximately 65 percent) for saliva collection by mail for DNA 
analysis in the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study.
ISS
UES
 SURRO
UNDIN
G 
THE
 COLLECTION
 OF
 BIOSPECIMENS
 IN
 SOCIAL
 SURVEYSSurvey researchers intending to collect biospecimens must grapple with a 
number of issues, many of which will be unfamiliar to them. The majority of 
these issues can be grouped into three broad areas: (1) the collection and stor
-age of biospecimens, (2) sharing of biospecimens and the data collected there
-from, and (3) informed consent. In each of these areas there are concerns that 
must be addressed, questions that must be answered, and policies that must 
be devised if the bene˜ts of collecting the biospecimens are to be fully realized 
while the interests of research participants are protected.
Concerning the collection and storage of biospecimens, for example, what 
precautions should be taken in collecting the specimens from survey partici
-pants? What considerations should factor into an investigator™s choice of a stor
-age facility in which to maintain the specimens from a survey? What should the 
policies be for sharing those specimens?
With respect to the sharing of biospecimens, what are the risks to con˜
-dentiality in sharing specimens or the data derived from them? How can those 
risks be minimized while the usefulness of the data is maximized? What are the 
advantages and disadvantages of restricting access to the data versus restricting 
the data themselves?
Concerning informed consent, there are a great many uncertainties and 
controversies: How does one arrange for informed consent for specimens 
and data to be used in some future unspeci˜ed research project? How should 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 15
researchers handle situations in which an analysis of data has revealed sig
-ni˜cant health information about a participantŠinformation that may not be 
known to the participant? What happens when a study participant withdraws 
his or her consent? What should be included in an informed consent form for 
a social science survey that will include the collection of biospecimens? How 
should one deal with IRBs when submitting a proposal to conduct this sort of 
study?
The following chapters address each of these issues in detail.
ST
UDY 
PURPOSE
, 
SCOPE
, 
AND
 APPROACH
To address the issues outlined above, in 2008 NIA™s Behavioral and Social 
Research (BSR) Program asked the National Academies to convene an ad hoc 
panel of experts for the purpose of identifying best practices with respect to 
collecting, storing, protecting, and accessing biospecimens collected in social 
science surveys and the biodata derived therefrom. It is worth stating at the 
outset that these issues are not new: the research community is familiar with 
the challenge of reconciling the bene˜ts of providing wider access to research 
data and the resulting increased risk of a breach of con˜dentiality. Several pre
-vious National Research Council (NRC) reports have addressed aspects of the 
subject (see, for example, National Research Council, 1993, 2005). However, 
these issues have not been suf˜ciently examined in the context of biosocial 
surveys that collect both biospecimens and typical social science data, a dis
-cussion that is becoming increasingly salient. BSR is continuing to develop a 
portfolio of new research directions linking social and behavioral research with 
data on genetics and genomics. Several large longitudinal data collection efforts 
funded by BSR (e.g., the Health and Retirement Survey and the
 Wisconsin 
Longitudinal Study) are now collecting various types of biospecimens. In other 
cases, plans for collecting new biospecimens are currently under way. For many 
BSR
-supported researchers, the procedures and protocols surrounding the col
-lection, storage, and sharing of biospecimens are new. Furthermore, ongoing 
advances in bioinformatics (see, for example, Homer et al., 2008) have raised 
issues of con˜dentiality and security that have prompted BSR to review its 
procedures with respect to data sharing. 
The 10-member panel that conducted this study was appointed under the 
auspices of the Committee on National Statistics and the Committee on Popula
-tion of the National Academies. Its members included leading experts in social, 
behavioral, genetic, ethics, and genomic studies who were familiar with the 
wide range of issues involved. The panel was charged with preparing a report 
that would address these issues and provide recommendations for best prac
-tices, procedures, and guidance for funding agencies, IRBs, and researchers. 
To accomplish its task, the panel organized a public workshop as a means 
of interacting with other leading scientists engaged in (or considering) the col
-Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
lection of biospecimens. (The workshop agenda is presented in Appendix A, 
while the participants are listed in Appendix B.) The workshop discussions 
were designed to explore issues related to informed consent, data collection, 
con˜dentiality protection, data archiving, and data access for multipurpose 
population surveys that collect biological specimens and measures in addition 
to socioeconomic/demographic, behavioral/lifestyle, and physical and mental 
health measures. Speci˜cally, the panel was tasked to review the following 
issues, with particular reference to surveys sponsored by NIA: 

information that should be provided to survey respondents for informed 
consent and how the language of consent forms affects people™s willing
-ness to participate in surveys;

methods for collecting and processing genetic and biological speci
-mens and measures to minimize the burden on respondents, maximize 
research potential, and protect con˜dentiality and privacy;

relevant laws, regulations, and policies, including the Common Rule for 
Protection of Human Subjects, the Con˜dential Information Protection 
and Statistical Ef˜ciency Act of 2002, the 2002 regulations issued under 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, and 
relevant National Institutes of Health policies on data sharing, certi˜
-cates of con˜dentiality, and related topics, including the repository for 
genomewide association studies;

factors for IRBs to consider in reviewing requests for the collection of 
biological specimens and measures in surveys;

the risks of and evidence for actual misuse of biological specimens and 
measures in surveys;

whether and which statistical techniques can be used to make genetic 
and other biological measures anonymous in microdata ˜les while pre
-serving their utility for research;

the costs and bene˜ts of alternative systems for archiving genetic and 
other biological specimens and measures derived from population sur
-veys to permit later research use while protecting con˜dentiality; and

the costs and bene˜ts of alternative forms of access to microdata con
-taining genetic and biological measures, such as secure research data 
centers and licensing.
A word about this statement of task and the scope of this study is in order. 
Although the statement of task mentions both biological specimens and mea
-sures, the panel chose to focus this report on the former, for two reasons. First, 
as will be clear from the discussion in the following chapters, unique issues of 
collection, storage, and sharing and of informed consent and con˜dentiality 
are associated with biospecimens that do not arise with respect to biological 
measures such as the taking of height and weight or blood pressure. Second, 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 17
whereas the data derived from measures are well de˜ned and ˜nite in scope, a 
wide-ranging and potentially limitless set of data can be derived from biospeci
-mens, further complicating the issues that must be addressed.
The panel also wishes to emphasize that the starting point for this study is 
a decision that the bene˜ts of collecting biospecimens as part of a social science 
survey outweigh the costs noted earlier. This study does not address the calculus 
that factors into the decision about whether to collect biospecimens as part 
of a social science survey. The panel emphasizes, however, that the trade-offs 
involved are complex, not least because, as noted above, the potential bene˜ts 
are as yet not fully understood. 
To carry out its charge, the full panel met four times. In March 2008 the 
panel met to discuss its statement of task with the sponsor; to review prior 
work; and to identify critical themes and speakers for the public workshop, 
which was held in November 2008. Following the workshop, the panel met 
three more times (November 2008, June 2009, and August 2009) to discuss 
the presentations and the rich interactive discussions that had occurred at the 
workshop, to deliberate, and to outline this report. The report is based on the 
deliberations of the panel as informed by the workshop but is the product of 
the panel, not merely an account of the workshop.
REPORT
 O
RGANI
ZATION
The remainder of this report presents the panel™s ˜ndings, conclusions, 
and recommendations. Chapter 2 deals with issues concerning the collection, 
storage, use, and distribution of biological data, including issues of custodian
-ship and ownership. Chapter 3 reviews issues related to con˜dentiality and 
data sharing, including deidenti˜cation and other approaches to preserving the 
privacy of participants. Chapter 4 addresses issues related to informed consent, 
including biobanking, the use of blanket consent, and the role of IRBs. Finally, 
Chapter 5 offers the panel™s recommendations for practices and procedures that 
can best facilitate research and protect participants as the collection of biospeci
-mens in social science surveys moves forward over the next 5 to 10 years.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Collecting, Storing, Using, and 
Distributing Biospecimens
Social scientists have long experience with population surveys, but the 
collection of biospecimens as part of a survey protocol requires different 
technical and logistical skills and introduces complex legal and ethical 
issues. Additional, and often unforeseen, costs in terms of both money and time 
frequently must be borne as well. To be sure, epidemiologists have a long tradi
-tion of collecting biological data (often mimicking a clinical setting in the ˜eld) 
along with social and demographic data (that are often less rich than social 
surveys) but typically they are not designed to be representative of a larger 
population universe. Furthermore, social scientists generally have expectations 
regarding data sharing and access that differ from those of epidemiologists, 
clinicians, and medical researchers.
Adding the collection of biospecimens to social surveys provides the oppor
-tunity to identify or test biomarkers that can address questions in many areas of 
interest, from susceptibility to disease to measures of environmental exposure 
to a wide range of compounds. It is important, however, for proposed bio
-markers to be aligned properly with the goals, hypotheses, and concepts of the 
research. Each team of investigators will need to consider carefully numerous 
questions that will guide their decisions regarding the collection, use, and stor
-age of biospecimens: What biospecimens will best advance the research ques
-tions or hypotheses being investigated? What kinds of specimens will provide 
the most reliable measures (and be practicable in the ˜eld)? What constraints 
are involved in transporting specimens to a laboratory or tissue repository (in 
time)? What kind of preparation needs to be done in the ˜eld (and is it fea
-sible)? What safety issues need to be addressed? Which assays should be done 
19
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
˜rst? In addition, a host of logistical questions must be considered by the par
-ticipating scientists and their Institutional Review Boards (IRBs). These include 
how the specimens will be collected, managed, and stored; how access to them 
will be regulated and monitored; how they will be used to extract relevant bio
-markers; and whether and how the laboratory data and survey information will 
be made available to scienti˜c collaborators, the broader scienti˜c community, 
and the public.
There is no single formula for adding the collection of biospecimens to a 
survey; each investigation will have different requirements that will have to be 
weighed and balanced against constraints of budget, time, ˜eld conditions, and 
participant burden. Signi˜cant advance planning, piloting, and revision will be 
required, and even then it is wise to expect the unexpected.
These cautions are particularly important given the rapid pace of technol
-ogy development both with respect to the collection of specimens (e.g., blood, 
urine, saliva, or hair) as well as the ability to analyze data derived from such 
specimens (ranging from blood glucose levels to C-reactive protein to mercury 
levels to DNA). The prime example here is the analysis of genetic markers. Just 
a few years ago, analysis of large numbers of biological specimens was limited to 
examining a small number of candidate genes or, at best, a few thousand genetic 
markers. But the advent of microarrays that allow the measurement of expres
-sion levels of unprecedented numbers of human genes in a single experiment 
or the pro˜ling of a million single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across 
the genome began to change the way scientists and the IRBs that oversee their 
projects conduct their work. For example, pooled data from genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS), representing the genomes of multiple individuals, 
were viewed for some time as acceptable for public release. But when recent 
work on forensic analysis of DNA samples showed that the presence of a single 
individual could be detected in a large pool of such samples (Homer et al., 
2008), researchers and policy makers at the National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
reconsidered and changed data release policies. 
Concerns about data release and protected health information have been 
compounded by the rapid pace of development of next-generation DNA 
sequencing technologies. Sequencing the ˜rst human genome was a 15-year 
project that cost billions of dollars; new technologies, however, allow sequenc
-ing of human genomes in times that are on the order of 1
 month at a cost of 
less than $100,000, and technology advances may reduce the cost to $1,000 or 
less. This capability raises the prospect of having to deal with unprecedented 
amounts of personal informationŠthe entire genome sequence from large num
-bers of individuals. While such data may have great potential for the discovery 
of biomarkers and functional studies, dealing with the data and their implica
-tions for privacy and protection of human subjects will require addressing many 
as yet unanswered questions.
The focus in this chapter is on the specimens themselves, not the data 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 21
derived from them (discussed in Chapter 3), although clearly the kinds of data 
that ultimately can be obtained are constrained by the specimens that are col
-lected, the quality of the collection and storage procedures, the timing of the 
assays, and the integrity of the procedures. The chapter begins by describing 
some documents that provide guidance regarding best practices for investiga
-tors. It then reviews cross-cutting considerations for studies that include bio
-specimens. The subsequent sections offer a detailed discussion of issues related 
to collection, use, storage, custodial responsibility and ownership, and access 
and distribution.
BEST
-P
RACTICE
 REFERENCE DOC
UMENTS
Fortunately, researchers undertaking the collection and analysis of biospec
-imens for the ˜rst time do not have to reinvent the wheel. First, an increasing 
number of social science investigators have hands-on experience with collect
-ing, storing, using, and distributing biospecimens. A simple piece of practical 
advice is to talk with them. Second, documents that describe recommended 
procedures and laboratory practices are already available. Although they were 
not developed with social surveys speci˜cally in mind, these protocols have 
been ˜eld tested and approved by numerous IRBs and ethical oversight com
-mittees. These best-practice documents are updated frequently to re˚ect the 
growing knowledge and changing opinions about the best ways to collect, store, 
handle, and distribute biological specimens. They are useful places to begin.
The panel identi˜ed three documents that it believes are most relevant to 
the concerns of newcomers to biospecimen collection. Although these docu
-ments focus on guidelines for biospecimen repositories, they also provide more 
general guidance and important reminders for consideration during the plan
-ning process. They will be most useful for identifying factors that need to be 
considered in choosing a repository or in establishing even a small biospecimen 
archive. 
First is 
200
8 Best Practices for Repositories: Collection, Storage, Retrieval, 
and Distribution of Biological Materials for Research
, prepared by the Interna
-tional Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories (ISBER) (Inter
-national Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories, 2008). ISBER 
was formed in part to develop effective strategies for the long-term storage of 
biological specimens; it ﬁfosters education and research and promotes quality 
and safety in all activities relating to specimen collection, storage and dissemi
-nationﬂ (International Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories, 
2005, p. 5). The document covers repository organization, management, and 
facilities; storage equipment and environment; quality assurance and quality 
control; safety; training; tracking of biological materials; packaging and ship
-ping; specimen collection, processing, and retrieval; and legal and ethical issues 
for human specimens.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Second, in 2002 the National Cancer Institute (NCI) set out to understand 
the quality and characteristics of biospecimens used in cancer research and to 
develop a set of principles for their collection and handling. A 5-year process 
of research, workshops, and feedback led to the publication in 2007 of 
National Cancer Institute Best Practices for Biospecimen Resources
 (National Cancer Insti
-tute, 2007). Less detailed than the ISBER publication, the NCI guidelines do 
not offer speci˜cs, such as the temperature at which tissue samples should be 
stored or the precise sorts of labels that should be used. Rather, they provide 
ﬁsalient guiding principles that de˜ne state-of-the-science biospecimen resource 
practices, promote biospecimen and data quality, and support adherence to 
ethical and legal requirementsﬂ (National Cancer Institute, 2007, p. 1). 
Third, in 2007 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Develop
-ment (OECD) released 
OECD Best Practice Guidelines for Biological Resource 
Centres
 (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, 2007). 
These guidelines are broader than those of NCI in that they address more types 
of biological specimens, including viruses, bacteria, and other microorganisms, 
as well as samples taken from human subjects. They are also broader in the 
sense that they represent best practices from 30 countries rather than being 
drawn primarily from the best practices of U.S. institutions. However, they take 
the same general approach as the NCI guidelines in that they provide guiding 
principles rather than speci˜c suggestions.
1Collectively, these documents provide excellent advice on how to store 
biospecimens in ways that preserve them,
2 ensure adequate documentation, and 
protect con˜dentiality. However, they do not address questions that are most 
closely related to the design of the research itself, such as choice of biospecimen 
(e.g., blood, urine, saliva), choice of biomarker, and choice of assay.
3 Another 
important distinction for biosocial researchers is that the data archive (i.e., the 
collection of data derived from the specimens, as well as the data from the sur
-vey) is likely to be maintained separately from the specimens themselves, while 
documentation about the specimen collection and survey protocols may be 
archived in yet another location. Unlike the researchers addressed in the best-
practice documents, therefore, social scientists are likely to use a biorepository 
as a facility for the storage and distribution of specimens, not as a partner in 
the substantive or intellectual concerns of the study or as an entity with a claim 
to ownership of the specimens. These differences translate to a different set of 
1Two organizations in the United Kingdom (UK) have also produced valuable best-practice 
guides. The Wellcome Trust, the UK-based charity that funds innovative biomedical research, 
published 
Sharing Data from Large-Scale Biological Research Projects: A System of Tripartite Respon
-sibility 
(Wellcome Trust, 2003), while the UK Biobank, a long-term biobank study investigating the 
genetic and environmental components of disease, produced 
UK Biobank Ethics and Governance 
Framework 
(UK Biobank, 2007). 
2Blood spots are not addressed.
3For discussion of some of these issues, see National Research Council (2008).
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 23
challenges for data security and the protection of con˜dentiality from those 
covered in the best-practice documents. That said, the documents provide use
-ful guidelines for the choice and evaluation of a repository for biospecimens: 
even if the biorepository is not an intellectual partner, it must track and protect 
information in its custody.
CROSS-C
UTTIN
G CONSIDERATIONS
Ethical, Legal, and Policy Issues
Safeguarding the rights and safety of study participants is of paramount 
importance. Honoring promises regarding the privacy and con˜dentiality of 
participants and ensuring that all procedures conform to what has been estab
-lished during the informed consent process are fundamental to ethical research. 
The damage that can be caused by breaches of con˜dentialityŠpossible at 
many stages of research using biospecimensŠcan be devastating. Policies and 
protocols for using biospecimens properly in scienti˜cally sound research and 
for ensuring adherence to federal, local, state, and international laws governing 
the collection, storage, and use of biospecimens by all members of the research 
team and its collaborators and contractors are fundamental. Chapter 3 exam
-ines issues related to con˜dentiality and the sharing of biological and social 
data, while Chapter 4 contains a more detailed discussion of issues related to 
informed consent.
Informed consent, privacy, con˜dentiality, and identi˜ability in genomic 
research are all closely interrelated (Lowrance, 2006a). All are relevant to deci
-sions about deidenti˜cation and coding of data (and thus to protection, which 
in turn allows for dissemination). 
Privacy
 refers to the protection of an individ
-ual from unwanted intrusions, including the acquisition of information about 
that individual. It is a general protection against other individuals, groups, 
and society as a whole. By contrast, 
con˜dentiality
 refers to the protection of 
information about an individual that has already been provided willingly to one 
party; if the information is con˜dential, the recipient is responsible for ensuring 
that it is not released to others without the donor™s permission. 
Identi˜ability
 is the ability to associate data with a particular person. The identi˜ability of 
data can be thought of in terms of a spectrum from data that are impossible 
to identify, to those that can be identi˜ed as possibly being linked to a given 
individual, to those for which that linkage is known with certainty.
A primary consideration is that the privacy of study participants should 
be respected and protected. Sound scienti˜c research involving bi
ospecimens 
depends on protecting the privacy of the participants who contribute them and 
the con˜dentiality of their data. Yet many of the very scienti˜c and techno
-logical advances that make the collection of biological specimens so
 valuable
Š progress in genomic and proteomic science, the sequencing of the human 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
genome, the culture of rapid release of genomic data, and the increasing use 
of Internet-based searchable databases containing those data
Šincrease the 
risk of potential breaches of con˜dentiality and make it increasingly important 
to anticipate and prevent such breaches (National Cancer Institute, 2007). 
Advances in digital computing, communication, and storage technologies also 
are linked with a new world of research characterized by immense data sets, 
new forms of interdisciplinary collaboration, and unprecedented levels of data 
sharing among researchers, all of which raise the risk of breaches throughout 
the data collection, analysis, publication, and distribution process (see National 
Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medi
-cine, 2009).
While summary-level data are of great value, biosocial research often 
requires that individual-level survey data be linked to each biological specimen 
to facilitate the analysis of biodata derived from those specimens. However, the 
unrestricted release of both the individual survey data and the biodata poses 
potential risks for breaches of con˜dentiality. Although the public release of 
nominally deidenti˜ed data used to be widely accepted, the concept of deiden
-ti˜cation needs to be reconsidered when the data can represent an individual™s 
entire genome sequence or the state of a million or more variant positions along 
the genome, possibly together with various social, economic, psychological, or 
physiological characteristics. There is as yet no way of knowing what the fre
-quency and consequences of breaches in data security might be, but it appears 
clear that they have the potential to lead to individual or group discrimination 
or stigmatization, as well as to diminished public trust and reduced participa
-tion in and support for research. It is crucial to have policies and protocols 
in place to prevent the unauthorized release of sensitive information and to 
respond effectively if it occurs.
At the federal level, constitutional, legislative, and administration protec
-tions of privacy apply to situations in which biospecimens are collected, stored, 
analyzed, or disseminated. In at least one case, the U.S. Supreme Court implied 
that the Constitution might guarantee individuals some level of ﬁinformational 
privacyﬂ (
Whalen v. Roe
, 429 U.S. 589 [1977]). The Court has not developed 
that right further, however, and in any event, it would apply only to actions by 
governments and not private organizations, such as most health plans (Jones 
and Sarata, 2008, p.
 17). The federal court ˜nding that is perhaps most relevant 
to the issue of genetic privacy is 
Norman-Bloodsaw v. Lawrence Berkeley Labora
-tory
. A group of workers at Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL) complained 
that their privacy rights had been violated when the laboratory used their stored 
blood samples to test for pregnancy, sickle-cell anemia, and sexually transmit
-ted diseases without their consent. The district court sided with LBL, but the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit disagreed and sent the case (later 
settled out of court) back to the district court. The Court of Appeals found 
that, although the employees had originally agreed to provide blood samples, 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 25
ﬁthe ensuing chemical analysis of the samples to obtain physiological data is a 
further intrusion of the tested employees™ privacy interests.ﬂ The court added, 
ﬁOne can think of few subject areas more personal and more likely to implicate 
privacy interests than that of one™s health or genetic make-up,ﬂ and suggested 
that the tests ﬁmay also be viewed as searches in violation of Fourth Amend
-ment rights.ﬂ
4Among the federal statutes that may apply to genetic privacy are the Pri
-vacy Act of 1974 (5
 U.S.C. § 552a) and the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) 
(5 U.S.C. §§ 552 et seq.). The Privacy Act makes it illegal for federal agencies to 
disclose information (including medical information) from records maintained 
on individuals except under certain conditions. FOIA was intended to make 
much of the information maintained by federal agencies available to the public, 
but the act speci˜cally exempts ﬁpersonnel and medical ˜les and similar ˜les 
the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of 
personal privacy.ﬂ
5Additional federal privacy protections ˚ow from the Health Insurance Por
-tability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 and the Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) of 2008. Pursuant to HIPAA, the Secretary 
of Health and Human Services (HHS) put forth a set of regulations designed 
to protect the privacy of health information. The regulations cover all types of 
health information in any formŠelectronic, on paper, or oralŠand they de˜ne 
health information very broadly so that it encompasses genetic information 
as well as such details as disease status or family medical history; however, 
they apply only to ﬁcovered entities,ﬂ that is, institutions and providers that 
are subject to HIPAA. According to HHS regulations, the entities covered 
by HIPAA are health care providers that carry out certain types of electronic 
transactions, health plans, and health care clearinghouses (U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, 2005a). Many biosocial surveys will not be con
-ducted in HIPAA-covered entities, but following the guidelines is a good step 
toward protecting privacy, so the spirit of that law can perhaps serve as a useful 
guiding principle. In cases where HIPAA does apply, researchers ﬁare required 
to have in place reasonable safeguards to protect the privacy of patient infor
-mation and limit the information used or disclosed to the minimum amount 
necessary to accomplish the intended purpose of the disclosureﬂ (Jones and 
Sarata, 2008, p. 19; but see also Institute of Medicine, 2009). Serious violations 
may be punished by up to 10 years in prison and ˜nes of up to $250,000. The 
consequences of breaches of con˜dentiality can be so dire that the penalties 
should be proportionately large; some would argue that $250,000 for an institu
-tion might not be enough. In addition to HIPAA, GINA protects people from 
being discriminated against by health insurers or employers as a consequence 
4Norman-Bloodsaw v. Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 
135 F.3d 1260, 1269 (N.D. Cal. 1998).
55 U.S.C. § 552(b)(6).
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
of differences in their DNA that could potentially affect their health, say, by 
increasing their chances of getting a particular disease. The law enables people 
to participate in research studies or obtain medical tests without fear of having 
their DNA information subsequently used against them by health insurers or 
in the workplace.
An alternative to promising con˜dentiality is obtaining consent from par
-ticipants in advance with the understanding of full disclosure (Church, 2005; 
Lunshof et al., 2008) and acknowledging that biological samples are convert
-ible into identi˜able genomic and trait data. Large security gaps are often 
social in nature; for example, even though high-security defense access requires 
psychosocial security checks (well beyond any employed by health research 
organizations), classi˜ed materials still slip outside of secure environments 
(e.g., via theft, mislabeling, cross-contamination, willful sharing of data despite 
consequences, or unanticipated reidenti˜cation algorithms). To some, it may 
appear disingenuous to continue to promise con˜dentiality of samples in light 
of numerous recent examples to the contrary. 
 To help ensure informed consent 
(rather than merely obtaining legal signatures on consent forms), some groups 
require 100
 percent scores on tests of comprehension of the potential risks and 
bene˜ts for the subjects, families, and society (Church, 2005). This check has 
the additional bene˜t of educating participants before the study, rather than 
after they need to be informed of some alarming result.
The NCI recommendations regarding privacy and con˜dentiality (National 
Cancer Institute, 2007) include a detailed section designed to help guide bio
-repositories in their role as honest brokers of sensitive information. Although 
the recommendations refer to biorepositories, they are applicable to multiple 
stages of research, analysis, storage, and distribution processes:
Biospecimen resources should establish clear policies for protecting the pri
-vacy of identi˜able information. These policies may include data encryption, 
coding, establishing limited access or varying levels of access to data by bio
-specimen resource employees, use of nondisclosure agreements, and use of an 
honest broker system. (National Cancer Institute, 2007, p. 22) 
Researchers (and biorepositories) should consider obtaining a certi˜cate 
of con˜dentiality (National Cancer Institute, 2007). NIH is authorized to issue 
certi˜cates to researchers involved in clinical, biomedical, or other research 
that would allow them to refuse to disclose identi˜able information in fed
-eral, state, local, civil, criminal, administrative, or other proceedings (see also 
National Institutes of Health, 2009). If such a certi˜cate is obtained, the par
-ticipants should be informed about it during the informed consent process. The 
informed consent process should also include explaining what such certi˜cation 
means and the limits to the protection it can afford 
(National Cancer Institute
, 2007).
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 27
Technical and Logistical Issues
Most biospecimens are classi˜ed as biohazardous materials. Personnel 
who handle them at any stage of a project should be trained in their safe use 
and handling and take adequate precautions. Protection of those who collect 
and handle the specimens, including laboratory personnel, should be ensured. 
Potential threats include not only exposure to infectious agents, but also, for 
example, exposure to toxic chemicals used in processing specimens, cuts from 
broken glass or shards, exposure to dry ice during the shipping process, and 
irritation from adhesives. Protocols for collection need to be established that 
will ensure the safety of both research participants and the study staff, and pro
-tocols for processing, shipping, storage, and use must take account of the safety 
of each person who may be exposed. Research institutions may have speci˜c 
requirements to ensure the safety of biological materials.
Documentation is needed at all stages of a study. This requirement may be 
especially complex for social scientists who, in general, will be archiving not 
only specimens but also the more familiar kinds of self-reported or interviewer-
assessed data that are typically included in social science surveys. As noted 
earlier, biosocial survey data and specimens usually will be archived in more 
than one location or type of facility. The data requirements associated with the 
biospecimens themselves include information about the administrative and 
operational ﬁtrailﬂ of the specimensŠcollection site, date and time of collec
-tion, freeze/thaw occurrences, assay procedures, and laboratory quality control 
(QC) and quality assurance (QA), to name but a few that will be new to most 
social survey investigators. Researchers must also establish protocols for linking 
the different archives in a manner that protects individual con˜dentiality while 
having a minimal effect on research. Excessively restrictive rules for linking the 
data and specimens may hinder the originally envisioned research, the kind of 
research to which the participant consented in the ˜rst place.
 The specimens themselves will generally be stored in a biorepository. 
Detailed information on all specimen collection, processing, and storage pro
-cedures should be recorded and tracked by the biorepository™s information and 
database systems. The NCI guidance discussed earlier includes detail on the 
necessary systems: ﬁAn informatics system should support all aspects of bio
-specimen resource operations, including (but not limited to) research partici
-pant enrollment and consent; biospecimen collection, processing, storage, and 
dissemination; QA/QC; collection of research participant data; data security; 
validation documentation; and management reporting functions. In addition, 
the system should manage clinical annotations to the biospecimensﬂ (National 
Cancer Institute, 2007, pp. 11
12). The NCI guidelines cover such areas as 
identi˜cation of biospecimens, integration with local systems, interoperability, 
and ethical and legal issues pertaining to informatics systems.
Pretesting is important at all stages of a study. Those new to working with 
biospecimens will ˜nd it necessary to test processes and equipment that social 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
scientists usually do not have to consider. The adhesive on specimen labels, for 
example, should be checked to ensure that the labels will not come off in the 
freezer or if they get wet; in a similar vein, the ink must be checked to make 
sure it will not smudge or run. It is wise to use ice water or ﬁscrapﬂ specimens 
to test shipment protocols for frozen specimens and ensure that the packaging 
includes adequate dry ice. It is wise as well to anticipate possible delays at the 
shipping docks, at customs inspection stations, in traf˜c, and at airports; estab
-lishing fall-back procedures for misadventures is advisable. In short, every step 
of the protocol should be pretested with the equipment and processes to be 
used at that step. Suf˜cient training of survey staff (data and specimen collec
-tors and handlers) is also critical to eliminate the human error that may occur 
in the collection and processing of biospecimens. 
COLLECTION: DESI
GN AND OPERATION
As discussed above, the design of the protocol for collecting biospecimens 
must ensure the safety of both participants and staff. Interviewers or other 
survey staff who collect biological specimens from human subjects should 
take precautions to avoid infection from any pathogens that may be present in 
the specimens, especially when blood samples are being collected (Twitchell, 
2003). Again, these issues should be addressed during the training of survey 
staff. Well-trained interviewers also can facilitate the process of obtaining par
-ticipants™ informed consent, decrease data collection errors by ensuring that the 
correct protocols are followed, and minimize the risk to study participants. In 
addition, there has been a movement recently to develop measures and methods 
that can be administered by nonclinicians, in some cases yielding immediate 
information that can be imparted to participants by an interviewer who is not 
competent to offer any clinical or diagnostic interpretation of the information. 
Thus it is important to emphasize in interviewer training and supervision that, 
while interviewers may tell respondents what they have just measured (e.g., 
blood pressure), they should not offer any interpretation of such information.
Consideration must also be given to the different kinds of preparation that 
will need to occur in the ˜eld. For example, urine may need to be aliquoted or 
acidi˜ed, or blood may need to be centrifuged. Some assays must be performed 
on freshly collected specimens, and in these cases, it is important to plan for 
rapid transit or on-site laboratory work. 
Once a laboratory has been selected to analyze the biospecimens for the 
biomarker(s) of interest, the laboratory itself should conduct tests to evaluate 
assay reliability, and the investigator may want to test for both intra- and inter
-laboratory reliability (see Box 2-1 for a discussion on selecting a laboratory). 
Thus, the protocol may need to include the preparation of duplicate aliquots 
(for intralaboratory tests) or even triplicate aliquots (to test interlaboratory 
agreement of assay results). Ideally, the specimens used for these tests should 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 29
be collected from volunteers outside the target sample so as not to overburden 
the participants. The specimens to be tested should be indistinguishable in form 
from those of the participants so the laboratory cannot tell which specimens 
are intended for reliability testing. Duplicates should be sent to the laboratory 
at regular intervals to check for consistency of results. If possible, a third speci
-men should be sent to a different laboratory to validate results. For genomic 
assays, however, such replication may not be possible, and assay replication, in 
particular interlaboratory assay replication, may not be possible for assays that 
require unusually fresh specimens.
The kits a laboratory uses to perform assays may change over time because 
improvements occur in assay technology or because manufacturers discontinue 
making them. Investigators may want to purchase in advance all the assay kits 
needed for all the specimens to ensure consistency throughout the project. 
More generally, care should be taken to ensure that protocols remain constant 
in the ˜eld as well as in the laboratory and do not drift over the duration of the 
work. Activities that need to be monitored and checked for reliability or drift 
include the calibration of measurement instruments, the timing of specimen 
collections, specimen treatment, shipping methods, transit duration, and ˜eld 
processing (e.g., aliquoting and reagents), as well as practices within the labo
-ratories that perform the assays. In addition to monitoring for consistency over 
time, the checks should ensure that activities of all staff remain in conformity 
with the approved informed consent and safety procedures. 
USE (AND RE
USE)
Important issues with respect to use and reuse of biospecimens include 
the question of who uses them and when, costs associated with sharing the 
specimens, informed consent for reuse, and shipping protocols.
Who 
Uses Biospecimens and When?
As noted in Chapter 1, biospecimens in a repository are a nonrenewable 
resource: the amount of blood, tissue, or other material that has been collected 
from each participant is limited, whereas the data derived from those materials 
are limitless and can be used as often as desired. Thus an important question 
becomes: Who will use the specimens and for what purpose? Those who have 
ownership of the biospecimens will need to develop procedures for choosing 
among competing demands. 
A related question is when analysis of biospecimens and biodata should be 
undertaken. Costs of many analyses are steadily falling, so waiting to perform 
analyses can save money or make it possible to perform more analyses for the 
same cost. But there are also costs to waitingŠtime wasted by investigators, for 
example, and delays in uncovering what might be valuable information.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
BOX 2-1
 Selecting a Laboratory for Analysis of 
 Biospecimens in Population Studies
Several issues must be addressed in selecting a laboratory to analyze bio
-specimens for biomarker(s) of interest in population studies.* Once the decision 
has been made on which speci˜c biomarkers are of interest, a place to start in 
laboratory selection is to understand whether the markers are to be available for 
clinical purposes or are purely research measures. Clinical measures, such as 
conventional blood counts, clinical biochemistries, many antibodies to infectious 
agents, and many hormone levels, can be obtained in a number of places and 
are likely to be performed with standardized methods and rigorous quality control, 
often with procedures dictated by the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amend
-ments (CLIA). Determinations that are made only in research laboratories raise 
many additional issues:
The investigator should check to see whether all of the determinations of 
interest can be performed in one laboratory. 
Quality control procedures, including those for long-term validity and repro
-ducibility of results, should be established. Examples of prior data and toler
-ances, including coef˜cients of variation, should be requested. The survey 
protocol should allow for a suf˜cient number or quality of specimens so 
some can be divided and sent as ﬁblindﬂ duplicates and triplicates to check 
accuracy. 
It is important to check the usual funding source for the laboratory and the 
biomarker determinations. If the source is a grant of ˜nite duration, it may 
not be possible to continue the analysis over a longer period of time. It 
may be useful to ask whether the laboratory equipment and reagents will 
continue to be available. 
Many research laboratories are good at what they do, but are not equipped 
to perform the large number of determinations that may be required by a 
population study. This constraint should be considered in advance. The 
investigator should inquire how quickly the necessary procedures can be 
performed. A related issue is whether one site can perform all aspects of 
a single assay or determination; if not, additional quality control measures 
will be needed. 
Pricing of determinations may be dif˜cult for some laboratory personnel, 
who may lack experience with large quantities of materials over a long time 
frame. Thus, not only is obtaining the data at a reasonable price an issue, 
but it is also important that the price be estimated accurately for the longer 
term; renegotiations may be dif˜cult and costly. 
Several important determinations, such as telomere length, may be per
-formed by more than one method, and selecting the best method can be 
challenging. This is more of a scienti˜c than a logistical question, but it must 
be discussed with technical and scienti˜c experts so that whatever is done 
will be scienti˜cally credible when the studies are published. 
The investigator should inquire what kind of publishing credits will be re
-quired. Will an acknowledgment suf˜ce, or is coauthorship mandated? Does 
the laboratory analyst require sign-off on the relevant manuscript?
In addition, a number of administrative and logistical issues apply generally 
to biomarker determinations, although they may or may not affect clinical and 
research uses differently:
The same principles that apply to general purchases of commodities apply 
here as well. Reputation, history of service, timely delivery of information, 
and longevity are all important in laboratory selection. 
Transportation and handling of specimens from the ˜eld to the laboratory 
are critical, and may depend on the type of determinations being made. An 
example of such considerations is whether specimens need preliminary pro
-cessing, such centrifugation of blood into constituent parts, which may have 
to be done quickly after acquisition. Another example is whether specimens 
need to be frozen or refrigerated during transport. Analytes differ substan
-tially in terms of rate of deterioration. Some may require highly controlled 
environments and rapid transit, while others may remain intact under usual 
shipping conditions. All such questions need to be answered in advance. 
In many cases, the portability of the specimens may not be known, neces
-sitating preliminary test runs to ensure that they are preserved in transit. 
The same issues apply to long-term storage of the specimens, whether from 
prior collection or prospectively. 
There may or may not be differences in the ethical obligation to report spe
-ci˜c biomarker ˜ndings. Almost all biomarkers determined in CLIA-certi˜ed 
laboratories are by de˜nition clinically relevant, and thus a decision needs 
to be made as to whether the ˜ndings should be reported to participants or 
their physicians. In general, there is an ethical obligation to report ˜ndings 
from clinical laboratories, particularly if clinically abnormal ˜ndings surpass 
alert levels. The issue of reporting ˜ndings from research laboratories is 
more complex. The direct clinical import of the ˜ndings may not be under
-stood, nor would most clinicians be able to interpret them. Also, as noted 
above, the level of standardization and quality control may not be as high 
as in clinical laboratories, further impeding clinical interpretation. Decisions 
about reporting on biomarkers determined in research laboratories need to 
be made on a case-by-case basis, with medical input. (See also the discus
-sion of this issue in Chapter 4.)
*This discussion assumes that the markers of interest have already been selected, but such 
is not always the case. At times, discussion with investigators reveals that newer markers or 
those with greater speci˜city for the research question may be available. Identifying new and 
exploratory biomarkers is an iterative process and should involve reviews of the literature and 
discussions with relevant colleagues.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 31
BOX 2-1
 Selecting a Laboratory for Analysis of 
 Biospecimens in Population Studies
Several issues must be addressed in selecting a laboratory to analyze bio
-specimens for biomarker(s) of interest in population studies.* Once the decision 
has been made on which speci˜c biomarkers are of interest, a place to start in 
laboratory selection is to understand whether the markers are to be available for 
clinical purposes or are purely research measures. Clinical measures, such as 
conventional blood counts, clinical biochemistries, many antibodies to infectious 
agents, and many hormone levels, can be obtained in a number of places and 
are likely to be performed with standardized methods and rigorous quality control, 
often with procedures dictated by the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amend
-ments (CLIA). Determinations that are made only in research laboratories raise 
many additional issues:
The investigator should check to see whether all of the determinations of 
interest can be performed in one laboratory. 
Quality control procedures, including those for long-term validity and repro
-ducibility of results, should be established. Examples of prior data and toler
-ances, including coef˜cients of variation, should be requested. The survey 
protocol should allow for a suf˜cient number or quality of specimens so 
some can be divided and sent as ﬁblindﬂ duplicates and triplicates to check 
accuracy. 
It is important to check the usual funding source for the laboratory and the 
biomarker determinations. If the source is a grant of ˜nite duration, it may 
not be possible to continue the analysis over a longer period of time. It 
may be useful to ask whether the laboratory equipment and reagents will 
continue to be available. 
Many research laboratories are good at what they do, but are not equipped 
to perform the large number of determinations that may be required by a 
population study. This constraint should be considered in advance. The 
investigator should inquire how quickly the necessary procedures can be 
performed. A related issue is whether one site can perform all aspects of 
a single assay or determination; if not, additional quality control measures 
will be needed. 
Pricing of determinations may be dif˜cult for some laboratory personnel, 
who may lack experience with large quantities of materials over a long time 
frame. Thus, not only is obtaining the data at a reasonable price an issue, 
but it is also important that the price be estimated accurately for the longer 
term; renegotiations may be dif˜cult and costly. 
Several important determinations, such as telomere length, may be per
-formed by more than one method, and selecting the best method can be 
challenging. This is more of a scienti˜c than a logistical question, but it must 
be discussed with technical and scienti˜c experts so that whatever is done 
will be scienti˜cally credible when the studies are published. 
The investigator should inquire what kind of publishing credits will be re
-quired. Will an acknowledgment suf˜ce, or is coauthorship mandated? Does 
the laboratory analyst require sign-off on the relevant manuscript?
In addition, a number of administrative and logistical issues apply generally 
to biomarker determinations, although they may or may not affect clinical and 
research uses differently:
The same principles that apply to general purchases of commodities apply 
here as well. Reputation, history of service, timely delivery of information, 
and longevity are all important in laboratory selection. 
Transportation and handling of specimens from the ˜eld to the laboratory 
are critical, and may depend on the type of determinations being made. An 
example of such considerations is whether specimens need preliminary pro
-cessing, such centrifugation of blood into constituent parts, which may have 
to be done quickly after acquisition. Another example is whether specimens 
need to be frozen or refrigerated during transport. Analytes differ substan
-tially in terms of rate of deterioration. Some may require highly controlled 
environments and rapid transit, while others may remain intact under usual 
shipping conditions. All such questions need to be answered in advance. 
In many cases, the portability of the specimens may not be known, neces
-sitating preliminary test runs to ensure that they are preserved in transit. 
The same issues apply to long-term storage of the specimens, whether from 
prior collection or prospectively. 
There may or may not be differences in the ethical obligation to report spe
-ci˜c biomarker ˜ndings. Almost all biomarkers determined in CLIA-certi˜ed 
laboratories are by de˜nition clinically relevant, and thus a decision needs 
to be made as to whether the ˜ndings should be reported to participants or 
their physicians. In general, there is an ethical obligation to report ˜ndings 
from clinical laboratories, particularly if clinically abnormal ˜ndings surpass 
alert levels. The issue of reporting ˜ndings from research laboratories is 
more complex. The direct clinical import of the ˜ndings may not be under
-stood, nor would most clinicians be able to interpret them. Also, as noted 
above, the level of standardization and quality control may not be as high 
as in clinical laboratories, further impeding clinical interpretation. Decisions 
about reporting on biomarkers determined in research laboratories need to 
be made on a case-by-case basis, with medical input. (See also the discus
-sion of this issue in Chapter 4.)
*This discussion assumes that the markers of interest have already been selected, but such 
is not always the case. At times, discussion with investigators reveals that newer markers or 
those with greater speci˜city for the research question may be available. Identifying new and 
exploratory biomarkers is an iterative process and should involve reviews of the literature and 
discussions with relevant colleagues.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Costs Associated with Sharing Specimens
In addition to the costs of collecting and storing data, there are costs asso
-ciated with sharing specimens once they are in a biorepository. The process of 
sharing specimens can be complex and time-consuming and involves a variety 
of steps, such as internal review and reutilization procedures, with nontrivial 
costs. These costs must be accounted for and should be re˚ected in the budget. 
As discussed later in this chapter, the panel agreed that the data sharing plan 
submitted with a research proposal should address these issues. 
Informed Consent for Reuse
Reuse of specimens must be approved on the original consent form or 
through a separate IRB approval process. The latter process may require obtain
-ing a new consent from the participants; under certain circumstances, however, 
some IRBs will consider waiving the reconsent process. Each IRB has its own 
criteria for deciding on future use, but those criteria generally include the pos
-sibility that it may not be feasible to obtain updated consent for every new use, 
so that any new use should lie within the general scope of the original research. 
Blanket permission for any and all future (unspeci˜ed) uses is generally consid
-ered unacceptable by today™s increasingly conservative IRBs. Chapter 4 presents 
a more detailed discussion of this issue, including some proposed approaches 
for addressing it, while Chapter 3 reviews salient federal regulations.
Shipping
All biospecimens should be retrieved and shipped in a way that safeguards 
their integrity. Concerning retrieval, the NCI best-practice guidelines sim
-ply stipulate: ﬁSamples are retrieved from storage according to biospecimen 
resource SOPs [standard operating procedures] that safeguard sample qualityﬂ 
(National Cancer Institute, 2007, p. 6). For shipping of specimens, however, 
the guidelines go into much greater detail. They specify, for example, exactly 
how samples are to be shipped to maintain them at various temperatures, rang
-ing from 8°C to 
150°C. They describe the packaging to be used for paraf˜n 
blocks and slides, and they suggest that for particularly valuable samples, test 
packages, such as frozen water samples, be sent out ˜rst. They also cover how to 
maintain the proper paperwork when shipping biospecimens (National Cancer 
Institute, 2007). It is worth repeating the earlier caution about testing shipment 
protocols with ice water or ﬁscrapﬂ specimens to check each potential vulner
-able point in the protocol.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 33
STORA
GE Most social scientists will lack the expertise and resources to establish or 
maintain their own facilities for the storage of biospecimens. The panel™s best 
advice is to use experts in this area but to exercise careful oversight. A reason
-able starting point might be a cancer or Alzheimer™s disease center if the inves
-tigator is at a university that has one. Alternatively, many commercial facilities 
are available. The information in the best-practice documents described earlier 
can serve as an important guide for assessing the adequacy of potential sites. 
To ensure the maximum value from biospecimens, it is necessary to store 
them so they do not degrade, to keep careful records on them, and to ship them 
in a way that preserves their quality and their identity. Given the complexity 
of the storage and distribution of biospecimens, investigators should have the 
option of delegating storage and distribution to a specialized institutionŠa bio
-repositoryŠthat is available to accept the biospecimens collected from social 
science surveys (see Chapter 5). Biospecimens need to be kept stabilized at all 
stages of the process: collection, storage, shipment, aliquoting, in the ˜eld, and 
in the repository. A biorepository should be chosen that can ensure storage of 
all biospecimens in an appropriate stabilized state to preserve their integrity 
and allow the maximum number of analyses to be performed. For example, 
the Australasian Biospecimen Network describes a number of speci˜c recom
-mended practices in its 
Biorepository Protocols
: Audits should be conducted to check that biospecimen storage locations 
concur with database records; storage vessels (tubes, cassettes, etc.) should 
be checked to ensure they have remained intact; storage conditions should be 
monitored by a central alarm system and/or local alarms . . . ; back-up systems 
and enough empty freezer space should be allowed in case quick transfer of 
specimens from malfunctioning freezers is required . . . ; having multiple 
 
storage sites (on or off-site) ensures that all specimens will not be destroyed in 
the case of freezer malfunction or other emergency situations. (Australasian 
Biospecimen Network, 2007, p. 60) 
Automated security systems should monitor all storage equipment, and 
backup systems should be in place in case of an emergency such as a power 
failure. For example, the ISBER best-practice guidelines call for using an unin
-terruptible power supply (UPS) for critical equipment: ﬁComputer systems and 
electronic systems, such as environmental monitoring systems, safety systems 
(e.g., oxygen sensors, ventilations systems, etc.) or controllers for liquid nitro
-gen freezers, should be protected by a UPS. UPSs used in repositories should 
be tested on an annual basis to ensure their proper backup capabilitiesﬂ (Inter
-national Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories, 2008, p. 14).
For quality assurance and quality control purposes, training of person
-nel and harmonization of protocols throughout different repositories and the 
laboratories of individual researchers are essential to ensure reproducibility. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
There are a variety of international standards for laboratories and related facili
-ties, such as ISO9001:2000, developed by the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) for quality management systems (International Society 
for Biological and Environmental Repositories, 2005, 2008). 
Perhaps the most important issue in storing biospecimens is whether to 
keep them in a central repository or use an alternative approach, such as main
-taining them in separate repositories associated with the various institutions 
involved in their collection or keeping different types of specimens in different 
repositories. A major argument for using a central repository is that it should 
be more cost-effective than distributing specimens and data among several 
repositories, but this argument is based on general principles, not experience, 
as little is known about the cost of one option versus the other. Other issues 
to consider include which specimens (and which biodata) to keep and for how 
long. Storage is not freeŠthere is always an incremental cost for additional 
specimens and dataŠso at some point one must decide which specimens or 
data it makes sense (economically) to maintain and which can be discarded 
without signi˜cant loss. In the case of redundant specimens or data, erroneous 
data that cannot be corrected, or specimens that have insuf˜cient or no identi
-˜ers, it may make sense at some point to destroy them. On the other hand, the 
costs of data storage are declining, whereas the same cannot be said of the costs 
of biospecimen storage. Therefore, the issue of what to keep and what to dis
-pose of concerns mainly specimens rather than data. No clear guidelines exist 
on this issue, but it is one that researchers should be aware of and be prepared 
to address, preferably at the start of a study. 
Fortunately, new technologies are changing approaches to the storage of 
biological specimens and the associated costs. For example, while fresh-frozen 
tissue used to be essential for gene expression pro˜ling (because of RNA stabil
-ity issues), new methods such as Illumina™s DASL
6 assay have made it possible 
to use formalin-˜xed, paraf˜n-embedded (FFPE) tissue. This advance has 
reduced the need for expensive low-temperature storage and opened up the 
possibility of using large collections of FFPE samples that have been routinely 
archived in hospital pathology departments.
Finally, the informed consent process should include anticipating and 
requesting permission for the storage of specimens, as well as their future use 
(see above), and the specimen archive should include information that both 
links use of the specimens back to the informed consent documents and links 
the specimens to the data derived from them.
7 Specimens need to be stored 
with information that will allow determination of consent approvals. Did the 
participant agree to use of the specimen only at the time of collection? Was the 
6DASL = c
DNA-mediated 
Annealing, 
Selection, Extension, and 
Ligation Assay. 
7To protect research participants, IDs for the biorepository and the archive of the derived data 
should be different, and access to the link between them should be limited.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 35
agreement only for nongenetic tests? Has the participant withdrawn consent 
(and what does that mean with respect to the disposition of his/her specimens)? 
(See also Chapter 4.)
CUSTODIAL RESPONSIBILIT
Y AND OWNERSHIP
Storage of biospecimens raises issues concerning their custodianship and 
ownership. A number of groups and organizations have examined these issues, 
and a variety of publications suggest policies and best practices for addressing 
them.
Responsible custodianship of biospecimens implies certain basic steps, 
including the development of transparent policies to ensure proper use and 
storage. It is important, for example, that researchers develop guidelines early 
on regarding who should receive biospecimens and biodata for use in other 
studies. These guidelines are particularly important for biospecimens because, 
as noted earlier, they, unlike data, can be exhausted. Thus researchers must ask 
themselves such questions as: Should remaining biospecimens be distributed on 
a ˜rst-come, ˜rst-served basis? Should there be a formal application process? 
In studies within the United States, should foreign investigators have access? 
And in general, what factors will be taken into account in deciding who will 
be allowed to share the data? These are complex questions. If the proposed 
analyses lie beyond the competence of the original investigators, for example, 
projects will need to ensure that they have adequate support for the purpose. 
The panel agreed that the data sharing plan of a research proposal should 
specify policies and implementation plans for archiving and sharing both speci
-mens and the data derived therefrom. In general, there is no one best plan for 
the use and reuse of specimens, but the plan should include a discussion of the 
adequacy of the storage and retrieval protocols. It should spell out criteria for 
allowing other researchers to use (and therefore deplete) the available stock of 
specimens, as well as to gain access to any derived data. The plan should also 
specify the procedures for accessing the specimens and data. It should include 
provision for the storage and retrieval of specimens and clarify how the succes
-sion of responsibility for and control of the specimens will be managed at the 
conclusion of the project. Finally, the plan should contain information on how 
specimens and data derived from them are to be documented and provide for 
public access to that documentation.
The NCI best-practices document describes a number of custodianship 
practices that should be followed to ensure that biospecimens are maintained 
and used as effectively as possible (National Cancer Institute, 2007): 

The biorepository should ensure the proper storage of the specimens 
to maintain their physical integrity and the integrity of study partic
-ipants™ data linked to the specimens. It is the responsibility of the 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
principal investigator to choose a biorepository that can meet these 
requirements.

Clear and transparent protocols for the distribution of the specimens 
and the data to other investigators should be in place. 

Plans for handling, storing, and disposing of the biospecimens and 
associated data should be in place for such contingencies as the end of a 
grant, the end of a particular study, biospecimen depletion, and a study 
participant™s request for discontinuation of participation. 
Policies on Custodianship
Although the NCI best-practices document provides extensive guidance 
on many practices for biospecimen collection, storage, use, and maintenance, 
it does not specify the custodial roles and rights of biorepositories and their 
responsibilities to their host institutions or study participants, nor does it pro
-vide a functional de˜nition of custodianship. To clarify these responsibilities 
and to help develop a transparent policy for biorepository governance, the 
NCI Of˜ce of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research (OBBR) held a work
-shop in October 2007 (Custodianship and Ownership Issues in Biospecimen 
Research Symposium-Workshop). The workshop summary is an informative 
resource that makes a useful distinction between the concepts of ﬁcustodian
-shipﬂ and ﬁownershipﬂ (Of˜ce of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research, 
2008). It also provides recommendations for dealing with issues of ˜nancial and 
other types of con˚ict of interest (COI), intellectual property (IP), and access 
to products and bene˜ts. Another complexity is the relationship between the 
principal investigator and the biorepository. Most social scientists will use a 
biorepository to store and distribute specimens, but they will not wish to del
-egate scienti˜c decisions to the biorepository. Thus, it is important to specify 
at the outset the roles and responsibilities of the principal investigator and the 
repository. The OBBR workshop summary offers the following guidance on 
these issues:

One OBBR recommendation is that ﬁthe custodian of biospecimens 
should be someone other than the investigator . . . investigators with 
small biospecimen collections should be encouraged to establish or join 
an existing IRB-approved regulated biospecimen resourceﬂ (p. 8). 

Decisions regarding the distribution and reuse of biospecimens have 
the potential to create a con˚ict of interest. An expert panel might be 
appointed to provide technical/scienti˜c advice and to make recom
-mendations to the investigators regarding the disposition and use of the 
specimens in accordance with all ethical and IRB guidelines. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 37

Con˚icts of interest should be clearly identi˜ed. A starting point would 
be the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 50, Subpart F,
8 along 
with other NIH and university guidelines. All existing and possible 
institutional, NIH, and other COIs regarding biospecimens should be 
reviewed to determine whether they have been suf˜ciently addressed. 
All individuals responsible for biospecimen distribution should report 
COIs, and ˜nancial COIs should be disclosed to the public whenever 
possible.

Biorepository personnel and staff, as custodians of biospecimens, are 
not considered inventors under patent law for any inventions resulting 
from the research on specimens housed in the repository. Bioreposi
-tories have no inherent rights to future IP associated with inventions 
developed by researchers using the biorepository™s collection (see also 
National Institutes of Health, 2007). 

Educational materials on IP issues related to biospecimen research 
should be developed and made available to study participants. Possible 
˜nancial and non˜nancial bene˜ts and commercial products resulting 
from such research should be discussed in the informed consent docu
-ment, including possible supplemental material.

The existence of biospecimens should be made public when research 
data resulting from the use of those specimens are published, even if the 
biospecimens themselves are not available to the research community.
Court Decisions Regarding Ownership
There are few legal precedents related to the ownership of biospecimens, 
and they tend to be fact- and jurisdiction-speci˜c (Of˜ce of Biorepositories 
and Biospecimen Research, 2008). In general, the courts have denied claims to 
ownership by research participants. In one recent prominent case, 
Washington 
University v. Catalona
, the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of 
Missouri ruled that the research participants (human subjects) retained no 
rights to control their biospecimens after donation.
9 The court stated that in 
that particular case, the donation of biospecimens was an 
inter vivos
 gift. The 
informed consent document and the accompanying brochure were the key 
documents in this case, and the court used them as evidence that research sub
-jects retain no rights to repossess or transfer their biospecimens after donation 
or to direct any future use of the specimens for research. 
On appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth District stated that 
8Code of Federal Regulations Index, see 
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/CFR/INDEX.HTM
L (ac
-cessed January 26, 2010). 
9Washington University v. Catalona,
 Case No. 4:03CV01065-SNL, Document 152 (March 31, 
2006).
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
research participants do retain the right to discontinue participation in research 
by doing one of the following: not answering additional questions, ceasing donat
-ing additional tissue, or disallowing the use of their tissue in future research. The 
ability not to allow the use of donated specimens in future research is a key right 
of participants and is closely related to each participant™s right to withdraw from 
a study at any time.
The decisions of the district court and the appeals court re˚ect a public 
policy that medical research can advance only with continuing access to bio
-specimens. Nevertheless, it is possible that in another set of circumstances, the 
informed consent document could be interpreted as giving study participants 
the right to withdraw and physically repossess their biospecimens.
10
ACCESS
 AND
 DISTRIB
UTION
 Experience has led many IRBs to insist that biospecimens be destroyed 
when a clearly stated, focused use of the specimens has been completed, thus 
avoiding even the possibility of new and unapproved uses of the specimens. 
However, such stipulations impede the use of specimens to reproduce, chal
-lenge, or extend scienti˜c ˜ndings. The panel ˜nds that the latter goal out
-weighs the former. Consequently, the panel recommends the creation of at least 
one central facility for the storage and distribution of biospecimens, provided 
adequate procedural safeguards are in place (see Chapter 5 for a full discussion 
of the panel™s recommendations). 
Expanding access to biospecimens promotes further research and makes it 
possible to explore new questions without having to collect new specimens. It 
creates economies of scale, allowing different researchers to pursue a variety of 
investigations with specimens originally collected for a single purpose. Sharing 
biospecimens ﬁfosters an open research community and reinforces transparent 
scienti˜c inquiryﬂ (National Research Council, 2005, p. 39). Thus ensuring that 
researchers have broad access to biospecimens is essential to maintaining and 
improving the quality of the research enterprise. Access to biospecimens by a 
wide variety of researchers also enables a feedback system that can reveal prob
-lems with the specimens or their collection and suggest methods for improve
-ment (National Research Council, 2005). Eventually, moreover, people die, at 
which point they are no longer ﬁhuman subjects,ﬂ and the associated restric
-tions on the use of their biospecimens no longer apply (see the discussion of 
this issue in Chapter 3). 
For all of the above reasons, it is important to provide the widest possible 
access to biospecimens. Decisions about who obtains access can be based on 
various considerations, including ﬁthe scienti˜c merit and potential impact of 
the proposed research, whether the research use is appropriate to the nature 
10
See also the discussion in Chapter 4 on withdrawing consent.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COLLECTING, STORING, USING, AND DISTRIBUTING BIOSPECIMENS
 39
and purpose of the repository, adequacy of the research design and funding, 
public health bene˜ts and risks of the proposed research, legal and ethical 
considerations, and the quali˜cations of the research team and research envi
-ronmentﬂ (International Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories, 
2008, p. 49). But these considerations should not be used as a way of arti˜cially 
limiting access. 
To best serve the various research communities that can bene˜t from their 
biospecimens, principal investigators should develop clear and ethical access 
policies to facilitate sharing in ways that minimize disclosure risks and com
-ply with all federal and state regulations. Policies should be ˚exible enough 
to respond to new technologies when they appear and general enough that 
they can be adapted to different kinds of biorepositories. The data sharing 
plan should include detailed information regarding these policies and their 
proposed implementation. To avoid any appearance of self-interest, a project 
might empower an external advisory board to make decisions about access to 
its data.
When one institution transfers materials to another for research purposesŠ
for example, a biorepository making biospecimens available to an investigator 
at an institution not af˜liated with the repositoryŠa material transfer agree
-ment (MTA) sets forth the conditions under which the transfer is to be made 
and delineates the rights of the two parties. If a discovery made using the mate
-rial leads to a commercial application, for example, the MTA describes how any 
receipts or pro˜ts from the application will be allocated.
In the case of MTAs governing biospecimens from repositories and the data 
derived therefrom, investigators need to ensure that the agreement is speci˜c 
about what can and cannot be analyzed. If a clear understanding is not reached, 
and an investigator analyzes and publishes data without the full informed 
consent of those who have the rights to those data, serious problems can arise. 
One example is the experience of researchers at Arizona State University who 
analyzed genetic data from the Havasupai tribe in an effort to understand its 
high prevalence of diabetes. Through a series of misunderstandings, the tribe 
came to mistrust the researchers performing the analysis, and demanded that 
all analysis stop and its biological samples be returned. Because the agreement 
had not been speci˜c enough, the Arizona State researchers ended up with no 
data and no analysis after several years of work (Dalton, 2004).
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Protecting Privacy and Con˜dentiality: 
 Sharing Digital Representations of 
Biological and Social Data
One of the advantages of collecting biological specimens as part of 
social surveys is that digital representations of the data derived from 
the specimensŠsuch as measurements of lipid levels or indicators of 
the presence or absence of genes or diseasesŠcan be appended to the survey 
data and shared with other researchers. Wide dissemination of data facilitates 
advances in research and public policy. Indeed, the bene˜ts of wide access to 
data have led the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to require data shar
-ing as a criterion for funded proposals. However, biological and social data 
cannot be widely shared without consideration for the rights and interests of 
study participants from whom the data were derived, including their inter
-est in con˜dentiality. As has been noted in a number of previous reports by 
the National Research Council (1993, 2000, 2005, 2007), there is an inherent 
con˚ict between con˜dentiality and data access: the obligation to protect con
-˜dentiality pushes data disseminators to restrict access, whereas researchers™ 
demands push them to share highly detailed data. Balancing these con˚icting 
demands can be complicated, especially for large surveys that combine biologi
-cal and social data.
This chapter examines methods of sharing digital representations of bio
-logical and social data. It begins with a discussion of the risks inherent in shar
-ing such data. The second section reviews existing data sharing approaches 
and considers their potential usefulness in the context of this report. The ˜nal 
section summarizes some of the federal regulations related to the con˜dentiality 
of combined biological and social data.
41
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
RIS
KS TO
 C
ONFIDENTIALIT
Y 
IN
 L
IN
KED
 BIOLO
GICAL
 AND
 SOCIAL
 D
ATA
It is well understood that, before sharing data, organizations must remove 
all direct identi˜ers, such as names and addresses, from the ˜les. 
Deidenti˜ca
-tion
 refers to a reversible process whereby the data are key-coded, encrypted, 
or pseudonymized to remove personal information, but a key is generated 
that allows the data to be reassociated with the personal information.
1 By con
-trast, 
anonymization
 is an irreversible process in which the data are completely 
stripped of all identifying information that can be linked to the study partici
-pants (Elger and Caplan, 2006; Shostak, 2006).
Deidenti˜cation and anonymization of biodata should decrease the risk 
that unauthorized individuals can identify the participants who were the source 
of the data. However, deidenti˜cation and even anonymization may not be 
suf˜cient to protect participants™ con˜dentiality when the released data con
-tain other variables that, in combination, might enable a malicious data user 
(hereafter called an intruder) to identify individuals in the ˜le. For example, 
given precise values of such demographic variables as age, race, sex, educa
-tion, and occupation, an intruder might be able to link records in a released 
˜le to records in other databases that include data subjects™ names. Or, given a 
unique medical pro˜le, such as a diagnosis of a rare disease, an intruder might 
be able to use public knowledge, health records, or research data sets to link 
to identi˜ers or other data. This determination of an individual™s identity from 
data that have been deidenti˜ed or anonymized is referred to as 
reidenti˜cation
, and it is a risk that is growing as more and more data become readily available 
electronically. For example, electronic health records may enable an intruder to 
access individuals™ medical data and possibly link those data to social surveys 
with overlapping medical variables. 
Broadly speaking, con˜dentiality risks are of two types: identi˜cation dis
-closure risk and attribute disclosure risk. Identi˜cation disclosure occurs when 
an intruder learns that information on a targeted individual is in a particular 
shared ˜le; if this happens, it may be possible for the intruder to determine 
which of the records in the ˜le belongs to the targeted individual by examin
-ing the demographic or other variables. Attribute disclosure occurs when an 
intruder learns the value of a sensitive variable for a targeted individual, which 
may make it possible to identify records belonging to that individual. (There 
are other types of disclosure, such as perceived identi˜cation disclosure and 
inferential disclosure, but they are not discussed here.)
1Note that some biological measures vary suf˜ciently across time that they do not raise a risk of 
reidenti˜cation that is any greater than that for most social, economic, or psychological character
-istics. On the other hand, some of the latter characteristics are unchanging and thus pose a greater 
risk. In this chapter, the focus is on characteristics that are unchanging or suf˜ciently stable that 
they raise a risk of reidenti˜cation. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
 43
A great deal of research has been done to assess the risks of disclosure 
for biological and social data (e.g., National Research Council, 2005, 2007). 
Conceptually, the combination of biological and social data presents no new 
issues related to disclosure risk. What is important in the context of this report 
is that disclosure risk increases as more variables are added, and the risk of 
identi˜cation disclosure is greater with combined data than with any single 
type of data. Suppose, for example, that an individual is nearly identi˜able 
from a combination of demographic variables that are publicly available; this 
would be the case, for instance, if only a small number of people matched those 
particular characteristics. Then adding a set of biomarkers that was available 
to an intruder could enable the intruder to identify that person. Similarly, an 
individual might not be identi˜able from a small number of genes provided in 
a released ˜le, but adding demographic data could provide enough information 
to result in identi˜cation.
Additionally, the degree of potential harm from attribute disclosure is 
greater in the case of combined data. For example, an intruder™s learning that 
someone has a particular set of genes might not be especially damaging, but the 
potential damage would be much greater if the intruder also learned phenotypic 
information from social data, such as criminal histories or sexual habits. Like
-wise, learning someone™s identity from social science data might be innocuous, 
but if the person™s disease status were also uncovered, harm could resultŠfor 
example, from discrimination.
Assessing the risks of sharing combined data is complex. First, the data 
steward must determine to the extent possible which variables would be avail
-able to intruders. The answer depends on the nature of the variables and may 
change over time. Furthermore, some biological and social variables are effec
-tively permanent characteristics, so that sharing them poses risks for both the 
present and the future. A key example is genetic data. While there is currently 
no way to search for a person™s identity using his or her DNA, ongoing work 
of researchers, government, and companies such as 23AndMe may well make 
individuals™ genomes, in whole or in part, available to intruders in the near 
future. Hence, because of the permanence of genetic data, any sharing of such 
data now could lead to disclosure risks in the future. Indeed, research by Malin 
and Sweeney (2004) indicates that genetic data already pose risks: the authors 
show that unlabeled DNA sequences stripped of demographic data and identi
-˜ers, when interpreted for common disease genes and screened against publicly 
available data, could be narrowed down to several individuals.
Anyone who disseminates such data also must take into account the varia
-tion that may exist across databases in the variables available to intruders. High 
variation provides an additional layer of con˜dentiality protection since the 
same record may have different values in the shared ˜le and in the intruder™s 
external database, making correct matching dif˜cult. While such variations 
can easily be found in social science data because of inconsistencies in self-
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
reporting, some clinically derived biological data are measured with very little 
error, so this additional layer of protection does not exist. Genetic data are 
again a good example, as the error rates for genotyping are known to be very 
small (Hao et al., 2004; Saunders, Brohede, and Hannan, 2007).
A third consideration is future technologies that might be used by intrud
-ers. Data that appear safe today may not be safe in the future. As an example, 
a recent report by researchers at the Translational Genomics Research Institute 
in Phoenix, Arizona, and the University of California, Los Angeles, shows that 
there is a much greater risk of identifying participants in a genetic survey than 
was previously thought (Homer et al., 2008). The report relates to genome-wide 
association studies (GWASs), which use the complete genomes from a number 
of individuals with a particular disease to scan for markers that may be associ
-ated with that disease. The surprising ˜nding was that if one knows the DNA 
of a particular person, it is possible to tell whether that person is included in 
the GWAS database simply by looking at the allele frequencies. This ˜nding 
led NIH to put some of its data behind a ˜rewall, a step that was taken by the 
Wellcome Trust as well (Clayton, 2008). Once an intruder knows that someone 
is in a particular data set, that knowledge may provide information about the 
person™s health or disease status, since GWASs typically focus on a particular 
phenotypeŠdementia, for example, or breast cancer. 
Finally, while much of the research on identi˜ability has involved genomic 
data, similar risks can be expected for other highly detailed and high-dimensional 
data, such as proteomic and metabolomic data.
2 Given ongoing rapid technol
-ogy advances and the likelihood that electronic health records will become 
commonplace in the next few years, it is possible that these data will be avail
-able to intruders in the near future. 
APPROACHES
 TO
 S
HARIN
G B
IOLO
GICAL
 AND
 S
OCIAL
 D
ATA
The literature on data sharing describes two broad approaches to protect
-ing the con˜dentiality of individuals whose records appear in data collections: 
restricting access and restricting data. The restricted access approach involves 
controlling who can access the data for analysis and under what conditions. Spe
-ci˜c strategies include licensing agreements and data enclaves. The restricted 
data approach involves providing a redacted version of the data to those who 
wish to use it. Redaction strategies are often termed statistical disclosure limi
-2Proteomics refers to the branch of molecular biology that deals with the full set of proteins 
encoded by a genome; proteomic data are data associated with proteins expressed by a genome, 
cell, tissue, or organism. Metabolomics refers to the study of the chemical ˜ngerprints that speci˜c 
cellular processes leave behind; metabolomic data are the small-molecular metabolite pro˜les 
present in cells or tissue.  
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
 45
tation (SDL); they include such approaches as recoding variables, suppressing 
data, and perturbing data. 
Restricted Access
There are four primary strategies for restricted access: (1) licensing, (2) 
remote execution systems, (3) data enclaves, and (4) virtual data enclaves.
Licensing
To obtain data with little or no redaction other than removal of direct 
identi˜ers such as names and addresses or geocodes, researchers sign a licens
-ing agreement not to use the data for malicious purposes, such as identifying 
individuals and subsequently taking injurious actions based on those identi
-˜cations. A number of statistical agencies, including the National Center for 
Education Statistics, use this approach, as do public data archives such as the 
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) and the 
principal investigators of many social science and biosocial surveys. Licensing 
allows researchers to obtain highly detailed data and thus facilitates secondary 
analyses of the data. However, this approach relies on researchers not violating 
the terms of the license. Enforcement is generally the responsibility of the fund
-ing agency. For certain types of violations, substantial penalties can be levied, 
such as revoking funding from the responsible investigator and institution. One 
disadvantage of licensing is the dif˜culty that often characterizes the process; 
Box 3-1 describes some ways to make the process less burdensome for both 
researchers and data stewards. 
Remote Execution Systems
In this approach, con˜dential data are maintained in a computer system 
owned by the data disseminator, and a secondary researcher who wishes to per
-form a study with the data submits a query to the system. As long as the informa
-tion is not con˜dential, the system provides the results of the query (which may 
be computed by the system or by staff at the data-disseminating organization) 
to the researcher without revealing the individual data. The National Center 
for Health Statistics and the U.S. Bureau of the Census maintain such systems. 
These systems are not foolproof, however, as intruders can use judicious queries 
to glean sensitive information about data subjects. To minimize this risk, the 
system must limit the types of analyses that can be performed, which reduces 
the utility of the data to outside researchers. Furthermore, without full access 
to individual-level data, researchers ˜nd it dif˜cult to perform exploratory data 
analyses or to check the ˜t of models. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
BOX 3-1
 Ways to Facilitate the Licensing Process
A number of authors have noted that the licensing process can be dif˜cult, 
time-consuming, and even costly and thus may limit the number of researchers 
who use the specimens and data in a storage facility (see, for example, Nolte and 
Keller, 2004; National Research Council, 2005). The most successful researchers, 
who have many options from which to choose, may eschew projects for which the 
licensing process is too demanding; indeed, concern has been expressed that 
some investigators may not use data unless they have easy access. At the same 
time, managing licenses is dif˜cult for data stewards. Those who produce data for 
research often lack the capacity to manage numerous contracts. Even professional 
data archives can be overwhelmed by the requirements of dealing with ˜le cabinets 
full of paper contracts that require constant monitoring.
Thus it is important to ˜nd ways to make licensing easier. One recommendation 
to that end is offered in the National Research Council report 
Expanding Access to 
Research Data: Reconciling Risks and Opportunities
: ﬁStatistical and other agen
-cies that provide data for research should work with data users to develop ˚exible, 
consistent standards for licensing agreements and implementation procedures for 
access to con˜dential dataﬂ (National Research Council, 2005, p. 79). A variety 
of options could be explored along these lines. For example, it might be possible 
to have a central licensing agency that would license individual researchers and 
laboratories in such a way that they would not have to seek a new license each 
time they sought access to a new data set. Or there could be a tiered licensing 
system with differing licensing requirements depending on such things as the sen
-sitivity of the data or the amount of access requested, so that investigators whose 
projects presented a lesser risk to the con˜dentiality of the data might be subject 
to a less onerous licensing process. In one effort to contribute to solving problems 
with licensing, the NIH-sponsored Data Sharing for Demographic Research Project 
at the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) pub
-lished guidance for developing and implementing a restricted-use data contract or 
license (see http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/DSDR/rduc/ [accessed May 27, 2010]). In 
the next step of this project, plans are to develop a largely automated system for 
managing licenses and for validating the security of computers with which licensed 
data will be analyzed.
Data Enclaves
With this approach, an investigator works in a room dedicated to access
-ing the data. Only approved researchers are allowed in the enclave. Computers 
in the room are not connected to the Internet or to other external resources. 
Researchers cannot take individual-level data from the enclave, and all results 
they obtain are checked by the data disseminator for potential con˜dentiality 
breaches before they can be taken out of the enclave. Because of these features, 
this approach offers the highest level of security. It also carries a variety of costs, 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
 47
however. Data enclaves are inconvenient for investigators who must travel to 
them. Moreover, most enclaves require that data users pay a substantial fee to 
cover the costs of maintaining the facility and its staff; they also require poten
-tially time-consuming background checks and proposal approvals. Hence, the 
amount of analysis likely to be carried out on the data in an enclave is limited 
(National Institutes of Health, 2006). 
Virtual Data Enclaves
Virtual data enclaves combine features of licensing, remote execution sys
-tems, and data enclaves. The data are housed in a system owned by the data 
disseminator. Licensed secondary researchers access the data remotely; that is, 
the researcher™s computer serves as a dummy terminal. The National Opinion 
Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago maintains such a system, 
called the NORC Data Enclave. Users of a virtual data enclave cannot store 
the data on their computers, and certain functions on their computers, such 
as printing and the ability to copy data to removable media (including disks 
and micro-vault storage media), are disabled. Virtual data enclaves thus allow 
researchers to access the data without traveling to a secure data enclave. They 
also avoid some of the disclosure risks posed by licensing researchers to store 
data on their own machines, such as the accidental loss of CD-ROMs or sharing 
of data with unapproved investigators or students. As with licensing, however, 
con˜dentiality protection depends on researchers not violating terms of the 
data use agreement; thus, virtual data enclaves are less secure than physical 
ones. 
Restricted Data
Many data sets containing biological or social data are shared after identify
-ing or sensitive values have been altered. Alterations can be made in a variety 
of ways, including coarsening the variables by, for example, releasing ages in 5-
year categories rather than as exact values; top-coding, as in reporting incomes 
that exceed a threshold T simply as ﬁabove Tﬂ; swapping, or exchanging small 
amounts of data between records, with the goal of introducing uncertainty 
about identities; adding noise to numerical variables; and replacing sensitive 
values with synthetic data derived from a probability model (see the detailed 
discussion in National Research Council, 2007). One could characterize these 
methods as protecting con˜dentiality by obscuring relatively high-order fea
-tures of the data. Top-coding, for example, destroys analyses of the tails of the 
distributions; swapping attenuates the correlations among swapped and non
-swapped attributes; adding random noise distorts distributions and attenuates 
relationships; and synthetic data are guaranteed to preserve only the relation
-ships in the synthesis models.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Generally speaking, greater modi˜cations of the data lead to greater pro
-tection but also to greater reduction in the utility of the data. Thus, determining 
the amount and type of data alteration involves trade-offs. Weighing the type 
and extent of protection against the reduction in the utility of the data requires 
developing a way of measuring both the risk of disclosure for data altered in 
various ways and the utility of the data. Although some metrics for data util
-ity exist (Karr et al., 2006), the assessment is a nontrivial task. In general, it is 
dif˜cult for researchers not trained in methods of con˜dentiality protection to 
apply these methods in ways that optimize the utility of data while adequately 
protecting con˜dentiality.
It is dif˜cult to imagine that standard protection methods will be effective 
for multidimensional biological and social data. Consider, for example, using 
these methods to protect 660,000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that 
are planned for release. It is not clear how many and which SNPs are needed 
to identify individuals, particularly if the data also contain psychological, social, 
or economic variables. If the data disseminator decides to protect a large pro
-portion of the SNP data by, for example, swapping or synthesis, it is inevitable 
that many interaction effects among the SNPs will be nearly destroyed. This 
outcome is problematic since analyses of gene
gene or gene
environment inter
-actions are inherently high-dimensional. One way to get around the limitations 
of data restriction is to combine this type of approach with restricted access. 
An example of such a combined approach is provided in Box 3-2.
Choosing a Data Sharing Strategy
The restricted access and restricted data strategies described above provide 
varying degrees of con˜dentiality protection, and each has its limitations with 
respect to preserving the utility of the data for research purposes. In general, 
there is a trade-off between the level of protection that is afforded and the level 
of utility that is preserved.
Of the restricted access strategies, remote execution systems and data 
enclaves offer the highest level of protection, but they also impose the greatest 
limitations on the utility of the data: the former because the types of analyses 
that can be performed are signi˜cantly limited, and the latter because research
-ers bear a heavy burden in having to travel to the enclave, pay substantial 
fees, and undergo background checks and proposal approvals. Licensing and 
virtual data enclaves impose fewer limitations, but the protection they provide 
depends on researchers abiding by the terms of the license or data use agree
-ment. Nonetheless, the panel believes that, given rigorous enforcement (see the 
discussion later in this chapter), these two strategies hold the greatest promise 
for sharing combined biological and social data in ways that support and sustain 
promises of con˜dentiality while preserving the utility of the data. As discussed 
in Chapter 5, the panel also believes that an effort must be made to improve the 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
 49
BOX 3-2
 Data Sharing for the Health and Retirement Study
The Health and Retirement Study (HRS) at the University of Michigan uses 
a combination of approaches to share data while protecting con˜dentiality (Nolte 
and Keller, 2004). Investigators who wish to use sensitive or potentially identi˜able 
data from the HRS can apply for a license for full access to the data if they agree 
to certain conditions, such as developing and implementing a data protection plan 
to protect participant con˜dentiality; allowing yearly inspections; providing annual 
reports; and in some cases, submitting to a prepublication review of the analysis 
results. The major disadvantages of this approach are the length of time required 
to obtain approval for a nonstandard data protection plan and the fact that only 
principal investigators of a federally funded project who are also af˜liated with an 
institution with an NIH-certi˜ed human subjects review process can apply for a 
license. Thus, junior faculty members and students, for example, have dif˜culty 
accessing the data through such agreements (Nolte and Keller, 2004).
For this reason, the HRS also makes its data available through the Michigan 
Center on the Demography of Aging (MiCDA) Data Enclave in Ann Arbor. Investi
-gators who do not meet the requirements for a data license can come to the data 
enclave to perform data analyses. There are few restrictions other than a review of 
the analyses by the data enclave staff to ensure that they include no information 
that could compromise the con˜dentiality of the participants whose data are in 
the database. The main disadvantage is that an investigator must go to the data 
enclave to perform an analysis (Nolte and Keller, 2004). To avoid this disadvantage, 
the HRS began a virtual data enclave program, through which researchers can 
access data on the HRS server remotely from their own institutions. To maintain 
con˜dentiality, all the data are kept in the HRS computers. Remote users send 
instructions to perform analyses that are carried out on the HRS computers and 
then receive the results. Various security systems ensure that no con˜dential data 
are released, and the data enclave staff still review the results of the analyses to 
ensure that no breaches of con˜dentiality occur. The main disadvantage of this 
approach is the cost of setting up secure computer systems at the investigators™ 
home institutions (Nolte and Keller, 2004).
The HRS approaches to data access illustrate two access models available for 
dealing with biospecimens and associated data.
licensing process so as to make it less complex and time-consuming, employing 
options such as those outlined in Box 3-1.
Data restriction strategies are both imperfect in protecting con˜dentiality 
and likely to signi˜cantly reduce the utility of the data. Combining these strate
-gies with some form of restricted access, as is done for the Health and Retire
-ment Study (Box 3-2), can address these limitations by enhancing security and 
necessitating less extreme alterations of the data.
Regardless of which strategy for data sharing is chosen, it is essential to 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
make the decision during the process of planning for the study and to ensure 
that consent forms contain the necessary detail to enable the strategy™s imple
-mentation. Box 3-3 provides two case examples of the importance of planning 
in advance for data sharing.
SALIENT
 F
EDERAL
 R
EGU
LATIONS
A variety of federal regulations deal with issues related to data sharing and 
privacy. This section provides an overview of those that are most important to 
researchers dealing with biodata in social science surveys.
BOX 3-3
 The Importance of Planning for Data Sharing: 
 Two Case Examples
Because placing biosocial survey data into data archives poses so many risks 
to participants™ con˜dentiality, it is important to take the obstacles to sharing data 
into account when planning a survey, preparing consent forms, and working with 
the relevant Institutional Review Boards (IRBs). If the data sharing strategy is not 
properly planned in advance, it can be dif˜cult to arrange later. A brief description 
of the types of issues encountered by two projects based in Italy is suf˜cient to 
illustrate some of those dif˜culties.
The SardiNIA Study of Aging is an international collaboration funded primar
-ily by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) to study the effects of various genetic 
variants on aging in a group of people in Sardinia, the second-largest island in the 
Mediterranean Sea. The research has helped identify genetic variants linked to lipid 
levels and risk for coronary artery disease. But dif˜culties arose when the principal 
investigators were asked to provide their data to the Database of Genotypes and 
Phenotypes (dbGaP), a database operated by the National Center for Biotech
-nology Information to archive and distribute data from genome-wide association 
studies (GWASs).
Because the SardiNIA study began before dbGaP had been fully established, 
no provisions were made during the planning for the study to place the data in 
dbGaP. The SardiNIA investigators were able to provide dbGaP a listing of the traits 
and diseases that had been studied, a data dictionary, and the genotyping platform 
that had been used, along with p-values for every single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) for every trait that had been studied. The investigators were able to supply 
that information because it did not include any personal data that could lead to 
breaches of con˜dentiality. On the other hand, the investigators were unable to 
provide dbGaP with information on family relationships and raw data connecting 
each participant to corresponding trait values and genotypes.
Placing the SardiNIA data into dbGaP would require approval from the IRB 
overseeing the study. In their original informed consent forms, the investigators had 
not discussed the possibility of depositing data into dbGaP or any other archive. 
Instead, the consent forms had speci˜ed only that investigators and staff with the 
National Research Council of Italy would have access to the data, and that NIA 
would have access only to data that were anonymously coded. Depositing all of 
the SardiNIA data in dbGaP would require participants™ reconsenting, and only data 
from surviving participants who reconsented would be able to be deposited. Obtain
-ing reconsents would require a great deal of additional expense, effort, and time.
One option the investigators suggested was providing a limited amount of data 
to dbGaPŠonly general information about the study and statistics regarding the 
prevalence of various genetic variants in the populationŠand then accepting re
-quests for more complete data from individual researchers. The raw data would 
remain with the SardiNIA group rather than at dbGaP, and the SardiNIA IRB would 
decide on a case-by-case basis who would receive access to the more complete 
data.Similar issues arose with the proposed archiving of data from the InCHIANTI 
(Invecchiare in Chianti, or ﬁaging in the Chianti areaﬂ) Study, which examined aging 
among the populations of two small towns in the Tuscany region of Italy. In this case, 
the principal investigator of the study spoke with the study™s steering committee, 
explaining the position of the National Institutes of Health that data from research 
paid for with public funds should be shared. The steering committee agreed that 
at least part of the data should be archived, but its members were concerned that 
doing so might not be possible given the language in the consent forms, which said 
the data could be shared with the collaborators of the InCHIANTI group but did not 
mention making the data available in a public database. To archive the InCHIANTI 
data would require obtaining new consent forms from the participants that speci˜
-cally allowed for placing the data in a public archive. In the case of participants 
who had since died, it would be possible to place some of their data in an archive 
because of the wording of the original consent form, but none of their genetic data 
could be included.  
One clear lesson to be drawn from these two examples is the importance of 
including a discussion of data sharing in consent forms. Without such explicit dis
-cussion, it may be impossible to make data publicly available.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
 51
Federal Privacy Regulations
Among the federal regulations pertaining to privacy are the Common Rule 
(45 Code of Federal Regulations [CFR] 46 Part 160 and Part 164, Subparts A 
and E) (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2000, 2005b) and the 
Standards for Privacy of Individually Identi˜able Health Information, issued by 
the Department of Health and Human Services and commonly referred as the 
Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Privacy Rule. 
These regulations are intended to protect the human subject™s personal health 
information and identity while allowing society to bene˜t from the use of that 
information, including for research purposes (U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services, 2003). 
BOX 3-3
 The Importance of Planning for Data Sharing: 
 Two Case Examples
Because placing biosocial survey data into data archives poses so many risks 
to participants™ con˜dentiality, it is important to take the obstacles to sharing data 
into account when planning a survey, preparing consent forms, and working with 
the relevant Institutional Review Boards (IRBs). If the data sharing strategy is not 
properly planned in advance, it can be dif˜cult to arrange later. A brief description 
of the types of issues encountered by two projects based in Italy is suf˜cient to 
illustrate some of those dif˜culties.
The SardiNIA Study of Aging is an international collaboration funded primar
-ily by the National Institute on Aging (NIA) to study the effects of various genetic 
variants on aging in a group of people in Sardinia, the second-largest island in the 
Mediterranean Sea. The research has helped identify genetic variants linked to lipid 
levels and risk for coronary artery disease. But dif˜culties arose when the principal 
investigators were asked to provide their data to the Database of Genotypes and 
Phenotypes (dbGaP), a database operated by the National Center for Biotech
-nology Information to archive and distribute data from genome-wide association 
studies (GWASs).
Because the SardiNIA study began before dbGaP had been fully established, 
no provisions were made during the planning for the study to place the data in 
dbGaP. The SardiNIA investigators were able to provide dbGaP a listing of the traits 
and diseases that had been studied, a data dictionary, and the genotyping platform 
that had been used, along with p-values for every single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) for every trait that had been studied. The investigators were able to supply 
that information because it did not include any personal data that could lead to 
breaches of con˜dentiality. On the other hand, the investigators were unable to 
provide dbGaP with information on family relationships and raw data connecting 
each participant to corresponding trait values and genotypes.
Placing the SardiNIA data into dbGaP would require approval from the IRB 
overseeing the study. In their original informed consent forms, the investigators had 
not discussed the possibility of depositing data into dbGaP or any other archive. 
Instead, the consent forms had speci˜ed only that investigators and staff with the 
National Research Council of Italy would have access to the data, and that NIA 
would have access only to data that were anonymously coded. Depositing all of 
the SardiNIA data in dbGaP would require participants™ reconsenting, and only data 
from surviving participants who reconsented would be able to be deposited. Obtain
-ing reconsents would require a great deal of additional expense, effort, and time.
One option the investigators suggested was providing a limited amount of data 
to dbGaPŠonly general information about the study and statistics regarding the 
prevalence of various genetic variants in the populationŠand then accepting re
-quests for more complete data from individual researchers. The raw data would 
remain with the SardiNIA group rather than at dbGaP, and the SardiNIA IRB would 
decide on a case-by-case basis who would receive access to the more complete 
data.Similar issues arose with the proposed archiving of data from the InCHIANTI 
(Invecchiare in Chianti, or ﬁaging in the Chianti areaﬂ) Study, which examined aging 
among the populations of two small towns in the Tuscany region of Italy. In this case, 
the principal investigator of the study spoke with the study™s steering committee, 
explaining the position of the National Institutes of Health that data from research 
paid for with public funds should be shared. The steering committee agreed that 
at least part of the data should be archived, but its members were concerned that 
doing so might not be possible given the language in the consent forms, which said 
the data could be shared with the collaborators of the InCHIANTI group but did not 
mention making the data available in a public database. To archive the InCHIANTI 
data would require obtaining new consent forms from the participants that speci˜
-cally allowed for placing the data in a public archive. In the case of participants 
who had since died, it would be possible to place some of their data in an archive 
because of the wording of the original consent form, but none of their genetic data 
could be included.  
One clear lesson to be drawn from these two examples is the importance of 
including a discussion of data sharing in consent forms. Without such explicit dis
-cussion, it may be impossible to make data publicly available.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
There is some complexity to the application of these federal regulations. 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule, for example, applies only to health data obtained 
from covered entities, for example, physicians, hospitals, and Medicare or 
Medicaid records, but not to reports or biodata obtained from individuals in 
the course of a social science survey. Moreover, both rules may be interpreted 
differently depending on the kind of research in questionŠfor example, direct 
human subjects research versus research using leftover biospecimens in a bio
-repository or biodata stored in a biobank. Generally speaking, biorepositories 
and biobanks are not considered covered entities under the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule unless their contents were obtained in research requested and approved 
by a covered health provider.
The Common Rule and the HIPAA Privacy Rule need to be clari˜ed to 
alleviate the scienti˜c community™s fears that they could be misinterpreted in 
a way that could be damaging to research on biospecimens. In particular, it 
is important to (1) develop a standard for what constitutes ﬁminimal risk,ﬂ 
especially in the context of the use of existing biospecimens and biodata, and 
(2)
 de˜ne ﬁhuman subjectﬂ more clearly in light of the fact that research can be 
carried out on specimens and data that were collected from people who later 
died (Meslin and Quaid, 2004, p.
 230). Under the Common Rule, someone who 
has died is not considered a ﬁhuman subject,ﬂ but in the case of biospecimens, 
it can be argued that the surviving interests of the deceased person, such as his 
or her reputation, should be protected. Another point of confusion is whether, 
if the research carried out on deceased persons can generate information about 
living people, those individuals should also be considered ﬁsubjectsﬂ (DeRenzo, 
Biesecker, and Meltzer, 1997; Meslin and Quaid, 2004, p. 230). 
In some instances, the Common Rule and HIPAA Privacy Rule actually 
contradict each other, such as in informed consent for future, unspeci˜ed 
research: the Common Rule allows authorization of such unspeci˜ed uses, 
but the HIPAA Privacy Rule requires a speci˜c research purpose for each 
authorization of release of protected health information (Vaught et al., 2007). 
Furthermore, the HIPAA Privacy Rule distinguishes between the creation of a 
biospecimen repository or a database containing protected health data and the 
release of data from such resources for research purposes. The rule requires a 
participant™s authorization for each instance of data release unless a waiver is 
granted by the Institutional Review Board (IRB). This inconsistency between 
existing federal guidelines, along with differing interpretations of the guide
-lines, has prompted some experts to lament the burden on researchers that 
results, as well as to question the rules™ effectiveness in protecting the privacy 
of research participants (Bankhead, 2004; Nosowsky and Giordano, 2006).
Since the privacy, con˜dentiality, and identi˜ability of human research 
subjects are important concerns, many institutions devote a good deal of time 
and resources to the discussion of best practices in these areas. The National 
Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) held a workshop in October 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROTECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY
 53
2006 to address these issues and how they pertain to genomic research. The 
discussion document developed for this workshop and the workshop report 
provide useful points to consider, especially with respect to the de˜nition of 
ﬁidenti˜ableﬂ data, strategies for data deidenti˜cation, and the risks that dei
-denti˜ed data may be reidenti˜ed (Lowrance, 2006a, 2006b). According to the 
workshop report, some of the ﬁthemes that were accepted as grantedﬂ are that 
(1) at this stage of advanced genomic science, the scienti˜c community must do 
everything possible to respect and protect the privacy of human subjects whose 
genomic information is being used for research, and (2) everyone in the chain of 
data collection shares the responsibility for privacy and identity protection. 
On this subject, it is also worth noting two other points concerning privacy. 
First, the Common Rule does not apply to research done by private companies, 
organizations, or individuals that do not receive support from the U.S. govern
-ment, except in the case of institutions (e.g., universities) that have accepted 
blanket responsibility for enforcement of the rule, regardless of the source of 
research support. Second, neither the Common Rule nor the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule will protect an individual™s privacy and identity in the case of a court-
ordered subpoena requesting personal information, but that level of protection 
can be provided by a federal Certi˜cate of Con˜dentiality. 
Genetic Discrimination
On March 21, 2008, after 13 years of debate, Congress passed and President 
Bush signed into law the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act. This act 
protects Americans from being discriminated against in either employment or 
health insurance based on their genetic information (U.S. House of Representa
-tives, 2008). Although this legislation provides a certain amount of protection 
from genetic discrimination, it is limited to asymptomatic individuals and thus 
does not protect individuals already presenting readily detectable symptoms of 
a genetic condition (Rothstein, 2008). At this point, there is relatively little in 
the judicial record to indicate how courts will deal with employers, insurers, or 
others discriminating against an individual on the basis of information about 
that individual™s genetic makeup. No cases of genetic discrimination have yet 
been brought before federal or state courts, for example. 
One case that offers some insight into how the courts may deal with the 
issue is a 2001 suit ˜led by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) against Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF) Railroad for testing 
its employees without their consent for a rare genetic condition that causes 
carpal tunnel syndrome. The doctors hired by BNSF also screened the employ
-ees for diabetes and alcoholism without their knowledge, and at least one 
BNSF employee was threatened with termination for refusing testing (National 
Human Genome Research Institute, 2008). The EEOC argued on behalf of 
BNSF employees that these tests were unlawful based on the Americans with 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Disabilities Act (Public Law 101-336) as they were not job related, and any 
change in employment due to the results would constitute discrimination based 
on a disability. This lawsuit was quickly settled, and BNSF agreed with all the 
EEOC™s requests.
Legal Sanctions and Enforcement
At present, NIH relies on its ability to restrict grant funding to ensure that 
best practices are upheld, data are shared, con˜dentiality is respected, and so 
forth. If, for example, an investigator signs a licensing agreement to obtain data 
from a repository and then fails to abide by the terms of the agreement, NIH 
can cut off all or part of that researcher™s funding. The general perception is 
that enforcement of these agreements is weak, but there has been no evidence 
of breaches of con˜dentiality (National Institutes of Health, 2006).
As more and more biospecimens and biodata are collected by and made 
available through biorepositories and biobanks, it will become increasingly 
important to ensure effective enforcement of the rules governing the use of 
these materials and data, coupled with strong legal sanctions when the rules 
are broken. To this end, a number of questions need to be answered: What 
sort of enforcement scheme should be used? Should digital representations of 
biological data be turned over to an archive such as the Inter-university Con
-sortium for Political and Social Research? Given that most researchers do not 
want to do their own policing, who should police the use of biospecimens and 
biodataŠthe Of˜ce of Research Integrity or some other agency?
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Informed Consent
Although the informed consent process necessarily takes place before the 
collection, storage, and analysis of biological specimens and biodata, it 
requires giving potential participants an honest explanation of exactly 
what the research entails and what risks they face by participating. The consent 
process, therefore, hinges on the information and observations offered in earlier 
chapters of this report. 
While clinicians and biomedical researchers have contended with issues 
of informed consent related to biological data for many decades, consensus on 
how to address these issues remains elusive. Active debate continues among 
clinicians, researchers, and ethicists about exactly what forms of consent are 
necessary in various situations. The debate has been particularly heated with 
respect to large-scale repositories of human biological specimens that are linked 
to clinical or socioeconomic data and are being used to assess interactions 
between genes and the environment similar to those discussed in this report. 
Thus, social scientists considering adding the collection of biospecimens to their 
surveys will ˜nd that doing so makes informed consent a much more complex 
process than is the case for survey research that involves collecting only self-
reported psychological, social, or economic data. This is true in particular if the 
biospecimens and the data derived therefrom will form a large collection to be 
used by numerous researchers for an indeterminate period of time for research 
purposes that may all not be well de˜ned at the time consent is obtained, espe
-cially if genomic data are involved. The controversies do not make this kind of 
research impossible, but they do add substantial complications that social sci
-ence researchers need to anticipate. This chapter begins with an overview of the 
55
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
informed consent process. It then examines how collecting biospecimens alters 
the informed consent process with which social scientists are familiar. The third 
section reviews a number of unresolved issues surrounding informed consent 
in social science survey research that includes the collection of biospecimens. 
The chapter ends with a discussion of the role of Institutional Review Boards 
(IRBs) in the informed consent process for such research.
OVER
VIEW
 OF
 THE
 INFORMED
 CONSENT
 PROCESS
This section summarizes the purpose and the basic elements of the informed 
consent process.
The Purpose of Informed Consent
Informed consent as it is understood today did not exist until about mid
-way through the twentieth century (see, for example, Faden and Beauchamp, 
1986). In the medical arena, physicians historically were obligated to act in the 
best interests of their patients as they understood those interests, but they felt 
no obligation to inform a patient completely about a situation and then follow 
the patient™s decision. A scattering of early cases established that physicians had 
to provide patients with information about proposed procedures and that the 
terms of the patient™s consent could place legal limits on the procedures that 
could be performed. It was not until a series of cases in the 1950s and 1960s 
that clinical informed consent became well established as a legal right with 
full legal redress, equivalent to the penalties for battery, if it was not obtained. 
Battery theory was gradually replaced by negligence theory in the 1950s and 
1960s (Levine, 1988). Similarly, there was historically no generally recognized 
obligation of those performing medical research to inform their subjects about 
the conduct, purpose, and risks of the research and to obtain their consent 
for participation, although there were some rudimentary versions of informed 
consent as early as 1900 (Vollman and Winau, 1996). A famous case in which 
informed consent was obtained was the Walter Reed yellow fever studies in the 
late nineteenth century. 
The ˜rst internationally recognized code of research ethics, the Nuremberg 
Code of 1947, was developed in response to revelations concerning abhorrent 
Nazi human experimentation before and during World War II. It empha
-sized the importance of informed consent and the centrality of subjects™ self-
determination to participate in medical research. Some years later, in 1964, at 
the 18th World Medical Assembly in Helsinki, Finland, the World Medical 
Association adopted the Declaration of Helsinki, which provided a set of guid
-ing principles for ethical considerations related to biomedical research. Until 
the 1960s, informed consent to research generally was obtained only from vol
-Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 57
unteers. Then, as a result of U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) statute 
and the Declaration of Helsinki, the practice was extended to patients.
In the United States, the importance of obtaining informed consent for 
medical research achieved national prominence in 1972 following revelations 
of unethical practices by the U.S. Public Health Service in the Tuskegee syphi
-lis study. In 1974, the U.S. Congress passed the National Research Act, which 
created the National Commission for the Protection of Human Subjects of Bio
-medical and Behavioral Research. In 1979, the commission issued the Belmont 
Report, which set forth three guiding principles underlying the ethical conduct 
of research: (1) respect for persons, (2) bene˜cence, and (3) justice. 
The purpose of informed consent and the reasons behind it have changed 
little since the Declaration of Helsinki was issued: no one should be subjected 
to experimentationŠor other research activitiesŠwithout giving permission, 
and that permission is meaningful only if the person understands what he or 
she is giving permission for. Thus the process of informed consent is designed 
to provide human subjects with suf˜cient information about the nature and 
purpose of the research, the procedures to be employed, and the potential risks 
and bene˜ts of their participation so they can make an informed decision about 
whether to participate. As the types of studies have become more complex, the 
issues surrounding informed consent have become more complex and dif˜cult 
to resolve, but the basic underlying principles have not changed.
Basic Elements of Informed Consent
The basic elements of informed consent are set forth in the U.S. Code of 
Federal Regulations (45 CFR 46 Part 116). First, the language of the informed 
consent document should be reasonably clear and speci˜c. Some commentators 
have recommended that the document be written at the ˜fth-grade or some 
other low level of reading capability, but the precise appropriate reading level is 
somewhat controversial (see, for example, Levine, 1982). Among other topics, 
the document should address the following: 

the fact that research is being performed, the reason why it is being 
performed, and what the participant will be asked to do;

the risks and potential bene˜ts (including ˜nancial and non˜nancial) to 
the participant;

the level of con˜dentiality that will be maintained, which can include 
such information as whether the data resulting from collected biospeci
-mens will be deidenti˜ed or coded and whether the data or study results 
will be released to the participant, his/her family, or his/her health care 
provider; and

the participant™s right to withdraw consent without penalty.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Adding biological specimens to social science surveys changes the nature 
of the informed consent required. Because of the unique risks involved, social 
science surveys that collect biospecimens should include several additional ele
-ments in the informed consent document:
1
a process for dealing with blanket consent (see below), including what 
process will be used when the participant™s specimens or data are to be 
used in future studies; 

a process for dealing with any signi˜cant medical information that 
is uncovered by the analysis (in general, any information that is not 
released to the subject will not be released to treating physicians. On 
the other hand, the subject may choose to have some data released to 
him/her without also being released to treating physicians);

the process governing withdrawal and what it means with respect to 
what can be done with the specimens and data after withdrawal; and

how third-party issues (see below) will be handled, including questions 
about third-party privacy and the furnishing of medically relevant infor
-mation that may affect third parties.
Generally, although informed consent should be obtained before biospeci
-mens are collected, in some instances postcollection consent is appropriate. 
This is the case, for instance, for the use of leftover specimens from earlier 
surgery or cases in which it was not initially possible to obtain consent because 
of the participant™s illness, undue stress, or inability to comprehend the consent 
procedure.
2DIFFERENCES
 I
N C
ONSENT
 P
RACTICES
 B
ETWEEN
 S
OCIAL
 SCIENCE
 SU
RVEY 
AND
 BIOMEDICAL
 RESEARCH
When social science surveys include the collection of biospecimens, two 
hitherto separate informed consent processes coincide. Social scientists must 
deal with requirements and issues different from those to which they are 
accustomed.
1An alternative approach, used in the Personal Genome Project (PGP) is to make volunteers 
score 100 percent on a consent exam. This is intended to ensure that participants understand that 
there is no real way to predict what can be done with genomic data in the future, nor any way 
to protect con˜dentiality or protect against possible misuses of the data in the future with 100 
percent certainty. The panel does not believe that this is an appropriate or practical strategy in 
this context.
2Note that even the most sincere investigator cannot anticipate all of the ways in which a biologi
-cal specimen may be used in the future. This is a major issue, but without a clear solution. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 59
Traditional Consent Practices for Social Science Surveys
Traditionally, the informed consent process in social science survey research 
has been relatively straightforward. Because the risk of a breach is understood 
to be fairly small, the informed consent forms tend to be minimal as well; 
obtaining consent over the telephone at the beginning of a survey call is a com
-mon practice. At many institutions, the informed consent process is overseen 
by a nonmedical IRB, which generally has a very different idea of appropriate 
informed consent from that of a biomedical IRB (Martin and Marker, 2007). 
Traditional Consent Practices for Biomedical Research
Biomedical informed consent has typically been a much more rigorous pro
-cess than the traditional process in the social sciences. This is the case in part 
because in certain clinical trials and in other potentially invasive biomedical 
research, there can be a very real risk of physical harm. The informed consent 
process is generally seen as the responsibility of principal investigators and is 
usually overseen by medical IRBs. It involves extensive written consent forms 
containing detailed accounts of the potential risks, which are typically explained 
in face-to-face meetings with informed-consent personnel (Doyal and Tobais, 
2001). This closer scrutiny of biomedical research has also in˚uenced the treat
-ment of informed consent for medical research that poses not physical risks but 
˜nancial or psychological risks to participants.
Informed Consent for Social Science Surveys 
 That Include the Collection of Biospecimens
Social scientists who wish to add the collection of biospecimens to their 
surveys will likely need to adopt standards of informed consent similar to those 
appropriate for minimal-risk biomedical research. (Minimal risk, as in the Com
-mon Rule [see Chapter 3], is taken to mean that the probability and magnitude 
of possible harm or discomfort resulting from participating in the study is no 
greater than that encountered ordinarily in daily life or during the performance 
of routine physical or psychological examinations or tests.) In some cases, as 
discussed in Chapter
 3, the research may involve more than minimal concerns 
and risks. The addition of data derived from biospecimens to survey data may 
increase the risk of a breach of con˜dentiality and the amount of potentially 
damaging information that could be revealed in such a breach. To the extent 
that social science surveys that include the collection of biospecimens pose 
risks commensurate with those posed by biomedical researchŠincluding the 
risk, real or perceived, of disclosureŠthe informed consent process should be 
of parallel rigor. IRBs dealing with biosocial surveys should bene˜t from the 
standards and practices of both social and behavioral science IRBs and medi
-Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
cal IRBs in light of a careful reading of the Common Rule (see also, National 
Research Council, 2003).
UNRESOL
VED ISS
UES
A number of issues remain unresolved with respect to informed consent for 
social science survey research that involves the collection of biospecimens. They 
include consent for potential future uses of the specimens and the data derived 
therefrom, return of signi˜cant ˜ndings, withdrawal of consent, third-party 
issues, and the nature and extent of communication with participants.
Consent for Potential Future 
Uses
The concept of informed consent assumes that participants can be truly 
informed about the various aspects of a study, including its bene˜ts and risks. 
Yet with today™s increasingly rapid changes in science and technology, obtaining 
(and retaining) informed consent becomes a moving target. This is particularly 
true with respect to whole-genome sequencing, genomics, and information 
technology, in which changes occur so rapidly that it is dif˜cult to imagine what 
might be possible in just a few years™ time. As a result, it may be impossible to 
guarantee a participant™s privacy and con˜dentiality or to discuss comprehen
-sively what risks the participant might face by taking part in a survey in which 
biospecimens will be collected and stored for future use.
Researchers who are collecting biological specimens (or establishing collec
-tion protocols for such specimens) as part of a social science survey therefore 
face a dif˜cult issue concerning consent for potential future research uses of the 
specimens they collect and the data derived therefrom. Because it is impossible 
to know what types of research might be performed on the specimens and data 
in the future, researchers cannot fully inform study participants about those 
potential future uses when the original consent is sought. There are two basic 
approaches to dealing with this issue. One is to return to the participants to 
obtain their consent for each new kind of study, explaining its purpose, con
-duct, bene˜ts, and risks. The other is to ask the participants at the time of the 
original survey to provide a blanket consent that permits use of the specimens 
and data for various studies in the future without the need to recontact them to 
request consent. There are also various combinations of these two approaches 
that entail varying degrees of contact with and commitment from participants, 
but the focus here is only on the two basic options. In addition, in some cases 
deidenti˜cation or anonymization of the data may obviate the need to obtain 
informed consent for future research using the data (see Chapter 3), although 
this means of avoiding informed consent poses ethical issues.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 61
Recontact
Perhaps the most straightforward approach to ensuring that participants 
are comfortable with how their contributed specimens will be used is to recon
-tact them to obtain informed consent whenever a new study is proposed. This 
approach guarantees that no specimens will be used without participants™ 
explicit consent. However, it is a process many investigators ˜nd too costly, 
labor-intensive, and burdensome, and the consensus in the ˜eld is that it is 
economically and logistically infeasible. Moreover, it is impossible to reach 
every person involved in the original study after a signi˜cant amount of time has 
passed, as many of participants will have moved, and some will have died.
3 Recontact procedures raise ethical questions as well, since it can be argued 
that the act of seeking to contact participants may violate privacy, especially if 
they asked not to be contacted again in their original consent document. Recon
-tact also could be annoying to participants, especially if done frequently, and 
could reduce their willingness to continue to take part in the research. 
As a result, a variety of organizations and researchers have concluded 
that recontact is not a workable option and that insisting on it would prevent 
potentially valuable research from being carried out. A working group of the 
UNESCO International Bioethics Committee found, for example, that a ﬁsys
-tem which required fresh consent would be extremely cumbersome and could 
seriously inhibit researchﬂ (United Nations Educational, Scienti˜c and Cultural 
Organization, 2002, p. 16). Similarly, Strouse (2005, pp. 142Œ143) suggests that 
ﬁgoing back to subjects to seek speci˜c consent for each later study undertaken 
with the initial sample may seriously inhibit potentially important research.ﬂ
There is one report of a new approach that may make recontact easier and 
more feasible (Shickle, 2006). First Genetic Trust, a U.S. biotech company, has 
developed ﬁdynamic consent procedures in which subjects are contacted by 
e-mail each time their DNA is used.ﬂ Study participants offer informed consent 
for the initial study, and later, if the same or a different group of researchers 
wishes to use the biospecimens or the data generated therefrom in a new study, 
the participants can say yes or no to the new research (Shickle, 2006, p. 507). 
One limitation of this approach is that it depends on the study participants 
having regular access to the Internet, which may be problematic, particularly 
for older individuals. 
3The experience of the competition for the follow-up to the National Long-Term Care Survey 
may be instructive here. During the rebidding process, no applicant organization proposed retain
-ing the existing longitudinal sample, partly because doing so would have required that the Census 
Bureau recontact each participant and obtain an additional consent before any new data could be 
collected.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Blanket Consent
Because of the dif˜culties involved in recontact, many organizations 
and researchers have used or have called for the use of blanket consent to 
the general use of specimens or data in future, unspeci˜ed projects. This 
type of consent can be advantageous both for participants, as less is demanded 
of them, and for researchers, who avoid costly and time-consuming recontact 
procedures. ﬁIf you are creating a biobank, the idea is that you want to build 
a resource that is going to have all kinds of uses going forward, many yet 
unde˜ned. So blanket consent becomes something that, presumably, is more 
appealingﬂ (Malinowski, 2005, p. 8).
Among the organizations that have recommended the use of blanket con
-sent for data in biorepositories are UNESCO and the World Health Organiza
-tion groups working on these issues (World Health Organization, 1998; United 
Nations Educational, Scienti˜c and Cultural Organization, 2002). The UK Bio
-bank, one of the largest biobanks in the world, is not planning to seek consent 
prior to each new research study using stored biospecimens once the initial 
consent has been obtained (Shickle, 2006). The biobank does plan, however, to 
send out frequent newsletters to remind subjects of their participation and to 
inform them of what studies are being conducted and planned for the future. 
The biobank also uses e-mail as a form of contact, which opens up the pos
-sibility of using this means of communication each time participants™ DNA is 
used, giving them suf˜cient information and time to make an informed decision 
about whether to extend their consent to the newer projects. Again, however, 
any approach that relies on e-mail and access to the Internet may leave out some 
participants, particularly the elderly.
Approaches to Mitigating Problems Raised by Blanket Consent
One major problem with blanket consent is that it is inherently vague, 
and thus study participants can never know exactly what their biospecimens 
and other information will be used for in the future. This lack of knowledge 
presents a serious ethical issue: blanket consent arguably fails to meet the basic 
requirement for informed consent that it describe the possible risks of a study 
to potential participants. If the future studies are unknown, the risks of those 
studies cannot be described. For example, study participants may agree to 
enroll in a study that includes collecting biospecimens and to allow the sharing 
of their samples as long as their con˜dentiality is protected. But what happens 
if a future study results in diagnosing a particular participant with a disease? 
Should the participant be contacted with that information? What if the par
-ticipant would prefer not to know? (See the discussion of this issue below.) In 
short, it is always possible to envision scenarios that neither the participant nor 
the researcher could have anticipated at the time the informed consent was 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 63
given. Thus, it can be argued that blanket consent cannot truly be ﬁinformedﬂ 
consent (Deschênes et al., 2001). 
Some researchers have argued that such issues are not serious concerns and 
that a simple blanket consent is suf˜cient to safeguard the rights of participants. 
For example, Rothstein argues that ﬁas long as the potential research subjects 
are clearly apprised of the range of possible future uses of their sample, they 
should be permitted to give one-time blanket consent to such usesﬂ (Rothstein, 
2005, pp. 92Œ93). Others, however, have suggested that these issues need to be 
addressed. Moreover, as noted in Chapter 2, IRBs are increasingly conservative 
and therefore unlikely to grant approval for the use of blanket consent.
Various approaches to addressing this issue have been suggested. For 
instance, Greely (1999) proposes a variation on blanket consent that adds extra 
protections. His approach involves telling participants that their biological 
samples will be stored and explaining the possibility that they might be used 
for future research projects. At that point, participants could choose whether 
to consent to such future uses of their samples. Should researchers wish to 
undertake a future project using these samples, that project would have to be 
approved by an IRB or other appropriate body, which in certain circumstances 
could insist that the researchers return to the participants to obtain additional 
consent (Greely, 1999).  
Weir and Olick (2004) suggest a hybrid approach: participants would offer 
their consent for the speci˜c study for which their biospecimens were collected 
and would also offer consent for future, unspeci˜ed studies that fell within 
certain categories or satis˜ed certain conditions (see also Kapp, 2008). In effect 
they would be offered a menu of research options from which to choose, and 
they could consent to as many as they liked, depending on their values and 
beliefs. They might, for instance, consent to the use of their specimens for any 
research on diabetes or cancer but not for studies aimed at understanding the 
genetic components of behavior.
Another approach is to use a system of tiered consent, whereby partici
-pants are allowed to decide to what degree their specimens and data can be 
used. For example, participants might be given the option of having their 
specimens and data used only for the original study and not for any future 
research; in this case, the informed consent document should explain what will 
be done with the data and, especially, the specimens, when the original study 
is complete.
4 A second option might be to allow participants to specify the 
types of research for which their specimens could be used in the future. For 
example, a participant could agree for the specimens to be used only for
 cancer 
4It is possible that a tiered consent procedure could introduce biases in research data, but there 
is a growing array of methods for dealing with missing data, including selectively missing data. A 
discussion of such methods is outside the scope of this report, but see Little and Rubin (2002) for 
more discussion on this point.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
research or for research into Alzheimer™s disease and diabetes, or perhaps 
for any sort of medical research. Care must be taken when considering such 
a tiered system of informed consent, however, since it may be inappropriate 
for a broad range of inter- and multidisciplinary research. A tiered approach 
should be used only if the biorepository (or other appropriate agent) has suf
-˜cient experience and a tracking system sophisticated enough to monitor the 
various levels of informed consent.
Deidenti˜cation or Anonymization and Consent
In certain cases when data have been deidenti˜edŠthat is, meeting the 
requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA)
5 but not rendered completely and irreversibly anonymous
Šparticipants 
are not considered ﬁhuman subjectsﬂ under the Common Rule (45 CFR Part 46, 
Subpart A), so informed consent is not required (see Chapter
 3 for a detailed 
discussion of the Common Rule and the HIPAA Privacy Rule). This would be 
the case, for example, if a researcher were using coded data or specimens from 
a repository that had been collected by other researchers and if the researcher 
could not readily determine the identity of the individuals involved. (In this 
context ﬁcoded dataﬂ refers to records in which identifying information about 
individuals has been replaced by a number, letter, symbol, or combination 
thereof.) For example, the researcher may have signed an agreement prohibit
-ing him or her from receiving the key to the codeŠthe procedure under which 
data contributed to dbGaP have been declared not to be human subjects data 
(see Box 3-3 in Chapter
 3) (Of˜ce for Human Research Protections, 2008). In 
short, if the data and specimens have been deidenti˜ed or anonymized, if they 
were collected by someone else for a different study, and if the researcher agrees 
to use the data without the possibility of learning the identity of the subjects, 
then in general it is not necessary to obtain informed consent because the 
5The HIPAA Privacy Rule makes two methods available for deidentifying health information:
1. 
 Remove 18 speci˜c identi˜ers listed in the Privacy Rule and determine that there is 
no other information that may identify the individual. The identi˜ers are names; geo
-graphic subdivisions smaller than a state; all elements of dates (except year) related to 
an individual (including dates of admission, discharge, birth, death and, for ind
ividuals 
over 89 years old, the year of birth must not be used); telephone numbers; FAX num
-bers; e-mail addresses; Social Security numbers; medical record numbers; health plan 
bene˜ciary numbers; account numbers; certi˜cate/license numbers;
 vehicle identi˜ers 
and serial numbers including license plates; device identi˜ers and serial numbers; web 
URLs; Internet protocol addresses; biometric identi˜ers (including ˜nger and voice 
prints); full face photos and comparable images; and, any unique identifying number, 
characteristic or code.
2. 
 Obtain an opinion from a quali˜ed statistical expert that the risk of identifying an 
individual is very small under the circumstances; the methods and justi˜cation for 
the opinion should be documented. (See 45 CFR Subpart E 164.514 (b).)
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 65
participants who supplied the data and specimens are not considered human 
subjects. Aside from such special cases, however, for someone to be considered 
no longer a human subject for research purposes, complete and irreversible 
anonymization is generally required; deidenti˜cation is generally not enough. 
The dif˜culty with this approach is that, as discussed in Chapter 3, using 
deidenti˜cation or even anonymization is no guarantee that participants cannot 
be identi˜ed at some point. This problem is even more pressing in databases 
that combine social data with biological, and particularly genomic, data because 
the combination can sharply increase the risk of reidenti˜cation. Thus avoiding 
informed consent by using deidenti˜ed or anonymized specimens or data raises 
a serious ethical issue: although the participants are still exposed to risks from 
breaches of privacy, they are no longer afforded the usual protection given to 
human subjects under federal regulations (Greely, 2007). Moreover, this pro
-cedure explicitly creates a double standard for what constitutes ethically and 
legally appropriate practice. The original investigators (and anyone who obtains 
access to the specimens or data through them or their storage facility) must play 
by the usual rules governing research with human subjects, while those using 
the deidenti˜ed or anonymized data are deemed no longer subject to the Com
-mon Rule. Finally, as long as the original specimens or data exist in identi˜able 
form, it is relatively easy for anyone who has the deidenti˜ed version of the data 
to reidentify them through a merger with the identi˜able versions.
Return of Signi˜cant Findings
Investigators need to consider what they will do if their research yields 
information with implications for a participant™s health. In the course of ana
-lyzing the biospecimens collected for a study, for example, researchers may 
learn of a signi˜cantly increased risk of a life-threatening disease linked to a 
characteristic present in some of the samples, frequently, though not always, a 
genetic characteristic. Participants often expect that researchers have a moral 
obligation to share such information with them. Although in many cases the 
accuracy of genetic testing and its application in disease prediction are subject 
to debate (Zimmern and Kroese, 2007; Of˜t, 2008; see also Chapter 1), in other 
cases the connections are quite clear. It can be argued that if this information 
could affect a reasonable individual™s health care options, it should be disclosed, 
at least under certain conditions (Greely, 2007)Šfor example, if the informa
-tion clearly indicates the presence of an illness, and the illness is treatable. On 
the other hand, preliminary diagnostic data that reveal little about speci˜city or 
sensitivity should not be disclosed. Generally speaking, there should be differ
-ent thresholds for disclosure depending on the severity of the illness in question 
and on whether an effective treatment exists. A further complication is that only 
laboratories covered by the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments 
(CLIA) are allowed to disclose diagnostic information. Moreover, a participant 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
may not wish to be contacted with any information about the study or its 
results, in which case any kind of disclosure, even that deemed to be a moral 
obligation, could be considered an invasion of the participant™s privacy. It is 
now customary to advise participants to contact a CLIA-approved laboratory 
independently themselves if they are interested in obtaining information from 
biodata that might have signi˜cant implications for their health.
Currently, IRBs and ethics oversight committees are encouraged to review 
disclosure statements on a case-by-case basis. One of the factors that can 
in˚uence their decision is the expected validity of the prediction based on the 
presence of the risk factor, which can change over time as a result of new sci
-enti˜c discovery (McGuire et al., 2008). In any case, the protocols for sharing 
study results (if any) with the participants should be clearly explained in the 
informed consent document, subject to review by the IRB. The issue can be 
expected to arise with increasing frequency as more becomes known about the 
human genome, leading to a growing number of incidental ˜ndings that reveal 
genetic information with known implications for health that are not part of the 
research hypotheses of the study. Moreover, the issue extends beyond genetic 
and other data derived from biospecimens. A social science study that includes 
measuring blood pressure will, for example, reveal the occasional participant 
with dangerous hypertension. One possibility is to use the consent process to 
inform participants that no diagnostic information will be disclosed, but that 
they should have regular medical care and consider asking a physician to obtain 
genetic or other potential diagnostic indicators such as those collected in the 
study. This may be a tempting option for studies in which the investigators 
cannot claim competence to deal with diagnostic issues.
Withdrawal of Consent
There is widespread agreement that a basic component of any system of 
informed consent must be the ability to withdraw consent at any time. Initially, 
this concept was applied to human subjects research, as can be seen in the 
 
Declaration of Helsinki: ﬁIn any research on human beings, each potential 
subject . . . should be informed that he or she is at liberty to abstain from par
-ticipation in the study and that he or she is free to withdraw his or her consent 
to participation at any timeﬂ (World Medical Association, 1964). This concept 
actually originated much earlier, in the Nuremburg Code. Later, with the 
development of biobanks, the principle of withdrawal of consent was generally 
included in ethical guidelines for dealing with subjects who provide specimens 
(Eriksson and Helgesson, 2005). The Common Rule speci˜es that ﬁparticipa
-tion is voluntary . . . and the subject may discontinue participation at any time 
without penalty or loss of bene˜ts to which the subject is otherwise entitledﬂ 
(45 CFR 46 Part 116(a)(8)).
The reasons for withdrawing consent to use stored specimens and data are 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 67
usually different from the reasons for withdrawing consent for participating in 
medical research.
6 In the latter case, participants are generally concerned about 
some sort of direct physical harm, but this is not an issue for stored specimens 
and data. Instead, participants are concerned about such things as sensitive 
information ending up in the wrong hands, leading in turn to discrimination, 
stigma, or personal distress. For example, prior to the passage of the Genetic 
Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008, some participants might have 
worried that their genetic information would end up in the possession of an 
insurance company and possibly make it more dif˜cult for them to obtain 
insurance.
It is dif˜cult to estimate the risks of such occurrences, although some 
researchers believe them to be relatively small (e.g., Eriksson and Helgesson, 
2005). Nonetheless, in most cases a study participant may withdraw from the 
study at any time, and this right should be clearly stated in the informed consent 
document. 
When consent is withdrawn, the question arises of whether and to what 
extent the data gleaned from specimens can be used in research. As Shickle 
(2006, p. 515) notes: 
withdrawal raises some dif˜cult questions. It is clear that new data collection 
should stop. However, the participant may still be content for their DNA and 
previously collected data to be used. Their decision may depend on whether 
withdrawal has been triggered by a desire not to share information about a 
new disease, perhaps that is associated with stigma, or by fundamental con
-cerns about the way that the biobank is being maintained and used. 
In the case of previous disclosure or publication of the data, it may, in fact, 
be impossible not to use the data. As Shickle (2006, p. 515) comments, ﬁIt 
would be unreasonable and impractical for a participant to require that data 
previously collected be removed from any analyses previously conducted and 
potentially published.ﬂ
The more dif˜cult question is whether data derived from a participant™s 
biospecimens can be used in studies after consent is withdrawn. One possible 
solution to the continuing use of such data is anonymization. As with the use 
of anonymization to avoid the need for informed consent to uses of specimens 
and data beyond the original research, however, there are a variety of problems 
with using the procedure to deal with withdrawal of consent. As noted earlier, 
for example, anonymization renders the data less useful scienti˜cally, especially 
when it comes to social survey data that are linked to administrative records 
and other health data (see Chapter 3). And as discussed earlier, anonymization 
may not completely cut the link to a given individual; it may still be possible to 
6The regulations do not require that patients wishing to withdraw consent give a reason for 
doing so.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
identify the individual through various means, for example, by using identifying 
characteristics such as age, sex, and location. Stripping the specimen of all such 
information may render it useless for research purposes. Moreover, anonymiza
-tion may not truly satisfy a participant™s wishes. If the participant desires, for 
whatever reasons, that his or her data not be used for any purposes at all, strip
-ping the data of identifying information but still using them does not comply 
with this desire (Eriksson and Helgesson, 2005).
Arguing that biobank research produces a public good, Eriksson and 
Helgesson (2005, p.
 1075) suggest that withdrawal of consent should require 
more than simply a change of heart: ﬁDuring the course of the research, a par
-ticipant should be at liberty to withdraw his consent if he can present suf˜cient 
reasons why it is no longer reasonable to ask for his continued participation.ﬂ 
If the participant has suf˜cient reasonsŠsomething left to the researchers, bio
-bank managers, or an ethics committee to decideŠthe data will be anonymized 
or destroyed, as the participant chooses. Likewise, samples may be destroyed, 
anonymized, or returned.
The panel is not comfortable with Eriksson and Helgesson™s approach 
but does believe that there must be some practical limitations on the right to 
withdraw consent. In particular, the panel agrees that once data have already 
been published or relied upon in publications, it is not practical to delete them. 
(For a discussion of practical limitations on withdrawal of consent, see Levine 
[1988]). The larger message is that researchers should be aware of the issue, 
make plans for what they will do in cases of withdrawal of consent, and spell 
out those plans in the consent form. 
Third-Party Issues
Because relatives of the participants in a study share some of the partici
-pants™ DNA, many of the same risks participants face exist for their relatives 
as well, albeit in attenuated form. Any sensitive information, such as a genetic 
predisposition to a disease that is obtained from the genetic sample of a study 
participant may also apply to his or her biological relatives. Thus important 
questions arise concerning whether the researchers have any obligations to the 
participant™s family. 
Under federal regulations, third-party relatives are not generally consid
-ered to be research subjects, and researchers are not required to obtain their 
consent. However, a case involving Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) 
researchers about a decade ago indicates the dif˜culties that can arise when 
a study accumulates information about third parties. A VCU study question
-naire had included questions about the psychiatric history of the participants™ 
parents, and the father of one of the participants objected and complained to 
federal of˜cials that the questions invaded his privacy (Amber, 2000). When 
the Of˜ce of Protection from Research Risks (OPRR, now the Of˜ce of Human 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 69
Research Protections, or OHRP) reviewed the minutes pertaining to the VCU 
IRB™s review of the study, it found that the IRB had not considered whether the 
father or other family members should be regarded as research subjects whose 
consent to participate would be required. OPRR agreed that the father was 
a subject and faulted the IRB for its failure to consider whether, in this case, 
family members were or were not research subjects. 
In the case of genome-wide association studies, it is impossible to avoid 
accumulating some information about third parties, since sequencing the 
genome of a study participant inevitably provides genetic information about 
that individual™s biological relatives. Although it appears inappropriate to 
extend autonomy-based consent procedures to third-party relatives, it is impor
-tant to be aware that these risks exist, and that researchers™ ethical obligations 
to these individuals increase with the increasing risk of breaches of con˜dential
-ity and autonomy (Greely, 1997). Thus, it can be argued that study participants 
should be fully informed about these types of risks during the initial consent 
stage, even to the point of encouraging them to discuss their participation and 
possible consequences with their families before enrolling in a study (McGuire 
et al., 2008).
If information from a sample reveals potential health issues for a partici
-pant, those health issues could affect relatives as well. As noted above, there are 
no clear answers about what to do if analysis of data in a study indicates a link 
between a particular characteristic and the likelihood of developing a disease. 
One can argue that a moral obligation exists to inform the participants in a 
study of such a risk, but one can also make the opposing argument that at least 
some participants may not want to know and that recontacting them with the 
information is an invasion of privacy. The ethical issues are even muddier for 
third parties, and the question of whether researchers are morally obligated to 
inform third-party relatives of the results of a biomarker association or similar 
study remains unanswered. 
Effective Communication with Participants
In obtaining informed consent, it is not suf˜cient simply to decide what 
information should be provided to participants; one must also take into account 
the participants™ ability to understand and process that information. In other 
words, one must communicate the information effectively.
One of the most obvious factors to take into account is language needs. 
The necessary information should be provided in a language in which the par
-ticipant is ˚uent. Those whose English skills are questionable should be given 
the information in their native language.
Even among native English speakers, it is important to consider exactly 
how the information is presented. Communications should be at an appropriate 
level. Furthermore, those preparing the consent form should be familiar with 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
research on health literacy. Studies among those with different levels of edu
-cational attainment imply that a good deal of variation exists in health literacy 
even among populations with more than a high school education. 
To the extent possible, consent forms should be tailored to ˜t different 
populations. One population of special concern is the elderly, for whom cogni
-tive impairment may make informed consent problematic. This is a particular 
issue among the oldest adultsŠthose aged 85 and above.
Another issue to consider is how much information to provide. A balance 
must be achieved between presenting too little information, so participants 
cannot truly understand what they are consenting to, and presenting too much 
information, which may interfere with obtaining meaningful consent. A good 
approach is to consider the materiality of the informationŠa legal term of 
artŠand provide only that information which is material to the participant™s 
understanding of the bene˜ts and risks of participation and therefore to his or 
her capability to make a decision.
7 The Role of Institutional Review Boards
The Code of Federal Regulations (45 CFR Part 46) requires the use of 
IRBs for all research funded by the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS) that involves human subjects, and the Common Rule extends 
this requirement to most other federal agencies that fund research involving 
human subjects (see Chapter 3). Thus almost all federally funded research proj
-ects with human subjects must use IRBs, and they must follow the requirements 
concerning IRB use that are set forth in the federal statutes.
8Review and prior approval by research IRBs serves as the major protective 
oversight mechanism for all human subjects research in the United States, but 
the role of IRBs in protecting the rights of research participantsŠand in par
-ticular, their role in the process of informed consentŠhas been the subject of 
debate. Among other things, IRBs weigh in on the possible risks and bene˜ts 
of participation in a study, the proper selection of participants, and whether 
informed consent should be obtained. If informed consent is required, an IRB 
must approve the informed consent document before the beginning of the 
study and then review it periodically. IRBs are also permitted to waive or alter 
the informed consent requirement if a study meets the conditions described in 
the Common Rule, the basic federal rule governing the role of IRBs in over
-seeing human subjects research. However, this kind of waiver is not always 
˜tting and can sometimes be dif˜cult for researchers to obtain (Littenberg and 
MacLean, 2006), although appropriate requests are rarely denied. 
7With medical studies, patients are sometimes encouraged to take the document home and give 
consent only after ﬁsleepingﬂ on it.
8See 45 CFR 46, 101 for exemptions.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INFORMED CONSENT
 71
The Role of IRBs in Reviewing Informed Consent Procedures
There is growing concern about the ability of IRBs to be effective in their 
role of reviewing the informed consent process. Over the past decade, a number 
of calls have been made to examine closely how IRBs carry out this role. One 
editorial in a medical journal commented, for example, that the ﬁtissue issueﬂ 
has become increasingly vexatious for IRBs, which struggle with the question 
of how to phrase informed consent forms to explain the genetic studies that 
might be performed on the tissue in the future (Levine, 2001). 
Furthermore, IRBs are becoming increasingly overburdened, with det
-rimental effects on their productivity and usefulness. In addition, persisting 
confusion about the federal guidelines that regulate human subjects research 
and the sometimes conservative interpretations of these guidelines by IRBs have 
raised concern in the research community as it strives for excellence that is both 
scienti˜c and ethical (Levine, 2006; Fost and Levine, 2007).
The Role of IRBs in Biorepositories and Biobanks
The role IRBs should play in research involving biospecimens and bio
-data (especially genetic data) from a repository or biobank is unclear, and this 
subject is not considered in the federal regulations. The current IRB structure 
was designed primarily for direct human research, and it works especially well 
in such cases as clinical drug trials because the IRB paradigm assumes that 
researchers will be working with live human subjects to whom they disclose 
the probability and magnitude of potential harms that may be associated with 
the research (Meslin and Quaid, 2004). The current IRB structure is not as well 
suited to research involving biorepositories or biobanks in which the tissues 
for the studies are not obtained directly from subjects; the principal harms 
are nonphysical; the studies may involve someone other than the person from 
whom the sample was obtained, such as a family member; and the studies do 
not require the person to be present or even alive to participate (Meslin and 
Quaid, 2004). This is one good reason why biosocial research should not be 
delegated completely to medical IRBs.
The problem is especially dif˜cult for social surveys that collect and store 
biospecimens and biodata; there are no clear and immediate bene˜ts of par
-ticipation for those who donate the specimens, yet risks are still present. The 
issues that arise from the storage of specimens and data from social science 
research were not anticipated when the federal regulations concerning IRBs 
were developed, and it may be necessary at some point to revisit these regula
-tions and update them for use with biorepositories and biobanks. Such issues 
have long been a concern of social scientists (and their IRBs) because they 
have a history of sharing data, and for the most part no such tradition exists in 
biomedical research.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Issues Related to the Involvement of Multiple IRBs
When researchers from different institutions are involved in a single proj
-ect or when researchers from one institution share biospecimens or biodata 
with researchers from another, multiple IRBs are likely to become involved. 
This involvement of multiple IRBs can cause a variety of problems that have 
no easy solutions (Burman et al., 2001). As Meslin (2006, p. 279) notes: ﬁAll 
researchers have experienced the frustration of submitting a protocol for a 
multi-center study only to have one IRB approve it, another decline to approve 
it, and a third require extensive modi˜cations that the other two did not.ﬂ This 
is a particularly dif˜cult problem for multicenter biomedical research, and 
in November 2005 a national conference was held to discuss solutions. The 
conference was sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, OHRP, the 
Association of American Medical Colleges, and the American Society of Clini
-cal Oncology. The workshop report details a number of the issues involved and 
some approaches to addressing them (National Institutes of Health, Of˜ce for 
Human Research Protections, Association of American Medical Colleges, and 
American Society of Clinical Oncology, 2005).
The issues to which Meslin refers are perhaps the most obvious ones that 
stem from the presence of multiple IRBs: How does an investigator proceed if 
one IRB approves the research plan and a second does not, or if one requires 
modi˜cations that another does not? And what happens if two IRBs impose 
contradictory sets of conditions that both cannot be met? There are also con
-cerns related to the IRBs™ continuing oversight of a project, as disagreements 
between them can be even more problematic once a project is under way, par
-ticipants have been recruited, and specimens and data are being analyzed.
As biosocial surveys and studies become more common, it is likely that the 
number of projects requiring multiple IRBs will increase. To be sure, this issue 
is not limited to biosocial surveys, but it will become increasingly important to 
˜nd new ways to provide the oversight that IRBs offer without the complica
-tions entailed in having to answer to independent and uncoordinated entities 
at multiple institutions. Two possible approaches are to develop procedures for 
centralized review or to ˜nd ways for IRBs at different institutions to cooperate 
in their reviews of multi-institution research (Wolf, Croughan, and Lo, 2002).
CONCL
USION
Social scientists planning to add the collection of biospecimens to their 
surveys are likely to ˜nd that the informed consent process is quite different 
from their past practice. The best way for them to deal with these new chal
-lenges is to consult with investigators at their institutions or others with prior 
experience with biosocial or biomedical research, who can provide practical 
information about developing an informed consent document and about what 
to expect from their IRBs.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Findings, Conclusions, and 
Recommendations
As the preceding chapters have made clear, incorporating biological spec
-imens into social science surveys holds great scienti˜c potential, but also 
adds a variety of complications to the tasks of both individual research
-ers and institutions. These complications arise in a number of areas, including 
collecting, storing, using, and distributing biospecimens; sharing data while 
protecting privacy; obtaining informed consent from participants; and engag
-ing with Institutional Review Boards (IRBs). Any effort to make such research 
easier and more effective will need to address the issues in these areas.
In considering its recommendations, the panel found it useful to think of 
two categories: (1)
 recommendations that apply to individual investigators, and 
(2) recommendations that are addressed to the National Institute on Aging 
(NIA) or other institutions, particularly funding agencies. Researchers who wish 
to collect biological specimens with social science data will need to develop new 
skills in a variety of areas, such as the logistics of specimen storage and manage
-ment, the development of more diverse informed consent forms, and ways of 
dealing with the disclosure risks associated with sharing biogenetic data. At the 
same time, NIA and other funding agencies must provide researchers the tools 
they need to succeed. These tools include such things as biorepositories for 
maintaining and distributing specimens, better guidance on informed consent 
policies, and better ways to share data without risking con˜dentiality.
73
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
TAKIN
G A
DVANTA
GE OF
 EX
ISTIN
G EX
PERTISE
Although working with biological specimens will be new and unfamiliar to 
many social scientists, it is an area in which biomedical researchers have a great 
deal of expertise and experience. Many existing documents describe recom
-mended procedures and laboratory practices for the handling of biospecimens. 
These documents provide an excellent starting point for any social scientist who 
is interested in adding biospecimens to survey research.
Recommendation 1: Social scientists who are planning to add biological 
specimens to their survey research should familiarize themselves with 
existing best practices for the collection, storage, use, and distribution of 
biospecimens. First and foremost, the design of the protocol for collec
-tion must ensure the safety of both participants and survey staff (data and 
specimen collectors and handlers). 
Although existing best-practice documents were not developed with social 
science surveys in mind, their guidelines have been ˜eld-tested and approved by 
numerous IRBs and ethical oversight committees. The most useful best-practice 
documents are updated frequently to re˚ect growing knowledge and changing 
opinions about the best ways to collect, store, use, and distribute biological 
specimens. At the same time, however, many issues arising from the inclusion 
of biospecimens in social science surveys are not fully addressed in the best-
practice documents intended for biomedical researchers. For guidance on these 
issues, it will be necessary to seek out information aimed more speci˜cally at 
researchers at the intersection of social science and biomedicine. 
COLLECTIN
G, S
TORIN
G, 
USIN
G, 
AND
 DISTRIB
UTIN
G B
IOSPECIMENS
As described in Chapter 2, the collection, storage, use, and distribution 
of biospecimens and biodata are tasks that are likely to be unfamiliar to many 
social scientists and that raise a number of issues with which even specialists 
are still grappling. For example, which biospecimens in a repository should be 
shared, given that in most cases the amount of each specimen is limited? And 
given that the available technology for cost-ef˜cient analysis of biospecimens, 
particularly genetic analysis, is rapidly improving, how much of any specimen 
should be used for immediate research and analysis, and how much should be 
stored for analysis at a later date? Collecting, storing, using, and distributing 
biological specimens also present signi˜cant practical and ˜nancial challenges 
for social scientists. Many of the questions they must address, such as exactly 
what should be held, where it should be held, and what should be shared or 
distributed, have not yet been resolved.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 75
Developing Data Sharing Plans
An important decision concerns who has access to any leftover biospeci
-mens. This is a problem more for biospecimens than for biodata because in 
most cases, biospecimens can be exhausted. Should access be determined 
according to the principle of ˜rst funded, ˜rst served? Should there be a formal 
application process for reviewing the scienti˜c merits of a particular investi
-gation? For studies that involve international collaboration, should foreign 
investigators have access? And how exactly should these decisions be made? 
Recognizing that some proposed analyses may lie beyond the competence of the 
original investigators, as well as the possibility that principal investigators may 
have a con˚ict of interest in deciding how to use any remaining biospecimens, 
one option is for a principal investigator to assemble a small scienti˜c com
-mittee to judge the merits of each application, including the relevance of the 
proposed study to the parent study and the capacities of the investigators. Such 
committees should publish their review criteria to help prospective applicants. 
A potential problem with such an approach, however, is that many projects may 
not have adequate funding to carry out such tasks.
Recommendation 2: Early in the planning process, principal investigators 
who will be collecting biospecimens as part of a social science survey 
should develop a complete data sharing plan. 
This plan should spell out the criteria for allowing other researchers to use 
(and therefore deplete) the available stock of biospecimens, as well as to gain 
access to any data derived therefrom. To avoid any appearance of self-interest, 
a project might empower an external advisory board to make decisions about 
access to its data. The data sharing plan should also include provisions for the 
storage and retrieval of biospecimens and clarify how the succession of respon
-sibility for and control of the biospecimens will be handled at the conclusion 
of the project. 
Recommendation 3: NIA (or preferably the National Institutes of Health 
[NIH]) should publish guidelines for principal investigators containing 
a list of points that need to be considered for an acceptable data sharing 
plan. In addition to staff review, Scienti˜c Review Panels should read and 
comment on all proposed data sharing plans. In much the same way as an 
unacceptable human subjects plan, an inadequate data sharing plan should 
hold up an otherwise acceptable proposal.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Supporting Social Scientists in the Storage of Biospecimens
The panel believes that many social scientists who decide to add the col
-lection of biospecimens to their surveys may be ill equipped to provide for the 
storage and distribution of the specimens.
Conclusion: The issues related to the storage and distribution of biospecimens 
are too complex and involve too many hidden costs to assume that social 
scientists without suitable knowledge, experience, and resources can handle 
them without assistance.
Investigators should therefore have the option of delegating the storage and 
distribution of biospecimens collected as part of social science surveys to a 
centralized biorepository. Depending on the circumstances, a project might 
choose to utilize such a facility for immediate use, long-term or archival stor
-age, or not at all. 
Recommendation 4: NIA and other relevant funding agencies should 
support at least one central facility for the storage and distribution of 
biospecimens collected as part of the research they support.
PROTECTIN
G PRI
VAC
Y AND
 C
ONFIDENTIALIT
Y: 
SHARIN
G DI
GITAL REPRESENTATIONS OF 
BIOLO
GICAL AND SOCIAL DATA
Several different types of data must be kept con˜dential: survey data, data 
derived from biospecimens, and all administrative and operational data. In the 
discussion of protecting con˜dentiality and privacy, this report has focused on 
biodata, but the panel believes it is important to protect all the data collected 
from survey participants. For many participants, for example, data on wealth, 
earnings, or sexual behavior can be as or more sensitive than genetic data.
Conclusion: Although biodata tend to receive more attention in discussions of 
privacy and con˜dentiality, social science and operational data can be sensi
-tive in their own right and deserve similar attention in such discussions.
Protecting the participants in a social science survey that collects biospeci
-mens requires securing the data, but data are most valuable when they are made 
available to researchers as widely as possible. Thus there is an inherent tension 
between the desire to protect the privacy of the participants and the desire to 
derive as much scienti˜c value from the data as possible, particularly since the 
costs of data collection and analysis are so high. The following recommenda
-tions regarding con˜dentiality are made in the spirit of balancing these equally 
important needs.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 77
Genomic data present a particular challenge. Several researchers have dem
-onstrated that it is possible to identify individuals with even modest amounts 
of such data. When combined with social science data, genomic data may 
pose an even greater risk to con˜dentiality. It is dif˜cult to know how much or 
which genomic data, when combined with social science data, could become 
critical identi˜ers in the future. Although the problem is most signi˜cant with 
genomic data, similar challenges can arise with other kinds of data derived from 
biospecimens.
Conclusion: Unrestricted distribution of genetic and other biodata risks vio
-lating promises of con˜dentiality made to research participants. 
There are two basic approaches to protecting con˜dentiality: restricting 
data and restricting access. Restricting dataŠfor example, by stripping indi
-vidual and spatial identi˜ers and modifying the data to make it dif˜cult or 
impossible to trace them back to their sourceŠusually makes it possible to 
release social science data widely. In the case of biodata, however, there is no 
answer to how little data is required to make a participant uniquely identi˜
-able. Consequently, any release of biodata must be carefully managed to protect 
con˜dentiality.
Recommendation 5: No individual-level data containing uniquely identify
-ing variables, such as genomic data, should be publicly released without 
explicit informed consent.
Recommendation 6: 
Genomic data and other individual-level data con
-taining uniquely identifying variables that are stored or in active use 
by investigators on their institutional or personal computers should be 
encrypted at all times. 
Even if speci˜c identifying variables, such as names and addresses, are 
stripped from data, it is still often possible to identify the individuals associated 
with the data by other means, such as using the variables that remain (age, sex, 
marital status, family income, etc.) to zero in on possible candidates. In the case 
of biodata that do not uniquely identify individuals and can change with time, 
such as blood pressure and physical measurements, it may be possible to share 
the data with no more protection than stripping identifying variables. Even 
these data, however, if known to intruders, can increase identi˜cation disclosure 
risk when combined with enough other data. With suf˜cient characteristics to 
match, intruders can uniquely identify individuals in shared data if given access 
to another data source that contains the same information plus identi˜ers. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Conclusion: Even nonunique biodata, if combined with social science data, 
may pose a serious risk of reidenti˜cation. 
In the case of high-dimensional genomic data, standard disclosure limita
-tion techniques, such as data perturbation, are not effective with respect to 
preserving the utility of the data because they involve such extreme alterations 
that they would severely distort analyses aimed at determining gene
gene and 
gene
environment interactions. Standard disclosure limitation methods could 
be used to generate public-use data sets that would enable low-dimensional 
analyses involving genes, for example, one gene at a time. However, with several 
such public releases, it may be possible for a key match to be used to construct 
a data set with higher-dimensional genomic data.
Conclusion: At present, no data restriction strategy has been demonstrated to 
protect con˜dentiality while preserving the usefulness of the data for draw
-ing inferences involving high-dimensional interactions among genomic and 
social science variables, which are increasingly the target of research. Provid
-ing public-use genomic data requires such intense data masking to protect 
con˜dentiality that it would distort the high-dimensional analyses that could 
result in ground-breaking research progress.
Recommendation 7: Both rich genomic data acquired for research and 
sensitive and potentially identi˜able social science data that do not change 
(or change very little) with time should be shared only under restricted 
circumstances, such as licensing and (actual or virtual) data enclaves. 
As discussed in Chapter 3, the four basic ways to restrict access to data are 
licensing, remote execution centers, data enclaves, and virtual data enclaves. 
Each has its advantages and disadvantages.
1 Licensing, for example, is the 
least restrictive for a researcher in terms of access to the data, but the licensing 
process itself can be lengthy and burdensome. Thus it would be useful if the 
licensing process could be facilitated.
Recommendation 8: NIA (or preferably NIH) should develop new stan
-dards and procedures for licensing con˜dential data in ways that will 
maximize timely access while maintaining security and that can be used 
by data repositories and by projects that distribute data.
Ways to improve the other approaches to restricted access are needed as 
well. For example, improving the convenience and availability of virtual data 
enclaves could increase the use of combined social science and biodata without 
1See the discussion on ﬁChoosing a Data Sharing Strategyﬂ in Chapter 3.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 79
a signi˜cant increase in risk to con˜dentiality. The panel notes that much of 
the discussion of the con˜dentiality risk posed by the various approaches is 
theoretical; no one has a clear idea of just what disclosure risks are associated 
with the various ways of sharing data. It is important to learn more about these 
disclosure risks for a variety of reasonsŠdetermining how to minimize the risks, 
for instance, or knowing which approaches to sharing data pose the least risk. 
It would also be useful to be able to describe disclosure risks more accurately 
to survey participants.
Recommendation 9: NIA and other funding agencies should assess the 
strength of con˜dentiality protections through periodic expert audits of 
con˜dentiality and computer security. Willingness to participate in such 
audits should be a condition for receipt of NIA support. Beyond enforce
-ment, the purpose of such audits would be to identify challenges and 
solutions. 
Evaluating risks and applying protection methods, whether they involve 
restricted access or restricted data, is a complex process requiring expertise in 
disclosure protection methods that exceeds what individual principal investi
-gators and their institutions usually possess. Currently, not enough is known 
to be able to represent these risks either fully or accurately. The NIH require
-ment for data sharing necessitates a large investment of resources to anticipate 
which variables are potentially available to intruders and to alter data in ways 
that reduce disclosure risks while maintaining the utility of the data. Such 
resources are better spent by principal investigators on collecting and analyz
-ing the data.
Recommendation 10: NIH should consider funding Centers of Excellence 
to explore new ways of protecting digital representations of data and 
to assist principal investigators wishing to share data with others. NIH 
should also support research on disclosure risks and limitations.
Principal investigators could send digital data to these centers, which 
would organize and manage any restricted access or restricted data policies or 
provide advisory services to investigators. NIH would maintain the authority 
to penalize those who violated any con˜dentiality agreements, for example, by 
denying them or their home institution NIH funding. Models for these cen
-ters include the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research 
(ICPSR) and its projects supported by NIH and the Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) and 
the UK data sharing archive. The centers would alleviate the burden of data 
sharing as mandated of principal investigators by NIH and place it in expert 
hands. However, excellence in the design of data access and control systems 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
is likely to require intimate knowledge of each speci˜c data resource, so data 
producers should be involved in the systems™ development.
INFORMED
 CONSENT
As described in Chapter 4, informed consent is a complex subject involving 
many issues that are still being debated; the growing power of genetic analysis 
techniques and bioinformatics has only added to this complexity. Given the 
rapid pace of advances in scienti˜c knowledge and in the technology used to 
analyze biological materials, it is impossible to predict what information might 
be gleaned from biological specimens just a few years hence; accordingly, it is 
impossible, even in theory, to talk about perfectly informed consent. The best 
one can hope for is relatively well-informed consent from a study™s participants, 
but knowing precisely what that means is dif˜cult. Determining the scope of 
informed consent adds another layer of complexity. Will new analyses be cov
-ered under the existing consent, for example? There are no clear guidelines on 
such questions, yet speci˜c details on the scope of consent will likely affect an 
IRB™s reaction to a study proposal. 
What Individual Researchers Need to 
Know and Do 
 Regarding Informed Consent
To be sure, there is a wide range of views about the practicality of provid
-ing adequate protection to participants while proceeding with the scienti˜c 
enterprise, from assertions that it is simply not possible to provide adequate 
protection to offers of numerous procedural safeguards but no iron-clad guar
-antees. This report takes the latter positionŠthat investigators should do their 
best to communicate adequately and accurately with participants, to provide 
procedural safeguards to the extent possible, and not to promise what is not 
possible.
2 Social science researchers need to know that adding the collection of 
biospecimens to social science surveys changes the nature of informed consent. 
Informed consent for a traditional social science survey may entail little more 
than reading a short script over the phone and asking whether the participant 
is willing to continue; obtaining informed consent for the collection and use of 
biospecimens and biodata is generally a much more involved process. 
2In a few cases, it may be necessary to deceive participants about the purposes of a studyŠfor 
example, in ˜eld tests of labor market discriminationŠbut these situations are unlikely to occur 
in biosocial studies. However, the Common Rule (45 CFR 46: 46.116.c.2, 46.116.d.3) explicitly 
permits such exceptions when they are scienti˜cally necessary. 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 81
Conclusion: Social scientists should be made aware that the process of obtain
-ing informed consent for the use of biospecimens and biodata typically differs 
from social science norms.
If participants are to provide truly informed consent to taking part in any 
study, they must be given a certain minimum amount of information. They 
should be told, for example, what the purpose of the study is, how it is to be 
carried out, and what participants™ roles are. In addition, because of the unique 
risks associated with providing biospecimens, participants in a social science 
survey that involves the collection of such specimens should be provided with 
other types of information as well. In particular, they should be given detail on 
the storage and use of the specimens that relates to those risks and can assist 
them in determining whether to take part in the study.
Recommendation 11: In designing a consent form for the collection of 
biospecimens, in addition to those elements that are common to social 
science and biomedical research, investigators should ensure that certain 
other information is provided to participants:

how long researchers intend to retain their biospecimens and the 
genomic and other biodata that may be derived from them;

both the risks associated with genomic data and the limits of what 
they can reveal;

which other researchers will have access to their specimens, to the 
data derived therefrom, and to information collected in a survey 
questionnaire;

the limits on researchers™ ability to maintain con˜dentiality;

any potential limits on participants™ ability to withdraw their speci
-mens or data from the research;

the penalties
3 that may be imposed on researchers for various types 
of breaches of con˜dentiality; and

what plans have been put in place to return to them any medically 
relevant ˜ndings.
Researchers who fail to properly plan for and handle all of these issues 
before proceeding with a study are in essence compromising assurances under 
informed consent. The literature on informed consent emphasizes the impor
-tance of ensuring that participants understand reasonably well what they are 
consenting to. This understanding cannot be taken for granted, particularly as 
it pertains to the use of biological specimens and the data derived therefrom. 
3Penalties might include NIH eliminating researchers™ eligibility for funding and institutions 
eliminating research privileges of faculty.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
While it is not possible to guarantee that participants have a complete under
-standing of the scienti˜c uses of their specimens or all the possible risks of their 
participation, they should be able to make a relatively well-informed decision 
about whether to take part in the study. Thus the ability of various participants 
to understand the research and the informed consent process must be consid
-ered. Even impaired individuals may be able to participate in research if their 
interests are protected and they can do so only through proxy consent.
4 Recommendation 12: NIA should locate and publicize positive examples 
of the documentation of consent processes for the collection of biospeci
-mens. In particular, these examples should take into account the special 
needs of certain individuals, such as those with sensory problems and the 
cognitively impaired.
Participants in a biosocial survey are likely to have different levels of com
-fort concerning how their biospecimens and data will be used. Some may be 
willing to provide only answers to questions, for example, while others may 
both answer questions and provide specimens. Among those who provide 
specimens, some may be willing for the specimens to be used only for the cur
-rent study, while others may consent to their use in future studies. One effective 
way to deal with these different comfort levels is to offer a tiered approach to 
consent that allows participants to determine just how their specimens and 
data will be used. Tiers might include participating in the survey, providing 
specimens for genetic and/or nongenetic analysis in a particular study, and 
allowing the specimens and data to be stored for future uses (genetic and/or 
nongenetic). For those participants who are willing to have their specimens and 
data used in future studies, researchers should tell them what sort of approval 
will be obtained for such use. For example, an IRB may demand reconsent, in 
which case participants may have to be contacted again before their specimens 
and data can be used. Ideally, researchers should design their consent forms to 
avoid the possibility that an IRB will demand a costly or infeasible reconsent 
process.
Recommendation 13: Researchers should consider adopting a tiered 
approach to obtaining consent. Participants who are willing to have their 
specimens and data used in future studies should be informed about the 
process that will be used to obtain approval for such uses.
4Note that this report does not address the issue of obtaining informed consent from children.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 83
What Institutions Should Do Regarding Informed Consent
Because the details of informed consent vary from study to study, indi
-vidual investigators must bear ultimate responsibility for determining the details 
of informed consent for any particular study. Thus researchers must under
-stand the various issues and concerns surrounding informed consent and be 
prepared to make decisions about the appropriate approach for their research 
in consultation with staff of survey organizations. These decisions should be 
addressed in the training of survey interviewers. As noted above, however, the 
issues surrounding informed consent are complex and not completely resolved, 
and researchers have few options for learning about informed consent as it 
applies to social science studies that collect biospecimens. Thus it makes sense 
for agencies funding this research, the Of˜ce for Human Research Protection 
(OHRP), or other appropriate organizations (for example, Public Responsibil
-ity in Medicine and Research [PRIM&R]) to provide opportunities for such 
learning, taking into account the fact that the issues arising in biosocial research 
do not arise in the standard informed consent situations encountered in social 
science research. It should also be made clear that the researchers™ institution 
is usually deemed (e.g., in the courts) to bear much of the responsibility for 
informed consent. 
Recommendation 14: NIA, OHRP, and other appropriate organizations 
should sponsor training programs, create training modules, and hold 
informational workshops on informed consent for investigators, staff 
of survey organizations, including ˜eld staff, administrators, and mem
-bers of IRBs who oversee surveys that collect social science data and 
biospecimens. 
The Return of Medically Relevant Information
An issue related to informed consent is how much information to provide 
to survey participants once their biological specimens have been analyzed and 
in particular, how to deal with medically relevant information that may arise 
from the analysis. What, for example, should a researcher do if a survey partici
-pant is found to have a genetic disease that does not appear until later in life? 
Should the participant be noti˜ed? Should participants be asked as part of the 
initial interview whether they wish to be noti˜ed about such a discovery? At 
this time, there are no generally agreed-upon answers to such questions, but 
researchers should expect to have to deal with these issues as they analyze the 
data derived from biological specimens. 
Recommendation 15: NIH should direct investigators to formulate a plan 
in advance concerning the return of any medically relevant ˜ndings to 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
survey participants and to implement that plan in the design and conduct 
of their informed consent procedures. 
INSTIT
UTIONAL
 R
EVIEW
 B
OARDS
Investigators seeking IRB approval for biosocial research face a number 
of challenges. Few IRBs are familiar with both social and biological science; 
thus, investigators may ˜nd themselves trying to justify standard social science 
protocols to a biologically oriented IRB or explaining standard biological pro
-tocols to an IRB that is used to dealing with social scienceŠor sometimes both. 
Researchers can expect these obstacles, which arise from the interdisciplinary 
nature of their work, to be exacerbated by a number of other factors that are 
characteristic of IRBs in general (see Chapter 4).
Recommendation 16: In institutions that have separate biomedical and 
social science IRBs, mechanisms should be created for sharing expertise 
during the review of biosocial protocols.
5What Individual Researchers Need to Do Regarding IRBs
Because the collection of biospecimens as part of social science surveys 
is still relatively unfamiliar to many IRBs, researchers planning such a study 
can expect their interactions with the IRB overseeing the research to involve a 
certain learning curve. The IRB may need extra time to become familiar and 
comfortable with the proposed practices of the survey, and conversely, the 
researchers will need time to learn what the IRB will require. Thus it will be 
advantageous if researchers conducting such studies plan from the beginning 
to devote additional time to working with their IRBs. 
Recommendation 17: Investigators considering collecting biospecimens 
as part of a social science survey should consult with their IRBs early 
and often.
What Research Agencies Should Do Regarding IRBs
One way to improve the IRB process would be to give members of IRBs 
an opportunity to learn more about biosocial research and the risks it entails. 
5Sharing expertise between biomedical and social science IRBs does not require a return to the 
days when there was only one IRB at each institution, a situation that still exists at many small 
institutions. For example, the Social and Behavioral Science IRB at the University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, has asked a geneticist to serve as an ex
 of˜cio member of the IRB when it considers 
protocols that use genetic data.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FINDINGS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 85
This could be done by individual institutions, but it would be more effective if 
a national funding agency took the lead (see Recommendation 14).
CONCL
USION
It is the panel™s hope that its recommendations will support the incorpo
-ration of social science and biological data into empirical models, allowing 
researchers to better document the linkages among social, behavioral, and 
biological processes that affect health and other measures of well-being while 
avoiding or minimizing many of the challenges that may arise. Implementing 
these recommendations will require the combined efforts of both individual 
investigators and the agencies that support them.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.References
Amber, D. (2000). Case at VCU brings ethics to forefront: Genetics researchers who elicit family 
medical histories cautioned about informed consent. 
The Scientist,
 14
(9), 1. Available: http://
www.the-scientist.com/article/display/11831/ [accessed July 12, 2009]. 
Aubert, G., and Lansdorp, P.M. (2008). Telomeres and aging. 
Physiological Reviews, 
88
, 557Œ579.
Australasian Biospecimen Network. (2007). 
Guidelines for Biorepository Protocols. 
(Revision 4, 
March). Available: 
http://www.abrn.net/pdf/ABN_SOPs_Review_Mar07_˜nal.pd
f [accessed 
February 18, 2010]. 
Bankhead, C. (2004). Privacy regulations have mixed impact on cancer research community. 
Journal 
of the National Cancer Institute, 
96
(23), 1,738˛1,740.
Burman, W.J., Reves, R.R., Cohn, D.L., and Schooley, R.T. (2001). Breaking the camel™s back: 
Multicenter clinical trials and local institutional review boards. 
Annals of Internal Medicine,
 134
, 152˛157.
Church, G.M. (2005). The Personal Genome Project. 
Molecular Systems Biology
, 1:2005.0030 
doi:10.1038/msb4100040. Available: http://thepersonalgenome.com/2005/12/church_on_
the_p/ [accessed June 22, 2010].
Clayton, E.W. (2008). 
Data Access vs. Con˜dentiality: Balancing Risks and Bene˜ts
. Presentation at 
the Workshop on Collecting, Storing, Protecting, and Accessing Biological Data Collected in 
Social Surveys, November 17Œ18, National Research Council, Washington, DC. 
Dalton, R. (2004). When two tribes go to war. 
Nature,
 43
0(6999), 500˛502.
DeRenzo, E.G., Biesecker, L.G., and Meltzer, N. (1997). Genetics and the dead: Implications for 
genetics research with samples from deceased persons. 
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 
69
(3), 332˛334.
Deschênes, C., Cardinal, G., Knoppers, B.M., and Glass, K.C. (2001). Human genetic research, 
DNA banking and consent: A question of ﬁformﬂ? 
Clinical Genetics, 
59
(4), 221˛239.
Dickson, S.P., Wang, K., Krantz, I., Hakonarson, H., and Goldstein, D.B. (2010). Rare variants 
create synthetic genome-wide associations. 
PLoS Biology, 
8(1), e1000294.
Doyal, L., and Tobais, J. (Eds.). (2001). 
Informed Consent in Medical Research
. London: BMJ 
Books.
87
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Elger, B.S., and Caplan, A.L. (2006). Consent and anonymization in research involving biobanks: 
Differing terms and norms present serious barriers to an international framework. 
European 
Molecular Biology Organization Reports, 
7(7), 661˛666.
Epel, E.S., Blackburn, E.H., Lin, J., Dhabhar, F.S., Adler, N.E., Morrow, J.D., and Cawthon, R.M. 
(2004). Accelerated telomere shortening in response to life stress. 
Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 
101(49), 17,312Œ17,315. 
Eriksson, S., and Helgesson, G. (2005). Potential harms, anonymization, and the right to withdraw 
consent to biobank research. 
European Journal of Human Genetics, 
13
(9), 1,071˛1,076.
Faden, R.R., and Beauchamp, T.L. (1986). 
A History and Theory of Informed Consent
. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Fost, N., and Levine, R.J. (2007). The dysregulation of human subjects research. 
Journal of the 
American Medical Association, 
298
(18), 2,196˛2,198.
Greely, H.T. (1997). The control of genetic research: Involving the groups between. 
Houston Law 
Review, 
33
(5), 1,397˛1,430.
Greely, H.T. (1999). Breaking the stalemate: A prospective regulatory framework for unforeseen 
research uses of human tissue samples and health information. 
Wake Forest Law Review, 
34
(3), 737˛766.
Greely, H.T. (2007). The uneasy ethical and legal underpinnings of large-scale genomic biobanks. 
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics, 
8, 343˛364.
Greely, H.T. (2009). Collecting biomeasures in the PSID: Ethical and legal concerns. 
Biodemogra
-phy and Social Biology, 
55
(2), 270˛288. 
Hao, K., Li, C., Rosenow, C., and Hung Wong, W. (2004). Estimation of genotype error rate using 
samples with pedigree information: An application on the GeneChip Mapping 10K array. 
Genomics, 
84
(4), 623˛630.
Hauser, R. M., and Weir, D. (in press). Recent developments in longitudinal studies of aging in the 
United States. Submitted to 
Demography
.Homer, N., Szelinger, S., Redman, M., Duggan, D., Tembe, W., Muehling, J., Pearson, J.V., Stephan, 
D.A., Nelson, S.F., and Craig, D.W. (2008). Resolving individuals contributing trace amounts 
of DNA to highly complex mixtures using high-density SNP genotyping microarrays. 
PLoS 
Genetics, 
4(8), e1000167. 
Huizinga, D., Haberstick, B.C., Smolen, A., Menard, S., Young, S.E., Corley, R.P., Stallings, M.C., 
Grotpeter, J., and Hewitt, J.K. (2006). Childhood maltreatment, subsequent antisocial behav
-ior, and the role of monoamine oxidase A genotype. 
Biological Psychiatry, 
60(7), 677˛683. 
Institute of Medicine. (2009). 
Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, Improving 
Health Through Research
. S.J. Nass, L.A. Levit, and L.O. Gostin, Eds, Committee on Health 
Research and the Privacy of Health Information: The HIPAA Privacy Rule. Board on Health 
Sciences Policy and Board on Health Care Services. Washington, DC: The National Acad
-emies Press. 
International Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories. (2005). Best practices for 
repositories I: Collection, storage, and retrieval of human biological materials for research. 
Cell Preservation Technology, 
3(1), 5˛48.
International Society for Biological and Environmental Repositories. (2008). 2008 best practices for 
repositories: Collection, storage, retrieval, and distribution of biological materials for research. 
Cell Preservation Technology, 
6(1), 3˛58.
Jones, N.L., and Sarata, A.K. (2008). 
Genetic Information: Legal Issues Relating to Discrimination 
and Privacy
. CRS Report for Congress. Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service. 
Kapp, M.B. (2008). Biobanking human biological materials: Issues surrounding the collection of 
samples for use in future research. 
Pharmaceutical Medicine, 
22
(2), 75˛84.
Karr, A.F., Kohnen, C.N., Oganian, A., Reiter, J.P., and Sanil, A.P. (2006). A framework for 
evaluating the utility of data altered to protect con˜dentiality. 
American Statistician, 
60(3), 
224˛232.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES
 89
Levine, R.J. (1982). Commentary on the readability of consent forms. 
IRB: A Review of Human 
Subjects Research, 
4(1), 8˛9.
Levine, R.J. (1988). 
Ethics and Regulations of Clinical Research 
(2nd ed.). New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Levine, R.J. (2001). Institutional review boards: A crisis in con˜dence. 
Annals of Internal Medicine, 
134
(2), 161˛163.
Levine, R.J. (2006). Empirical research to evaluate ethics committees™ burdensome and perhaps 
unproductive policies and practices: A proposal. 
Journal of Empirical Research on Human 
Research Ethics, 
1(3), 1˛4.
Lindau, S.T., Hoffmann, J.N., Lundeen, K., Jaszczak, A., McClintock, M.K., and Jordan, J.A. 
(2009). Vaginal self-swab specimen collection in a home-based survey of older women: Meth
-ods and applications. 
Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences, 
64
B(S1), i106Œi118. 
Littenberg, B., and MacLean, C.D. (2006). Passive consent for clinical research in the age of 
HIPAA. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 
21
(3), 207˛211.
Little, R.J.A., and Rubin, D.B. (2002). 
Statistical Analysis with Missing Data 
(2nd ed.). Malden, 
MA: Wiley-Interscience. 
Lowrance, W.W. (2006a).
 Privacy, Con˜dentiality, and Identi˜ability in Genomic Research
. Discus
-sion document for workshop convened by the National Human Genome Research Insti
-tute, October, Bethesda, MD. Available: 
http://www.genome.gov/Pages/About/OD/Reports
 Publications/Identi˜abilityWorkshopWhitePaper.pd
f [accessed June 15, 2008].
Lowrance, W.W. (2006b). 
Summary of the NHGRI Workshop on Privacy, Identi˜ability, and Con
-˜dentiality in Genomic Research
. Workshop convened by the National Human Genome 
Research Institute, October, Bethesda, MD. Available: 
http://www.genome.gov/1951919
8 [accessed June 15, 2008].
Lunshof, J.E., Chadwick, R., Vorhaus, D.B., and Church, G.M. (2008). From genetic privacy to 
open consent. 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 
9(5), 406˛411.
Malin, B., and Sweeney, L. (2004). How (not) to protect genomic data privacy in a distributed 
network: Using trail re-identi˜cation to evaluate and design anonymity protection systems. 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 
37
(3), 179˛192.
Malinowski, M.J. (2005). Taking genomics to the biobank: Access to human biological samples and 
medical information. 
Louisiana Law Review, 
66
(43), 43˛67. 
Marmot, M., and Steptoe, A. (2008). Whitehall II and ELSA: Integrating epidemiological and 
psychobiological approaches to the assessment of biological indicators. In National Research 
Council, 
Biosocial Surveys 
(pp. 42˛59). Committee on Advances in Collecting and Utilizing 
Biological Indicators and Genetic Information in Social Science Surveys, M. Weinstein, J.W. 
Vaupel, and K.W. Wachter, Eds. Committee on Population, Division of Behavioral and Social 
Sciences and Education. Washington DC: The National Academies Press. 
Martin, J., and Marker, D.A. (2007). Informed consent: Interpretations and practice on social 
surveys. 
Social Science and Medicine, 
65
(11), 2,260˛2,271. 
McGuire, A.L., Fisher, R., Cusenza, P., Hudson, K., Rothstein, M.A., McGraw, D., Matteson, S., 
Glaser, J., and Henley, D.E. (2008). Con˜dentiality, privacy, and security of genetic and ge
-nomic test information in electronic health records: Points to consider. 
Genetics in Medicine, 
10(7), 495˛499.
Meslin, E.M. (2006). Shifting paradigms in health services research ethics: Consent, privacy, and 
the challenges for IRBs. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 
21
(3), 279Œ280. 
Meslin, E.M., and Quaid, K.A. (2004). Ethical issues in the collection, storage, and research use of 
human biological materials. 
Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine, 
144
(5), 229˛234.
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine. 
(2009). 
Ensuring the Integrity, Accessibility, and Stewardship of Research Data in the Digital 
Age
. Committee on Ensuring the Utility and Integrity of Research Data in a Digital Age. 
Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, Policy and Global Affairs Division. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
National Cancer Institute. (2007). 
National Cancer Institute Best Practices for Biospecimen Re
-sources
. Washington, DC: Author.
National Human Genome Research Institute. (2008). 
Cases of Genetic Discrimination
. Available: 
http://www.genome.gov/1251397
6 [accessed June 26, 2009].
National Institutes of Health. (2006). 
Data Sharing Workshop for Behavioral and Social Studies 
that Collect Genetic Data: Workshop Highlights
. Workshop of the Behavioral and Social 
Research Program of the National Institute on Aging, Bethesda, MD. Available: http://www.
nia.nih.gov/NR/rdonlyres/AF0997F6-0C16-4A76-96C0-D3780F00E6D4/7292/2006Aug_
 Genetics_Data_Sharing_Highlights_09_01_06_.PDF [accessed June 23, 2009].
National Institutes of Health. (2007). 
NIH Data Sharing Policy
. Available: 
http://grants.nih.gov/
grants/policy/data_sharing
/ [accessed June 20, 2008].
National Institutes of Health. (2009). 
Certi˜cates of Con˜dentiality Kiosk
. Available: 
http://grants.
nih.gov/grants/policy/coc
/ [accessed June 16, 2009]. 
National Institutes of Health, Of˜ce for Human Research Protections, Association of American 
Medical Colleges, and American Society of Clinical Oncology. (2005). 
Alternative Models 
of IRB Review: Workshop Summary Report
. Available: 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/sachrp/
documents
/AltModIRB.pd
f [accessed July 12, 2009].
National Research Council. (1993). 
Private Lives and Public Policies: Con˜dentiality and Accessibil
-ity of Government Statistics.
 Panel on Con˜dentiality and Data Access, Committee on Na
-tional Statistics, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2000). 
Improving Access to and Con˜dentiality of Research Data: 
Report of a Workshop.
 Committee on National Statistics, C. Mackie and N.Bradburn, Eds. 
Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press.
National Research Council. (2003). 
Protecting Participants and Facilitating Social and Behavioral 
Science Research. 
Panel on Institutional Review Boards, Surveys, and Social Science Research. 
C.F. Citro, D.R. Iigen, and C.B. Marrett, Eds. Committee on National Statistics and Board on 
Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences. Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and 
Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
National Research Council. (2005). 
Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and Op
-portunities
. Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes, Committee on National Statistics, 
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.
National Research Council. (2007). 
Putting People on the Map: Protecting Con˜dentiality with 
Linked Social
˛Spatial Data
. Panel on Con˜dentiality Issues Arising from the Integration of 
Remotely Sensed and Self-Identifying Data. M.P. Gutmann and P.C. Stern, Eds. Committee 
on the Human Dimensions of Global Change. Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and 
Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
National Research Council. (2008). 
Biosocial Surveys.
 Committee on Advances in Collecting and Uti
-lizing Biological Indicators and Genetic Information in Social Science Surveys. M. Weinstein, 
J.W. Vaupel, and K.W. Wachter, Eds. Committee on Population, Division of Behavioral and 
Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Nolte, M.A., and Keller, J.J. (2004). 
Research Use of Restricted Data: The HRS Experience
. Paper 
presented at Joint Statistical Meetings 2004, August, Toronto, Canada. Available: 
http://www.
amstat.org/Sections/Srms/Proceedings/y2004/Files/Jsm2004-000274.pd
f [accessed June 24, 
2009].
Nosowsky, R., and Giordano, T.J. (2006). The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
of 1996 (HIPAA) privacy rule: Implications for clinical research. 
Annual Review of Medicine, 
57
, 575˛590.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCES
 91
Of˜ce for Human Research Protections. (2008). 
Guidance on Research Involving Coded Private 
Information or Biological Specimens
. Available: 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/humansubjects/
guidance/cdebiol.ht
m [accessed July 14, 2009].
Of˜ce of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research. (2008). 
Custodianship and Ownership Issues 
in Biospecimen Research: SymposiumŒWorkshop, Summary
. Paper prepared by Rose Li and 
Associates for the National Cancer Institute.
Of˜t, K. (2008). Genomic pro˜les for disease risk: Predictive or premature? 
Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 
299
(11), 1,353˛1,355.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. (2007). 
OECD Best Practice Guidelines 
for Biological Resource Centres
. Paris: Author.
Rothstein, M.A. (2005). Expanding the ethical analysis of biobanks. 
Journal of Law, Medicine, & 
Ethics, 
33
(1), 89˛101.
Rothstein, M.A. (2008). Is GINA worth the wait? 
Journal of Law, Medicine & Ethics, 
36
(1), 
174Œ178. 
Saunders, I.W., Brohede, J., and Hannan, G.N. (2007). Estimating genotyping error rates from 
Mendelian errors in SNP array genotypes and their impact on inference. 
Genomics, 
90(3), 
291˛296.
Shickle, D. (2006). The consent problem within DNA biobanks. 
Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Science Part CŠStudies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, 
37
(3), 503˛519.
Shostak, J. (2006). 
De-identi˜cation of Clinical Trials Data Demysti˜ed
. Paper presented at 
PharmaSUG SAS conference, May, Bonita Springs, FL.
Strouse, D.S. (2005). Informed consent to genetic research on banked human tissue. 
Jurimetrics 
Journal, 
45
, 135Œ152.
Twitchell, K.T. (2003). Bloodborne pathogens: What you need to knowŠPart I. 
American Associa
-tion of Occupational Health Nurses Journal, 
51
(1), 38˛45. 
UK Biobank. (2007). 
UK Biobank Ethics and Governance Framework
. Available: 
http://www.
ukbiobank
.ac.uk/docs/EGFlatestJan20082.pd
f [accessed June 20, 2008]. 
United Nations Educational, Scienti˜c and Cultural Organization. (2002). 
Human Genetic Data: 
Preliminary Study by the IBC on its Collection, Processing, Storage and Use
. Paris: Author. 
Available: 
http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/˜les/2138/10563744931Rap˜nal_gendata_en.pdf/
Rap˜nal_gendata_en.pd
f [accessed June 16, 2009]. 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2000). 
Standards for Privacy of Individually 
Identi˜able Health Information
. Available: 
http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/˜nal/pvcguide1.
ht
m [accessed June 26, 2009].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2003). 
Protecting Personal Health Information 
in Research: Understanding the HIPAA Privacy Rule
.  Washington, DC: Author. Available: 
http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/pdf/HIPAA_Booklet_4-14-2003.pd
f [accessed June 
26, 2009].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2005a). 
Are You a Covered Entity?
 Available: 
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HIPAAGenInfo/06_AreYouaCoveredEntity.as
p [accessed July 10, 
2009].
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2005b). 
Protection of Human Subjects
. Available: 
http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/documents/OHRPRegulations.pd
f [accessed June 26, 2009]. 
U.S. House of Representatives. (2008). 
Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 
200
8. H.R. 
493, 110th Congress. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce. 
Vaught, J.B., Lockhart, N., Thiel, K.S., and Schneider, J.A. (2007). Ethical, legal, and policy issues: 
Dominating the biospecimen discussion. 
Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers, & Prevention, 
16
(12), 2,521˛2,523. 
Vollman, J., and Winau, R. (1996). Informed consent in human experimentation before the 
Nuremberg code. 
British Medical Journal, 
313
(7070), 1,445˛1,449.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Wade, N. (2010). A new way to look for diseases™ genetic roots. 
The New York Times
. Available: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/01/26/science/26gene.html [accessed March 29, 2010].
Weir, R.F., and Olick, R.S. (2004). 
The Stored Tissue Issue: Biomedical Research, Ethics, and Law in 
the Era of Genomic Medicine
. New York: Oxford University Press.
Wellcome Trust. (2003). 
Sharing Data from Large-Scale Biological Research Projects: A System of 
Tripartite Responsibility
. Report of a meeting organized by the Wellcome Trust and held on 
January 14Œ15, Fort Lauderdale, FL. Available: http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/
WellcomeReport0303.pdf [accessed June 22, 2010].
Westin, A.F. (2007). 
How the Public Views Privacy and Health Research.
 Available: http://
www.
iom.edu/Object.File/Master/48/528/%20Westin%20IOM%20Srvy%20Rept%2011-1107.
pd
f [accessed November 11, 2008]. 
Westin, A.F. (2008, November). 
Americans™ Changing Concerns About Health Privacy
. Presentation 
at the Workshop on Collecting, Storing, Protecting, and Accessing Biological Data Collected 
in Social Surveys, November 17Œ18, National Research Council, Washington, DC. 
Widom, C.S., and Brzustowicz, L.M. (2006). MAOA and the ﬁcycle of violenceﬂ: Childhood 
abuse and neglect, MAOA genotype, and risk for violent and antisocial behavior. 
Biological 
Psychiatry, 
60(7), 684˛689. 
Wolf, L.E., Croughan, M., and Lo, B. (2002). The challenges of IRB review and human subjects 
protections in practice-based research. 
Medical Care, 
40(6), 521˛529.
World Health Organization. (1998). 
Proposed International Guidelines on Ethical Issues in Medi
-cal Genetics and Genetic Services
. Report of a WHO meeting on ethical issues in medical 
genetics. Geneva: Author. Available: 
http://www.who.int/genomics/publications/en/ethical
 guidelines1998.pd
f [accessed June 16, 2009].
World Medical Association. (1964). 
Declaration of Helsinki: Recommendations Guiding Physicians 
in Biomedical Research Involving Human Subjects
. Available: 
http://www.cirp.org/library/
ethics
/helsinki
/ [accessed June 17, 2009]. 
Zimmern, R.L., and Kroese, M. (2007). The evaluation of genetic tests. 
Journal of Public Health, 
29
(3), 246˛250.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Agenda for the Workshop on Collecting, 
Storing, Protecting, and Accessing 
Biological Data Collected in Social Surveys
November 17
19, 2008
The 
Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street NW
Washington, DC
November 
17
, 
200
8ŠRoom 
100
8:30Œ8:45 am
 Welcome and Opening Remarks 
  NRC representative
  Bob Hauser, Committee chair
  Richard Suzman, NIA

Background and purpose 

Goals of the workshop

Sponsor perspective
 SESSION 1: Overview
  Session Chair: Bob Hauser, 
University of Wisconsin
8:45Œ9:05  
  
Data Access Versus Con˜dentiality: Balancing Risks and 
Bene˜ts
  Ellen Wright Clayton,
 Vanderbilt University
9:05Œ9:25
 Where Are We Now? Where Do We Want to Go?
  George Church,
 Harvard University
9:25Œ9:45
  Overview of Biobanks and Data Harmonization
   
Jennifer Harris,
 The Norwegian Institute of Public 
Health, Oslo, Consultant to NIA, NIH
93
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
9:45Œ10:45
 Discussion
10:45Œ11:00
 Break
 SESSION 2: Risks and Rewards of Data Linking
  Session Chair: Hank Greely, 
Stanford University
11:00Œ11:20
 Risks and Rewards
  Katherine Mullan Harris,
 University of North Carolina
11:20Œ11:40
  
Legal and Ethical Issues in Using Biological Data and 
How They Differ from Social Science Data
  Barbara Koenig,
 Mayo Clinic, University of Minnesota 
11:40Œ12:30 pm
 Discussion
12:30Œ1:30 
 Lunch
 SESSION 3: Storing and Maintaining Biological Data
   
Session Chair: Maxine Weinstein, 
Georgetown 
University
1:30Œ1:45
  
Case Study 1ŠPENN Biomarker Core of the Alzheimer™s 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative
  Leslie M. Shaw,
 University of Pennsylvania
1:45Œ2:00
  
Case Study 2ŠSWAN: Current Practices of Receipt and 
Storage of Biospecimens
  Kathi Shea,
 SeraCare Life Sciences, Inc.
2:00Œ2:15
  
Case Study 3ŠLaws and Regulations on Biobanks: 
Present Status and Future Directions
  Bartha Knoppers,
 University of Montreal
2:15Œ3:15
 Discussion
3:15Œ3:30
 Break
 SESSION 4: Informed Consent
  Session Chair: Barbara Stanley, 
Columbia University
3:30Œ4:00
 Informed Consent: Best Practices
  Holly Taylor,
 Johns Hopkins University
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 95
4:00Œ4:15
  
Informed Consent: Recent Developments in Legal and 
Ethical Requirements for Data Collection and Use
  Paul Appelbaum,
 Columbia University
4:15Œ4:30
  
Research with Biological Data Collected in Social 
Surveys: The Role of IRBs in Informed Consent
  Karen Maschke
, The Hastings Center
4:30Œ5:30
 Discussion
6:30Œ8:30
 Working Dinner 
November 
18
, 
200
8ŠRoom 
100
 SESSION 5: Protecting Data and Con˜dentiality
  Session Chair: Bob Wallace, 
University of Iowa
8:30Œ8:50 am
 Americans™ Changing Concerns About Health Privacy
  Alan Westin,
 Columbia University (Emeritus)
8:50Œ9:10
 Quantifying Disclosure Risks
  Jerry Reiter,
 Duke University
9:10Œ9:30
  
A Privacy Preserving Framework for Integrating, Storing, 
and Querying Biological Data
  Murat Kantarcioglu,
 University of Texas
9:30Œ9:50
  
Assessing the Utility of Statistical Methods for Limiting 
Disclosure Risk: Value of Synthetic Data Sets
  John Abowd, 
Cornell University
9:50Œ11:00
 Discussion
11:00Œ11:15
 Break
 SESSION 6: Accessing and Sharing Data
    
Session Chair: Myron Gutmann, 
University of 
Michigan
11:15Œ11:35
  Data Licensing Agreements/Restricted Access
  Alan Karr, 
National Institute of Statistical Sciences
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
11:35Œ11:55
 Repository Issues and Practices
  MaryFran Sowers, 
University of Michigan
11:55Œ12:45 pm
 Discussion
12:45Œ1:45
 Lunch
1:45Œ3:00
 SESSION 7: Collecting Our Thoughts
  Session Chair: Bob Hauser, 
University of Wisconsin
  
Format: Brief comments from the chair followed by a 
period of general discussion. 

What have we learned? 

Remaining questions

Conclusions

Future directions 
3:00 pm
 Public Workshop Adjourn
3:15Œ5:30
  
CLOSED SESSION (COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
ONLY)ŠRoom 213

Report preparation
6:30Œ8:30
 Working Dinner
November 
19
, 
200
8 9:00Œ5:30 pm
  
CLOSED SESSION (COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
ONLY)ŠRoom 208

Report preparation (cont.)
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Participants in the Workshop on 
Collecting, Storing, Protecting, and 
Accessing Biological Data Collected in 
Social Surveys
NOVEMBER
 17
18, 2008
John Abowd, Cornell UniversityPaul S. Appelbaum, Columbia UniversityTimothy J. Beebe, 
Mayo College of MedicinePartha Bhattacharyya, National Institute on AgingStephen J. Blumberg, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Laura Branden, Westat
Michelle Brotzman, Westat
Somnath Chatterji, World Health Organization
George M. Church, Harvard Medical School
Ellen Wright Clayton, 
Vanderbilt University
George T. Duncan, 
Carnegie Mellon UniversityHenry T. 
Greely, 
Stanford University
Myron P. 
Gutmann, University of MichiganJohn Haaga, National Institute on AgingElizabeth Hamilton, National Institute on AgingJennifer Harris, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, and Consultant to the National Institute on AgingKathie Mullan Harris, University of North CarolinaRobert M. Hauser, 
University of Wisconsin
John Milburn Jessup, National Cancer InstituteClifford Johnson, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Murat Kantarcioglu, University of Texas
Alan F. 
Karr, 
National Institute of Statistical Sciences97
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
Jonathan King, National Institute on AgingBartha M. Knoppers, University of Montreal
Barbara A. Koenig, Mayo College of MedicineLaura Levit, Institute of MedicineStacy Tessler Lindau, 
University of ChicagoJennifer H. Madans, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Karen J. Maschke, Hastings CenterJames W. McNally, 
University of MichiganGeraldine M. McQuillan, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Sharyl Nass, Institute of MedicineLis Nielsen, National Institute on AgingRandall J. Olsen, Ohio State UniversityGeorgeanne Patmios, National Institute on AgingJohn Phillips, National Institute on AgingJerome P. Reiter, 
Duke UniversityJeanne Rosenthal, Westat
Jane Schulman, Westat
Leslie Shaw, 
University of PennsylvaniaKathi Shea, SeraCare, Inc.
Sherry Sherman, National Institute on AgingJanet M. Eisenhauer Smith, University of Wisconsin, Madison
Mary Fran Sowers, University of MichiganErica Spotts, National Institute on AgingBarbara Stanley, 
Columbia UniversityRichard Suzman, National Institute on AgingHolly Taylor, 
Johns Hopkins UniversityMelissa Thomas, Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.Arti Varanasi, Westat
Ulyana Vjugina, American Society of HematologyRobert B. Wallace, 
University of IowaMaxine Weinstein, 
Georgetown UniversityAlan Westin, 
Columbia University (emeritus)Louise Wideroff, 
National Cancer InstituteGooloo Wunderlich, 
Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and EducationConducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Biographical Sketches of Panel 
 Members and Staff
Robert M. Hauser
 (
Chair) is Vilas Research professor of sociology and director, 
Center for Demography of Health and Aging at the University of Wisconsin, 
Madison. His research in sociology, statistics, and demography has addressed 
aging and the life course, social and economic inequality, educational attain
-ment, and cross-national and cross-temporal comparisons of intergenerational 
mobility. Since 1980, he has led the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (WLS), 
which has followed the life course of more than 10,000 Wisconsin high school 
graduates. Dr. Hauser is a fellow of the American Statistical Association and 
a member of the National Academy of Sciences. He has served on numerous 
National Research Council (NRC) committees, including the Panel on Insti
-tutional Review Boards, Surveys, and Social Science Research; the Panel to 
Review the 2000 Census; and the Committee on Performance Levels for Adult 
Literacy. He holds a B.A. in economics from the University of Chicago and an 
M.A. and Ph.D., both in sociology, from the University of Michigan.
George M. Church
 is professor of genetics at Harvard Medical School and 
director of the Center for Computational Genetics. With degrees from Duke 
University in chemistry and zoology, he coauthored research on 3-D soft
-ware and RNA structure with Sung-Hou Kim. His work on his Ph.D. from 
Harvard in biochemistry and molecular biology with Wally Gilbert included 
the ˜rst direct genomic sequencing method in 1984. Dr. Church initiated the 
Human Genome Project as a research scientist at newly formed Biogen Inc. 
and a
 Monsanto life sciences research fellow at the University of California, 
San
 Francisco, with Gail Martin. He invented the broadly applied concepts 
99
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
of molecular multiplexing and tags, homologous recombination methods, and 
array DNA synthesizers. Technology transfer of automated sequencing and soft
-ware to Genome Therapeutics Corp. resulted in the ˜rst commercial genome 
sequence (the human pathogen 
H. pylori
, 1994). Dr. Church has served in 
advisory roles for 12 journals (including 
Nature Molecular Systems Biology
), 
˜ve granting agencies, and 24 biotech companies (founding Knome, Joule, and 
LS9). His current research focuses on integrating biosystems modeling with the 
Personal Genome Project and synthetic biology. 
Barney Cohen 
(Study Director
) is director of the Committee on Population of 
the National Academies/NRC. His work at the NRC has encompassed a wide 
variety of domestic and international projects, including studies on fertility, 
morbidity, mortality, housing, urbanization, migration, aging, and HIV/AIDS. 
Currently, he is also serving as the liaison of the National Academies to the 
Academy of Science of South Africa and the Ghanaian Academy of Arts and 
Sciences as part of a larger project aimed at supporting the development of 
academies of science in Africa.
 Dr. Cohen holds an M.A. in economics from 
the University of Delaware and a Ph.D. in demography from the University of 
California, Berkeley. 
George T. Duncan
 joined the Carnegie Mellon University faculty in the Depart
-ment of Statistics in 1974 and the Heinz College faculty in 1978. He became 
professor emeritus in 2008. He has served as director of the Heinz College™s 
M.S., M.P.M., and Ph.D. programs. He served as associate dean for faculty from 
2001 to 2002. Prior to coming to Carnegie Mellon, Dr. Duncan taught in the 
mathematics department at the University of California, Davis. He is a visit
-ing faculty member at Los Alamos National Laboratory, has been a visitor at 
Cambridge University, and was Lord Simon visiting professor at the University 
of Manchester in 2005. He is a fellow of the American Statistical Association, 
a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, a fellow 
of the Royal Statistical Society, and an elected member of the International 
Statistical Institute. Dr. Duncan™s general research interests are in Bayesian deci
-sion making and information technology and social accountability. His primary 
focus is on con˜dentiality of statistical databases. His work has appeared in 
leading journals, including the 
Journal of the American Statistical Association
, Management Science
, 
Econometrica
, 
Operations Research
, 
Psychometrika
, and 
Biometrika
. He holds a B.S. and an M.S. in statistics from the University of 
Chicago and a Ph.D. in statistics from the University of Minnesota. 
Henry T. 
Greely
 is Deane F. and Kate Edelman Johnson professor of law in 
Stanford University™s Law School. He also holds an appointment (by courtesy) 
with the Stanford University Department of Genetics. Professor Greely special
-izes in the legal implications of new biomedical technologies, especially those 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 101related to genetics, neurosciences, and stem cells. He frequently serves as an 
advisor on California, national, and international policy issues. He chairs the 
California Advisory Committee on Human Embryonic Stem Cell Research, is a 
codirector of the Law and Neuroscience Project, and is a founder and executive 
committee member of the Neuroethics Society. Active in university leadership, 
Professor Greely chairs the steering committee for the Stanford Center for Bio
-medical Ethics, directs the law school™s Center for Law and the Biosciences and 
the Stanford Center for Biomedical Ethics™ Program on Stem Cells in Society, 
and serves on the leadership council for the university™s interdisciplinary Bio-X 
Program. He is a fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of 
Science. He holds a J.D. from Yale Law School.
Myron P. 
Gutmann
 is assistant director of the National Science Foundation, 
with responsibility for the Directorate for the Social, Behavioral, and Economic 
Sciences. He is also research professor at the Inter-university Consortium for 
Political and Social Research (ICPSR) and professor of history and information, 
University of Michigan. From 2001 to 2009 he served as director of ICPSR. He 
has a broad range of interests in interdisciplinary historical population
 studies, 
especially relating population to agriculture, the environment, and health. He 
also studies ways in which digital materials can be properly preserved and shared 
and how the con˜dentiality of research subjects can be protected when data 
about them is made available for secondary use. Dr. Gutmann teaches about 
historical demography and about the social, demographic, and economic history 
of Europe and the Americas. He holds an M.A. and a Ph.D. from
 Princeton 
University. He has served on a number of national and international advisory 
committees, including the U.S. Committee for CODATA and the National 
Academies™ Board on Research Data and Information. Dr. Gutmann™s work on 
this panel was completed before he assumed his position at the National Science 
Foundation. 
Robert J. Levine 
is professor of medicine and lecturer in pharmacology; director 
of the Law, Policy and Ethics Core of the Center for Interdisciplinary Research 
on AIDS; and senior fellow in bioethics at Yale University. He is a fellow of 
the Hastings Center and the American College of Physicians; a member of the 
American Society for Clinical Investigation and American Society for Phar
-macology and Experimental Therapeutics; a director and former vice chair of 
PRIM&R (Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research); past president of 
the American Society of Law, Medicine and Ethics (two terms); and past chair
-man of the Connecticut Humanities Council. In the past he was also chair of the 
Institutional Review Board at Yale-New Haven Medical Center (1969
2000), 
founding codirector of Yale University™s Interdisciplinary Bioethics Center, 
chief of the Section of Clinical Pharmacology at Yale, chairman of the Section 
on Medico-Legal Matters and R&D Administration of the American Society 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Associate Editor 
of Biochemical 
Pharmacology
, and editor of 
Clinical Research
. Dr. Levine is the founding editor 
of
 IRB: A Review of Human Subjects Research 
(editor 1979Œ2000 and currently 
chair of the Editorial Board) and has served as consultant to several federal 
and international agencies involved in the development of policy for the pro
-tection of human subjects (including twice serving as chair of the Council for 
International Organizations of Medical Sciences Steering Committee to revise 
its 
International Ethical Guidelines for Biomedical Research Involving Human 
Subjects
). He is the author of numerous publications, including the book 
Ethics 
and Regulation of Clinical Research
 (two editions). In the last 35 years, most 
of Dr. Levine™s research, teaching, and publications have been in the ˜eld of 
medical ethics, with particular focus on the ethics of research involving human 
subjects.
John Quackenbush
 is professor of computational biology and bi
oinformatics 
with appointments in the Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of
 Public 
Health, and the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. His work focuses on the chal
-lenges of how best to collect, manage, and analyze genomics data, with an 
emphasis on methods, spanning the laboratory to the laptop, for using genomic 
and computational approaches to reveal the underlying biology. Recently he has 
been looking at patterns of gene expression in cancer with the goal of elucidat
-ing the networks and pathways that are fundamental in the development and 
progression of the disease. He holds a Ph.D. in theoretical particle physics from 
the University of California, Los Angeles.
Jerome P. Reiter
 is associate professor of statistical science, Department of 
 
Statistical Science, Duke University. His methodological research focuses mainly 
on ways of protecting con˜dentiality in public-use data, handling missing data 
in large surveys, and drawing causal inferences in observational data. Dr. Reiter 
is chair of the Privacy and Con˜dentiality Committee of the American Statisti
-cal Association. He is associate editor of several publications, including the 
Journal of Privacy and Con˜dentiality
, the 
Journal of the American Statistical 
Association
, and 
Survey Methodology
. He holds a B.S. from Duke University 
and a Ph.D. in statistics from Harvard University.
Robert B. Wallace
 is professor of epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology, 
and director of the Center on Aging at the University of Iowa. His current 
research interests include the epidemiology of aging, cancer epidemiology and 
control, and survey research. He presently is leading the Women™s Health Initia
-tive in Iowa, and he was recently named chair of the Board on Select Popula
-tions of the Institute of Medicine. He is a member of the Institute of Medicine 
and has served on several NRC committees. Dr. Wallace holds an M.D. from 
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 103Northwestern University and an M.Sc. in epidemiology from the State Univer
-sity of New York, Buffalo.
Maxine Weinstein
 joined the faculty of Georgetown University in 1987; she 
holds an appointment in the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences as distin
-guished professor of population and health. Her work explores the behavioral 
and biological dimensions of reproduction and aging. She is an investigator on 
the Taiwan project, a study that explores the reciprocal relations among stress, 
health, and the social environment among the elderly. She is also an investigator 
on the MIDUS II study. Dr. Weinstein holds a B.S. from Antioch College and 
a Ph.D. from Princeton University.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D
Acronyms
AAMC
 Association of American Medical Colleges
ASCO
 American Society of Clinical Oncology
BNSF 
 Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad
BSR 
 Behavioral and Social Research Program
CFR 
 Code of Federal Regulations
CLIA 
 Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments
COI 
 con˚ict of interest 
DASL
 Data and Story Library
EEOC 
 Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
ELSA 
 English Longitudinal Study of Aging
FFPE 
 formalin-˜xed, paraf˜n-embedded tissue
FOIA 
 Freedom of Information Act
GINA 
 Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act
GWASs 
 genome-wide association studies
HDL
 high-density lipoprotein
HHS 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
HIPAA 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
105Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106 CONDUCTING BIOSOCIAL SURVEYS
HRS
 Health and Retirement Study
ICPSR
 Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research
IOM 
 Institute of Medicine
IP 
 intellectual property
IRB
 Institutional Review Board
ISBER 
 International Society for Biological and Environmental 
Repositories
ISO 
 International Organization for Standardization
LBL 
 Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
MiCDA 
 Michigan Center on the Demography of Aging Data
MTA 
 material transfer agreement
NCES
 National Center for Education Statistics
NCHS
 National Center for Health Statistics
NCI 
 National Cancer Institute
NHANES 
 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
NHGRI 
 National Human Genome Research Institute
NIA 
 National Institute on Aging
NICHD
 Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development
NIH
 National Institutes of Health
NORC
 National Opinion Research Center
NRC
 National Research Council
OBBR 
 Of˜ce of Biorepositories and Biospecimen Research
OECD 
 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OHRP
 Of˜ce of Human Research Protections (formerly OPRR)
OPRR 
 Of˜ce of Protection from Research Risks 
QA 
 quality assurance
QC 
 quality control
SDL 
 statistical disclosure limitation
SNP 
 single nucleotide polymorphism
SOP 
 standard operating procedure
SWAN 
 Study of Women™s Health Across the Nation
UNESCO
 United Nations Education, Scienti˜c and Cultural 
Organization
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D
 107UPS 
 uninterruptible power supply
VCU 
 Virginia Commonwealth University
WHO
 World Health Organization
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON NATIONAL STATISTICS
The Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT) was established in 1972 
at the National Academies to improve the statistical methods and information 
on which public policy decisions are based. The committee carries out studies, 
workshops, and other activities to foster better measures and fuller under
-standing of the economy, the environment, public health, crime, education, 
immigration, poverty, welfare, and other public policy issues. It also evaluates 
ongoing statistical programs and tracks the statistical policy and coordinating 
activities of the federal government, serving a unique role at the intersection of 
statistics and public policy. The committee™s work is supported by a consortium 
of federal agencies through a National Science Foundation grant.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON POP
ULATION
The Committee on Population was established by the National Research 
Council in 1983 to bring the knowledge and methods of the population sci
-ences to bear on major issues of science and public policy. The committee™s 
work includes basic studies of fertility, health and mortality, and migration 
aimed at improving programs for the public health and welfare in the United 
States and developing countries. The committee also fosters communication 
among researchers in different disciplines and countries and policy makers in 
government, international agencies, and private organizations. The work of the 
committee is made possible by funding from several government agencies and 
private foundations.
Conducting Biosocial Surveys: Collecting, Storing, Accessing, and Protecting Biospecimens and BiodataCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.