DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13003Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation forAllocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study ofMolecular Dynamics22 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-16119-0 | DOI 10.17226/13003Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for theStudy of Molecular Dynamics; Board on Life Sciences; Division on Earth and LifeStudies; National Research CouncilReport of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics   Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Alloca
tion of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics 
 Board on Life Sciences 
Division on Earth and Life Studies       Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ii THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth 
Street, N.W.  Washington, D.C. 20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are draw
n from the councils of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the National Academy of 
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the 
committee responsible for the report were chosen fo
r their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance. 

 
This study was supported by Grant No. UPVI-6375 be
tween the National Academy of Sciences and D.E. 
Shaw Research.  Any opinions, fi
ndings, conclusions, or recommendati
ons expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflec
t the views of the organizations or agencies that 
provided support for the project. 

 
  Copyright 2010 by the National Academy 
of Sciences. All rights reserved.   
 
Printed in the United States of America 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.             September 2, 2010 
 Jodi Swidzinski Hezky, Ph.D. 

D. E. Shaw Research 

120 West 45th Street, 39th Floor 
New York, NY 10036  
 
Dear Dr. Hezky: 

 
This letter details the work and transmits 
the final report of the Committee on Proposal 
Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics.   
 
The committee evaluated submissions in res
ponse to a Request for Proposals (RFP) for Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton, a speci
alized supercomputer d
esigned and constructed 
by D.E. Shaw Research that allows for dramat
ically accelerated molecular dynamics simulations.  
D.E. Shaw is making time on a 512 node Anton machine available to the non-commercial 
research community without cost.  During this 
time, the Anton machine will be housed at the 
Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center (PSC)™s Nationa
l Resource for Biomedical Supercomputing; 
the related support work to enable Anton to be 
used by the community is supported by a grant 
from the National Institute of General Medical Sc
iences to the PSC.  The work of the National Research Council (NRC) committee to evaluate proposals requesting allocations of time on 
Anton was supported by a contract between D.E.
 Shaw Research and the National Academy of 
Sciences and was performed under the auspices of 
the National Research Council™s Board on Life 
Sciences. 
 
To undertake this task, the National Resear
ch Council convened a committee of experts to consider the proposals submitted in response to the Anton allocation RFP.  The committee of 16 
was chaired by Dr. Robert L. Jernigan, Director
 of the Baker Center for Bioinformatics and 
Biological Statistics and Professor of Biochemistry
, Biophysics, and Molecular Biology at Iowa 
State University.  The committee members were chosen for their 
expertise in molecular dynamics simulations, as well as in the subject areas represen
ted in the 67 proposals that were considered 
by the committee for simulation time.  The 
committee comprised a cross section of the 
biomolecular MD field, including both senior members and more junior investigators.  The 

biographies of all of the committee members can be found in Appendix D. 

 
The goal of the RFP for Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton is to facilitate breakthrough 

science in the study of biomolecular systems 
by providing access to a dedicated, massively 
parallel supercomputer that allows significantly faster simulations of biomolecular systems using 
periodic boundary conditions and explicit solven
t models.  Anton™s capabilities allow questions to 
be addressed on multi-microsecond simulation time
scales, so the program seeks to support 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 projects addressing important and potentially high im
pact questions that would be most advanced 
by receiving time on this specialized machine. 

 The Anton RFP and a review guidance document 
listed criteria against which the committee was 
requested to evaluate proposals, including:   Scientific Merit, including potential to advance understanding of an important problem 
or question in the field; potential for breakthrough science resulting in new discoveries 

and understanding; impact that successful 
completion of the proposed research would 
have on the knowledge, methods, 
and current barriers in the field; and a scientifically and 
technologically feasible project with clear, well-developed, a
nd appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to the proposed studies.   Justification for Requested Time Allocation
, including a clear and well-justified need for multi-microsecond simulation time and a clear
 and convincing justification that the 
length and number of proposed simulation 
runs and node-hours requested are necessary 
and sufficient to achieve the scientific objectives. 
  Investigator Qualifications, including appropriate experience and training to 
successfully conduct the proposed studies, evidence of knowledge and prior experience 

with molecular simulations, and past publications. 
 As described in the RFP, staff at PSC provided an initial review of proposal submissions for 
completeness and to determine whether they met t
echnical requirements for simulation on Anton.  
A PSC staff member was also present as an ob
server during the review committee discussions in 
the event that additional technical specification questions arose. 

 D.E. Shaw Research and Pittsburgh Supercomputing 
Center will make time on Anton available in 
two phases.  During the first six months, 15 propo
sals will receive allocations of 100,000 node-
hours each and during the second six months, approx
imately 30 proposals will receive allocations 
of 50,000 node-hours each.  The committee was asked
 to identify the proposals which best met 
the selection criteria to receive simulation time on Anton for each of these two phases.   

The committee™s judgments are based on a dete
rmination of which proposals best met or 
exceeded the selection criteria described above and on the estimates of required simulation time 
provided by the applicants. 

 
In assembling the committee and conducting the revi
ew, the National Research Council sought to 
balance the need to include committee members wi
th specialized expertise in the subfields of 
biomolecular MD (in order to evaluate the technical
 details of proposals), the desire of D.E. Shaw 
Research and the National Resource for Biomedical Supercomputing at the Pittsburgh 

Supercomputing Center (PSC) to allow members of
 the review committee to take advantage of 
the specialized opportunity provided by Anton and to submit proposals if they chose, and the 

need for a review process that was fair and cr
edible. The following pro
cess was used to address 
these sometimes conflicting goals: 
 Committee members were allowed to submit proposals
1;                                                  1 Three members of the committee submitted proposals 
as either Principal Investigators or affiliated 
faculty: Carol Post was the PI for proposal PSCA00077P, Klaus Schulten was the PI for proposal 
PSCA00024P, and David Beveridge was a member of the ABC Consortium that submitted proposal 

PSCA00033P (PI: Thomas Cheatham). 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3  Prior to the committee meeting, each proposal
 was read by two primary reviewers and 
evaluated based on the criteria in the RFP.  These criteria are described in Appendix C; 
 The proposals were divided into two subgroups and any committee member who was 
either a Principal Investigator (PI) or affilia
ted faculty on a proposal was only involved in 
reviewing the subgroup of proposals that did not include their own
2;  All other committee members participated in 
the review and discussion of all proposals in 
both subgroups, except for those proposals submitted by PIs or affiliated faculty from 
their own institution or for which they eith
er had a current academic or collaborative 
relationship, or with whom they had some past
 academic or personal relationship that led 
the committee member to voluntarily recuse him/herself and leave the room during the 

discussion of that specific proposal; and 
 All committee members, except for those who were a PI or affiliated faculty on the 
proposals under consideration, participat
ed in a final session on the second day to 
combine the results of the subgroup discussions and agree on proposals to be identified 

for allocations of time on Anton.  
Table 1 (Appendix A) lists the subgroups to which all proposals were assigned and the names of 
the committee members who were not involved in
 the review or discussion of each proposal. 
 
The NRC committee held its 2-day meeting in Wash
ington, D.C. on July 26-27, 2010.  On the 
first day of the meeting, members of the 
committee first discussed proposals from subgroup A 
and then proposals from subgroup B, following th
e general procedures described above.  For each 
subgroup of proposals, the committee members w
ho served as primary reviewers were asked to 
summarize their reviews of the proposals for whic
h they were responsible, and these summaries 
were followed by discussion among the group.  
Committee members considered the relative 
strengths of the proposals and worked toward 
reaching consensus on which ones best met the 
Anton selection criteria.  If a decision could not be made during this round of discussion, an 

additional committee member was a
ssigned to review the proposal
 in detail.  Committee members 
then returned to the discussion at a later time. 
 
On the second day, all committee members, except fo
r those who were either a PI or affiliated 
faculty on the proposals, participated in a fina
l session to combine the results of the subgroup 
discussions and agree on proposals to be identifie
d for allocations of time on Anton.  Although 
the committee was motivated by its desire to 
enable as many members of the community as 
possible to have the opportunity to receive time, 
it particularly sought to identify those proposals 
which it judged were most likely to lead to hi
gh impact or breakthrough science, even if these 
entailed some risk of failure.   

 
The proposals listed below addressed important biological questions and were those which the 
committee judged took best advantage of Anton™
s specialized capabilities to address questions over multi-microsecond simulation timescales.  The 
committee debated the relative advantages of 
using Anton to address kinetic versus equilib
rium questions.  In many cases, the proposals 
identified by the committee as best
 meeting the selection criteria dealt with kinetic questions and 
incorporated Anton™s ability to generate dyna
mic trajectories; they frequently involved 
informative comparisons between experimental a
nd computational results.  In other cases, the 
committee judged that proposals addressing important thermodynamic issues or aspects of 
methods and force-field validation would be of significant practical value to the community and 
would also be greatly advanced by receiving time 
on Anton.  Conversely, some of the proposals 
which were evaluated as meeting the Anton sel
ection criteria less well were judged by the 
                                                 2 Dr. Post reviewed proposals in subgroup A; Drs. Beveridge and Schulten reviewed proposals in subgroup 
B.  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 committee to lack focus, to pose questions th
at needed additional preliminary research and 
development, or that might be alternatively me
t using other computational resources or analysis 
methods.    The committee has concluded that the proposals lis
ted below best meet the objectives of the RFP for Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton.  Mo
re detailed comments for all 67 proposals are 
included in Appendix B.  

 Phase 1 (initial six months):  
The committee was asked to identif
y 15 proposals that best met the criteria of the RFP to receive 
approximately 100,000 node-hours each of simulati
on time on Anton, for a total time allocation 
of approximately 1,500,000 node-hours.   

 
The 44 proposals that initially requested approxi
mately 60,000-100,000 node-hours of time were 
evaluated by the committee for Ph
ase 1.  Of these, the proposals listed below were judged by the 
committee as being the 15 that ex
ceeded the Anton selection criteria and would most benefit from 
receiving full allocations of requested time.  In
 numerical order by proposal submission number, 
these are: 
 PSCA00007 Capturing Large-Scale Structural Transitions in Membrane 
Transporters at Atomic Resolution
; PI: Emad Tajkhorshid, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign 
 PSCA00010 Structural Determinants of Flickering in K+ Channels
; PI: Benoit Roux, University of Chicago 
 PSCA00013 The Atomistic Scale Kinesin Mechanism Elucidated on the 
Experimental Time Scale; PI: Wonmuk Hwang, Texas A&M University 
 PSCA00023 Visualizing the Pathway of Integrin Headpiece Opening Induced by 
Ligand Binding
; PI: Timothy Springer, Harvard University 
 PSCA00024 Determining the Pathway of Nascen
t-Protein Insertion through the 
Protein-Conducting Channel and into the Membrane
; PI: Klaus Schulten3, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 PSCA00028 Long Time Simulations of Protein Folding: a Synergistic Approach; PI: Vijay Pande, Stanford University 
  PSCA00046 Toward gaining insights into the mechanism of substrate transport by 
the aspartate transporter GltPh
; PI: Ivet Bahar, University of Pittsburgh 
 PSCA00047 Long Timescale Molecular Dynamics 
Simulation of Protein Folding; PI: Martin Gruebele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 PSCA00048 Computational Design and Evaluation of Novel Enzyme Catalysts
; PI: Kendall Houk, University of California-Los Angeles 
                                                  3 Dr. Schulten is a member of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing 
Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 PSCA00052 Sequencing DNA using MspA
; PI: Aleksei Aksimentiev, University of 
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
 PSCA00059 Study of microsecond time scale protein dynamics crucial for 
phosphorylation-mediated signaling; PI: Michael Hagan, Brandeis University 
 PSCA00065 Atomistic modeling of the resting and 
activated states of a voltage-gated potassium channel voltage-sensing domain; PI: Alfredo Freites, University of California-Irvine  PSCA00072 Understanding Sec-facilitate protein translocation and membrane 
integration: New mechanistic insights from microsecond-timescale trajectories on 
Anton; PI: Thomas Miller, Califor
nia Institute of Technology  PSCA00074 Resolving the Molecular Mechanisms of Calcium Binding to Cadherins 
Involved in Hearing and Deafness
; PI: David Corey, Harvard Medical School  PSCA00077 Investigation of conformational properties of residues near 5-fold 
symmetry axis during uncoating of rhinovirus 
capsid by long time scale molecular 
dynamics simulation using Anton at NRBSC
; PI: Carol Post
4, Purdue University 
 Phase 2 (second six months): The committee also was asked to id
entify approximately 30 proposals that best met the criteria of 
the RFP to receive approximately 50,000 node-hours each of simulation time on Anton, for a total 

time allocation of approximately 1,500,000 node-hours. 
 The proposals identified by the committee for inclusion under this phase of the project fell into 
three categories:  

 A. Proposals that initially requested approximately 50,000 or fewer node-hours of simulation time and that the committee judged 
would most benefit from a full allocation 
of requested time. 
 
B. Proposals that initially requested more than 50,000
 node-hours of simulation time.  The 
committee concluded that these proposals well met the criteria of the RFP and addressed 

questions that would benefit from receiving simulation time on Anton.  However, these 
proposals were evaluated by the committee as meeting the goals of the RFP for 
Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton slightly less well that the proposals selected for 

inclusion in Phase 1.  The committee concl
uded that valuable progress could still be made in addressing the goals of these proposals with a reduced allocation of time of 

50,000 node-hours each. 
 C. Additional proposals that the committee conc
luded would also benefit from receiving 
simulation time on Anton, ranging from 15,0
00 to 50,000 node-hours, to complete the 
available allocation of simulation time. 
 
                                                    4 Dr. Post is a member of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time 
for the Study of Molecular Dynamics. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 A. Proposals initially requesting approx
imately 50,000 node-hours of time  
 The committee judged that these proposals also ex
ceeded the Anton selection criteria and should 
be considered for a full allocation of requ
ested simulation time of 50,000 node-hours.  In 
numerical order by proposal submission number, these are: 

 PSCA00014 Dynamic coupling and binding in
 a GTPase-effector complex
; PI: Matthias Buck, Case Western Reserve University 
 PSCA00015 Understanding the mechanics of energy conversion in Na+-dependent 
co-transporters
; PI: Michael Grabe, University of Pittsburgh 
 PSCA00029 Linking Structure and Conductance of Ion Channels; PI: Andrew Pohorille, University of California-San Francisco 
 PSCA00034 Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Signal Transduction in the Squid 
Rhodopsin G-Protein Coupled Receptor; PI: Douglas James Tobias, University of 
California-Irvine  PSCA00037 Dynamics and functional motions of the GlpG intramembrane protease
; PI: Ana Nicoleta Bondar, University of California-Irvine 
 PSCA00057 Lipid-mediated assembly of membrane proteins
; PI: Stephen White, 
University of California-Irvine  
 PSCA00058 Application of New Tools for Characterizing Protein Dynamics to 
Microsecond-Scale, Explicitly-Solvated MD 
Simulations of Intrinsically Disordered 
and Natively Folding Proteins; PI: Michael Colvin, University of California-Merced 
 PSCA00061 Exploring Lipid-Protein Interactions Using Microsecond-scale 
Molecular Dynamics Simulation
; PI: Toby Allen, University of California-Davis 
  PSCA00062 To knot or not to knot: slipknotting in the smallest knotted protein
; PI: Jose Onuchic, University of California-San Diego 
 PSCA00067 Development and testing of improved 
Þxed-charge force Þelds for 
proteins; PI: David Case, Rutgers University 
 B. Proposals initially requesting more than 50,0
00 node-hours of simulation time, to be 
considered for a modified allo
cation of 50,000 node-hours. 
 
The committee judged that these proposals well me
t the Anton selection criteria.  However, because only 15 proposals could receive the maximum allocation of simulation time, the 

committee has included them among those proposals to 
be considered for a modified allocation of 
50,000 node-hours.
  In numerical order by proposal submission number, these are:
  PSCA00001 Detailed Characterization of the Equilibrium Fluctuations of the 
Engrailed Homeodomain
; PI: Christopher Langmead, Carnegie Mellon University 
 PSCA00026 Characterization of Dynamics Control of Chemotaxis Initiation
; PI: Jerome Baudry, University of Tennessee at Knoxville   
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 PSCA00027 Molecular Flexibility in Drug Design Using Microsecond Molecular 
Dynamics; PI: James Andrew McCammon, University of California-San Diego  
 PSCA00033 Molecular Dynamics of DNA and Protein DNA Complexes: A Proposal 
for Obtaining Micro-second Trajectories using Anton
; PI: Thomas E. Cheatham5, University of Utah 
 PSCA00068 Mechanistic insights into the ﬁinside-outﬂ signaling of integrins
; PI: Marta Filizola, Mount Sinai Medical Center   
  C. Additional proposals that would benefit from re
ceiving time allocations on Anton, some with 
modified allocations, to complete the available allocation of simulation time 
 The committee judged that these proposals met th
e Anton selection criteria and would benefit 
from receiving simulation time on Anton rangi
ng from 15,000 to 50,000 node hours.  In 
numerical order by proposal submission number, these are:
  PSCA00005 Exploration of the Human Adenovirus Protease Activation Pathway via 
Long Timescale Molecula
r Dynamics Simulations
; PI: Ross Walker, University of California-San Diego [identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00006 Continuous Long-Time Dynamics of 
RNA Molecules: Watching without 
Blink-ing for Microseconds through Anton™s Microscope
; PI: Ioan Andricioaei, University of California-Irvine 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA00009 Simulations of a Sterol Transport Protein (Osh4) that Tethers 
Membranes of the Endoplasmic Reticulum and Plasma Membrane
; PI: Jeffery B. 
Klauda, University of Maryland at College Park 
[identified for 25,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA00012 Using ANTON to probe the conformational space of poly-glutamine and 
its aggregation to understand its role in Huntington™s disease, a protein aggregation 
disease; PI: Bruce J. Berne, Columbia University 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00017 Understanding the Transcriptional Regulation of MerR
; PI: Jerry M. 
Parks, Oak Ridge National Laboratory 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00020 A Peptides Interactions with Lipid Bilayers: Implications for 
Aggregation and Neurotoxicity
; PI: Jie Zheng, University of Akron 
[identified for 
50,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA00036 Uncovering the mechanism of Protei
n Tyrosine Phosphatase 1B induced insulin resistance in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus through MD simulations of the 
PTP1B-IRK complex; PI: Thanh Truong, University of Utah 
[identified for 15,000 
node-hours]
  PSCA00039 Micro-Second Molecular Dynamics Simu
lation of the Folding Pathways 
of Tetratricopeptide Repeat Units in the Cargo Binding Domain of Kinesin Motor 
Proteins; PI: Carol Parish, University of Richmond 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
                                                  5 Dr. Beveridge, a member of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing 
Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics, is a member of the Consortium that submitted this proposal. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 PSCA00040 Molecular Dynamics Simulations of 
Conformational Dynamics in the 
p38a MAP Kinase: Differential Dynamics in 
the Crystal and Solution Environments 
and the Effects of Binding a Small Molecule Inhibitor
; PI: Adrian H. Elcock, University of Iowa 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA00041 Growth mechanisms of amyloid fibrils
; PI: Jian-Min Yuan, Drexel University 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA00042 Characterizing changes in the conf
ormation and dynamics of epidermal 
growth factor receptor induced by muta
tions associated with anti-cancer drug 
treatment; PI: Peter Coveney, Yale University 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00043 Structural and Functional Water Dynamics in Rhodopsin Activation from Picoseconds to Microseconds
; PI: Mark R. Chance, Case Western Reserve 
University 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00045 All Atom Molecular Dynamics Simula
tion of Connexin Hemichannel 
Voltage Gating; PI: Thaddeus A. Bargiello, Albe
rt Einstein School of Medicine 
[identified for 24,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00049 Assessment of Multi-Microsecond Simulations of Intrinsically 
Disordered Proteins Using NMR: Applications to FCP1 in the Unbound State
; PI: Scott A. Showalter, Pennsylvania State University 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours]
  PSCA00063 All-Atom Molecular Dynamics Simulations of S-Adenosyl Methionine 
(SAM) Assisted SAM-I Riboswitch (Un)Folding Pathways: A Small Molecule with a 
Strong Arm; PI: Shantenu Jha, Louisiana State University 
[identified for 50,000 node-
hours] 
 PSCA00064 Structural mechanism of integrin activation induced by talin
; PI: Cheng 
Zhu, Georgia Institute of Technology 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 PSCA00073 The Effect of 
-Synuclein on Membrane Structure
; PI: Jonathan Sachs, University of Minnesota 
[identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
 
The time allocations for the 47 proposals judged by the committee as best meeting the Anton 
selection criteria total approximately 3,000,000 
node-hours.  In carrying out its charge, the 
committee identified as many promising proposals as feasible given the overall constraints on 

simulation time, to allow the maximum number 
of users possible the opportunity to take 
advantage of this special resource.  If additiona
l node-hours of simulation time become available 
during the course of the project, the committee en
courages D.E. Shaw Research and Pittsburgh 
Supercomputing Center to allocate these hours to the research groups showing the most 
promising results and which woul
d benefit most greatly from the additional time.  The committee 
also encourages D.E. Shaw and PSC to provi
de a collective repository and to encourage 
investigators to share the data generated, since 
the trajectories obtained may be of use to other 
investigators in the community.  

   
 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 The committee wishes to thank D.E. Shaw Res
earch, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, and all 
of the 2010 Anton applicants for the opportunity
 to review these proposals and to identify which 
of the proposals best met the requirements set 
forth in the RFP.  The committee members were 
vocal in their enthusiasm for the computationa
l opportunities provided by Anton and pleased to 
be a part of helping determine how to al
locate time on this important resource. 
 Sincerely, 
 Robert L. Jernigan Chair  
 
cc:  Dr. Joel Stiles, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center 
Dr. Warren Muir, National Research Council 
   Dr. Frances Sharples, National Research Council  
   Appendixes:  A. Table 1: Proposals Reviewed by the Committee 
B. Individual Proposal Summary Evaluations 
C. Proposal Evaluation Criteria 
D. Roster and Biographical Sketches of Committee Members 
E. The Board on Life Sciences and the National Academies 
F. Acknowledgement of Report Reviewer Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10  APPENDIX A TABLE 1: PROPOSALS REVI
EWED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 This appendix is not available to the public. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 APPENDIX B INDIVIDUAL PROPOSAL SUMMARY EVALUATIONS 
 This appendix is not available to the public. 
 
 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12  APPENDIX C PROPOSAL REVIEW CRITERIA  
 The committee used the points below to help guide its review of the proposals.  The 
reviewers were asked to comment on the strengths and weaknesses of the proposals by 

considering the following:
   Level of scientific merit  1. Potential to advance understanding of an important problem or question in the 
field; potential for breakthrough science resulting in new discoveries and 

understanding 2. Impact that successful completion of the proposed research would have on the 
knowledge, methods, and current barriers in the field  
3. Project is scientifically and technologically feasible with clear, well-developed, 
and appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to the proposed studies 
 Justification for requested time allocation 1. Clear and well-justified need for multi-microsecond simulation time 
Clear and convincing justification that the length and number of proposed 

simulation runs and node-hours requested are necessary and sufficient to 

achieve the scientific objectives
  Investigator qualifications and past accomplishments 1. Appropriate experience and training to successfully conduct the proposed studies 
2. Evidence of knowledge and prior experience with molecular simulations 

3. Past publications 
   Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 APPENDIX D  COMMITTEE ON PROPOSAL EVALUATION FOR ALLOCATION OF 
SUPERCOMPUTING TIME FOR THE 
STUDY OF MOLECULAR DYNAMICS  ROBERT L. JERNIGAN
 (Chair), Director, Laurence H. Baker Center for Bioinformatics and 
Biological Statistics and Professor, Department
 of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Molecular 
Biology, Iowa State University 
NILESH BANAVALI
, Research Scientist, Wadsworth Center and Assistant Professor, School of 
Public Health, State University of New York, Albany 

DAVID L. BEVERIDGE
, Professor of Theoretical Chemistry and Molecular Biophysics, 
Wesleyan University 

CHARLES L. BROOKS III
, Warner-Lambert/Parke-Davis Professor of Chemistry and 
Professor of Biophysics, University of Michigan 
XIAOLIN CHENG
, Staff Scientist, Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Adjunct Professor, 
University of Tennessee, Knoxville 

RUXANDRA DIMA
, Assistant Professor of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati 
BARRY H. HONIG
, Director, Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics and 
Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, Columbia University 
GERHARD HUMMER
, Chief, Theoretical Biophysics Section, The National Institute of 
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health  

RONALD M. LEVY
, Board of Governors Professor of Chemistry & Chemical Biology and 
Director, BioMaPS Institute for Quantitative Biology, Rutgers University 
GLENN J. MARTYNA
, Researcher, IBM 
GREGORY PETSKO
, Gyula and Katica Tauber Professor of Biochemistry and Chemistry, 
Brandeis University 
CAROL B. POST
, Professor of Medicinal Chemistry 
and Molecular Pharmacology, Purdue 
University 

KLAUS J. SCHULTEN, Swanlund Professor of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana-
Champaign 
JEFFREY SKOLNICK
, Professor and Director of the Center for the Study of Systems Biology, 
Georgia Research Alliance Eminent Scholar in 
Computation Systems Biology, Georgia Institute 
of Technology 

FENG WANG, Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry, Boston University 
ARIEH WARSHEL
, Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Southern 
California  STAFF  KATHERINE BOWMAN
, Senior Program Officer,
 Board on Life Sciences 
KATHRYN HUGHES
, Program Officer, Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology 
CARL-GUSTAV ANDERSON
, Senior Program Assistant, Board on Life Sciences 
JAMES MULLER, Intern, Board on Life Sciences 
  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14  BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS 
 CHAIR 
 Robert L. Jernigan
 is the Director of the Laurence H. Baker Center for Bioinformatics and 
Biological Sciences as well as a Professor in the Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and 
Molecular Biology at Iowa State University.  
He received his B.S. in Chemistry from the 
California Institute of Technology in 1963 a
nd completed his Ph.D. in 1968 at Stanford 
University.  He has previously served as Deputy Chief of the Laboratory of Experimental and 

Computational Biology and Chief of the Section on Molecular Structure in the National Cancer 
Institute of the National Institutes of Health.  He is also a former Chair of the NIH Advisory Committee on Computer Usage and has served on multiple committees on computing resources.  

Dr. Jernigan is currently on the editorial boards for the journals 
Biochemistry
, the Journal of Data 
Mining in Genomics and Proteomics
, and 
Bioinformatics and Biological Insights
.    MEMBERS 
 Nilesh Banavali received his Ph.D. from the University of Maryland in 2001 for studies on 
nucleic acid force fields and base flipping with Alexander MacKerell Jr.  He pursued postdoctoral 
training at Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the University of Chicago with 
Benoît Roux on implicit and implicit/explicit solvent 
models and free energy characterization of 
conformational change and allostery in macromol
ecules.  He currently serves as a Research 
Scientist at the Wadsworth Center and as Assistant Professor in the School of Public Health at the 
State University of New York, Albany.  The prim
ary goal of his research is to use computational 
calculations and refined analysis techniques 
to optimally extract free energy landscapes 
describing biologically relevant macromolecula
r conformational change.  Dr. Banavali also 
develops techniques to facilitate validation of computational pr
edictions with structural and 
biochemical data. 
  David L. Beveridge attended the College of Wooster, Woos
ter Ohio graduating in 1959, with a 
major in chemistry.  After two years at Monsan
to Research Laboratory, he went for graduate 
studies at the University of Cincinnati.  Based 
on his studies and research under the mentorship of the eminent physical chemist, Hans H. Jaffe, he
 was awarded a Ph.D. in Physical Chemistry in 
1965.  He was granted an NIH Postdoctoral Fellows
hip to study molecular quantum mechanics at 
the Centre de Mecanique Ondulatoire Appliquee in Paris, France with Dr. Odilon Chalvet.  Dr. 
Beveridge continued his postdoctoral studies at Carn
egie Mellon University with Prof. J.A. Pople, 
where he worked on the development of INDO mole
cular orbital theory.  In 1968, Dr. Beveridge 
joined faculty of the City University of New Yo
rk, at first in a joint appointment with Hunter 
College Chemistry Department and The Mount Si
nai School of Medicine and subsequently full 
time at Hunter College.  In 1986, Dr. Beveridge 
moved from New York City to become Professor 
of Chemistry at Wesleyan University.  In 1988,
 he was granted a Merit Award by the NIH and 
named University Professor of the Natural Sciences and Mathematics.  His current research 

involves theoretical and computational modeling studies of the structure, motions, salvation, and 
ligand binding properties of DNA and RNA using 
molecular dynamics simulation.  He served as 
Dean of Natural Sciences and Mathematics (
1992-1999) and has authored or co-authored over 
200 papers in the scientific literature.  In a
ddition to research and teaching, he now serves 
Wesleyan as Director of the NIH supported Program in Molecular Biophysics and Biological 

Chemistry. 

 Charles L. Brooks received a B.S. from Alma College in 1978.  Dr. Brooks pursued graduate 
studies at Purdue University under the direction of Professor Stephen A. Adelman.  His graduate 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 work focused on the development of non-equilibrium
 statistical mechanical
 theories for reactions 
on surfaces, in solids and in liquids using mol
ecular timescale generalized Langevin (MTGLE) 
theory.  In 1982, he received his Ph.D. in Ph
ysical Chemistry from Purdue University.  Dr. 
Brooks was engaged in postgraduate work at Harv
ard University with Professor Martin Karplus 
between the years of 1982 and 1985, focusing on theoretical and computational biophysics.  Dr 

Brooks was also the recipient of an NIH Postdoctoral Fellowship between 1983 and 1985.  In 
1985, Professor Brooks joined the Chemistry Facu
lty of Carnegie Mellon University and was 
promoted to Professor of Chemistry in 1992.  He received an Alfred P. Sloan Research 

Fellowship in 1992 and during this period, 1992-1993, spent a sabbatical year working at the 
Karolinska Institute in Stockholm Sweden and 
The Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla 
California.  Dr. Brooks has recently moved to the University of Michigan, where he holds the 

positions of Warner-Lambert/Parke-Davis Professor of Chemistry and Professor of Biophysics.  

Dr. Brooks™ research includes multi-scale modeling of the dynamics and assembly of complex 

biological assemblies, protein folding, unfolding and aggregation, and free energy 
approximations. 
 
Xiaolin Cheng
 is a staff scientist at the Center for Molecular Biophysics of the Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory.  He is also an adjunct pr
ofessor in the Department of Biochemistry and 
Cellular and Molecular Biology at the Univers
ity of Tennessee, Knoxville.  Dr. Cheng received 
his B.S. from Nanjing University, China, and 
his Ph.D. in Computational Chemistry from the 
State University of New York at Stony Br
ook, where he worked with Professor Carlos Simmerling on application of enhanced sampli
ng approaches to biomolecular simulations.  He 
subsequently joined Professor Andy McCammon's 
group at University of California, San Diego 
as a postdoctoral research associate, mainly 
working on nicotinic acetylcholine receptor 
simulation, and methodological development fo
r fast and scalable continuum electrostatic 
calculation.  Dr. Cheng moved to Oak Ri
dge National Laboratory in early 2008. 
 
Ruxandra I. Dima 
has an interdisciplinary training in th
eoretical and computational physics and 
physical chemistry and her current research 
focuses on the area of computational biophysical 
chemistry with special emphasis on single molecule experiments and aggregation.  After 
receiving her undergraduate degree from the Univer
sity of Bucharest, Romania in 1994, she studied at the Pennsylvania State University wher
e she obtained her PhD in 1999.  Her thesis was 
concerned with the determination of mean field 
free-energy potentials between amino acids in 
proteins.  She then took a postdoctoral appoint
ment (2000-2005) at the Institute for Physical 
Science and Technology, University of Mary
land where she worked on problems related to 
protein aggregation, allostery, RNA folding, and single-molecule biophysics.  In 2005 she took a 
faculty position at the University of Massachuset
ts, Lowell.  She joined the faculty at the 
University of Cincinnati in 2006. 

 
Barry H. Honig
 is a biophysicist who specializes in bi
oinformatics and in developing theoretical 
methods for analyzing the physical chemical properties of macromolecules.  He received a B.A. 
from the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn in 1963,
 an M.A. from Johns Hopkins University in 
1964, and completed a Ph.D. in chemistry at th
e Weismann Institute of Sciences.  He is 
particularly noted for innovating methods to com
pute and display the electrostatic potentials of 
macromolecules based on their 3D structures.  The computer programs DelPhi and GRASP were 

developed in his laboratory and are widely used
 by the academic and industrial communities.  
Since 1981, Dr. Honig has been a Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics at 
Columbia University.  In 1990, Dr. Honig was elected President of the Biophysical Society, he 
received an NIH Merit Award in 1995, and he is 
a recipient of the 2002 Founders Award of the 
Biophysical Society.  Dr. Honig is a Howard H
ughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Investigator.  He serves on the editorial boards of several journals and has published over 190 scientific papers 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 throughout his distinguished career.  He was elect
ed to membership in the National Academy of 
Sciences in 2004. 
 Gerhard Hummer
 received a doctoral degree in physics for work done jointly at the Max-Planck 
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in Göttingen an
d the University of Vienna (1992).  In 1996, 
he started his independent career in the Theore
tical Division of Los Alamos National Laboratory 
after his postdoctoral work there.  In 1999, Dr. Hummer joined the Laboratory of Chemical 
Physics in the National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases at the National 
Institutes of Health where he is a Senior Investigator.  His research focuses on areas including 
theory of single-molecule experiments; channel 
function; peptide and protein folding; complex 
formation and ligand binding; pr
oton pumping and bioenergetics; 
reaction-rate calculations; and the development of new methods for biom
olecular simulation a
nd electrostatics.  
Ronald M. Levy 
is a Board of Governors Professor of Chemistry at Rutgers University.  He 
received his B.A. from Reed College in 1970 a
nd completed his Ph.D. in 1976 at Harvard 
University.  His research is primarily in the areas of protein simulation and modeling and 

molecular solvation.  He h
as been awarded a Sloan Foundation Fellowship, a Johnson and 
Johnson Discovery Research Award, an NIH Res
earch Career Development Award, and a 
Guggenheim Fellowship.  Over the past two d
ecades he has developed the IMPACT molecular 
modeling code.  Current interests include the e
xploration of energy landscapes for protein binding 
and folding, new molecular simulation methods 
and multi-scale models, and the determination of 
solvation free energies. 
 
Glenn J Martyna received a Ph.D. in chemical from Columb
ia University in 1989.  He was then 
a NSF postdoctoral fellow in computational sci
ence and engineering at the University of 
Pennsylvania.  Dr. Martyna was appointed to faculty of Indiana University, Bloomington, in 1993 
and was awarded tenure in 2000.  In 2001, he jo
ined IBM's TJ Watson Research Lab in Yorktown 
Heights, NY.  Dr. Martyna was awarded an honorary Professorship of Physics at the University 

of Edinburgh, UK in 2008.  His research fo
cuses on the use of novel methodology, parallel 
algorithms, and computer simulation to probe biophysical, materials and chemical systems 
including studies of aqueous solutions, comp
lex heterogeneous inte
rfaces, phase change 
materials, and nanomaterials. 

 
Gregory A. Petsko
 is the Gyula and Katica Tauber Professor of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Pharmacodynamics and the director of the Rosenstiel Basic Medical Sciences Research Center at 

Brandeis University.  He was elected to memb
ership in the National Academy of Sciences in 
1995 and to the Institute of Me
dicine in 2001.  He has devel
oped low-temperature methods in 
protein crystallography and their use to study en
zymatic mechanisms and has pioneered the study 
of protein dynamics in enzymatic reactions.  For 
over 25 years, he has worked to understand how 
enzymes achieve their extraordinary catalytic power, developing crystallographic methods for 

direct observation of productive enzyme-substrate 
and enzyme-intermediate complexes that led to 
techniques for studying protein crystal structures at
 very low temperatures.  Dr. Petsko is also a 
founding scientist of the combinatorial-chemistry company ArQule, Inc. 
 Carol Post received her B.S. from the University of Arizona in 1975, and received a Ph.D. from 
the University of California, San Diego in 1981.
  She pursued post-graduate research between 
1982 and 1985 at Harvard University.  She is 
currently a Professor of Medicinal Chemistry and 
Molecular Pharmacology at Purdue University, 
where she operates the Post Lab (Computational 
and Structural Biology Research Group).  The research focus of the Post Lab is broadly described 
as investigations to understand the regulation 
and function of protein-protein interactions 
associated with cell signaling and viruses.  Multi-dimensional, multinuclear NMR methods are 

used to determine 3-dimensional structure of protein complexes.  Computational methods are 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17 used to study the mechanism of action of antiv
iral compounds, and the molecular mechanism for 
phosphotyrosine control of protein function in signal transduction. 

 Klaus Schulten received his Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1974. He is Swanlund Professor 
of Physics and is also affiliated with the Depart
ment of Chemistry as well as with the Center for 
Biophysics and Computational Biology at the Un
iversity of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.  
Professor Schulten is a full-time faculty member
 in the Beckman Institute and directs the 
Theoretical and Computational Biophysics Group.
  His professional interests are theoretical 
physics and theoretical biology. His current 
research focuses on the structure and function of 
supramolecular systems in the living cell, and on
 the development of non-equilibrium statistical 
mechanical descriptions and efficient computing tools for structural biology. 

 
Jeffrey Skolnick received his B.A. in Chemistry, Summa Cum Laude, from Washington 
University, St. Louis in 1975.  He received his 
M. Phil. in Chemistry from Yale University in 
1977 and his Ph.D. in Chemistry from Yale Univer
sity in 1978, with Professor Marshall Fixman.  
Dr. Skolnick is a Professor at Georgia Technical 
University and Director of the Center for the 
Study of Systems Biology.  Dr. Skolnick has recently completed a very promising study in cancer 

metabolomics where he and his research group va
lidated a predictive algorithm that can identify 
novel metabolites with anticancer properties. Th
ey have also developed a new, powerful 
algorithm that can predict protein function and bi
nding sites, and which can be used for rapid 
screening ligand libraries.  In addition, Dr. Skolnick has developed physics based, atomic 

potentials for protein structure refinement.  He a
nd his team demonstrated that the library of all 
protein folds is above the percolation threshhold, 
i.e., any protein structure can be related to any 
other by no more than eight intermediate structures. 

 Feng Wang received his B.S. in Chemistry from Peking University (1998) and Ph.D. in 
Theoretical Chemistry from the University of Pitts
burgh (2003).  He did post-doctoral research in 
computational physical chemistry at the Univers
ity of Utah with Professor Gregory A. Voth.  
Since 2005, he has been an Assistant Professor 
in the Department of Chemistry at Boston 
University.  Dr. Wang received a Mellon Fellowship 
at the University of Pittsburgh in 2002, an 
NSF CAREER Award in 2007, and an HP Outstanding Junior Faculty award in 2010.  His 
research focuses on systematic development 
of high quality force fields, free energy 
determinations, and enhanced sampling. 

 
Arieh Warshel received his BS degree in Chemistry, Summa Cum Laude, from Technion Israel 
in 1966, and his MS and PhD degrees in Chemical 
Physics in 1967 and 1969, respectively, from 
the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. Afte
r his PhD, he did postdoctoral work at Harvard 
University. From 1972 to 1976, he was at the We
izmann Institute and at the MRC Laboratory for 
Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England. In 1976 
he joined the faculty of the Department of 
Chemistry at USC, where he now is Professo
r of Chemistry and Biochemistry. and a Full 
Member of the USC Norris Cancer Center. Dr. 
Warshel has authored over 350 peer-reviewed 
research articles (H index 92) and book chapters, 
two books, and several key computer programs.  
Dr. Warshel™s research focuses on simulations of 
the functions of biological system and other 
challenging problems in modern computational bi
ophysics and chemistry. He and his coworkers 
have pioneered the key approaches for simulating 
the functions of biological molecules, including 
introducing molecular dynamics (MD) in
 Biology, developing the quantum 
mechanical/molecular-mechanical (QM/MM) approach, introducing simulations of enzymatic 
reactions, developing simulations of electron tran
sfer and proton transfer processes in proteins, 
pioneering microscopic modeling of electrostatic effects in macromolecules and introducing 

simulation of protein folding. Dr. Warshel receive
d the Tolman Medal in 2003, has been elected a 
Fellow of the Biophysical Society in 2000, a Fello
w of the Royal Society of Chemistry in 2008, 
and a Member of the National Academy of Science in 2009. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 APPENDIX E  THE BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES
 AND THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES 
  
BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES, NA
TIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL 
  KEITH YAMAMOTO
 (Chair), University of Califor
nia, San Francisco, CA ANN M. ARVIN,
 Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
BONNIE L. BASSLER
, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 
VICKI L. CHANDLER
, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Palo Alto, CA 
SEAN EDDY
, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Farm Research Campus, Ashburn, VA 
MARK D. FITZSIMMONS
, John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, IL 
DAVID R. FRANZ
, Midwest Research Institute, Frederick, MD 
LOUIS J. GROSS, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN 
JO HANDELSMAN, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 
CATO T. LAURENCIN, 
University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 
JONATHAN D. MORENO
, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
ROBERT M. NEREM
, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 
CAMILLE PARMESAN, 
University of Texas, Austin, TX MURIEL E. POSTON, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, NY 
ALISON G. POWER, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY BRUCE W. STILLMAN
, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 
CYNTHIA WOLBERGER
, Johns Hopkins University Sch
ool of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
MARY WOOLLEY
, Research!America, Alexandria, VA 
  STAFF  FRANCES E. SHARPLES
, Director JO L. HUSBANDS
, Scholar/Senior Project Director 
KATHERINE BOWMAN
, Senior Program Officer 
MARILEE K. SHELTON-DAVENPORT
, Senior Program Officer 
INDIA HOOK-BARNARD
, Program Officer 
ANNA FARRAR
, Financial Associate 
CARL-GUSTAV ANDERSON
, Senior Program Assistant 
AMANDA L. MAZZAWI
, Senior Program Assistant 
SAYYEDA AYESHA AHMED
, Program Assistant 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance 
of science and technology and to their use for th
e general welfare.  Upon the authority of the 
charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, 
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to 
advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is 
president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
 The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel orga
nization of outstanding engineers.  It is 
autonomous in its administration and in the selec
tion of its members, sharing with the National 
Academy of Sciences the responsibility for a
dvising the federal government.  The National 
Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer
ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes th
e superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. 
Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering. 

 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to 
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health of the public.  
The Institute acts under the responsibility given to 
the National Academy of Sciences by its congressiona
l charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to id
entify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is 
president of the Institute of Medicine. 
 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 
furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, 
the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Scien
ces and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  
The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph 
J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National 

Research Council.  www.national-academies.org 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular DynamicsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 APPENDIX F ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF REPORT REVIEWER 
 This report has been reviewed in draft form 
by an individual chosen for his perspective 
and technical expertise, in accordance with
 procedures approved by the NRC's Report 
Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institut
ion in making its published report as sound as 
possible and to ensure that the report m
eets institutional standards for objectivity, 
evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential to protect the 
integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individual for his review of this report:  
Sean Eddy, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Janelia Farm Research Campus 
 
Although the reviewer listed above has provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, he was not asked to endorse the conclusions. In addition, he was asked to ensure that an independent examination of th
is report was carried out in accordance with 
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution. 
