DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13076Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices:Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and ResearchGaps90 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-18513-4 | DOI 10.17226/13076Committee on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: CurrentKnowledge and Research Gaps; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board;Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilPublic Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: 
Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, N.W.
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Govern-
ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the 
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer
-ing, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the Department of Homeland
 Security 
with assistance from the National Science Foundation under award number 
IIS
-095654. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed 
in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily re˚ect the views 
of the organizations that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number
-13: 978
-0-309
-18513
-4International Standard Book Number
-10: 0
-309
-18513
-0Cover:
 Wireless tower with radio waves. Used with the permission of Shutterstock 
Images, image ID 66493861.
This report is available from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20001 
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Lockbox 285
Washington, DC 20055
(800) 624
-6242
(202) 334
-3313 (in the Washington metropolitan area)
Internet: http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2011 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonpro˜t, self
-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON PUB
LIC
 R
ESPONSE
 TO
 A
LERTS
 AND
 WARNIN
GS ON
 MO
BILE
 DE
VICES
: CU
RRENT
 KNOWLED
GE AND
 R
ESEARCH
 GAPS
ELLIS STANLEY, Dewberry LLC, Western Emergency Management 
Services, 
Co-Chair
JEANNETTE N.R. SUTTON, University of Colorado at Colorado 
Springs, 
Co-Chair
LOUISE COMFORT, University of Pittsburgh
JOHN HARRALD, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
RICHARD G. MUTH, State of Maryland Emergency Management 
Agency
DAVID ROPEIK, Ropeik & Associates
JOHN H. SORENSEN, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMP
UTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMM
UNICATIONS 
BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Sun Labs, 
Chair 
PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE, Hewlett Packard Company 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University 
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
JOHN E. KELLY III, IBM Research
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University 
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study 
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 
WILLIAM H. PRESS, University of Texas, Austin 
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Yahoo! Research 
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research 
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc. 
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Silver Lake Partners
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc. 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
EMILY ANN MEYER, Program Of˜cer 
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˜cer 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
ENITA A. WILLIAMS, Associate Program Of˜cer
For more information on CSTB, see its website at 
 http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, National Research Council, 
500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334
-2605, 
or e
-mail the CSTB at 
cstb@nas.ed
u.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
This report presents a summary of the Workshop on Public Response 
to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Current Knowledge and 
Research Gaps, held April 13 and 14, 2010, in Washington, D.C., under the 
auspices of the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Committee on Public 
Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Current Knowledge 
and Research Gaps. The complete statement of task for the committee is 
provided in Box P.1. 
The workshop was structured to gather inputs and insights from social 
science researchers, technologists, emergency management professionals, 
and other experts knowledgeable about how the public responds to alerts 
and warnings, focusing speci˜cally on how the public responds to mobile 
alerting. 
Although this document was prepared by the above
-named commit
-tee on the basis of the workshop presentations and discussions, it does 
not, in keeping with NRC guidelines for developing report summaries, 
necessarily re˚ect a consensus view of the committee. Additionally, these 
summaries should not be taken as remarks made solely by the
 scheduled 
session speakers, because the discussions included remarks offered by 
others in attendance, and the summaries of the workshop sessions pro
-vided in the chapters of this report are a digest both of the presenta
-tions and of the subsequent discussion. In keeping with the workshop™s 
purpose of exploring an emerging topic, this summary does not contain 
˜ndings or recommendations.
Preface
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 PREFACE
This workshop report reveals (1) the extensive body of knowledge 
regarding alerts and warnings and the public response and action before, 
during, and after emergency situations; and (2) the many questions that 
arise when considering how to apply this knowledge to the Commercial 
Mobile Alert Service (CMAS), which is currently under developmentŠ
and more generally to the use of mobile and other new information and 
communications technologies for alerts and warnings.
Chapter 1, which covers the ˜rst two sessions of the workshop, pro
-vides a brief overview of the CMAS program and its objectives, as well 
as background information on the alerting process and public response. 
Chapters 2 through 5 provide integrated summaries of the session pre
-sentations and the discussion that followed, organized by topic. Chap
-ter 6 summarizes the research questions identi˜ed during the breakout 
sessions and subsequent plenary discussion. Appendix A presents the 
workshop agenda, and speaker biosketches are provided in Appendix B. 
Appendix C provides the biosketches of the committee and staff.
Ellis Stanley and Jeannette N.R. Sutton,
Co-Chairs
Committee on Public Response to 
Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: 
Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
BOX P.1
 Statement of Task
The Department of Homeland Security™s (DHS™s) Commercial Mobile Alert 
Service (CMAS) program is intended to provide alerts and warnings to over 
80% of the American population on mobile devices (cell phones and pagers). 
An ad hoc committee will plan and conduct a public workshop to examine cur
-rent knowledge and research on how the public responds to alerts and warn
-ings with a speci˜c focus on mobile alerting, examine related work on mobile 
and text messaging, and identify research gaps relevant to the CMAS program. 
The workshop will feature invited presentations and discussion. An unedited 
 
transcript of the event will be provided to DHS and placed in the project™s public 
access ˜le. A workshop report will be issued. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Robert Kraut, Carnegie Mellon University,
Leslie Luke, San Diego County Of˜ce of Emergency Management,
Dennis Mileti, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Helena Mitchell, Georgia Institute of Technology,
George Percivall, Open Geospatial Consortium, Inc.,
Ramesh Rao, University of California, San Diego, and
Michelle Wood, California State University, Fullerton.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-tents, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its release. The 
review of this report was overseen by David Mendonça, Rensselaer Poly
-technic Institute. Appointed by the National Research Council, he was 
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS
responsible for making certain that an independent examination of this 
report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and 
that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for 
the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee 
and the institution.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
1  
OVERVIEW
 AND
 C
ONTE
XT: T
HE
 C
OMMERCIAL
 M
OBILE 
1 ALERT
 S
ERVICE
, 
THE
 W
ARNING
 P
ROCESS
, 
AND
 P
UBLIC
 RESPONSE
 Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS), 2
 Research on Effective Alerts and Warnings and Implications 
 of the Research for CMAS, 6
 Misconceptions About Responses to Alerts and Warnings, 11
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 12
2  
CURRENT
 U
SE
 OF
 T
EXT M
ESSAGES
 FOR
 A
LERTS
 AND
  14
 WARNINGS
: EX
PERIENCES
 AND
 L
ESSONS
 L
EARNED
 Subscription, 15
 Message Content, 16
 Use of Multiple Methods to Ensure Receipt and to Cope with 
Network Congestion, 17
 Operational Issues, 18
 Education of the Public, 19
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 20
3  
COMMUNICATING
 D
URING
 A C
RISIS 
21
 Crisis Communication Versus Risk Communication, 21
 Old Media Versus New Media, 22
 Use of Social Media to Fill Communications Gaps, 24
 Synergistic Use of Multiple Media, 24
Contents
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 CONTENTS
 Information Sharing and Gathering, 25
 Microblogging, 27
 Other Next
-Generation Crisis Communication Tools, 28
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 29
4 PUBLIC
 E
DUCATION
 AND
 T
RAINING 
31
 An Example: The Great California ShakeOut, 31
 Building an Educational Campaign, 34
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 35
5 COMMUNICATING
 WITH
 A
T-
RISK
 P
OPULATIONS 
37
 Use of Wireless Devices by People with Disabilities, 37
 Special Considerations for People Who Are Blind or Have 
 Low Vision, 39
 Special Considerations for Those with Impaired Hearing, 39
 Special Considerations with Respect to Disabilities in the 
 Elderly Population, 42
 Gender
-Based Considerations, 43
 Considerations Related to Race and Ethnicity, 44
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 45
6 RESEARCH
 G
APS 
46
 Research Opportunities, 46
 Implementation Challenges, 50
 Future Tools for Alerts, 51
APPENDI
XES
A Workshop Agenda
 55
B Biosketches of Workshop Speakers
 59
C Committee and Staff Biosketches
 73
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1This report presents a summary of the Workshop on Public Response 
to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Current Knowledge and 
Research Gaps, held in April 2010 in Washington, D.C., under the aus
-pices of the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Committee on Public 
Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Current Knowledge 
and Research Gaps. The workshop explored what is known about how 
the public responds to alerts (an 
alert
 indicates that something signi˜cant 
has happened or may happen) and warnings (a 
warning
 typically follows 
an alert and provides more detailed information indicating what protec
-tive action should be taken) and the implications of what is known about 
such public responses with regard to the U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security™s (DHS™s) Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS).
1 CMAS is 
currently being developed to provide a national capability to deliver brief 
text alerts to cellular telephone subscribers.
After the welcome and opening comments, the ˜rst session of the work
-shop introduced CMAS, and the second session provided an overview of 
what is known about how people respond to alerts and warnings. 
In the ˜rst session, Denis Gusty, DHS, discussed the origins and 
current status of CMAS and the program™s requirements. In the second 
session, Peter White, AT&T, discussed the use of text messages for alert
-ing and the technical and operational considerations that factored into 
1 
 The Commercial Mobile Alert Service is sometimes de˜ned as the Commercial Mobile 
Alert System.
1Overview and Context: 
 The Commercial Mobile Alert 
Service, the Warning Process, 
and Public Response
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
planning for CMAS. Michael Lindell, Texas A&M University, provided 
an overview of what is known from past research about the process of 
sending alerts and warnings and how people respond to them, and Joseph 
Trainor, University of Delaware, went on to debunk key misconceptions 
about the public response to alerts and warnings and about other behav
-ior during a disaster. Garry Briese, Briese and Associates, moderated the 
second session and commented on the use of CMAS to deliver alerts. This 
chapter provides an integrated summary of these presentations and the 
discussions that followed, organized by topic.
COMMERCIAL MO
BILE ALERT SER
VICE (CMAS)
Why CMAS?
Regarding the wide use of cellular telephones and other mobile 
wireless devices in the United States, CTIAŠThe Wireless Association
® reported more than 290 million U.S. subscribers by mid
-2010, a greater 
than 90 percent penetration rate.
2 Cellular networks thus provide an 
attractive opportunity for delivering alerts and warnings, complement
-ing the mechanisms used todayŠbroadcast radio and television, cable 
television, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
weather radio, reverse
-911 (which allows jurisdictions to dial a list of 
telephone numbers and play recorded messages), and sirens. Cell phones 
are generally kept close at hand in a variety of settings; their users can be 
reached on the street, in automobiles, and at home or at work, and audio 
alerts can even awaken people when they are sleeping. Also, the ability to 
target messages to a cell phone™s actual location makes it possible to target 
more precisely those individuals who would be most at risk in a crisis 
situation. Cell phones thus seem well positioned to ˜ll gaps in message
-receipt coverage by traditional systemsŠas well as additional gaps that 
may open up as the reach of traditional broadcast media diminishes. 
Establishment of CMAS
The Warning, Alert, and Response Network (WARN) Act of 2006,
3 which establishes a national all
-hazards alert system and calls for the use 
of multiple technologies, including wireless telecommunications, was 
2 
 Statistics from CTIA Semi
-Annual Wireless Industry Survey, available at http://www.
ctia.org/advocacy/research/index.cfm/AID/10316; and CTIA Wireless Quickfacts, avail
-able at http://www.ctia.org/advocacy/research/index.cfm/aid/10323. Note that a penetra
-tion rate calculated, as here, by dividing subscribers by the U.S. population is likely to be an 
overestimate, because some individuals may have multiple subscriptions.
3 
 Public Law 109
-347.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND CONTEXT
 3motivated in part by a desire to leverage new technologies to increase 
the reach of alerts and warnings.
4 As required under the WARN Act, the 
Commercial Mobile Service Alert Advisory Committee (CMSAAC) was 
established in late 2006 by the Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) to engage stakeholders in the development of initial policy and 
procedures for one component of that national systemŠthe use of cellular 
telephones for alerts. CMSAAC, composed of representatives from service 
providers, handset vendors, emergency personnel, and industry groups, 
issued its ˜rst report in 2007, de˜ning CMAS™s basic system architecture 
and establishing technical standards and operating procedures.
5 Following the issuance of the CMSAAC report, the CMAS program 
was established within the Department of Homeland Security. The task 
of validating the CMSAAC recommendations was assigned to DHS™s Sci
-ence and Technology Directorate, along with an examination of related 
issues such as the state of knowledge about the likely public response 
to alerts and warnings on mobile devices. The workshop summarized in 
this report was convened as one element of DHS™s examination of public 
response (see the statement of task for this study in Box P.1 in the Preface 
of this report).
Overview of CMAS
Three types of alerts were de˜ned by the WARN Act of 2006 for issu
-ance by CMAS: 
1. Presidential alerts,
 to be issued by the president when there is a 
national emergency or threat (note that a presidential alert, for which the 
Emergency Alert System [EAS] and its predecessors for communicating 
with the public in a national emergency were originally implemented, has 
never been issued); 
2. Imminent threat alerts,
 to be issued when there is an immediate 
threat to people or property, such as a tornado; and 
4 
 The use of multiple new technologies for alerts and warnings was initiated under Execu
-tive Order 13407: ﬁPublic Alert and Warning System,ﬂ issued June 26, 2006. This executive 
order established the Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS), which will serve 
as a modernization and integration of the nation™s alert and warning infrastructure, of which 
CMAS will be one component.
5 
 The recommendations of the CMSAAC appear in its draft report: Commercial Mobile 
Service Alert Advisory Committee, Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 
Commercial 
Mobile Alert Service Architecture and Requirements,
 PMG
-0035, FCC, Washington, D.C., 2007; 
and in FCC, ﬁNotice of Proposed Rule Making on the Matter of Commercial Mobile Alert 
System,ﬂ 
Public Safety Docket No. 07
-287, 2008.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
3. Child abduction emergency alerts (also known as AMBER Alerts),
 to be 
issued in the case of a child who has been abducted or who has run away. 
Alert system subscriptions can either be opt
-in (one must register to 
receive messages) or opt
-out (one must take action to not be registered 
automatically). CMAS will be an opt
-out system; cellular cu
stomers would 
receive imminent threat alerts and AMBER Alerts unless they opted out. 
It will not be possible to opt out of receiving presidential alerts. Carrier 
participation is voluntary; to date the major cellular carriers have signed 
on to the program. 
The deployment of CMAS requires new cellular telephone software, 
which in most cases means the purchase of new handsets, although 
some phones may be ˜eld
-upgradable. Once the service is deployed, 
carriers will be required to notify subscribers if their handsets are CMAS
- 
compatible and to place labels on new handsets indicating whether they 
support CMAS or not.
CMAS
-compatible handsets will use a special alert tone for CMAS 
messagesŠto draw attention to the messages and to distinguish them 
from other messages. This tone will override the normal ringer
-volume 
settings. A unique vibration cadence will also be used to reach hearing
-impaired users. 
The CMAS architecture (Figure 1.1) provides for alerts to be issued 
at the federal, state, tribal, and local levels. Alerts are to be transmitted 
by the originating entities to a Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA)
-administrated gateway for approval, formatting, and transmis
-sion to participating cellular service providersŠwhich will then transmit 
the alert over their networks.
The message format de˜ned for CMAS was based on prior work to 
de˜ne a standard alert
-message format, the Common Alerting Protocol. 
This format, which speci˜es the geographical area affected, the recom
-mended action, an expiration time, and the sending agency, is designed 
to allow messages to increase interoperability with other alert systems. 
Additionally, the text of the CMAS itself (i.e., not including the header) is 
limited to 90 characters. 
CMAS will use a cell broadcast technology known as short message 
service
-cell broadcast (SMS
-CB) to transmit messages. This technology 
is different from the more familiar short message service (SMS) used to 
exchange text messages between subscribers. (SMS is also used for alerts 
and warnings; these opt
-in text alert systems have been introduced by 
a number of organizations and jurisdictions.) Cellular broadcast offers 
two principal advantages over SMS. First, a single broadcast message 
can reach each active cell phone within range of a given cellular tower, 
reducing the network capacity required for message delivery compared to 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND CONTEXT
 5FI
GU
RE 1.1
 Commercial Mobile Alert System (CMAS) reference architecture. 
NOTE: EOC, Emergency Operations Center; FEMA, Federal Emergency Manage-
ment Agency; NCE, non
-commercial educational; PBS, Public Broadcasting Ser
-vice; DTV, digital television; CMSP, commercial mobile service provider. 
that required for sending messages to each subscriber. Moreover, because 
 
cellular broadcast uses a data channel separate from that used for other 
messages and calls, it is unaffected by network congestion. This is impor
-tant because cellular networks can become damaged or overloaded in the 
very crisis situations in which alerts are most needed. The second prin
-cipal advantage of cellular broadcast over SMS is that, because messages 
can be localized to cellular towers, alerts can be geographically targeted, 
and targeted by actual subscriber location rather than by telephone area 
code or home service area. In the case of CMAS, this capability is to be 
used to localize messages by county or equivalent jurisdiction.
6 The CMSAAC report
7 referred to above recommends the use of 
 
cellular broadcast technology because of its immunity to network con
-gestion. The same report also cautions about the potential for overloading 
the network if broadcast messages are allowed to include links (i.e., Web 
uniform resource locators [URLs]) to more detailed information. Includ
-ing such links would, of course, be an obvious way to provide more 
information than can be contained in a CMAS message. However, this 
6 
 The localization is based on standardized codes for county and equivalent geographical 
entities previously de˜ned in the now
-withdrawn Federal Information Processing Standards 
(FIPS) 6
-4 standard and now de˜ned by the American National Standards Institute INCITS 
31:200x standard.
7 
 CMSAAC, PMG
-0035, 2007; and FCC, Public Safety Docket No. 07
-287, 2008.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
approach was rejected by the CMSAAC out of concern that the practice 
could quickly lead to network overload. 
The implications of this recommendation in light of what is known 
about the public response to alerts were discussed at the workshop. Sev
-eral participants observed that it is well known that people often seek to 
con˜rm alerts before taking action. It seems likely that people receiving 
an alert on a cell phone would seek additional information by texting 
or placing telephone calls to family or friends, using social networks, 
browsing news Web sites, or searching onlineŠactivities that might end 
up using more capacity than would be needed if people followed a link 
to of˜cial information. It was further observed that the contrast might be 
even starker if the of˜cial information were especially designed to spare 
network capacity, such as through little or no use of images and other 
multimedia content. The cumulative effect on network capacity depends 
on multiple factors, including the relative likelihood of people™s using 
the network either to download of˜cial supplemental information or to 
seek additional information independently, and the respective network 
 
capacity consumed by each activity. 
The CMAS program is envisioned by DHS and CMSAAC to be rolled 
out in ˚exible iterations, allowing for fuller testing of the system and also 
for the incorporation of new technologies or other enhancements. The ini
-tial phase will use English only, potentially creating challenges for those 
with limited pro˜ciency in the English language. The sending of messages 
in non
-English languages is being evaluated by DHS™s Science and Tech
-nology Directorate and CMSAAC for future iterations of CMAS.
RESEARCH ON EFFECTI
VE ALERTS AND WARNIN
GS AND IMPLICATIONS OF THE RESEARCH FOR CMAS
Conceptually, alerts and warnings are generally viewed as distinct.
8 Alerts
 are designed to indicate that something signi˜cant has happened 
or may happen. 
Warnings,
 which typically follow alerts, provide more 
detailed information, indicating who is at risk, where the risk resides, who 
is sending the warning message, and what protective actions need to be 
taken. The distinction is also useful because some technologies are better 
suited for the delivery of alerts (e.g., sirens or CMAS) whereas others (e.g., 
broadcast radio and television) are better able to deliver the more detailed 
messages needed to provide warnings. However, from the standpoint 
of an individual receiving a message, the distinction may not always be 
apparent or even relevant. 
8 
 The focus of this report is on alerts and warnings. Similar terms are used in related con
-texts, such as the watches and warnings that are issued by the National Weather Service.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND CONTEXT
 7The Warning Process
People receive alerts and warnings about emergencies in a variety of 
ways, including print and electronic media and face
-to
-face communica
-tion. Each of these channels of communication has distinct
 characteristicsŠ
such as the rate and precision of dissemination, penetration into normal 
activities, speci˜city and distortion, and feedbackŠthat dictate how effec
-tive they will be in particular circumstances or in reaching particular seg
-ments of the population. 
Sirens, for example, provide a very limited amount of information 
but can be effective at getting people™s attention and have broad reach, 
notably to people who are outdoors or who otherwise do not have access 
to broadcast media or telephones. Weather radios provide much more 
detailed information than sirens can, for example, but the message deliv
-ery depends both on people™s owning specialized equipment and on that 
equipment™s being switched on. Citizens often relay information received 
on their own alert systems, which frequently leads to a distortion of the 
initial message. Face
-to
-face communication does have the advantage, 
however, of allowing the sender (e.g., a neighbor, coworker, or friend) to 
verify immediately that the message was received.
Public of˜cials often use multiple outlets to ensure wide dissemina
-tion of messages. One reason for doing so relates to the different charac
-teristics of the different communication channels. For example, because 
weather forecasts allow alerts and warnings to be issued days in advance, 
many information outlets, including print media, are useful for carrying 
messages about hurricanes or winter storms. By contrast, tornado warn
-ings are very time
-sensitive, and so sirens and other immediate alerting 
systems are required for these hazards. Not everyone has access to a par
-ticular single information source; for example, not everyone happens to be 
watching television when alerting messages are shown, and not everyone 
can hear sirens. Finally, people have individual preferences about how 
they want to receive information. 
A model for an alert and warning system includes event detection, 
message dissemination (alerts and warnings), message receipt, and 
response. (Box 1.1 focuses on the last two of these elementsŠmessage 
receipt and public response.
9) This model takes into account a number of 
factors associated with the alert or warning, including the source, access 
to and preferences about communications channels, the message, sender 
and receiver characteristics, and social and environmental cues, each of 
which affects how people receive, process, and act on the information. 
9 
 The issuance of an ﬁall
-clearﬂ message is sometimes considered the ˜nal stage of the 
warning process.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
BOX 1.1
 The Warning Process: Message Receipt and Response by the Public 
Below is a list of steps that the affected population takes during a crisis or 
emergency following the receipt of an alert and/or warning message. 
Ł Receive the warning
ŠPeople must physically receive a warning.
Ł Understand the warning
ŠOnce people receive a warning they must be 
able to process the message and understand what it means.
Ł Believe the warning is credible
ŠPeople must believe that the source of the 
warning is reliable and the threat could materialize.
Ł Con˜rm the threat
ŠPeople must take steps in order to verify that the 
threat described in the warning is real.
Ł Personalize the threat
ŠPeople must believe that the threat is something 
that can potentially affect them.
Ł Determine whether or not protective action is needed
ŠPeople need to 
decide if they need to take action.
Ł Determine whether protective action is feasible
ŠPeople need to decide if 
they are able to take action.
Ł Decide if you have the resources to take protective action
ŠFinally people 
need to have the resources to actually do what is required.
SOURCE:
 Reprinted
 with
 permission
 from
 Joseph
 Trainer.
 2010.
 Myths
 and
 Misconceptions
 Surrounding People, Alerts, and Warnings.
 Presentation at Workshop
 on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings
 on Mobile Devices, Washington,
 DC, April 13; based on earlier work in D. Mileti and J. Sorensen, Communication of Emergency Public Warnings,
 Oak Ridge National Laboratory,
 ORNL-6609, 1990.Consider, for example, the process of delivering tsunami warnings: 
(1) a warning center detects an earthquake with the potential to generate 
a tsunami; (2) the warning center transmits this information to a variety 
of receivers, including government agencies and the media; (3) some, but 
not all, of these entities receive the message; and (4) of those that receive 
the message, not all transmit it to members of the public. Ultimately, some 
citizens will receive the message from multiple sources, but some will not 
receive the message at allŠand only some recipients of the message will 
take prompt action. Flash ˚oods exemplify events with such rapid onset 
that there may not be time for an of˜cial warning message to be formu
-lated and sent. In such cases, it may be individuals in a community who 
successfully deliver timely messages and prompt appropriate action. 
People interact and make decisions during various points in the 
warning process. They must be exposed to the message, comprehend 
the message, and then make a decision about what protective action to 
take. People™s decisions about protective action are often in˚uenced by 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND CONTEXT
 9situational factorsŠfor example, do they have the appropriate supplies 
for sheltering in place or evacuating? However, most often people™s ˜rst 
action is to search for additional information to con˜rm the alert or warn
-ing. In such situations, people also consider social cues such as whether 
their neighbors are evacuating or whether local businesses are closing, 
and environmental cues such as whether they can see evidence of the 
reported hazard. They may also turn to other warning sources such as 
radio, print, or online information for con˜rmation.
The source of an alert or warning has a marked in˚uence on people™s 
perception of its validity and thus on their decisions regarding what 
protective action, if any, they will take. If the information source is not 
identi˜ed in the message, the message is unlikely to be deemed as trust
-worthy. Several factors affect the public™s view of trustworthinessŠfor 
example, does the source have appropriate expertise and does the source 
have a protective responsibility? Therefore, it is important to recognize 
that the public will rely on different information sources in different 
types of emergency situations. For example, in an incident involving 
water
-supply contamination, the public may respond most effectively to 
warnings from the water utility. Similarly, a weather alert issued by the 
National Weather Service is generally viewed by the public as having a 
high degree of
 credibility. In other situations, such as those for less famil
-iar hazards (e.g., water contamination), the responsible party may not be 
the most trusted source, and the public will rely chie˚y on local and state 
government information sources. 
Effective Warning Messages
For warnings, there is a sizable body of social science research
10
 on 
what constitutes effective warning messages, which include the essential 
elements listed in Box 1.2.
11
 Other relevant information in addition to the 
essential elements includes the of˜cial actions that have been taken or are 
in progress, sources of of˜cial assistance, and sources for further of˜cial 
information. 
In contrast, much less is known about effective content for alerts 
because traditional alert technologiesŠsuch as sirens and weather radio 
10
  The extensive ﬁAnnotated Bibliography for Public Risk Communication on Warnings for 
Public Protective Actions Response and Public Educationﬂ was compiled by Dennis Mileti, 
Rachel Bandy, Linda B. Bourque, Aaron Johnson, Megumi Kano, Lori Peck, Jeannette Sutton, 
and Michele Wood and is available at www.colorado.edu/hazards/publications/informer/
infrmr2/pubhazbibann.pdf. 
11
  Much of this section, including the information in Box 1.2, draws on the work of
 Dennis 
Mileti and his colleagues, which was provided to committee members as background infor
-mation leading up to the workshop.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
BOX 1.2
 Essential Elements of Effective Warnings
For warnings, there is a sizable body of social science research on what con
-stitutes effective warning messages. These key elements are listed below.
The message should beŠ
Ł Clear, with no jargon;
Ł Speci˜c in its instructions;
Ł Accurate and truthful;
Ł Certain, using authoritative language; and
Ł Consistent, also explaining any changes from past messages.
The message should contain the following information:
Ł What exact action should be taken;
Ł When to take action, including when action should start and when it 
should be completed;
Ł Where the hazard is taking place, in order to de˜ne clearly to whom the 
message is directed;
Ł Why protective action is necessary, including consequences if action is 
not taken; and
Ł Who is sending the message.
The message should be con˜rmed as follows:
Ł Through frequent repetition, and 
Ł Through issuance over multiple communication paths.
SOURCE:
 Drawn
 from
 the
 work
 of
 Dennis
 Mileti
 and
 colleagues
 provided
 to
 committee
 members
 as background information prior to the workshop.alertsŠare only able to convey a very small amount of information. 
Such alerts require signi˜cant public education prior to a hazardous 
event so that populations at risk can translate tonal alerts to protective 
actions. Some recent alerting systems, such as the SMS text messages 
being provided today by many local jurisdictions, are able to provide 
added content, but because they are new and subscribed to by only a 
limited subset of the population, there has been relatively little experi
-ence with their use in disasters and thus fairly little is actually known 
about how to formulate effective messages. 
As a result, past research and lessons learned are not fully translatable 
to the question of what would constitute effective content for CMAS alerts, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND CONTEXT
 11
because CMAS messages will contain more information than conventional 
alerts provide but much less information than conventional warnings offer. 
Moreover, CMAS raises novel issues such as the potential advantages as 
well as drawbacks in providing links (URLs) to associated warnings and 
other information. Chapter 6 discusses these issues in more detail. 
MISCONCEPTIONS A
BOUT RESPONSES 
TO ALERTS AND WARNIN
GSClassic examples of misconceptions about people™s behavior following 
disasters include the idea that there is looting, price gouging, panic, and 
role abandonment. Such common assumptions about people™s behavior 
are often at odds with what has been learned from post
-disaster research 
about how people actually behave. 
Following is a non
-exhaustive sampling of misconceptions relevant 
to alerts and warnings: 
Ł Misconception: Alerts cause mass panic.
 As a result of this miscon
-ception, warnings are often delayed until they have become absolutely 
necessary, in order to avoid panic. In fact, research has shown that what 
 
sociologists call 
normalcy bias
Šthat is, the underestimation of the pos
-sibility of the disaster occurring and of its possible effectsŠis a greater 
risk. For example, consider the last time that you heard a ˜re alarm 
soundŠmost likely people did not immediately evacuate the building in 
which the alarm rang.
Ł Misconception: People who do not comply with alerts are either irrational 
or stupid.
 Research shows that alerting messages received by the public are 
just one type of input important to decision
-making processes. Messages 
are not directives, and they are normally not immediately complied with. 
The warning process (Box 1.1) includes physically receiving the warning, 
understanding the warning, believing its credibility, con˜rming and per
-sonalizing it, and determining what action to take.
Ł Misconception: Technical terms are intuitive.
 Terms that an emergency 
manager may believe to be intuitive may not be understood by a signi˜
-cant portion of the public. Consider, for example, the difference between 
a 
tornado warning
 (which means that there is imminent danger and one 
should take shelter immediately) and a 
tornado watch
 (which means that 
conditions for a tornado are favorable and one should prepare to take 
shelter).
 Ł Misconception: Response to alerts is binary; either compliance or non
-compliance occurs
. The reality is that people may take many different 
actions in response to alerts, actions that are shaped by the steps outlined 
in Box 1.1. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Ł Misconception: Individual messages constitute the complete ﬁsystem.ﬂ
 Each individual alert or warning should actually be thought of as con
-tributing to a larger, integrated context. It is important to understand not 
only the meaning of a particular message but also how it relates to earlier 
alerts and warnings and to information available from other sources. 
Ł Misconception: Technology delivery systems are neutral or value-free.
 It 
is important to recognize that there are distinct characteristics and differ
-ences between population groups that own and use particular technolo
-gies and population groups that do not own and use those technologies. 
The characteristics and differences among groups include such factors as 
income and age. 
Ł Misconception: One-size-˜ts-all solutions.
 No single system will reach 
the entire population or be suited for all circumstances. Technology, lan
-guage, type of hazard, and regional subculture are among the many 
 
factors that should be taken into consideration.
Note that the identi˜cation of the statements above as misconcep
-tions does not mean that they never occur. For example, contrary to the 
common misconception, looting after disasters rarely happens; however, 
there are exceptions, such as the pervasive looting that took place after 
Hurricane Hugo severely damaged St. Croix in 1989. The exceptions are 
associated with special circumstancesŠin this case to extreme differences 
in economic and political status and the release of years of political and 
social tension following the disaster. 
OBSER
VATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
In the discussion following the panel presentations at the workshop, 
participants offered a number of observations about the role of CMAS in 
a national all
-hazards warning system, including the following:
Ł Alerts and warnings systems are sociotechnical systems that require 
a thorough understanding not only of the technology but also of the inter
-actions among detection, dissemination, and public response.
Ł CMAS will be only one of many sources of alerts and warnings and 
should be thought of as a new and useful component of what must be an 
integrated system.
Ł Like other capabilities for delivering alerts and warnings, CMAS 
will have both advantages and limitations. CMAS will allow messages 
to be geographically targeted with some precision, and it will provide a 
speci˜c message directly to the public without opportunities for distor
-tion. It also has a potentially wide reach, given that many people keep 
wireless devices within 3 feet of them all the timesŠand will be especially 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW AND CONTEXT
 13
important for reaching households that do not have conventional land
-line telephone service. Among the limitations of CMAS are the brevity 
of the message content and the fact that there is no provision for receipt 
veri˜cation.
Ł Localization of CMAS messages by county or equivalent jurisdic
-tion might be too coarse
-grained, especially in the case of large counties 
and highly localized events. Some tighter localization may be possible, 
but this would be constrained by the size of the regions potentially served 
by individual cellular towers and their overlapping coverage.
12
Ł The cellular networks on which CMAS will depend are suscep
-tible to damage in certain types of disasters, and the message length of 
CMAS is limited. Thus it will be important to educate people to use older 
technologies such as broadcast radio and television in addition to mobile 
devices in order to obtain additional information if needed, or as primary 
sources of information if cellular networks are not available. 
Ł Further examination of the CMSAAC recommendation
13
 not to 
include URLs in CMAS messages is warranted. CMSAAC rightly cau
-tions about the potential for network overload in emergencies. However, 
if a CMAS message does not point people to an authoritative source of 
additional information, it is possible that the network will be overloaded 
as people place calls, browse news Web sites, or search for information 
to con˜rm an alert or warning and obtain additional information. In par
-ticular, it is worth considering whether a link to a site carefully designed 
to minimize network traf˜c might cause less congestion than the informa
-tion seeking and resulting demands on network capacity that would take 
place without such a link. 
12
  Tests conducted in 2010 by the County of San Diego, State of California, and Sprint, 
for example, found that localization was more dif˜cult along the coast where the density 
of cellular towers was highest and there was considerable overlap in the areas that they 
served. Personal communication with workshop participants Leslie Luke and Stephen Rae, 
County of San Diego.
13
  CMSAAC, PMG
-0035, 2007; and FCC, Public Safety Docket No. 07
-287, 2008.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
2Current Use of Text Messages for 
 Alerts and Warnings: 
 Experiences and Lessons Learned
Many communities, universities, and other organizations have 
deployed text alerting systems using short message service (SMS) and/or 
e-mail to supplement other avenues for conveying alerting messages to 
the public. Many of the lessons learned from these systems may be appli
-cable to the Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS) program, although 
CMAS will have some distinct features not found in the other systems: 
(1) CMAS will use cellular broadcast rather than SMS or e
-mail, (2) all 
cellular subscribers of participating carriers who use CMAS
-compliant 
telephones will receive alerts unless they opt out, and (3) CMAS will use 
the cellular network to target messages geographically based on the actual 
location of the recipient.
The District of Columbia established a text alerting system, DC Alerts, 
to deal not only with typical severe
-weather warnings but also with 
road closings and other security measures that are frequently in force in 
the nation™s capital. Considerable effort was made in planning for the 
service™s rolloutŠan effort that included in
-depth training, exercises, and 
pilots, and the involvement of community organizations for obtaining 
initial and ongoing feedback.
Exemplifying another emergency noti˜cation systemŠin the wake of 
the crisis that occurred on the campus of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute 
and State University (Virginia Tech) on April 16, 2007, when a student 
opened ˜re, the establishment by Virginia Tech of a robust emergency 
noti˜cation system became a high priority. Indeed, spurred by this incident 
and as mandated by the Higher Education Opportunity Act of 2008Š
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USE OF TEXT MESSAGES FOR ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 15
which requires the immediate noti˜cation to campus communities upon 
con˜rmation of signi˜cant emergencies or dangerous situations
1Šalerting 
systems have been instituted at colleges and universities nationwide. The 
Virginia Tech Emergency Noti˜cation System (ENS) delivers text messages 
by way of SMS and e
-mail and delivers voice messages by way of cellular 
and landline telephones. It also provides information on a Web site.
2 In the workshop session on the current use of text messages for alerts 
and warnings, Barbara Childs
-Pair, BDR, Inc. (and former director of the 
D.C. Emergency Management Agency), gave a presentation on lessons 
learned during the rollout of the District of Columbia™s alerting system, 
and Michael Mulhare, Virginia Tech, discussed Virginia Tech™s experience 
with its campus alerting system. Darrell Darnell, White House Of˜ce for 
Critical Infrastructure Protection and Resilience Policy and Strategy, served 
as the session moderator. The sections that follow provide an integrated 
summary of these presentations and the discussions that followed, orga
-nized by topic. They draw on the Virginia Tech and District of Columbia 
examples to examine design, implementation, messaging, and operational 
aspects of alerting systems as they relate to the public response. 
SUB
SCRIPTION
Virginia Tech™s system is opt
-outŠthat is, employees are automati
-cally enrolled, and students are enrolled when they register for classes 
unless they actively opt out of the system. Registrants can also provide 
up to three different telephone numbers at which they may be contacted. 
The system has approximately 55,000 subscribers, or about 85 percent of 
the student, faculty, and staff population. 
DC Alerts is an opt
-in system, with registration offered through a Web 
site. The system allows registrants to choose what types of alerts they 
want to receiveŠthose involving severe weather, transportation disrup
-tions, interruptions of utility services, government or school closings, 
AMBER Alerts, or other breaking news and informationŠand to limit 
alerts according to the time of day or neighborhood in which situations 
occur. Registrants can also sign up to see information for particular com
-munities and districts regarding crime. (During registration, users can 
also ask to receive messages in Spanish.) 
Characteristically for this system, DC Alerts registration can spike 
before major events. For example, in December 2008, the month before 
the presidential inauguration, there had been 30,000 subscribers; but just 
1 
 Public Law 110
-315.
2 
 The ENS is described in detail in Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 
Emergency Noti˜cation System Protocols, 
January 2010. Blacksburg, Va. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
prior to the inauguration, on January 14, 2009, there were about 70,000 
subscribers. Within a month that number dropped to 40,000, only to start 
climbing again as the Cherry Blossom Festival approached in the spring. 
Two educational issues related to subscription were noted as being 
important to communicate to the public. First, events can occur at any 
time, and alert services are important all the time, not just during large 
events. Second, it is important for individuals to subscribe to an appropri
-ate set of alerts to ensure that they receive messages that are important for 
them to have but avoid receiving messages that they do not need. During 
registration for the alerts, people often sign up for all possible categories, 
but it is possible to tailor one™s registration for alerts to meet individual 
needs. For example, a person who commutes into the District of Columbia 
but lives in Virginia might want to register for severe
-weather alerts only 
during work hours, which the system allows. 
Subscription management is a challenge in both opt
-in and opt
-out 
systems. For example, in addition to delivering messages to people™s con
-tact telephone numbers, Virginia Tech also delivers alerts to an
 employee™s 
or a student™s university
-issued e
-mail address. This provides for a redun
-dant communications channel that helps ensure message receipt if the 
student or staff member is away from the telephone or has failed to keep 
their registered telephone number current. 
A related issue is the ability to remove inactive names from the sys
-tem, which both reduces the load on the system and prevents people 
from receiving alerts that no longer apply to them. At Virginia Tech, 
anyone not associated with the university for two consecutive semesters 
is automatically removed from the system. In the District of Columbia, 
the frequency of events encourages registrants to keep their information 
updated. However, the DC Alerts system also has numerous registrants 
who no longer live in the areaŠfor example, interns or contractors who 
may reside in the city only for a short period of time often fail to remove 
their names from the system.
MESSA
GE CONTENT
Virginia Tech alerts are focused on three key pieces of information: 
(1) the nature of the incident, (2) the location where the incident has 
occurred, and (3) the action to be taken. Often the action to be taken is 
simple, such as ﬁStay awayﬂ or ﬁStay indoors.ﬂ Virginia Tech uses sub-
sequent messages to provide additional information and to point to other 
sources of information. Developing the content of these messages is com
-plicated, and it can be dif˜cult to satisfy those receiving messages. 
The speci˜c language used in an alert can matter greatly. For example, 
the use of the word ﬁshootingﬂ in the alert sent about the 2007 incident 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USE OF TEXT MESSAGES FOR ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 17
at Virginia Tech would come under criticism later for having been too 
vagueŠthat is, had someone been shot accidentally or had a violent crime 
occurred?
3 In another incident, an alert about an escaped convict believed 
to be on campus referred to the escapee as a ﬁmurdererﬂŠlanguage that 
some criticized as being too in˚ammatory. 
At Virginia Tech, a set of message templates has been developed to 
improve the understandability of messages and to reduce the time needed 
for agreement to be reached on their formulation. These templates take 
into account 18 possible events, with two different categories of emer
-gencies. The two categories are ﬁUrgentﬂ (for situations that may pose a 
threat) and ﬁImmediateﬂ (for situations con˜rmed to pose an immediate 
threat). The predetermined messages include the number of characters 
used by each template so that one can quickly see how much additional 
information can be included in the message. (Message length is limited by 
the maximum of 160 characters allowed in an SMS message.) Also, great 
emphasis is placed on avoiding jargon in the messages so that they can 
be readily understood.
USE OF M
ULTIPLE METHODS TO ENS
URE RECEIPT 
AND TO COPE WITH NETWORK CON
GESTION
The Virginia Tech alerting system can activate several alerting methods 
simultaneously. Subscribers can designate up to three different communica
-tion methodsŠincluding as many as three telephone numbersŠto receive 
voice messages, text alerts, and e
-mail. (Allowing for three telephone num
-bers permits students to direct that alerts be sent to their parents as well.) 
Users are asked to con˜rm their receipt of messages; if a message is not 
con˜rmed, the system will attempt to reach the other registered numbers. 
A third
-party vendor coordinates the receipt of the message by cellular 
providers.
Several technologies are used to extend the Virginia Tech systemŠ
e-mails are used to send longer, more detailed messages, and displays 
that show the messages also sent by SMS are present in most classrooms. 
Other traditional alert and warning capabilities are also used, including a 
hotline number that provides recorded information, sirens, loudspeakers, 
and alerts to local media. Virginia Tech also provides desktop software 
that receives messages by means of an Internet connection and noti˜es 
the user with audio and a message window.
A ˜nal element of the Virginia Tech system is the university Web site. 
3 
 Virginia Tech Review Panel. 
Mass Shooting at Virginia Tech: Report of the Review Panel.
 Richmond, Va. August 2007. Available at http://www.governor.virginia.gov/tempcontent/
techpanelreport.cfm. Accessed April 13, 2010.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Because the university Web site had crashed on the day of the shooting 
in 2007, considerable effort was made subsequently to ensure that the site 
could withstand large amounts of traf˜c. For example, during emergen
-cies the content is stripped down to only essential elements in order to 
reduce server load and network bandwidth.
4 This capability is especially 
important because once an initial alert is sent, telephone systems can 
become saturated (as people seek additional information or attempt to 
ascertain the well
-being of others). Through the inclusion in initial mes
-sages of a pointer to the Web site for additional information and updates, 
users know where to continue to go to get information as a situation 
develops. 
OPERATIONAL ISS
UES
Protocol
An important element of any alerting system is the establishment of a 
protocol that formalizes decisions made about what events the emergency 
noti˜cation system will be used for and about who makes the decision to 
notify the public (or other agencies or organizations). The protocol also 
establishes a standard that can be consulted in case, in the aftermath of an 
event, questions arise regarding why a message was or was not sent. 
Especially when dealing with particularly dangerous or threatening 
events, it is important to be able to issue alerts promptly. One possible 
source of delay is the time that it can take on
-duty personnel to contact 
and gain the approval of the of˜cials with the authority to issue an alert. 
To avoid such a potential delay, the Virginia Tech protocol gives explicit 
authority to whichever senior police of˜cers (those with a rank of sergeant 
or corporal) are on duty and also gives authority to other (nonpolice) cam
-pus of˜cials. The intent is to provide the of˜cials on duty with con˜dence 
that they have the authority to issue alerts when needed.
Testing 
Virginia Tech tests all the noti˜cation channels of its system each 
semester. Additional, limited tests are periodically conducted with smaller 
test populations. Such tests are mandated by both federal law (the Higher 
Education Opportunity Act of 2008) and Virginia law. Although these 
4 
 See National Research Council, 
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from 
 
September 
11
, The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2003, p. 42, for a discussion 
of the implications of ﬁ˚ash crowdﬂ events for Internet services and strategies for coping 
with them.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USE OF TEXT MESSAGES FOR ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 19
tests are expensive (a full functional test at Virginia Tech costs roughly 
$150,000), they not only verify that the system operates correctly, but they 
help educate the target population about the service and provide con˜
-dence to decision makers that the capability will work when needed. 
Location
The geographical area covered by both the Virginia Tech alerting sys
-tem and DC Alerts overlaps with that covered by other alerting systems 
and provided by other universities or local jurisdictions. DC Alerts has 
developed partnerships with the multiple universities in the District of 
Columbia. Its initial agreement was with the George Washington Uni
-versity, to ensure that students would receive alerts and be noti˜ed of 
any recommended protective action. Virginia Tech has several campuses 
in the greater Washington, D.C., metropolitan area not covered by the 
campus alerting system; furthermore, alerts regarding the Blacksburg, 
Virginia, main campus might not be relevant for those on campuses in 
the Washington, D.C., area. Virginia Tech encourages those students to 
register with DC Alerts to ensure they have access to alerts and warnings 
information.
DC Alerts has the additional challenge of reaching commuters and 
tourists who do not reside in the city. Tourists are unlikely to have regis
-tered for alerts, and commuters will primarily be interested in alerts and 
warnings only while they are working in the city. Although the registra
-tion system allows people to sign up for some alerts to be sent only dur
-ing work hours, people still need to register for multiple systemsŠone 
for their home and one for workŠif they are to receive all relevant alerts 
and warnings. 
ED
UCATION OF THE P
UB
LIC
Community organizations and leadership play an important educa
-tional role with respect to DC Alerts. The District of Columbia received 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) funds that supported extensive training and 
drills for citizens, including staff and students in the local schools. The 
District of Columbia initiated 36 community and neighborhood programs. 
The District™s Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency 
spent about 6 months working in the neighborhoods educating the com
-munity and working with community leadership. A program manager 
and program monitors were identi˜ed not only to work within the com
-munity to ensure that alerts and warnings were disseminated but also to 
provide feedback to emergency responders during an actual emergency 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
or crisis on how the community was being affected, what the current 
response in the community was, and what additional information might 
be helpful.
At Virginia Tech, with its steady ˚ow of new students arriving each 
year, there is need for a continuous process of educating new members of 
the community. Virginia Tech is currently developing a training program 
for students, faculty, and staff to ensure that the population is aware of 
emergency preparedness and its importance. 
OBSER
VATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
In the discussion following the panel presentations, a number of 
observations were offered regarding how information from SMS messag
-ing might be applied to the Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS). 
The observations included the following:
Ł Community engagement can be an important part of any sys
-tem. Community organizations can assist in educating the public about 
emergency preparedness, can assist in the dissemination of information 
during major events, and also can provide emergency managers with 
feedback on the public response. Although CMAS does not have a built
-in 
 
capability to verify that messages are received, community organizations 
can provide that information during and after an event.
Ł Coordination among geographically overlapping emergency noti
-˜cation systems can help ensure that affected populations receive alerts 
and warnings. 
Ł Alerting systems operated by local jurisdictions and other organi
-zations can supplement and complement the information delivered by 
CMAS. 
Ł Multiple alerting tools using distinct communications channels are 
invaluable in maximizing the population reached during an emergency. 
Ł Approaches such as CMAS™s use of a separate delivery channel 
or the use of low
-bandwidth Web sites can ease the stress placed on net
-works and increase the likelihood that affected populations are able to 
receive messages.
Ł Although higher precision of geographical targeting is desirable in 
order to provide people with the most relevant information, this can be 
dif˜cult to achieve in practice. CMAS only localizes by county or equiva
-lent jurisdiction, and alerts sent by individual jurisdictions are based on 
telephone numbers or e
-mail addresses and thus cannot target people 
moving among multiple jurisdictions.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21
3Communicating During a Crisis
The Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS) is currently being 
developed to leverage communications technology for communicating 
with the public in a crisis. In the workshop session on messaging, risk 
communications, and risk perception, Timothy Sellnow, University of 
Kentucky, and Matthew Seeger, Wayne State University, examined what is 
known about communicating risk and the relationship between message 
content and public response. They also considered what the implications 
might be of using as brief a message as a 90
-character text messageŠthe 
maximum allowed for a CMAS message. 
In the next workshop session, Technologies for Alerts and Warnings: 
Past, Present, and Future, Robert Dudgeon, San Francisco Department 
of Emergency Management; Jennifer Preece, University of
 Maryland; 
and David Waldrop, Microsoft, Inc., considered the role of social net
-works in alerting and warning. Nalini Venkatasubramanian, University 
of
 California, Irvine, then discussed future alerting technologies. 
The two sessions were moderated by Brett Hansard, Argonne National 
Laboratory, and John Sorensen, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, respec
-tively. This chapter provides an integrated summary of the presentations 
and the discussions that followed, organized by topic.
CRISIS COMM
UNICATION 
VERS
US RISK COMM
UNICATION
In a simpli˜ed model, there are three stages in a crisis eventŠthe 
stages (1) before the crisis, (2) during the crisis, and (3) after the crisis. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Risk communication,
 which centers on what is known about potential risks 
and possible responses, functions primarily in the stages before and after 
a crisis. Before a crisis, the goal is to educate and engage with the public 
and just before the crisis to issue warnings. After the crisis, the goals shift 
to applying lessons learned during the crisis and to building resilience 
from future events. 
Crisis communication,
 by contrast, occurs in stage 2, during the crisis, 
and has very speci˜c communications demands. Crisis communication 
inherently involves many acknowledged unknowns in the context of a 
particular event. Thus, an approach that is successful for risk communica
-tion may not succeed during a crisis.
During a crisis situation, communication with the public shifts from 
a dialogue about potential risks to instructional messages focused on the 
steps that members of the public should take to protect themselves (for 
example, evacuating or sheltering in place). Another aspect of response 
management involves connecting with othersŠindividuals trying to con
-nect with one another, such as families seeking to reunite, and emergency 
responders from a variety of agencies needing to connect with others in 
order to coordinate response efforts. 
OLD MEDIA 
VERS
US NEW MEDIA
The traditional view of information dissemination centers on the com
-mand post. Alerts and warnings are prepared by public of˜cials, media 
receive their information from brie˜ngs by public information of˜cers 
(PIOs), and the public receives its information from the media. According 
to the traditional view, the perception of the crisis is tightly controlled by 
the context of the brie˜ng room and the information that the PIO chooses 
to provide. Likewise, information is mediated, the timing of the informa
-tion is very controlled, and direct access to the crisis zone is controlled. 
Regardless of which news source people turn to, they receive much the 
same information.
Today™s media can provide un˜ltered, more
-immediate informa
-tion. Long before an alert is delivered by CMAS or another of˜cial 
source, information about the event will most likely already be avail
-able on social media sites, such as Twitter or Facebook, that support 
online social interaction, including the widespread sharing of people™s 
observations about current events. Information shared using these tools, 
or even information simply exchanged among individuals, includes 
not only text but images and video, which are readily captured using 
mobile telephones. As a result, those directly affected by a disaster 
can also become key sources of information about the event. These tools 
also change conventional news gatheringŠreporters can use cell phones 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING DURING A CRISIS
 23
to interview people at the scene of an event or to gather both still images 
and video quickly. 
One potential consequence of the use of these new tools is that the 
personal experience of those caught up in a disaster, who may be experi
-encing psychological trauma and stress, can now be shared widely. Even 
those not physically present can vicariously experience the traumatic 
nature of disasters.
In contrast to conventional mass media that reach mass audiences, 
the new media tend to reach audiences that are more selective or lim
-ited, in the sense that the messages that these media convey are targeted 
to particular groups. For example, in Facebook, people see information 
provided by individuals or organizations that they have designated as 
ﬁfriends,ﬂ and in Twitter people see information provided by individuals 
or organizations that they ﬁfollowﬂ (although it is also possible to search 
all Twitter messages based on keywords). Recipients of information may 
in turn re
-post the information (in Twitter parlance, ﬁretweetingﬂ) and 
may provide additional information that they think will be of interest 
to their connections. Social media can also broaden the reach of conven
-tional media; people commonly redistribute links to news reports about 
disasters. 
Social media also allow a community to leverage the trust that people 
place in their connections. Information provided by colleagues, friends, 
and family may be viewed as more credible than a mass alert or a news 
report. Similarly, local media may have more credibility than national 
media do if the local media are seen as being more interested in service 
to their communities than in wide audience appeal.
Old and new media may also differ in their resilience in a disaster. For 
example, although their ability to provide mobile communications can be 
invaluable in a disaster, cellular networks are subject to overload, their 
infrastructure is subject to damage, and keeping both the infrastructure 
and the individual phones powered can be a challenge. Older technolo
-gies have often proven to be resilientŠfor example, during Hurricane 
Charley in 2004, a local radio station™s building was destroyed, and yet 
the station was operating again within 5 hours.
Finally, disasters and people™s natural desire to feel connected during 
such crises may prompt them to adopt additional media, both new and 
old. Individuals in the elderly population who may not currently have 
cellular telephones may come to recognize their value during a disaster, 
and younger people who may not currently have battery
-powered radios 
may purchase them when they realize the potential shortcomings of the 
cellular network during a disaster. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA TO FILL COMM
UNCIATIONS 
GAPS
In November 2007, a freighter hit the San Francisco
-Oakland Bay 
Bridge, dumping 55,000 gallons of bunker fuel into the San Francisco 
Bay. Although the event was very visible and might have appeared to 
be a serious incident, bunker fuel ˚oats and is relatively easy to clean 
up. However, because of˜cial information was not made available to the 
public promptly, emergency management of˜cials quickly ﬁlost the public 
information battle.ﬂ Blogs and other media began reporting
 inaccurate 
informationŠbut these media were not being tracked by of˜cials. Soon 
the reports led to unsanctioned cleanup efforts and the formation of 
protest rallies. Further complicating the situation, the San Francisco city 
government lacked the authority to close the city™s beaches even though 
the bunker fuel was toxic. The upshot of the situation was that the San 
Francisco Department of Emergency Management found itself dealing 
with the repercussions of a nondisaster that, despite a very successful 
cleanup effort, was being viewed as a disaster by the public.
This event highlights the challenges of traditional crisis communi
-cations capabilities. Traditional tools such as the Emergency Alert Sys
-tem, which provide for noti˜cation of emergencies via broadcast radio 
and television, as well as newer technologies such as satellite radio and 
cable
 television, do not appear to be useful during such events because 
the events themselves are generally viewed as not being serious enough 
to warrant the use of the traditional alert and warning tools. As far as 
working through the media, it can take PIOs a long time to prepare, get 
approval for, and deliver news releases and brie˜ngs. The city of San 
 
Francisco did have a short message service (SMS)
-based alerting tool avail
-able, but here too, it would have taken a while to get a message composed 
and approved. More
-rapid dissemination tools, including the use of social 
media, are being looked to as additional tools for providing more timely 
information in future events.
SYNER
GISTIC 
USE OF M
ULTIPLE MEDIA
Events during the wild˜res in San Diego County, California, in Octo
-ber 2007 provide an interesting example of how different types of media 
can be used synergistically. A primary driver of information during the 
disaster was local radio station KPBS. To complement KPBS broadcasts 
during the ˜res, station staff used a Twitter account and a Google map 
to provide updated information. Box 3.1 shows the Twitter stream, and 
Figure 3.1 shows the Google map. As the wild˜res progressed, this ad hoc 
system emerged, providing focused information and addressing speci˜c 
areas where information was missing. The Twitter content was variedŠ
ranging from links to of˜cial government information sites to transporta
-Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING DURING A CRISIS
 25
BOX 3.1
 Examples of Twitter Messages
Following is a sample of Twitter messages sent by public radio and television 
broadcaster KBPS (@kpbs) during the wild˜res in San Diego County, California, 
in 2007.
Ł ﬁTo get a list of local assistance centers in Southern California visit http:/
/tinyurl.com/ywejgn.ﬂ 
Ł ﬁThe CA Department of Insurance is sending fraud investigators to assis-
tance centers and neighborhoods to reduce the chance of scam artists.ﬂ
Ł ﬁFire victims can register with FEMA [Federal Emergency Management 
Agency] online by visiting http://tinyurl.com/yolpfj.ﬂ
Ł ﬁSanta Clarita area update: Buckweed Fire now joins the Magic Fire in 
being 100 percent contained.ﬂ
Ł ﬁResource: people suffering with stress following the wild˜res can con
-tact the Orange Co Emergency Op Center hotline at (714) 628
-7085.ﬂ
Ł ﬁThe Malibu ˜re has been fully contained.ﬂ
Ł ﬁCaltrans [California Department of Transportation] says Route 74 will 
remain open in both directions tonight.ﬂ
SOURCE: KPBS Public Radio @kpbs [Twitter].
 Available
 at http://twitter.com/kpbs.
tion information. The Google map integrated several different pieces of 
information into a single visual cue. The interactive map not only showed 
the locations of the ˜res but also where to ˜nd shelters, where evacuation 
centers were, and even where evacuees could take their animals. 
INFORMATION SHARIN
G AND 
GATHERIN
GA recent study that examined people™s use of social media in respond
-ing to the 2009
-2010 H1N1 in˚uenza outbreak found that people used 
social media not only to forward the of˜cial messages but also to add 
pointers to additional information that might or might not have been 
deemed reliable by health care authorities. During the initial H1N1 out
-break, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) made a 
concerted effort not only to use multiple outlets to maximize the reach of 
the CDC message but also to try to ensure that CDC messages were the 
public™s primary source of information on the subject. To that end, CDC 
also used Facebook, Twitter, and other social media tools to monitor pub
-lic opinion and to correct rumors. A lesson to be drawn from this expe
-rience is that although one cannot determine what information people 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
FI
GU
RE 3.1
 During the wild˜res in San Diego County, California, in 2007, an 
interactive Google map provided interactive information that could be updated, 
on wild˜re location, shelters, transportation disruptions, and other useful loca
-tions. SOURCE: Fire information posted by KPBS. © 2010 Google; Map data © 
2010 Google, INEGI.
Fi
gure 3-
1receive, it is possible to monitor the information that is being seen by the 
public and to reiterate key points if necessary.
A ˚ash ˚ood that occurred in March 2010 in San Francisco illustrates 
the potential for using social media to gather information about an inci
-dent. During the course of that event, emergency managers had received 
word from 911 telephone reports of a sinkhole at a downtown intersec
-tion. However, the severity of the event did not become fully apparent 
until pictures and video were posted on social media sitesŠin fact there 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING DURING A CRISIS
 27
turned out to be a 20
-foot geyser gushing from a manhole. Twitter and 
Facebook proved important sources of information on other problems 
such as the ˚ooding of some San Francisco Municipal Railway (Muni) 
stations. Such reports can complement information provided by of˜cials 
on the scene, who may not be able to provide reports because they are 
overburdened with responding to events. 
Another lesson learned from the San Francisco ˚ash ˚ood incident is 
that people on the ground may be the source of both the ˜rst reports and 
the most detailed reports (including pictures and video)Šand can make 
such information widely available to the public using social media. On the 
one hand, there are potentially signi˜cant bene˜ts to people™s receiving 
such prompt and detailed information. On the other hand, there are risks 
that false information will be reported and spread. The net result is that 
social media communiqués on such incidents can both aid and complicate 
the task of emergency managers. 
MICRO
BLO
GG
IN
G Users of Twitter during crises are re
-posting information from tradi-
tional media, providing commentary on the event and on the public 
and government response, and informing their connections as to how 
they are themselves being affected by the event. A 2009 study of Twitter 
content during a crisis found that message content could be categorized 
as follows: 37 percent of the messages provided information (warnings, 
updates, answers); 34 percent were commentary; 26 percent dealt with 
personal impact or requests for information; and 4 percent were promo
-tions of available media coverage or products and services.
1 In addition 
to individuals sending messages, public of˜cials can also make use of 
Twitter to reach portions of the public. Indeed, a recent study suggests 
that brief messages can be communicated during disasters in a highly 
effective manner.
2 The demographics of Twitter usage differ from those for mobile 
phones, with a penetration rate signi˜cantly lower than the 85 percent 
who subscribe to cellular telephone service. Also, Twitter users tend to 
be younger and richer, and more of them are in nonminority populations. 
According to data collected in March 2010, the majority of Twitter users 
1 
 F. Vultee and D.M. Vultee. ﬁWhat We Tweet About When We Tweet About Disasters: The 
Nature and Sources of Microblog Comments During Emergencies.ﬂ Paper presented at the 
93rd National Communication Association Annual Convention, Chicago, Ill., November 
12
-15, 2009.
2 
 S.R. Veil, T. Buehner, and M. Palenchar. ﬁIncreasing Dialogue in Disasters: Incorporating 
Social Media in Risk and Crisis Communication.ﬂ Paper presented at the National Com
-munication Association Conference, San Francisco, Calif., November 2010.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
are female (55 percent), between the ages of 18 and 34 (45 percent), and 
Caucasian (69 percent), with an income above $100,000 (30 percent).
3 As a 
result, one would not expect Twitter to be the most effective way of reach
-ing many of the populations known to be at most risk in a crisis.
OTHER NEXT-
GENERATION CRISIS COMM
UNICATION TOOLS
A number of organizations have been experimenting with a variety 
of new tools for emergency management. For example, Microsoft devel
-oped a prototype social network (called Vine, released as a beta in 2009, 
and discontinued in late 2010) especially targeted toward supporting the 
needs of families, other small groups, and small organizations. 
One rationale behind the creation of Vine was that there are many 
types of disasters, on many different scales and of many different descrip
-tions, local and global, human
-made and natural, personal and societal, 
and only some of these emergencies require an alert to be sent by federal, 
state, or local governmental authorities. Events of interest only to families 
or other small groups can still ˜nd tools that support alerts and warnings 
to be useful. Another rationale behind the creation of Vine was the need 
for tools that support the variety of roles that individuals may play in an 
emergencyŠfor example, father, husband, Red Cross volunteer, and Little 
League coach. Flexible tools that support each of these roles could be of 
considerable value. 
Several years ago, researchers at the University of Maryland began 
designing and developing a prototype of another sort of tool, 911.gov.
4 This tool was designed both to allow the public to use mobile phones 
and to enable the Web population to report a wide variety of incidents.
5 The Web
-based tools allowed users to upload photographs and videos 
so that emergency responders had a better understanding of what was 
happening at the site of a disaster. Over time, a number of cities and coun
-ties have embraced the use of mobile and Web technologies to augment 
traditional 911 systems.
Looking ahead, workshop participants suggested several directions 
for next
-generation tools. These include building alerting tools that employ 
multiple communications channels (e.g., e
-mail, Web, social networks, 
and mobile) and support bidirectional communications (so that recipients 
can send information back to emergency managers). Future tools might 
3 
 Data available at www.quantcast.com/twitter.com. Accessed March 28, 2010.
4 
 Additional information can be found at the project™s Web site, http://www.cs.umd.
edu/hcil/911gov/.
5 
 Ben Shneiderman and Jennifer Preece. ﬁ911.gov: Community Response Grids.ﬂ 
Science
  315:944 
(2007). Available at http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content
/summary/315/5814/944. 
 
Accessed August 23, 2010.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING DURING A CRISIS
 29
be better integrated with a user™s existing social networking tools (so that 
a different, unfamiliar tool need not be used in a disaster) and leverag
-ing users™ existing social networks (e.g., also alerting, where appropriate, 
one™s friends or family). Such tools would reach people more effectively, 
provide them with more targeted information, provide emergency man
-agers with the ability to gather and aggregate information that is relevant 
to the communities that they serve, and open up opportunities for the 
public to be more involved with their communities and government. 
OBSER
VATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
During the presentations and in the discussion following the panel 
presentations, a number of observations drew on recent experiences with 
using social media and other communications tools:
Ł Integrated systems that can easily span traditional and new com
-munications systems will be needed to maximize the reach of alerts and 
warnings. For example, although cellular technology is widely used, it 
reaches neither everyone nor everywhere. 
Ł The available technologies for delivering alerts and warnings will 
change over time. Emergency managers will need to adapt when users 
shift to new tools. 
Ł Although social media play a growing role in disaster and crisis 
communications, they are not yet primary or major sources of information 
during a disaster; instead they serve as emerging tools that may play an 
increasingly important role in the future.
6Ł Messages that come from local entities are generally viewed as 
more credible than those coming from national sources. This suggests 
that although CMAS messages will be routed through a national gate
-way, it will be useful to include the responsible local agency as part of 
the message. 
Ł Trust and credibility are affected by timing. If a CMAS alert is one 
of the ˜rst pieces of information received, its credibility will be higher. 
Ł Alerts and warnings have to be actionable and should include 
contextŠfor example, why one should take this particular action. 
Ł Those receiving a message will ˜rst try to verify the information. 
Additional information sources need to be provided. If people do not 
6 
 Studies following the San Diego wild˜res found that only 0.2 percent of the population 
received their ˜rst evacuation noti˜cation through the Internet, and 4.9 percent subsequently 
used the Internet for follow
-on information. See John Sorensen, Barbara Vogt Sorensen, 
Allen Smith, and Zachary Williams. 
Results of an Investigation of the Effectiveness of Using 
Reverse Telephone Emergency Warning Systems in October 
200
7 San Diego Wild˜res.
 ORNL/
TM
-2009/1254. Oak Ridge National Laboratory: Oak Ridge, Tenn.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
have the ability to obtain additional information, the effectiveness of the 
message will be limited. Although a ﬁclickableﬂ link to additional infor
-mation may not be feasible (and indeed is not permitted in the initial 
release of CMAS), it still may be possible to reference secondary sources 
such as broadcast radio and television or Web sites. 
Ł Message testing and audience analysis will play an important role 
in CMAS. Post
-event analysis can provide some of the best information 
regarding public response and the effectiveness of the messages that were 
sent. 
Ł Emergency managers or public information of˜cers may encounter 
dif˜culties when they experiment with using social media. First, the man
-agers™ or PIOs™ leadership may be uncomfortable with the relative loss of 
control with respect to how an alerting message is distributed, compared 
to traditional dissemination methods. Second, the information technology 
systems in the agency may block access to social media Web sites and 
services. Addressing both of these issues will require new policies that 
support the use of social media.
Ł Communication during a crisis has bene˜ts beyond public response. 
Communicating with others during crisis can be cathartic; reconstituting 
a sense of community is a critical function of communication systems.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31
4Public Education and Training
Public education and outreach not only can help people understand 
the purpose and capabilities of an alerting or warning system but also can 
prepare and motivate them to take appropriate action when alerts or warn
-ings are received. In the workshop session on public education and train
-ing, Mark Benthien, Southern California Earthquake Center, discussed his 
experience with education initiatives pertaining to earthquakes. Michele 
Wood, California State University, Fullerton, discussed current research 
on public education campaigns, and Daryl Rand,
 Harrison Advertising/
The Rand Group, examined the education question from a marketing 
perspective. Inés Pearce, Pearce Global Partners, Inc., was moderator for 
the panel. This chapter provides an integrated summary of these presenta
-tions and the discussions that followed, organized by topic.
AN EXAMPLE: THE 
GREAT CALIFORNIA SHAKEO
UTEarthquakes are typically ﬁno
-noticeﬂ events, which means that the 
˜rst alert that a person generally receives of an earthquake is the feeling of 
the ground shaking. (Today it is possible to provide very limited advance 
alerts to those suf˜ciently far from the epicenter of an earthquake; see 
Box 4.1 for a description of earthquake detection and alerting systems.) 
Those affected by an earthquake do not have the opportunity that those 
receiving a hurricane alert might, to take time gathering information 
about the hazard and to decide what actions to take; nor is there an 
opportunity (or need), as there might be with severe weather, for people 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
BOX 4.1 
 Early Earthquake Warning Systems
Early Earthquake Warning Systems (EEWSs) exploit the limited window 
 
afforded between the time that earthquake energy propagates from the epi-
center of an earthquake to the time that it reaches an affected population. 
Numerous locales are developing tools such as EEWSs, but only two have a 
public message componentŠthose of Mexico and Japan. EEWSs can be used, 
for example, to tell people to take shelter and to tell drivers to pull over to the 
side of the road. They can also be used to automatically secure transportation 
and industrial systems. For example, the Japanese EEWS is used to stop trains 
automatically. 
Mexico City is especially well suited to the EEWS approach because earth
-quakes generally occur on the coast and then propagate to the lake
-bed deposit 
under Mexico City, which ampli˜es the shaking. Mexico City™s system provides a 
public alert when shaking ˜rst occurs at the coast. The Japanese system delivers 
both Emergency Alert System (EAS)
-like television and radio alerts and alerts 
resembling the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
weather radio that makes use of dedicated receivers. 
California is also developing an EEWS. The ˜rst phase of development, from 
2006 to 2009, involved developing and testing detection algorithms. Work has 
now progressed into a prototyping phase. The development and deployment 
of the system are being conducted with caution so as to avoid false alarms, 
which might undermine the credibility of the system. An existing system, the 
California Integrated Seismic Network, does send out a notice of the location 
of the epicenter and the magnitude of an earthquake within 5 seconds after 
the earthquake. These notices are sent only to of˜cial emergency managers, 
but they could possibly be used to issue public alerts as well. The Department 
of Homeland Security™s Science and Technology Directorate is also examining 
sensor technologies and automation and sensor data that could be used to 
trigger alerts or warnings. 
The EEWS program has raised a number of challenging technical and social 
questions associated with the time sensitivity of alerts, including the
 following:
Ł To ensure the timely detection of an earthquake, sensors must be densely 
distributed in potential fault areas, and communications with the sensors must 
be rapid and reliable. No matter how extensive the sensor network, there will 
be ﬁblind spotsﬂ if an earthquake epicenter is directly below the population. 
Ł In addition to the need for communications with sensors to be fast and 
reliable, detection algorithms must also be fast and reliable, able to detect 
within seconds whether a signi˜cant event has occurred.
Ł To issue timely alerts, the communications channels for notifying the 
public must be low
-latency and reliable. For example, e
-mail, short message 
service, and reverse
-911 are too slow. The EAS or sirens could be fast enough, as 
could the cellular broadcast technology to be used for the Commercial Mobile 
Alert Service.
Ł The briefness of the advance warning time for earthquakes means that 
people will need to be well educated with respect to what particular messages 
mean and what steps should be taken. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PUBLIC EDUCATION AND TRAINING
 33
to personally con˜rm the event. As a result, it is especially important to 
provide the public with advance education and training about earthquake 
risks and proper protective action. 
The Earthquake Country Alliance (ECA) is a statewide coalition of 
California organizations and individuals who are developing materials 
and activities with consistent messaging. The goal is twofold: to edu
-cate people about preparedness and to educate people about protective 
actions. The ECA focuses on practicing simple protective action, such 
as that recommended in the easily remembered phrase ﬁDrop, cover, 
and hold on.ﬂ The goal is that, through drills, not only will people learn 
appropriate protective behavior, but they would practice it instinctively 
when they received an alert. Annually the ECA coordinates a statewide 
drill called the Great California ShakeOut. The ECA provides manuals 
to participating organizations on how to perform an earthquake drill, 
as most organizations have not held such drills before. At the appointed 
time, the ECA also issues the test alert.
In addition to teaching people the simple actions advocated in ﬁDrop, 
cover, and hold on,ﬂ the ShakeOut also provides an opportunity to edu
-cate participants on preparedness practices. Educating those living in 
earthquake country about preparedness is extremely important. To be 
properly prepared before an earthquake occurs, the ECA asks that people 
do the following: secure their living space, ensuring that top
-heavy fur
-niture, water heaters, television sets, and other heavy objects will not fall 
during an earthquake; store water, 1 gallon per person per day for at least 
3 days, but ideally up to 2 weeks; and have a ˜re extinguisher and ensure 
that family members know how to use it properly. The ShakeOut is hav
-ing an impact, as the state of California sees an increase in the purchase 
of preparedness products at the time of the drill.
The ShakeOut started in 2008 with the Great Southern California 
ShakeOut. November 12
-16, 2008, was a week of special events to educate 
and encourage Southern Californians to be prepared; a regional drill was 
held November 13, 2008. There were 5.57 million participantsŠchie˚y 
schools but also businesses, communities, governments, and families. In 
2009 the event went statewide, with 6.9 million participants. The Shake
-Out is now an annual event for which the ECA partners with state agen
-cies and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). Although 
the ECA has been successful in recruiting businesses, schools, and orga
-nizations as participants, individual registrations are quite low. The ECA 
is using social media to encourage people to participate and also to count 
people who may not be registering. 
Starting in 2011, participation in the drills will be extended to states in 
the central United States, coinciding with the bicentennial of large earth
-quakes which struck that region in 1811 and 1812. Similar drills are being 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
planned or are under consideration in other regions that have historically 
experienced severe earthquakes, including the Paci˜c Northwest, Utah, 
and Alaska. 
BU
ILDIN
G AN ED
UCATIONAL CAMPAI
GNMuch time and money have been spent educating the public in the 
areas of preparedness and emergency management. However, such edu
-cational campaigns often have not proven very fruitful for three key 
reasons: (1) The time or space allocated for public service announcements 
is limited, and many pro bono commercials run late at night. (2) Emer
-gency management professionals may not be familiar with marketing. 
Indeed, few undergraduate or graduate programs provide courses in 
public education, outreach, or marketing. (3) Professionals with market
-ing expertise tend not to be involved in emergency planning and prepara
-tion activities. 
Several organizations have aimed to close the gaps listed above by 
creating guidelines for public awareness. Two of them, the Emergency 
Management Accreditation Program (EMAP), a nonpro˜t organization 
that provides assessment and accreditation of emergency management 
programs and personnel, and CBS Outdoor, a for
-pro˜t advertisement 
managing ˜rm, have developed a set of blueprints for creating public 
awareness plans and educational initiatives. EMAP™s public awareness 
program guideline, 
Assessing Your Disaster Public Awareness Program,
 was 
issued in 2006.
1 In formulating its guidelines, EMAP convened experts 
from a wide variety of disciplines. The contribution of CBS Outdoor was 
An Approach to Preparedness,
 a blueprint for emergency managers to use 
in creating a public education and outreach plan.
2 The blueprints from EMAP and CBS Outdoor, along with an extensive 
body of earlier work,
3 lay out guidelines for the development of success
-1 
 Emergency Management Accreditation Program (EMAP). 
Assessing Your Disaster Public 
Awareness Program.
 EMAP, Washington, D.C., October 2006.
2 
 CBS Outdoor. 
An Approach to Preparedness.
 CBS Outdoor, New York, N.Y. 2007.
3 
 E.g., Dennis Mileti, Sarah Nathe, Paula Gori, Marjorie Greene, and Elizabeth Lemersal, 
Public Hazards Communication and Education: The State of the Art,
 Natural Hazards Research 
and Applications Information Center, Boulder, Colo., 2004; Dennis S. Mileti and John H. 
Sorensen, 
Communication of Emergency Public Warnings: A Social Science Perspective and State-
of-the-Art Assessment
 (Report ORNL
-6609 for the Federal Emergency Management Agency), 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tenn., 1990; Michael K. Lindell and Ronald 
W. Perry, 
Behavioral Foundations of Community Emergency Planning,
 Hemisphere Publishing, 
Washington, D.C., 1992; Dennis S. Mileti and Colleen Fitzpatrick, ﬁCommunication of Pub
-lic Risk: Its Theory and Its Application,ﬂ 
Sociological Practice Review
 2(1):20
-28 (1991); and 
 
Dennis S. Mileti, Colleen Fitzpatrick, and Barbara C. Farhar, ﬁFostering Public Preparations 
for Natural Hazards,ﬂ 
Environment 
34(3):16
-20, 6
-39 (1992).
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PUBLIC EDUCATION AND TRAINING
 35
ful public education campaigns. They draw on the social psychology of 
hazard education and on extensive investigations into the public response 
to past campaigns to set out principles for effective public education cam
-paigns and other lessons learned. 
OBSER
VATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
In the discussion following the panel presentations, workshop par
-ticipants made the following observations regarding planning and imple
-menting effective educational campaigns:
Ł Do not use fear to engage the public.
 Fear is not an effective tactic for 
engaging the public and should not be used as the primary tactic for this 
purpose. Although such tactics may be effective in increasing people™s 
perception of risk, this perception does not necessarily translate into 
desired behavioral changes. 
Ł Make use of multiple sources of information.
 For example, local ˜re 
departments are considered by the American public to provide the most 
honest and complete information about emergency situations, but only 
about a third of the U.S. population has access to such information. Local 
˜re departments are thus a very effective source of information, but not 
for everyone. Rather than identifying and relying on a single credible 
source, use a panel of sources to reach the broadest audience possible
. Ensure that messages are consistent across information sources. 
Ł Understand community demographics and media cover.
 Geodemographic 
mapping allows demographic variables that correlate with risk to be over
-laid with the areas covered by various media.
Ł Make public education interactive and experiential.
 People bene˜t from 
experiencing what warning messages and alerts will look like. It is essen
-tial to build in feedback for the system in order to collect evaluation data 
from those experimenting with the system. 
Ł Encourage information seeking.
 Encourage people to talk with one 
another about emergency preparedness. People who start communicating 
with one another are more likely to take appropriate action. People are 
seeking information in new ways using social media and other communi
-cations technology, and it is important to embrace the new opportunities 
that this use presents. 
Ł Partner with businesses. 
Businesses have a responsibility to their 
employees to provide emergency planning. Businesses have speci˜c 
needs, and it is important to coordinate with them during their emer
-gency planning to ensure that there is not con˚icting information and that 
there is planned action between the business and emergency management 
of˜cials.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Ł Partner with school groups.
 Students typically absorb new infor
-mation readily and can become conduits for such information to their 
families.
Ł Educate those responsible for preparing messages.
 Credibility is impor
-tant and will be diminished if a message contains incorrect information, 
unclear information, or even typographical errors. 
Ł Put the information on the table and include the elected of˜cials.
 Con
-˚icts can arise between governmentsŠfor example, between city and 
county governments. Although emergency managers may have con˚icts, 
they can usually work together and generally already are doing so. The 
challenge comes with public information of˜cers who are managing infor
-mation for elected of˜cials. The elected of˜cials often engage in extensive 
battles in terms of getting information out. 
Ł Have a simple message. 
Regardless of what type of disaster a geo
-graphic area may faceŠhurricane, tornado, earthquake, or ˚oodŠthe 
recommended preparatory actions are often very similar even if the pri
-orities are different. These preparatory actions include telling people to 
have food and water on hand, to have a battery
-powered radio, and 
to be prepared to evacuate if necessary. If these basic ﬁcalls to actionﬂ can 
be conveyed to and acted on by even a signi˜cant fraction of the popula
-tion, much progress will have been made.
Ł Engage various funding sources and partnerships. 
Professional market
-ing
 campaigns can be costly. Building public education campaign funds 
into grants can be helpful, but private
-public partnerships can also be 
helpful. Emergency managers can also reach out to local marketing or 
public relations professional associations.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37
5Communicating with 
At
-Risk Populations
Although the Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS) will send 
alerts to people™s cellular telephones and thus reach a large fraction of the 
population, this approach will also present special challenges for certain 
at
-risk segments of the population. In the workshop session on commu
-nicating with at
-risk populations, Judy Harkins, Gallaudet University, 
discussed research performed at Gallaudet University on how best to pro
-vide alerts to people who are deaf and hard of hearing. Ed Price,
 Georgia 
Institute of Technology, discussed research completed at the Georgia Insti
-tute of Technology™s Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center for Wire
-less Technologies (Wireless RERC) on how people with hearing, sight, 
physical, and cognitive disabilities interact with cellular telephones and 
alerts. Chris Mayhorn, North Carolina State University, shared insights on 
reaching older adults. Brenda Phillips, Oklahoma State University, served 
as moderator and highlighted the interactions of gender and ethnicity on 
emergency preparation, education, and response. The rest of this chapter 
provides an integrated summary of these presentations and the discus
-sions that followed, organized by topic.
USE OF WIRELESS DE
VICES 
BY PEOPLE WITH DISA
BILITIES
The Wireless RERC uses ongoing surveys, which have over the past 
few years involved more than 1,600 people with disabilities, to collect 
data on use trends and user needs. People with disabilities have impor
-tant communications needs, often using mobile devices as a lifeline, not 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
only during medical emergencies but also daily to further independence 
and access to services. For people with disabilities who are unable to drive 
themselves, mobile devices can be imperative in arranging for transporta
-tion. Indeed, the penetration of wireless devices in communities of people 
who have disabilities is the same, if not slightly higher, than in the com
-munity at large. 
This ˜nding, and the observation that text messages are increasingly 
used to deliver alerts and warnings, prompted the Wireless RERC to con
-duct a series of ˜eld trials, focus groups, and simulations to investigate a 
variety of approaches to delivering text alerts. The study population was 
primarily individuals who are blind or have low vision, or who are deaf 
or hard of hearing, along with a few participants with cognitive disabili
-ties; the study population included people with varying levels of technical 
savvy. The tests used two different devices: (1) a Windows mobile device 
with custom software to provide a tone alert similar to that used in the 
Emergency Alert System (EAS), other customized attention signals, and 
text
-to
-speech processing; and (2) standard BlackBerry devices that sup
-port text messaging and are commonly used in the community of people 
who are deaf and hard of hearing. 
The Wireless RERC studies were completed before an initial set of 
requirements for the CMAS program was set forth by the 2007 Com
-mercial Mobile Service Alert Advisory Committee (CMSAAC) report.
1 The studies used a standard short message service (SMS) text message 
and a Web page, putting essential information in the SMS body and 
including a hyperlink to the full alert on the Web page. The ˜rst test 
group, composed of people who are blind and vision
-impaired, used 
the custom device. These test subjects found that the tone alerts and 
speech synthesis were a signi˜cant improvement over the phones that 
they normally used. The second test group, composed primarily of 
people who are deaf and hard of hearing, used the BlackBerries. They 
found the text message alerts to be useful but not a big improvement 
over the systems that they normally used. For example, many in this 
group already subscribed to alerts from third
-party providers such as 
the Weather Channel. For them, the EAS
-like alert was slightly preferred 
because it provided somewhat more detailed information and did not 
contain advertisements. Notably, in postŒ˜eld surveys, 83 percent of 
people with sensory limitations said that receiving emergency alerts by 
way of wireless devices was highly desirable. 
After the 2008 adoption of the CMSAAC recommendations by the 
FCC, Wireless RERC conducted a second series of tests using CMAS
-like 
messages (90
-character messages that did not contain links to second
-1 
 CMSAAC, PMG
-0035, 2007; and FCC, Public Safety Docket No. 07
-287.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING WITH AT-RISK POPULATIONS
 39
ary sources) and alerting by means of a distinctive tone and vibration 
cadence. About three
-quarters of those who had participated in previ
-ous tests thought that this CMAS
-like alert was an improvement over 
the third
-party alerts with which they were familiar. They observed that 
CMAS
-like messages were simple and that they clearly indicated what 
action to take, but these people suggested that it would be useful if links 
to supplemental information were included. 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR PEOPLE 
 WHO ARE 
BLIND OR HA
VE LOW 
VISION
Text alerts are inherently ill suited for people who are blind unless 
the telephone that they are using has the ability to read the textŠthat is, 
has text
-to
-speech capabilities. Without the inclusion of text
-to
-speech 
capabilities, CMAS
-like messages simply cannot be used by those who 
are blind. Moreover, there are questions about the more general usability 
of cell phones by people who are blindŠthe phones that they commonly 
employ fall into two categories. The ˜rst category consists of much older 
telephones with fewer features and settings and thus very simple inter
-faces that can readily be memorized. However, these older phones cannot 
receive CMAS messages, and it is unclear whether new phones that do 
support CMAS will be simple enough to be used by those who are blind. 
The second category consists of new smartphones that have built
-in voice 
commands and voice menus. Today, these capabilities are only found on 
high
-end smartphones, which may be too expensive for many. 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR THOSE 
WITH IMPAIRED HEARIN
G Fortunately, there are several resources for emergency alerting that 
already exist for those who have a hearing impairment. E
-mail and SMS 
alerting systems are already understood to work well. Television coverage 
of emergencies provides a great deal of text and visual graphics, so that 
even those who cannot hear what is being said can glean at least some 
of the needed information from the media coverage. There are National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) weather radios with 
text displays, ˚ashing lights to garner attention, and vibration functions 
to awaken a person. However, the content of the text component is much 
more limited than the audio (speech) information that is broadcast to the 
radios. Telephone emergency noti˜cation systems are not particularly use
-ful for those with impaired hearing, as fewer people with impaired hear
-ing have a land line, and most telephone alerting systems do not provide 
a TTY option, which would allow a person who is deaf to receive the calls 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
as text. One of the greatest challenges is the ﬁeye
-busyﬂ situation in which 
the attention of a person with impaired hearing is focused elsewhere. The 
attention
-getting mechanism must be disruptive enough to cause the user 
to change focus immediately. 
Once the existence of an emergency is known by a person who has 
a hearing impairment, the Web is extremely useful for that person. As 
discussed previously, social and new video can play an important role. 
However, any video posted by emergency response or management needs 
to be captioned or it is not particularly useful for those with a hearing 
impairment. During the San Diego wild˜res, a local organization posted 
video communicating in American Sign Language (ASL) for those with 
deafness, indicating that there were resources as well interpreters at a 
local shelter. 
When people who are deaf are not at home, it becomes even more 
dif˜cult to alert them to potential crises and disasters. Conventional 
sources of emergency warningsŠcar radios, sirens, and public
-address 
systemsŠare inaccessible to them. Communication with bystanders and 
often even communication with responders are not possible. CMAS will 
play an important role in reaching people who have impaired hearing 
when they are not at home. 
Gallaudet University™s experience with opt
-in emergency noti˜ca
-tion highlights the importance of CMAS participation™s being opt
-out. 
 
Gallaudet had an opt
-in e
-mail and mobile alerting system; however, only 
15 percent of those under the age of 25 registered. The university has since 
moved to an opt
-out e
-mail alert. Students have their phones with them 
constantly, but if they cannot be induced to opt in, the system is useless. 
Students claim that they choose not to participate because too
-frequent 
alerts would be annoying. 
Tone and 
Vibration
An important component of CMAS is the unique tone to alert cellular 
telephone users that the message being received is different from other 
messages. The current speci˜ed tone is the EAS two
-tone signal at 960 
and 853 hertz. The cell phone industry supported these tones because 
most ring tones are in the high range. However, these frequencies can be 
dif˜cult for those who are hearing
-impaired, as their hearing capability 
usually resides in the lower frequencies. This challenge will need to be 
considered during future iterations of CMSAAC recommendations. 
CMAS will also provide a distinct vibration cadence for people with 
impaired hearing. A recent study of a small sample of Gallaudet students 
and staff was done to determine what the best vibration cadence might 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING WITH AT-RISK POPULATIONS
 41
be.
2 Participants rated the following four vibratory temporal patterns 
presented on a mobile: (1) no pattern/constant, (2) even on
-off, (3) long 
and short pattern similar to the one selected by CMAS, and (4) long and 
buzzy short pulses. Three different durations of each pattern were tried: 
4 seconds, 8 seconds, and 12 seconds. Participants evaluated the effective
-ness of the patterns and the similarity to their own devices™ default tone, 
responding to the question of whether the patterns would be suf˜ciently 
distinguishable to get their attention in an emergency. Based on the results 
of this study, the signal needs to be long. The best ratings were for single 
signals at about 12.5 seconds. The even
-on
-off pattern, which is currently 
speci˜ed by CMAS, was somewhat more preferred. Although a temporal 
and unique pattern is important, the nature of the speci˜c pattern is sec
-ondary to length in importance, according to the study.
The study at Gallaudet University did not examine the strength of 
the vibration, as that cannot be changed on current mobile devices. How
-ever, it is important to note that as devices become smaller, vibrations are 
becoming weaker. This could pose a challenge for future generations of 
alerting systems. 
American Sign Language
Wireless RERC completed some research with people who are deaf 
who use American Sign Language (ASL) as their primary language. For 
most people who are born with deafness or who are early deafened, 
ASL, not English, is likely to be their primary language, and some may 
have very limited pro˜ciency in English. (ASL and English are distinct 
languages, with quite different grammatical structures.) Wireless RERC 
simulated ASL alerts on smartphones. Test subjects received a CMAS
-type 
90
-character message followed by a video of someone signing the alert. 
Most people thought that the combination of text and ASL was better 
than either one alone, suggesting that ASL may be a desirable capability 
in future iterations of CMAS. 
The research conducted by Wireless RERC also found that the com
-mon terminology used in the National Weather Service alerts, such as 
ﬁTake coverﬂ or ﬁLow
-lying area,ﬂ do not translate well into ASL and 
that not all people understood those terms. People in different parts 
of the country may use different ASL terms, but the advantage here at 
least is that National Weather Service alerts are also regionalized. The 
2 
 J. Harkins, P. Tucker, N. Williams, and J. Sauro. ﬁVibration Signaling in Mobile Devices 
for Emergency Alerting: A Study with Deaf Evaluators.ﬂ 
Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf
 Education
 (in press).
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
National Weather Service should work more closely with the community 
of people who are deaf to identify more easily understood words and 
descriptions. 
SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS WITH RESPECT TO 
DISA
BILITIES IN THE ELDERLY POP
ULATION
The overall population of the world is aging. Based on projections, by 
2050 at least a full 20 percent of the U.S. population, or 70 million people, 
will be 65 years of age or older.
3 During disasters or crises, older adults 
are vulnerable for several reasons. They are much more likely to become 
casualties during a disaster, to suffer long
-term psychological distress, 
and to recover economically more slowly. 
Every sensory channel can become less sensitive as individuals age. 
For example, reduced ˜ne motor control makes cellular telephone
 buttons 
and keys dif˜cult to manipulate, a problem that is compounded for those 
with arthritis of the ˜ngers. Research looking at the usability of sev
-eral alternativesŠtouch screens, larger keyboards, and voice inputŠhas 
found that touch screens are the easiest for elderly persons to use and can 
enable older adults to achieve performance comparable to that of younger 
adults. However, these solutions can present their own challenges, includ
-ing accidental activation and arm fatigue.
Declines in vision can also impair effective response to warnings and 
alerts in older adults. Older adults generally have greater susceptibility 
to glare and dif˜culty distinguishing between certain colors, for example, 
blue and green. For CMAS and mobile devices, text for older persons 
needs to be made more readable through the use of 12
- or 14
-point, sans 
serif fonts and the avoidance of colors that are dif˜cult to distinguish 
between. Older adults also tend to have dif˜culty hearing higher frequen
-cies. As discussed earlier, most ring tones are in the higher frequencies, 
and this could prevent older adults from hearing the alerts. The prefer
-ence of a particular vibratory cadence may differ by age. 
In addition to an increase in visual and auditory disabilities or impair
-ments that often occurs in older persons, there are comorbidities associated 
with age. Older adults thus often face multiple hindrances in receiving and 
responding to alerts and warnings delivered by mobile devices.
There are also signi˜cant challenges for those with diminished cogni
-tive abilities. Steps such as comprehending an alert, seeking additional 
information, and deciding on an appropriate decision to take protective 
action rely heavily on cognitive abilities such as attention and memory. 
3 
 U.S. Census Bureau, ﬁU.S. Interim Projections by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin.ﬂ 
Washington, D.C., 2004.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING WITH AT-RISK POPULATIONS
 43
As people age, these abilities may diminish as a result of changes in per
-ception, motor abilities, and cognition as well as changes in memory and 
reading comprehension skills. Research on cognitive aging indicates that 
there are often de˜cits in the selective attention of older adults, meaning 
that they may have dif˜culty identifying what information is important. 
To alleviate such limitations caused by cognitive challenges, it is useful 
to direct attention to the speci˜c parts of a message that are the most 
important. Older adults may also experience memory de˜cit and may 
have problems simultaneously processing information while reading text. 
Cognitive overload or information overload can tax working memory, 
which suggests the importance of not sending multiple messages in rapid 
succession and of avoiding overly complex instructions and jargon.
All of the factors described above can decrease the usability of cel
-lular telephones by older people, which is a major factor in reducing the 
adoption of cell phones by this group. Fifteen percent of Americans do not 
access the Internet on a regular basis; most of these are older adults. Only 
25 percent of adults 65 years of age or older have cell phones. Further-
more, owning a cell phone does not necessarily mean the owner can use 
the device. Older adults are not generally viewed as early adopters of new 
technologies, but it is a misconception that they are technophobes. Their 
choice of whether or not to use cell phones or other information technol
-ogy depends on the technology™s utility and ease of use. Persons who 
are elderly will probably need to be trained not only to use the mobile 
devices but also educated about how useful the alerts and warnings sys
-tem would be. 
GENDER-
BASED CONSIDERATIONS 
The importance that gender can have in people™s behavior during 
disasters was underscored by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, in which 
a large majority of fatalities in some communities were women and chil
-dren.
4 Many women drowned because they had not been taught to swim, 
in part because their customary role in the culture is to bring ˜sh caught 
by the men to market. Another cultural factor involved in these drown
-ings was the clothing customarily worn by women, in which they became 
entangled as they tried to escape the ˚ood waters or search for their chil
-dren. Children, who were most likely to be looked after by women, were 
also placed at higher risk. 
In the United States, an important gender
-based social pattern is that 
women are more likely than men to be the caregivers for children and 
elderly relatives, who are more likely to be at risk in a disaster. When 
4 
 BBC News, ﬁMost Tsunami Dead FemaleŠOxfam,ﬂ March 26, 2005. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
issuing messages, consideration needs to be given to the recipients of 
the message and also to those who surround the people at risk. Another 
signi˜cant gender
-based factor is that women tend to act sooner than 
men when a warning or alert is issued, which places men at greater 
risk. During Hurricane Mitch in 1998, a greater number of men than of 
women died.
5 This is generally attributed to the desire of men to protect 
their resources and family homes. Coinciding with studies highlighting 
the isolation of older populations, particularly of older males, data on 
Hurricane Katrina show that older African
-American men tended to die 
disproportionately compared to other populations.
6 CONSIDERATIONS RELATED TO RACE AND ETHNICITY
As discussed in Chapter 4, educational initiatives need to take into 
account an ethnic community™s usual information channel. This informa
-tion should inform the development of public education campaigns. 
Preferred information sources (television, radio, or online) can vary 
across racial and ethnic lines. For example, it has been reported that many 
Mexican
-Americans prefer to get information on community initiatives 
and programs at neighborhood meetings. Race and ethnicity also play a 
role in the public™s response to alerts.
7 It is important to identify where 
credibility and trust lie and to use those avenues. Furthermore, racial 
and ethnic minorities are more likely to seek multiple con˜rmations from 
informal sources and to delay taking protective action. This was particu
-larly apparent during Hurricane Katrina, when affected populations ˜rst 
gathered multiple generations living within the area before making a 
decision on protective action. 
Language can also create a challenge in receiving messages among 
populations with limited pro˜ciency in English. A tornado hit Saragosa, 
Texas, in 1987. Unfortunately an English
-language warning was translated 
incorrectly, and Spanish
-speaking people thought that they were getting 
5 
 The World Bank. ﬁHurricane MitchŠThe Gender Effects of Coping and Crises.ﬂ 
 PREMnotes,
 No. 57, August 2001. Available at http://www1.worldbank.org/prem
/PREMNotes/premnote57.pdf. Accessed December 21, 2010.
6 
 Sebastian N. Jonkman, Bob Maaskant, Ezra Boyd, and Marc Loyd Levitan. ﬁLoss of Life 
Caused by the Flooding of New Orleans After Hurricane Katrina: Analysis of the Relation
-ship Between Flood Characteristics and Mortality.ﬂ 
Risk Analysis
 29:676
-698 (2009).
7 
For additional information, see Ronald W. Perry and Lisa S. Nelson, ﬁEthnicity and 
 
Hazard Information Dissemination,ﬂ 
Environmental Management
 15(4):581
-587 (1991); Ronald 
Perry and A. Mushkatel, 
Minority Citizens in Disasters,
 University of Georgia Press, Athens, 
Ga., 1996; Ronald Perry and M. Lindell, 
Communicating Environmental Risk in Multiethnic 
Communities,
 Sage, Thousand Oaks, Calif., 2004; or A. Fothergill, E.G.M. Maestas, and J.D. 
Darlington, ﬁRace, Ethnicity and Disasters in the United States: A Review of the Literature,ﬂ 
Disasters
 23:156
-173 (1999).
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMUNICATING WITH AT-RISK POPULATIONS
 45
news
 of a tornado, not a 
warning
 of a tornado. People were gathered at 
community centers, and so they did not have access to radio. Others were 
home watching Spanish
-language television, which was not broadcast
-ing the message. These gaps in message receipt led to a large number of 
people not taking the appropriate protective action.
OBSER
VATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
The panelists and participants in the discussion following the panel 
offered the following observations regarding communicating with at
-risk 
populations:
Ł Affordability and accessibility have to be considered in developing 
warning systems and designing new technologies. A technology that is 
out of reach for a large segment of the population loses a great deal of its 
usefulness.
Ł Poor literacy is another challenge, which suggests that message 
testing needs to be done with a diverse set of test users.
Ł In addition to taking into account the challenges faced by elderly 
persons, it is also important to consider the use of alerts and warnings by 
children. For example, how will a child who is home alone respond to an 
alert?
Ł Credibility of the person or system conveying an alert or warn
-ing message is critical to ensuring that people take appropriate action, 
and people tend to trust ﬁpeople like themselves.ﬂ This suggests the 
need for attention to diversity in educational campaigns and message 
formulation. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
6Research Gaps
The Workshop on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile 
Devices: Current Knowledge and Research Gaps had two principal goals: 
(1) to present what is known about the public response to alerts and 
warnings and how what is known about that response relates to the 
design, operation, and future development of the Commercial Mobile 
Alert Service (CMAS) program; and (2) to identify gaps in that research. 
The following sections present research opportunities identi˜ed by the 
committee and drawn from plenary presentations and discussions in 
breakout sessions of the workshop, along with associated implementation 
challenges, and a list of new technologies for alerts and warnings that are 
likely to raise additional research questions.
RESEARCH OPPORT
UNITIES
Message Content
The CMAS speci˜cation provides for 90
-character messages and 
prohibits the inclusion of uniform resource locators (URLs) that link to 
additional sources of information. Workshop participants indicated that 
relatively little is known empirically about how people will respond to 
such short alerts. Following is a list of research topics in the areas of mes
-sage content and length identi˜ed by workshop participants:
Ł How does a 90
-character limit for alerts constrain the ability to 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH GAPS
 47
provide the public with alerts? What implications does the 90
-character 
limit have for public response? 
Ł Can such a short message provide enough information to let indi
-viduals know that a signi˜cant event has taken place? Does it provide 
enough information for individuals to obtain additional information and 
take appropriate action to protect themselves?
Ł What are the message characteristics that lead to effective instruc
-tion in crisis situations? 
Ł What does the public want the alert or warning message to say? 
What do they need to hear? 
Ł To what extent will CMAS alerts trigger information
-seeking behav
-iors, and what forms will such behavior take? Might that
 information
- 
seeking behavior end up leading to the network overloads that the Com
-mercial Mobile Service Alert Advisory Committee (CMSAAC) voiced 
concern about? 
Message Dissemination
Segments of the population are becoming increasingly accustomed to 
receiving mobile text messages, including alerts and warnings, from other 
individuals, from businesses, and from government agencies. Indeed, 
there has been some experience with the use of text alerts in munici
-pal and countywide systems as well as some research looking at the 
effectiveness of these systems, but there has been no experience with 
national
-scale systems. Moreover, the user bases for the systems in place 
today are small, and participation is entirely on an opt
-in basisŠso these 
systems only reach users who are most interested in receiving such alert
-ing information. Where opt
-out systems have been established, such as 
at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, the populations 
have been relatively small and centered around a particular institution. 
In contrast, CMAS will establish a large
-scale opt
-out system that covers 
much of the general population. Following is a list of unanswered ques
-tions about how the general public might respond to CMAS messages:
Ł What are the consequences of too many messages (e.g., if the 
threshold for events which trigger alerts is set too low, if alerts cover too 
large a geographical area, if messages are repeated too often, or if there 
are too many false alarms)? Is there a threshold level that would cause 
people to ignore the messages or opt out from participating? 
Ł What are the consequences of too few messages (e.g., if the thresh
-old for alerts is set too high or messages are repeated too infrequently)? 
Ł How does an alerts and warnings system generate the 
credibility 
needed to garner attention and guide the public™s response? 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Ł What level of geographical targeting is needed to make messages 
relevant? Is the targeting by county or equivalent entities suf˜ciently 
precise? 
Ł Will the distinctive alert tone and other special features be suf˜cient 
to distinguish CMAS alerts from other text messages, including spam? 
Information-Seeking 
Behavior
Given the limited information that can be provided in a CMAS alert, 
gaining an understanding of what people will do in response to alerts is 
a central question. Past research has shown that people respond to alerts 
and warnings by seeking additional information to con˜rm the event, 
determine their risk, and decide on their next action. Following is a list of 
research questions in the area of information
-seeking behavior:
Ł Can the information
-seeking behavior of people who receive CMAS 
alerts be predicted? What are the mechanisms for obtaining information 
and the sources of information that various subgroups use, and what 
information are they likely to seek? 
Ł Will a CMAS alert create a demand for cell
-phone
-delivered infor
-mation that could overwhelm bandwidth
-limited communications chan
-nels such as the cellular networks over which people receive the alerts? 
For example, when they have received an alert, will people place phone 
calls to friends or relatives, search for Internet information, or browse 
news and information Web sites?
Ł How do individuals determine what are credible sources of infor
-mation, and how does that determination differ by group? 
Ł Would a pointer (URL) to a bandwidth
-conserving of˜cial source 
of additional information actually reduce network congestion compared 
to the bandwidth used by individuals seeking information on their own? 
(That is, might some people be satis˜ed with that additional information, 
which could be specially tailored to reduce the bandwidth required to 
deliver it?)
Ł How could authoritative secondary sources best be incorporated 
into the CMAS program?
Social Media
New and social media such as Facebook and Twitter are being used 
both by professionals and by citizens to disseminate information in emer
-gency situations. These tools may be used as a second and con˜rming 
source during an alert or warning. Additionally, social media tools are 
often designed and used to provide short pieces of information, which 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH GAPS
 49
may provide insight on the best use and content for CMAS messages. The 
following research topics with respect to social media tools for alerts and 
warnings were identi˜ed at the workshop: 
Ł To what extent can results of research on social media be applied 
to gaining an understanding of what the public response to CMAS alerts 
might be? 
Ł What roles will social media play in emergency communications? 
Will the social media be among the important secondary sources that peo
-ple turn to for information? Will these media ever play a primary or major 
role in initial alerts? How do they relate to, or complement, CMAS?
Ł How might social media factor into CMAS and other of˜cial mes
-sage dissemination? 
Ł How will public education initiatives need to be designed to help 
the public understand and evaluate the usefulness of unof˜cial informa
-tion sources? 
Demographics and Access
Although the use of cellular telephones is widespread, not everyone 
owns, carries, or uses a cell phone, and cell phone service is not available 
in some sparsely populated areas. The following questions on these topics 
need further research: 
Ł What is the current demographic pro˜le of use of mobile devices 
in the United States?
Ł How does this use vary demographically (i.e., by age, income, 
ethnicity, gender)?
Ł How does this use of mobile devices vary with populations that 
have sensory or cognitive impairments?
Ł How do cell phones and text alerts ˜t into the broader set of com
-munications sources (including interactions with other individuals and 
community institutions) that communities use to convey information 
about emergencies? 
Ł What are the implications of supporting messages using text mes
-sages in only the Roman alphabet, which the initial rollout of CMAS 
supports? How can multiple languages best be incorporated into the 
subsequent phases of CMAS?
Context
The very nature of mobile devices means that people will receive 
CMAS messages in a wide variety of settingsŠincluding classrooms, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
highways, public trains and buses, and innumerable other places. Addi
-tionally, travelers who are away from home will receive alerts for hazards 
with which they may not be familiar. Following are questions needing 
further research that are related to the context in which people will receive 
alerts and warnings:
Ł How will an individual™s location affect his or her response to an 
alert or warning? (For example, what might be the response of a per
-son who is driving compared with that of a person traveling on public 
transportation?)
Ł How will people deal with messages about which they have not 
been educated? (For example, how might someone respond who lives on 
the West Coast and who then travels to ﬁTornado Alleyﬂ in the mi
dsection of the United States and is not familiar with the meaning of ﬁtornado 
warningﬂ or does not know what the appropriate protective action is in 
the case of a tornado?) 
IMPLEMENTATION CHALLEN
GES
The following sections describe challenges ahead for CMAS with 
respect to public education, the incorporation of CMAS efforts into a 
broader context of other alerting systems, and testing, piloting, and 
research with respect to CMAS messaging.
Public Education
Workshop participants emphasized that an effective educational com
-ponent is a key to introducing new alert technologies and methods. They 
cited past research showing that educating the public in advance about 
what actions to take under particular circumstances is key to effective 
public response. The constrained message context of CMAS places an 
even greater premium on educating the population in advance about the 
steps to take to protect themselves, the best places to go for additional 
information, and ways in which they might assist others. 
The size and diversity of the populations that will receive CMAS 
alerts and the diversity of the hazards about which alerts may need to 
be sent indicate the challenges of developing educational programs with 
suf˜cient breadth. These programs will need to explain not only CMAS 
but also the necessary public responses associated with different types 
of alerts. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH GAPS
 51
Incorporation into the 
Broader Context
Workshop participants observed that CMAS will need to be effec
-tively incorporated into the broader context that includes other alerts and 
warnings systems, broadcast media, social media, and so forth. CMAS 
will have the greatest effect if messaging is consistent across these sources 
(because inconsistent messages will hamper an effective public response) 
and if their use is coordinated. (For example, if a CMAS message says 
to tune to a local broadcast channel for further information, it is impor
-tant for local emergency management of˜cials to have forged good rela
-tionships with those broadcasters so that the information will in fact be 
available.) 
Testing, Piloting and Ongoing Research
The brevity of CMAS messages and the new contexts in which they 
will be used point to the importance of testing and research. It will be 
helpful to test the effectiveness of the wording of particular messages with 
test subjects. Before the CMAS program is introduced nationally, pilot 
programs can be used to determine what messaging is most effective, how 
CMAS messages can best be coordinated with other alerts and warnings, 
and so forth. Finally, ongoing research that gathers lessons learned from 
the early use of CMAS can be used to improve future generations of the 
program and to inform local, state, and federal of˜cials on best practices 
for using the system. 
FUTURE TOOLS FOR ALERTS
Advances in information and communications technologies are creat
-ing new opportunities for disseminating alerts and warnings. Several of 
these were discussed throughout the workshop, including the following:
Ł Ad hoc wireless networks.
 Most mobile devices have the capability to 
access wireless hot spots such as those found in coffee shops, bookstores, 
and public buildings. These semi
-public wireless networks have much 
more capacity than that of cellular wireless networks. Can these networks 
be quickly and easily accessed during emergencies to disseminate infor
-mation? Could they be useful as a redundant way of reaching mobile 
device users?
Ł Mobile devices and social media as information sources for emergency 
managers.
 Cell phones can be used by the public to report information 
from a disaster site. Social media and microblogging sites will continue 
to be used by those affected by a disaster or crisis. How can emergency 
managers best accumulate and access the information posted to social 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
media sites to respond to emergencies more ef˜ciently? What are the 
privacy implications of doing so?
Ł Location-based services for geographical targeting.
 Geographic codes 
used in CMAS to localize messages by county or equivalent jurisdiction 
will provide a fair approximation of the geographic area and population 
affected by an emergency. However, much more precise alerting could 
be provided by attaching more precise geographic information to alerts 
and making use of the location capability built into cell phones. In what 
scenarios might such precision be useful? What are potential drawbacks, 
such as concerns about privacy?
Ł Automation. 
How could automation be used to provide more timely 
alerts for highly time
-sensitive messages, such as those from Early Earth
-quake Warning Systems? Do technical or procedural factors make it dif
-˜cult to deliver alerts suf˜ciently rapidly? Might automated systems lead 
to an undesirable level of false alarms? 
Ł Distributed sensing using mobile devices.
 What is the potential for 
incorporating sensor devices in widely distributed devices such as cell 
phones to detect and provide more detailed information on events? 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55
Appendix A
Workshop Agenda
APRIL
 13-14, 2010
 NATIONAL
 A
CADEMY
 OF
 S
CIENCES
 WASHIN
GTON
, D.C.
Tuesday, April 13, 2010
8:30 a.m.
 Welcome and Opening Comments
  Jon Eisenberg, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunica
-tions Board (CSTB)
 Ellis Stanley and Jeannette N.R. Sutton, Committee Co-Chairs
 David Boyd, Program Manager, First Responder Group,
 Science 
and Technology Directorate, Department of Homeland 
 
Security (DHS)
9:00
 Overview of CMAS
 Denis Gusty,
 Branch Chief, Knowledge Management Tools, 
 
Science and Technology Directorate, U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security 
9:45 
  
Overview of Alerts and Warnings, the Alerts and Warnings 
System, and How People Respond
 Ł  
What do we already know about processes by which 
individuals and organizations respond to hazards?
  Michael Lindell, Texas A&M University
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
 Ł  
What are the myths and realities surrounding public 
response?
  Joseph Trainor, University of Delaware
   Ł  
How are text messaging and its use for alerts and warn
-ings evolving?
   Peter White, AT&T Wireless
  Moderator:
   Garry L. Briese, Briese and Associates/Center for New Media 
and Resiliency
11:15
  
Current Use of Text Messages for Alerts and Warnings: 
 
Experiences and Lessons Learned
 Ł Counties 
  Barbara Childs-Pair, former Director, District of Columbia 
Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency
 Ł Universities
  Michael Mulhare, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State 
University
 Moderator:
  Darrell Darnell, Of˜ce on Critical Infrastructure Protection 
and Resilience Policy and Strategy, White House National 
Security Staff 
1:30 p.m.
 Messaging, Risk Communications, and Risk Perception
 Ł  
What is known about communicating risk and messag
-ing? How does this apply to CMAS, which will deliver 
90
-character text messages to cell phones?
 Participants:
  Timothy Sellnow, University of Kentucky
  Matthew Seeger, Wayne State University
 Moderator:
  Brett Hansard, Argonne National Laboratory
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 57
3:15
  
Technologies for Alerts and Warnings: Past, Present, and 
Future
 Ł  
What technologies are currently being used or developed 
to provide alerts and warnings? How will the public use 
these technologies, and what are the
 implications for 
CMAS today and in the future?
 Participants:
  Nalini Venkatasubramanian, University of California, Irvine
  Robert Dudgeon, City of San Francisco™s Department of 
Emergency Management
  David Waldrop, Microsoft Corporation
  Jennifer Preece, University of Maryland, College Park
 Moderator:
  John H. Sorensen, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
4:30
 Breakout Sessions
 Ł  
What are key research results and lessons learned 
related to public response? 
 Ł  
What are the implications of these results for current, 
planned, and future alert and warning systems that use 
mobile devices?
 Ł  
What gaps exist in our understanding? 
 Ł  
What additional research might improve our under
-standing of public responses to alerts?
Wednesday, April 14, 2010
8:30 a.m.
 Breakout Report Back
9:00
 Public Education and Training
 Ł  
How do public education and training activities affect 
the public response to alerts? What can we learn from 
past and current public education campaigns? 
 Ł What are the implications for CMAS?
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
 Participants:
  Mark Benthien, Southern California Earthquake Center
  Michele Wood, California State University, Fullerton
  Daryl Rand, Harrison Advertising/The Rand Group
 Moderator:
  Inés Pearce, Pearce Global Partners, Inc.
10:30
 Communicating with At
-Risk Populations
 Ł  
What are the challenges in reaching at
-risk populations? 
What is known about these challenges, and where are 
the gaps in our understanding? What are the implica
-tions for CMAS?
 Ł An Aging Population
  Christopher B. Mayhorn, North Carolina State University
 Ł People with Disabilities
  Ed Price, Georgia Institute of Technology
 Ł The Hearing Impaired
  Judy Harkins, Gallaudet University
 Ł Minorities (and Moderator)
  Brenda Phillips, Oklahoma State University
12:00 noon
 Closing Session and Conclusions
 Ellis Stanley and Jeannette N.R. Sutton, Committee Co-Chairs
 Denis Gusty, Program Manager, First Responder Group,
 Science 
and Technology Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59
Mark 
Benthien
 is the director for Communication, Education and Out
-reach for the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), head
-quartered at the University of Southern California (USC). Mr. Benthien 
received a Bachelor of Science degree in geophysics from the University 
of California at Los Angeles in 1995 and a Master of Public Policy degree 
from USC in 2003. He communicates earthquake knowledge to end users 
and the general public in order to increase earthquake awareness, reduce 
economic losses, and save lives. Components of his work include the fol
-lowing: (1) coordinating productive interactions among SCEC scientists 
and with partners in science, engineering, risk management, government, 
business, and education; (2) managing activities that increase earthquake 
knowledge and science literacy at all educational levels; (3) leading efforts 
to improve earthquake hazard and risk assessments; and (4) promot
-ing earthquake preparedness, mitigation, and planning for response and 
recovery. Many of these efforts are in coordination with members of 
the Earthquake Country Alliance, a private
-public partnership of orga
-nizations that provide earthquake information and services, for which 
Mr. Benthien serves as the executive director. In this role he is the lead 
organizer of the Great California ShakeOut, a new annual earthquake drill 
with millions of participants throughout the state. 
David 
G. 
Boyd
 is the director of the Command, Control and Interoper
-ability Division at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and is 
responsible for research and development (R&D) programs that support 
Appendix B
Biosketches of Workshop Speakers
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
command and control, communications, computing, intelligence, surveil
-lance, reconnaissance, cybersecurity, and inte
rope
rability. Before joining 
DHS, Dr. Boyd served as the director of science and technology for the 
National Institute of Justice, where he managed R&D programs in every 
facet of technology affecting law enforcement and corrections, including 
the forensic sciences, less
-than
-lethal technologies, information and com
-munications technologies, and concealed weapons and contraband detec
-tion, among others. Dr. Boyd is a retired U.S. Army Of˜cer and a recipient 
of the 2005 Presidential Rank Award, the highest recognition available 
in the Federal Civil Service. With graduate degrees in management and 
public policy analysis as well as a doctorate in decision sciences, he has 
also published extensively in military, law enforcement, technical, and 
general
-circulation publications.
Garry L. 
Briese
 is a co
-founder of the Center for New Media and Resil
-iency and a principal in the professional services and consulting company 
Briese and Associates. In April 2008, he was appointed by the Secretary of 
the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) as the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency™s (FEMA™s) regional administrator for DHS/FEMA 
Region 8, for Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, North Dakota, and 
South Dakota. Mr. Briese served until January 2009 in this position, as 
the senior DHS/FEMA of˜cial in the region. During that time, the 2008 
Democratic National Convention was held in Denver, Colorado, and 
FEMA Region 8 was the lead agency for federal consequence management 
response preparations and response. Prior to coming to DHS/FEMA, 
he served as vice president, Emergency Management and Homeland 
Security, for ICF International, a NASDAQ
-listed professional services 
corporation based in Fairfax County, Virginia. Mr. Briese served as the 
executive director of the 12,000 member International Association of Fire 
Chiefs (IAFC) from 1985 to 2007. Previously he had served as the execu
-tive
 director of the Florida College of Emergency Physicians, and he has 
more than 36 years™ experience in all levels of emergency services, includ
-ing local, state, national, and international. He is a well
-known author 
and lecturer on leadership and on the future challenges for the ˜re and 
emergency services community and has coauthored two ˜rst
-responder 
emergency medical textbooks as well as an innovative textbook for the 
basic training of ˜re˜ghters. He developed several innovative programs 
such as the Fire Service Leadership Partnership Program, an internation
-ally recognized labor
-management relations program, and the National 
Fire Service Near Miss Reporting System. Mr. Briese has served as a career 
and volunteer ˜re˜ghter as well as the publicly elected chair of the Board 
of Fire Commissioners of a ˜re protection district in Orange County, 
Florida. He is a member of the advisory committee to the Board of the 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 61
National Fallen Fire˜ghters Foundation and is a member of the board of 
directors of the IAFC Foundation. Mr. Briese received his B.A. in inter
-national relations from the University of South Florida and his master™s 
degree in public administration from Nova Southeastern University. He 
is an adjunct faculty member in the Center for Trauma at the University 
of Colorado at Colorado Springs. 
Barbara Childs-Pair 
is the former director of the District of Columbia 
Homeland Security and Emergency Management Agency and the home
-land security adviser for the National Capital Region. In that role, she 
developed play books and protective action guides for the mayor of 
the District of Columbia, cabinet of˜cials, and elected of˜cials. She also 
assisted with the development of the ˜rst
-hour checklist and play books 
for the National Capital Regional after September 11. Ms. Childs
-Pair 
had extensive experience with brie˜ng mayors, governors, and White 
House of˜cials during her more
-than
-30
-year career with the District of 
Columbia.
Darrell Darnell 
is the director, Critical Infrastructure Protection and Resil
-ience Policy, National Security Staff in the newly created White House 
Of˜ce on Resilience. He assumed this position on October 26, 2009. Prior 
to joining the National Security Staff, Mr. Darnell was the director of the 
District of Columbia Homeland Security and Emergency Management 
Agency, from March 2007 to October 2009. As director, he led the devel
-opment of an overall public safety strategy to ensure the readiness and 
operational capability of the District of Columbia to prevent, or respond 
to and recover from, natural hazards, intentional acts of destruction, or 
accidental emergencies. He established a Homeland Security Program for 
the District of Columbia and directed the planning and interagency coor
-dination of District of Columbia support to special events and National 
Security Special Events such as the visit of Pope Benedict 
XVI to the 
United States and the inauguration of President Obama. Mr. Darnell 
served as the director, Preparedness Division, Department of Homeland 
Security Headquarters Operational Integration Staff (I
-Staff), where he 
oversaw DHS and interagency operational planning and the execution 
of national exercise, evaluation, and preparedness assessment programs. 
Prior to his assignment to the I
-Staff, Mr. Darnell served as the director of 
the Local Programs Division within the State and Local Program Manage
-ment Division at Of˜ce of State and Local Government Coordination and 
Preparedness where he oversaw the development and implementation of 
antiterrorism and counterterrorism preparedness programs for the Urban 
Areas Security Initiative. Mr. Darnell was a special assistant to the direc
-tor of the Of˜ce of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS), and 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
he assisted the Of˜ce of the Director in the administration and manage
-ment of the COPS Of˜ce, as well as serving as a liaison for the director 
to state and local law enforcement of˜cials. Mr. Darnell has served as an 
adjunct professor at Prince George™s Community College in Maryland 
and at the University of Maryland, University College
-Asian Division. He 
served honorably as a member of the United States Air Force, retiring in 
November 1997. Mr. Darnell is a senior fellow at the George Washington 
University Homeland Security Policy Institute and the ˜rst recipient of 
the Founder™s Award from the Naval Postgraduate School™s Center for 
Homeland Defense and Security. He is a graduate of the Harvard School 
of Public Health and Kennedy School of Government™s National Pre
-paredness Leadership Initiative.
Robert Dudgeon 
is a deputy director in the City of San Francisco™s Depart
-ment of Emergency Management and is responsible for the Division of 
Emergency Services. The division is responsible for coordinating the city™s 
multidisciplinary response to emergencies, developing emergency plans, 
managing the city™s exercise program and public preparedness programs. 
The Emergency Medical Services Agency, also housed in the division, 
is responsible for regulatory oversight of the city™s Emergency Medical 
Services System and medical planning for disasters. In addition, the divi
-sion is responsible for managing homeland security and other related 
preparedness grants for the city. As an adjunct assignment, Mr. Dudgeon 
serves as a senior adviser to Mayor Gavin Newsom on matters of disaster 
preparedness and emergency management. Mr. Dudgeon holds a B.A. 
in management and has more than 20 years of experience ranging from 
˜rst responder/paramedic to managing the San Francisco™s emergency 
operations center. 
Denis 
Gusty
 serves as the Program Manager, First Responder Group, 
Science and Technology Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland Secu
-rity. In addition, he leads the data interoperability programs of the Of˜ce 
of Interoperability and Compatability, which aim to improve incident 
response and recovery by developing tools that include the Federal Emer
-gency Management Agency (FEMA) Integrated Public Alert and Warning 
System (IPAWS) and the Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS) and 
the ED
XL messaging standards that help emergency responders man
-age incidents and exchange information in real time. Mr. Gusty came to 
Command, Control, and Interoperability from the U.S. General Services 
Administration (GSA), where he served as director of GSA™s Of˜ce of 
Intergovernmental Solutions. Prior to joining GSA, Mr. Gusty served as 
a program manager at the U.S. Department of Labor. In that role, he was 
responsible for helping to implement the President™s Management Agenda 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 63
by managing the e
-Government initiative, GovBene˜ts.gov. Mr. Gusty has 
more than 7 years of experience in developing intergovernmental partner
-ships and information technology policy and practices. 
Brett Hansard
 is the manager of the Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) 
Risk Communication and Management program, which provides public 
affairs training, product development, and exercise support to govern
-ment, nonpro˜t, private
-sector, and international organizations of all 
types. He has been with ANL since 1999. He has a deep and varied back
-ground in emergency public information, having served as spokesperson 
on stories of local, national, and international signi˜cance. As a Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) public affairs of˜cer, he has 
worked on more than 24 presidentially declared disasters, including the 
˚oods in the Midwest in 1993; the Northridge earthquake in California in 
1994; the ˚ood in Grand Forks, North Dakota, in 1997; Hurricane Floyd 
in 1999; the Colorado wild˜res in 2002; and Hurricane Katrina in 2005. In 
September 2001, Mr. Hansard served as lead public affairs of˜cer in sup
-port of FEMA Urban Search and Rescue efforts at the World Trade Center. 
In February 2002, he helped coordinate FEMA external affairs operations 
at the 2002 Olympic Winter Games in Salt Lake City, Utah, and in August 
2008 he oversaw the FEMA media monitoring and analysis program at 
the Democratic National Convention in Denver, Colorado. Mr. Hansard 
has performed a variety of roles within a Joint Information System/Joint 
Information Center, including serving as external affairs lead and public 
affairs lead, performing research and writing, and working on the news 
desk and on rapid response. He is also a certi˜ed ˜re information of˜cer. 
Previously Mr. Hansard served as press secretary and research assistant 
for the Senate Veterans™ Affairs Committee and as a staff member for U.S. 
Senator Alan Cranston. He has worked as campaign coordinator and 
spokesperson for a California State Senate campaign in Los Angeles. He 
has written numerous articles, speeches, and op
-ed articles for political 
candidates, senior public of˜cials, and chief executive of˜cers. He has an 
M.P.P. from the Harvard University Kennedy School of Government and 
a B.A. in journalism from California State University, Northridge.
Judy Harkins
 is a professor in Gallaudet University™s Department of 
Communication Studies. She is the founding director of the Technol
-ogy Access Program at the university and a principal investigator of 
the Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on Telecommunications 
Access in cooperation with the Trace Center, University of Wisconsin. 
Her research bears both directly and indirectly on the accessibility of 
emergency communications to people with disabilities. At Gallaudet she 
has developed a course on communication accessibility for deaf under
-Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
graduates. Dr. Harkins served in an advisory capacity to the Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) in the User Needs Group of the 
Commercial Mobile Service Alert Advisory Committee (CMSAAC), as 
an alternate on Network Reliability and Interoperability Council VII, and 
on two other FCC Federal Advisory Committees related to consumer 
issues and telecommunications accessibility. She comments frequently in 
FCC proceedings concerning public safety and people with disabilities, 
and she has participated actively in industry forums established within 
the Alliance for Telecommunication Industry Solutions to produce solu
-tions to accessibility problems. In 2009
-2010, she was honored with the 
Lifetime Achievement Award of Telecommunications for the Deaf, Inc., 
the Chairman™s award of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi
-neers/Communications Quality and Reliability Technical Committee, the 
Susan B. Hadden award for pioneering work in telecommunications by 
the Alliance for Public Technology, and a certi˜cate of appreciation for 
contributions to the accessibility committee of the National Emergency 
Number Association. 
Michael Lindell
 is the director of the Hazard Reduction and Recovery 
Center at Texas A&M University. He has a graduate degree in social 
psychology from the University of Colorado (1975), with a specialty in 
disaster research, and has completed hazardous materials emergency 
responder training through the Hazardous Materials Specialist level. 
Dr. Lindell has more than 25 years of experience in the ˜eld of emergency 
management, during which time he has conducted a program of research 
on the processes by which individuals and organizations respond to natu
-ral and technological hazards. In addition, he has had extensive experi
-ence in providing technical assistance to government agencies, industry 
groups, and private corporations in the development of emergency plans 
and procedures. Dr. Lindell has written extensively on emergency man
-agement and is the author of more than 60 technical reports, 60 journal 
articles and book chapters, and 5 books and monographs. Much of his 
research, especially that supported by the National Science Foundation 
(NSF), has examined the processes by which affected populations respond 
to warnings of the imminent threat of a natural or technological hazard. 
His organizational research, also supported by NSF, has looked at the 
effects of disaster experience and the community planning process on 
the development of adaptive strategies for promoting emergency pre
-paredness. Dr. Lindell has served as an adjunct faculty member for the 
Federal Emergency Management Agency™s National Emergency Training 
Center, lecturing on disaster psychology and public response to warning. 
He also has been an instructor in other workshops that federal agencies 
have sponsored for state and local emergency planners throughout the 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 65
country, and he has appeared as a panelist in conferences on protective 
actions in hazardous materials emergencies. In addition, he has been a 
consultant to ˜ve of the Department of Energy national laboratories on 
a variety of topics in the area of emergency preparedness and response. 
Christopher 
B. Mayhorn
, an associate professor and program coordinator 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Psychology program, joined the 
faculty at North Carolina State University in 2002. He earned a B.A. from 
the Citadel (1992) and an M.S. (1995), a graduate certi˜cate in
 gerontology 
(1995), and a Ph.D. (1999) from the University of Georgia. He also com
-pleted a postdoctoral fellowship at the Georgia Institute of Technology. 
His teaching duties include courses in research methodology, human 
factors, and cognition. Dr. Mayhorn™s current research interests include 
everyday memory, decision making, human
-computer interaction, and 
safety and risk communication, as well as the design of home medical 
devices for older adult populations. Dr. Mayhorn has more than 30 peer
-reviewed publications, and his research has been funded by government 
agencies such as the National Science Foundation. Currently, Dr. Mayhorn 
is serving on the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (HFES) Govern
-ment Relations Committee and as the president of the Carolina Chapter 
of HFES. 
Michael Mulhare 
was appointed director of emergency management 
at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech) in 
November 2008. The university™s Of˜ce of Emergency Management is 
a new of˜ce, reporting to the vice president of administrative services, 
which oversees emergency planning and preparedness and response. 
Mr. Mulhare is responsible for developing and maintaining a compre
-hensive and integrated emergency management program utilizing an 
all
-hazard approach to the coordination and management of risk assess
-ment, emergency management, disaster planning, and continuity of oper
-ations planning and response activities. He had previously, since 1985, 
served the Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management in 
a variety of capacities: from 2001 to 2008 as the department™s emergency 
response administrator in the Of˜ce of the Director, and in 2006 he took 
on the added duties of chief of the new Of˜ce of Emergency Response. 
Mr. Mulhare is a registered professional engineer, with more than 25 years 
of practical experience as an emergency manager, ˜rst responder, and 
scientist and engineer.
Inés Pearce
 is the chief executive of Pearce Global Partners, Inc. (PGP), 
addressing the needs of government, business, nonpro˜t organizations, 
and communities to reduce the potential for loss of life and property from 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
natural and human
-caused disasters. Ms. Pearce is a business continuity 
and emergency management expert with 17 years of professional experi
-ence, including 12 years specializing in public
-private partnerships. She 
serves as the senior adviser for the Business Civic Leadership Center 
(BCLC) of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, where she is the BCLC™s pri
-mary point of contact for community
-level disaster preparedness, recov
-ery, and partnership coordination. She has also serves as the BCLC™s 
liaison during disasters, for the facilitation of long
-term recovery, such 
as after the earthquakes in Chile and Haiti in 2010, the American Samoa 
tsunami in 2009, and, in 2008 the ˚ooding in Iowa, storms in Florida, 
and hurricanes in Texas and Louisiana. In 2009, Ms. Pearce was selected 
to the National Research Council™s Committee on Private
-Public Sector 
Collaboration to Enhance Community Disaster Resilience. Before launch
-ing PGP, Ms. Pearce was appointed director of Seattle Project Impact for 
the City of Seattle Of˜ce of Emergency Management, managing four 
mitigation programs that provided resources for safer schools, homes, 
and businesses, as well as better hazard maps. During her tenure,
 Seattle 
Project Impact received numerous national excellence awards. As an 
expert in public
-private partnerships, Ms. Pearce has represented the 
World Economic Forum at the United Nations™ (UN) Global Platform for 
Disaster Risk Reduction in Geneva, Switzerland, and has addressed the 
UN regarding public
-private partnerships at the World Conference for 
Disaster Reduction in Kobe, Japan. In 2003, Ms. Pearce was inducted into 
the Contingency Planning and Management (CPM) Hall of Fame in the 
Public Servant category. She has also received two National Excellence 
Awards from the Western States Seismic Policy Council; in 2009, she 
received an Award of Recognition from the City of Los Angeles for the 
successful planning of the Great Southern California ShakeOut, the largest 
earthquake drill in U.S. history, with 5.5 million participants, surpassed in 
2009 with 6.9 million registrants statewide; and in 2010, she received the 
U.S. Geological Survey™s Shoemaker Award for Communications Excel
-lence. Ms. Pearce is the president of the Disaster Resistant Business Toolkit 
(DRB Toolkit
®) Workgroup, a 501c
-3 public charity that provides a com
-prehensive software tool facilitating the process for small businesses and 
nonpro˜t organizations to create and then implement improved disaster 
readiness plans; the president of the Contingency Planning and Recovery 
Management group; and a member of the board of the Cascadia Regional 
Earthquake Workgroup. She received her B.A. degree in political science 
from Gonzaga University.
Brenda Phillips
 teaches emergency management and research methods 
courses, with particular expertise in disaster recovery and high
-risk popu
-Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 67
lations at Oklahoma State University. She is a researcher with the Center 
for the Study of Disasters and Extreme Events and a faculty member in 
the Fire and Emergency Management Program. Her research has been 
funded by the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Geological Survey, 
and the Natural Hazards Center. She taught in Costa Rica through a 
Rotary Foundation International Grant, received a Fulbright
-Hays Award 
to Pakistan, and participated in a National Science Foundation Researcher 
Exchange with the People™s Republic of China. She has given invited pre
-sentations in New Zealand, Australia, Germany, Costa Rica, and India, 
and at the U.S. National Academies, Church World Services, the National 
Weather Service Training Center, and various state of˜ces of emergency 
management. Her work has been published in the 
Journal of Emergency 
Management, Disaster Management, Disasters, International Journal of Mass 
Emergencies and Disasters, Sociological Focus,
 and 
Humanity and Society
.Jennifer Preece 
is a professor in and dean of the College of Informa
-tion StudiesŠMaryland™s iSchoolŠat the University of Maryland. Her 
research focuses on the intersection of information, community, and tech
-nology. She is particularly interested in community participation on
- and 
off
-line. Dr. Preece is the author of eight books and numerous research 
articles. Two of her books are 
Online Communities: Designing Usability, Sup
-porting Sociability
 (Wiley, 2000) and a coauthored best
-selling text entitled 
Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction
 (Wiley, 1st ed., 2002; 
2nd ed., 2007; 3rd ed., 2011).
Ed Price
 is the research director of the Interactive Media Technology
 Center 
at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
 He is one of the founders of the 
center, starting there as a student at its inception in 1989. He has led many 
research efforts, including the award
-winning Odyssey Online educational 
program, which teaches cultural history through archeological artifacts. 
Dr. Price holds two worldwide patents in telemedicine and has ˜led addi
-tional patents on audio searching and eCommerce networks. He is past 
chair of the international Video Development Initiative (ViDe), which is the 
lead organization behind the proposed International Telecommunication 
Union H.350 standard for videoconferencing directories. Dr. Price is also a 
project director in the Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center on Mobile 
Wireless Technology for Persons with Disabilities, leading the development 
efforts in universal control and multimodal interfaces as well as research 
into emerging wireless technologies. He is also a primary representative 
to the INCITS V2 standards committee developing the Alternative Inter
-face Access Protocol, an emerging standard which will ensure that mobile 
devices will be able to interact with their surrounding environments.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Daryl Rand
, currently with Harrison Advertising and The Rand Group, 
has had a 35
-year career marked by long
-term assignments in adver
-tising, public relations, and media management. For the past 5 years, 
Ms. Rand has spearheaded an initiative focused on launching public 
education/awareness outreach campaigns for many of the nation™s major 
cities, including New York and San Francisco, and the State of New 
 
Jersey. She participated in crafting the Emergency Management Accredita
-tion Program™s Guidelines for Public Awareness Programs to strengthen 
public education. Her focus on the need to implement sustained readi
-ness education was instrumental in forming a coalition of the country™s 
top emergency managers, now known as the Top Eight. Her emergency 
management and homeland security perspectives have been broadened 
as a result of her membership in the Washington
-based organization 
Business Executives for National Security. Ms. Rand has been a consul
-tant to CBS Outdoor, the global leader in Out
-of
-Home Media, and its 
predecessors for the past 25 years. In that capacity, she helped negotiate 
the transit advertising franchise and subsequent extensions with New 
Jersey Transit for advertising rights on 3,000 buses managed by the only 
state authority operated by CBS Outdoor. Ms. Rand also supervised all 
statewide transit advertising operations and sales for their New Jersey 
market. She is the founder and president of Harrison Advertising, Inc., a 
Women™s Business Enterprise Corporation, fully certi˜ed by the State of 
New Jersey, New Jersey Transit, the Port Authority of New York and New 
Jersey, the Metropolitan Transit Authority, Washington Metropolitan Area 
Transit Authority, and Southeastern Pennsylvania Transit Authority. In 
addition, she and her father before her have served the Provident Bank as 
advertising and public relations counsel for ˜ve decades. Eight years ago, 
Ms. Rand founded the partnership of RM International with Alan Marcus 
to continue to serve the bank in that capacity.
Matthew Seeger 
is currently a professor and chair in the Department of 
Communication at Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan. His teach
-ing and research are in communication ethics, crisis and emergency risk 
communication, organizational responses to crisis and disaster, inter
-agency coordination, and informational needs. Dr. Seeger also served as 
associate dean of the Graduate School at Wayne State. He has advised 
35 doctoral dissertations in the areas of organizational communication, 
crisis communication, and related topics. He has served as a consultant to 
AT&T,
 DaimlerChrysler, Blue
-Cross/Blue
-Shield, General Motors, K
-Mart 
 
Corporation, and the State of Michigan, among other organizations. He 
has worked with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
and the State of Michigan on issues of crisis communication and the public 
health, cross
-border coordination, and crisis leadership. He participated in 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 69
the CDC™s debrie˜ng and critique of its response to the 2001
-2010 anthrax 
episode and in developing the CDC™s crisis communication protocols. He 
has worked very closely with the CDC on issues of pandemic in˚uenza 
preparedness. Dr. Seeger also worked with the U.S. Department of Agri
-culture on issues of risk communication. In 2002, he participated in a U.S. 
Department of State grant to train Russian government of˜cials in effective 
crisis communication. His work on communication risk and crisis man
-agement has appeared in the 
Handbook of Crisis and Risk Communication, 
International Encyclopedia of Communication, Journal of Health Communica
-tion Research, Communication Yearbook, Handbook of Public Relations, Public 
Relations Review, Communication Studies, Journal of Business Communica
-tion, Journal of Change Management, Management Communication Quarterly,
 Southern Communication Journal, Journal of Business Ethics,
 Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, 
Health Promotion and Practice,
 and 
Communication Research Reports
 and in 
several edited collections and proceedings. His books include 
Effective Cri
-sis Communication
 (Sage, 2007); 
Crisis Communication and the Public Health
 (Hampton, 2008); 
Communication and Organization Crisis 
(Praeger, 2003); 
and 
Risk Communication: A Message Centered Approach 
(Science Press, forth
-coming). He also wrote 
Ethics in Organizational Communication
 (Hampton, 
1998), a comprehensive treatment of ethical issues of communication faced 
by organizations. Dr. Seeger has received research support from CDC, the 
National Science Foundation, the National Center for Food Protection and 
Defense, and the State of Michigan. His current research interests focus on 
informational needs during crisis, crisis and public health, communica
-tion and natural disasters, crisis discourse, and the application of chaos 
theory and learning theory to crisis. He recently completed 
Communication, 
Organization and Crisis
 for Quorum Press and is working on a book dealing 
with crisis communication for Sage and editing 
Crisis Communication and 
the Public Health
 for Hampton Press.
Timothy Sellnow
 is a professor of communication at the University of 
Kentucky where he teaches courses in research methods, organizational 
communication, and risk and crisis communication. Dr. Sellnow™s research 
focuses on bioterrorism, pre
-crisis planning, and communication strate
-gies for crisis management and mitigation. He has conducted funded 
research for the Department of Homeland Security, the U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. He 
has published numerous articles on risk and crisis communication and 
has coauthored four books. His most recent book is entitled 
Risk Com
-munication: A Message-Centered Approach 
(Springer, 2008). Dr. Sellnow is 
the former editor of the National Communication Association™s 
Journal of 
Applied Communication Research.
 Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
John H. Sorensen
ŠSee biosketch in Appendix C, ﬁCommittee and Staff 
Biosketches.ﬂ
Joseph Trainor 
is a research assistant professor at the Disaster Research 
 
Center, University of Delaware, with joint appointments in the Depart
-ment of Sociology and Criminal Justice and the School of Urban Affairs 
and Public Policy. He is a member of the University of Delaware Research 
Council and an active participant in the International Research Com
-mittee on Disasters. His primary research interests include international 
aspects of disasters, social networks, disaster researcher and practitioner 
integration, warnings and protective action, human behavioral response 
to
 disasters, effects of organizational design, and patterns of association in 
multi
-organizational networks. Dr. Trainor has signi˜cant research experi
-ence and has been involved in a number of funded research projects, both 
in the United States and internationally. He has authored or coauthored 
more than 12 articles and book chapters on disaster
-related topics. He was 
the principal network analyst in a study of multi
-organizational coordina
-tion after the World Trade Center attacks on September 11; the lead gradu
-ate researcher on a project to examine the organizational and institutional 
development and operation of Emergency Support FuctionESF#9/Search 
and Rescue in the United States; and he conducted an analysis of the 
perspective of FEMA employees on the impacts organizational design. In 
addition to more traditional quantitative and qualitative research, he also 
has engaged in a number of ˜eld research projects. He was a member of a 
research reconnaissance team that traveled to India and Sri Lanka imme
-diately following the December 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, and later 
he served as the lead ˜eld researcher for the Disaster Research Center™s 
effort to examine the social aspects of Hurricane Katrina. Dr. Trainor has 
also recently been working to develop a number of disaster planning and 
outreach services. The goal of this effort is to provide state and local com
-munities with assistance as they engage in the disaster planning process 
and at the same time to provide emergency management students with 
real
-life experience. In addition to other efforts in this area, he assisted in 
the development of an approach to writing Emergency Operations Plans 
(EOP), a planning process for small communities, and has been involved 
in writing a number of research summaries for state, federal, and interna
-tional governments that summarize different aspects of key social science 
research on disasters. Finally, Dr. Trainor has been actively participating 
in the establishment of the University of Delaware™s new degree program 
in disaster science and management.
Nalini 
Venkatasubramanian 
is currently a professor in the Department 
of Computer Science at the University of California, Irvine. She
 has had 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 71
extensive research and industry experience in the areas of distributed
 systems, adaptive middleware, and distributed multimedia systems and 
mobile applications. Her experience in crisis alerting systems has been in 
the context of developing fast, reliable, and customized alerts to large pop
-ulations in the presence of surge demands and infrastructure
 failuresŠin 
particular through the RESCUE project and the CrisisAlert System. Pro
-fessor Venkatasubramanian has published more than 150 papers and is a 
recipient of several awards, including the NSF Career Award and Teach
-ing Excellence Awards. She has served on the program committee and 
organizing committee of a variety of conferences on middleware, distrib
-uted systems, and mobile applications. 
Dave Waldrop 
served as the architect of Microsoft™s Vine, a location
-aware 
social networking application focused on keeping family and friends in 
contact during emergencies. Prior to joining Microsoft, he served as the 
vice president of Netserv as well as the vice president of sales for Centen
-nial Computer Systems. Mr. Waldrop has extensive experience in senior 
leadership in sales, customer and product marketing, and business devel
-opment, and a distinguished track record of driving innovation through 
start
-up business models, establishing, negotiating, and driving large 
strategic partnerships, and developing and leading high
-performance 
teams.
Peter White
 began his professional career as an assistant district attorney 
in the New York County District Attorney™s Of˜ce, where he tried
 felony 
cases and later specialized in complex criminal investigations using 
eavesdropping and other electronic surveillance. He joined the wireless 
industry in 1995 as a director with AT&T Wireless Services and has held 
numerous legal and external affairs positions since that time. In 2003, 
Mr. White joined the International Division of AT&T Wireless, where he 
was responsible for all company relationships with governments from 
Bermuda, to the Cayman Islands, to Trinidad and Tobago. He returned to 
domestic matters in 2005, where he currently is responsible for enhanced
-911 and other emergency communications, roaming, and related policy 
issues.
Michele Wood 
received a doctorate in public health from the Depart
-ment of Community Health Sciences at the University of California, Los 
 
Angeles (UCLA); she also holds a master™s degree in community psychol
-ogy. Dr. Wood is an assistant professor in the Health Science Department 
at the California State University, Fullerton, where she teaches courses in 
statistics and program design and evaluation. She has 20 years™ experi
-ence designing, implementing, and evaluating interventions. Through 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
her af˜liation with the Southern California Injury Prevention Center in 
the UCLA School of Public Health, she managed a national household 
preparedness survey, conducted as part of the 
NationalCenterforthe
National Center for the 
Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (
START)programthrough
START) program through 
the University of Maryland™s Center of Excellence, as well as a California 
household telephone survey on earthquake preparedness. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73
Appendix C
Committee and Staff Biosketches
Ellis Stanley 
(Co-Chair
), director of Western Emergency Services, has more 
than 32 years of work experience in emergency management, beginning 
as the director of emergency management for Brunswick County, North 
Carolina, in 1975. While in Brunswick County, he was selected as the ˜rst 
˜re marshal for the jurisdiction and also served as ˜re and rescue commis
-sioner. There Mr. Stanley was very involved with hurricane planning and 
response as well as having developed one of the ˜rst ˜xed
-nuclear
-facility 
plans in the nation following the accident in 1979 at the Three Mile Island 
Nuclear Generating Station. In 1982 Mr. Stanley was appointed director of 
the Durham
-Durham County Emergency Management Agency, where he 
worked very closely with the world™s largest research park in the North 
Carolina Triangle area and was heavily involved with hazardous mate-
rials planning. In 1987 he was appointed director of the Atlanta
-Fulton 
County Emergency Management Agency by the governor of Georgia. 
While in Atlanta, Mr. Stanley had extensive experience in major event 
planning (the 1988 Democratic National Convention, the visit of Nelson 
Mandela in 1995, and the 2006 International Olympic Games). Mr. Stanley 
was appointed in 1997 as assistant city administrative of˜cer for the City 
of Los Angeles and in 2000 as the general manager of the Emergency 
Preparedness Department for the City of Los Angeles until his retirement 
in 2007. Mr. Stanley joined Dewberry, LLC, in November 2007 as the 
director of Western Emergency Management Services. In March 2008, he 
was chosen to be the director of DNC Planning for the city and county 
of Denver, Colorado. Because of the success of the Democratic National 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
Convention, the date August 29, 2008, was proclaimed ﬁThe Ellis Stanley 
Day in Denver.ﬂ
Jeannette N.R. Sutton 
(Co-Chair
) is a senior research scientist at the Trauma 
Health and Hazards Center at the University of Colorado at Colorado 
Springs, National Institute for Space, Science, and Security Centers. 
Dr. Sutton most recently worked as a research faculty member at the 
Natural Hazards Center at the University of Colorado, Boulder, where she 
coordinated a number of research projects on community preparedness, 
regional collaboration and the Urban Areas Security Initiative, warning 
systems for extreme events, and, most recently, the uses of social media 
during disasters and crisis events. Dr. Sutton is currently the principal 
investigator (PI) on two separate 3
-year National Science Foundation
-funded projects. The ˜rst, Disaster Resilient Rural Communities, focuses 
on the effects of information access on perceptions of collective ef˜cacy 
in rural communities affected by seasonal hazards (with co
-PI Charles 
Benight). The second project, Informal Online Communication in Crises 
and Disaster Events, is a comparative examination of online social 
networks that emerge in response to hazardous events (with co
-PI Carter 
Butts). Dr. Sutton is also af˜liated with the Argonne National Laboratory, 
where she conducts research on social media policy for emergency 
management and response. In addition, she serves as an academic adviser 
to Crisis Commons and the volunteer technical community responding 
to disasters. Dr. Sutton™s research has been featured in 
Nature
, 
Reason
, and 
Emergency Management Magazine
. She received her Ph.D. in sociology 
from the University of Colorado at Boulder, and a Master of Divinity 
from Princeton Theological Seminary. She served as a victim services 
coordinator following the Columbine High School shooting in 1999. 
Louise Comfort
 is a professor of public and international affairs and 
the director of the Center for Disaster Management at the University of 
 
Pittsburgh™s Graduate School of Public and International Affairs. She 
teaches in the ˜eld of public policy analysis, information policy, organi
-zational theory, and sociotechnical systems. She holds degrees in politi
-cal science from Macalester College (B.A.); the University of California, 
Berkeley (M.A.); and Yale University (Ph.D.). She has been the principal 
investigator of the Interactive, Intelligent, Spatial Information System 
(IISIS) Project, from 1994 to the present (http://www.cdm.pitt.edu). Her 
recent publications related to disaster management include the follow
-ing: 
Designing Resilience: Preparedness for Extreme Events
 (University of 
Pittsburgh Press, 2010); ﬁRetrospectives and Prospectives on Hurricane 
Katrina: Five Years and Countingﬂ (
Public Administration Review
, 2010); 
ﬁTransition from Response to Recovery: The January 12, 2010 Haiti Earth
-Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 75
quakeﬂ (
Earthquake Spectra
, 2010); ﬁThe Dynamics of Disaster Recovery: 
Resilience and Entropy in Hurricane Response Systems 2005Œ2008ﬂ (
Pub
-lic Organization Review, 
2009
); 
and ﬁCrisis Management in Hindsight: 
Cognition, Communication, Coordination and Controlﬂ (
Public Adminis
-tration Review
, 2007). Dr. Comfort is currently engaged in three large
-scale 
research projects on crisis management. In August 2009 she concluded 
a 5
-year National Science Foundation (NSF)
-funded research project on 
Secure CITI: A Critical Information Technology Infrastructure, in which 
she served as a co
-PI with two computer scientists. The project examined 
the design of networks of information infrastructure for urban regions. 
Dr. Comfort is currently the PI on a 3
-year NSF
-funded project on Design
-ing Resilience for Communities at Risk: Improving Decision Making to 
Support Collective Action Under Stress. This project focuses on the design 
and development of a computational model for an early tsunami detec
-tion system for a test bed off the coast of Padang, Sumatra, Indonesia. 
Further, she is engaged in the development of a test bed for information 
systems to be implemented with the collaboration of practicing agencies 
in the Pittsburgh metropolitan region, Pennsylvania. She is also a project 
lead investigator on a research arm to develop an electronic dashboard 
for a large research project, Public Health Adaptive Systems, that is exam
-ining the adaptive capacity of the public health system. This project, 
conducted jointly with three other research arms, is directed by
 Margaret 
Potter, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
 Pittsburgh, and 
funded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In her research, 
Dr. Comfort has focused on the design, development, and integration of 
information processes to support decision making in urgent, uncertain 
environments.
John Harrald 
is a professor at the Center for Technology, Security, and 
Policy at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. He previously 
served as the director of the George Washington University (GWU) Insti
-tute for Crisis, Disaster, and Risk Management (www.gwu.edu/~icdrm) 
and is a professor emeritus of Engineering Management and Systems 
Engineering in the GWU School of Engineering and Applied Science. He 
was the founding executive editor of the 
Journal of Homeland Security and 
Emergency Management
 (www.bepress.org/jhsem) and is a member of the 
National Research Council™s Disaster Roundtable Advisory Committee. 
Dr. Harrald has been actively engaged in the ˜elds of emergency and cri
-sis management and maritime safety and port security and as a researcher 
in his academic career and as a practitioner during his 22
-year career as a 
U.S. Coast Guard of˜cer; he retired from the Coast Guard in the grade of 
captain. Dr. Harrald received his B.S. in engineering from the U.S. Coast 
Guard Academy, an M.S. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
where he was an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, and an M.B.A. and Ph.D. from 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
Richard 
G. Muth
 was appointed executive director of the Maryland 
Emergency Management Agency (MEMA) by Governor Martin O™Malley 
on June 1, 2008. Director Muth has devoted his entire professional career 
to safeguarding the lives of Maryland citizens by improving public safety 
and emergency management practices at the federal, state, and local 
 
levels. He is a 33
-year career and volunteer veteran of the Baltimore 
County Fire Department. He has previously chaired the Governor™s Emer
-gency Management Advisory Council (GEMAC), served as a two
-term 
president of the Maryland Emergency Management Association, and 
was a committee member and subsequent chair of the State Emergency 
Response Commission (SERC). In 1993, Mr. Muth was appointed director 
of the Of˜ce of Emergency Preparedness in Baltimore County. In 1998, he 
served as the on
-scene coordinator of Maryland resources while battling 
massive wild˜res in the state of Florida; he was awarded a governor™s 
citation for his efforts. That same year, he was honored by the American 
Red Cross for establishing new protocols between Baltimore County and 
the Red Cross. In 1999, he was chosen to chair the Baltimore Metro Coun
-cil Y2K Contingency Planning Group. In 2003, Mr. Muth was appointed 
by Governor Robert Ehrlich to serve as Baltimore County™s Director of 
Homeland Security and Emergency Management; in that capacity he 
oversaw the county™s Hazardous Materials Program, Advanced Tactical 
Rescue, Fire Department Communications, and the Chemical Stockpile 
Program. He has chaired the U.S. Defense Department™s Weapons of Mass 
Destruction ProgramŠDomestic Preparedness Chemical team and has 
been recognized for his leadership roles in the aftermath of Hurricane 
Isabel and as Maryland™s Emergency Resource Coordinator following 
Hurricane Katrina. As MEMA™s executive director, he oversees a staff of 75 
people who work closely with state agencies and Maryland™s local juris
-dictions, coordinating and planning the state™s response to any disaster. 
When a disaster occurs, whether it is human
-made or natural, Mr. Muth 
becomes the lead person having the primary responsibility of managing 
the emergency event and closely advising the governor on preparedness 
and response strategies.
David Ropeik
 is an author and a consultant on risk perception and risk 
communication to government, business, health care organizations, trade 
and professional organizations, consumer groups, and educational insti
-tutions. He is a former instructor of risk communication at the Harvard 
School of Public Health and was co
-director of the school™s professional 
education course ﬁThe Risk Communication Challenge.ﬂ He is the author 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C
 77
of 
How Risky Is It, Really? Why Our Fears Don™t Always Match the Facts
 (McGraw
-Hill, March 2010). He is a coauthor of 
RISK, A Practical Guide for 
Deciding What™s Really Safe and What™s Really Dangerous in the World Around 
You
 (Houghton Mif˚in, 2002). He is the creator and director of the pro
-gram ﬁImproving Media Coverage of Risk,ﬂ a training program for jour
-nalists. Mr. Ropeik was a television reporter for WCVB
-TV in Boston from 
1978 to 2000; in that role he specialized in reporting on environment and 
science issues. He twice won the DuPont
-Columbia Award (often cited as 
the television equivalent of the Pulitzer Prize), and seven regional Emmy 
awards. He was a Knight Science Journalism Fellow at the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology (MIT), 1994
-1995, and a member of the board of 
directors of the Society of Environmental Journalists, 1991
-2000. He has 
taught journalism at Boston University, Tufts University, and MIT.
John H. Sorensen 
is a distinguished research staff member at the Oak 
Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). He has been involved with research 
on emergency planning and disaster response for more than 30 years. He 
has been the principal investigator (PI) on more than 40 major
 projects for 
federal agencies, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA), the Department of Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, 
the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Department of Defense, and the 
Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board. Dr. Sorensen has par
-ticipated in research including the Three Mile Island Public Health Fund 
Emergency Planning Project on Three Mile Island and the Second Assess
-ment of Research on Natural Hazards, for which he served as the sub
-group leader for Prediction, Forecast Warning and Emergency Planning. 
He has worked closely with the Chemical Stockpile Emergency Prepared
-ness program and consults for the nuclear power industry. Dr. Sorensen 
has authored more than 140 professional publications, including 
Impacts 
of Hazardous
 Technology: The Psycho-Social Effects of Restarting TMI-
1 (State 
University of New York Press, 1987)
. He has published extensively on 
response to emergency warnings, risk communications, organizational 
effectiveness in disasters, emergency evacuation, decontamination, and 
protective actions for chemical emergencies. Dr. Sorensen has led the 
development of emergency management information systems, simula
-tion models, conventional and interactive training courses, and educa
-tional videos. He has served on many advisory committees, including the 
 
Natural Hazard Research and Applications Center at the University of 
Colorado, the Atomic Industrial Forum™s National Environmental
 Studies Task Force on Emergency Evacuation, and FEMA™s Emergency Manage
-ment Technology Steering Group. He was a member of the National 
Research Council™s Subcommittee on Earthquake Research and the Com
-mittee for Social Science Research on Disaster. Dr. Sorensen has a Ph.D. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78
 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS ON MOBILE DEVICES
in geography from the University of Colorado at Boulder and was an 
assistant professor at the University of Hawaii before going to ORNL.
Staff
Jon Eisenberg
 is the director of the Computer Science and Telecommu
-nications Board of the National Research Council. He has also been the 
study director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies 
exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and commu
-nications technologies. In 1995
-1997 he was an American Association for 
the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Science, Engineering, and Diplo
-macy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Development, where he 
worked on technology transfer and information and telecommunications 
policy issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in physics from the Uni
-versity of Washington in 1996 and a B.S. in physics with honors from the 
University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988.
Virginia 
Bacon Talati
 is an associate program of˜cer for the Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. 
She formerly served as a program associate with the Frontiers of Engi
-neering program at the National Academy of Engineering. Prior to her 
work at the National Academies, she served as a senior project assistant 
in education technology at the National School Boards Association. She 
has a B.S. in science, technology, and culture from the Georgia Institute 
of Technology and an M.P.P. from George Mason University, with a focus 
in science and technology policy.
Shenae 
Bradley
 is a senior program assistant at the Computer Science 
and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. She cur
-rently provides support for the Committee on Sustaining Growth in Com
-puting Performance, the Committee on Wireless Technology
 Prospects 
and Policy Options, and the Computational Thinking for Everyone: A 
Workshop Series Planning Committee, among other projects. She for
-merly served as an administrative assistant for the Ironworker Manage
-ment Progressive Action Cooperative Trust and managed a number of 
apartment rental communities for Edgewood Management Corporation 
in the Maryland/D.C./Delaware metropolitan areas. She is in the process 
of earning her B.S. in family studies from the University of Maryland at 
College Park.
