DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13225Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators andData Systems352 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-21850-4 | DOI 10.17226/13225Morgan A. Ford and Carol Mason Spicer, Editors; Committee to Review Data Systemsfor Monitoring HIV Care; Board on Population Health and Public Health Practice;Institute of MedicineMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee to Review Data Systems for Monitoring HIV CareBoard on Population Health and Public Health PracticeMorgan A. Ford and Carol Mason Spicer, 
EditorsMONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATESINDICATORS AND DATA SYSTEMSMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Govern-ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the 
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer-ing, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for 
the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropri
-ate balance.This study was supported by Contract No. HHSP23320042509XI between the 
National Academy of Sciences and the White House Of˜ce of National AIDS 
Policy. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this 
publication are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the view of the 
organizations or agencies that provided support for this project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-21850-4International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-21850-0Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360 Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313; http://www.nap.edu. 
For more information about the Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page 
at: www.iom.edu
. Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost 
all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The serpent ad
-opted as a logotype by the Institute of Medicine is a relief carving from ancient 
Greece, now held by the Staatliche Museen in Berlin.
Suggested citation: IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2012. 
Monitoring HIV Care in 
the United States: Indicators and Data Systems. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁKnowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ ŠGoetheAdvising the Nation. Improving Health.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society 
of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. 
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Acad-emy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c 
and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding en-gineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, 
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the 
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is presi
-dent of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in 
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Insti-tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its 
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. 
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sci
-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. 
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the 
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The Coun-cil is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. 
Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of 
the National Research Council.www.national-academies.org
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE TO REVIEW DATA SYSTEMS 
FOR MONITORING HIV CARE
PAUL A. VOLBERDING
 (Chair), Professor, Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco 
ANGELA A. AIDALA, Associate Research Scientist, Department of 
Sociomedical Sciences, Joseph L. Mailman School of Public Health, 
Columbia University, New York, New York
DAVID D. CELENTANO,
 Professor and Chair, Department of 
Epidemiology, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, Maryland
MOUPALI DAS,
 Director of Research, HIV Prevention Section, 
 San Francisco Department of Public Health, California
VICTOR G. DeGRUTTOLA, Professor and Chair, Department of 
Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 
CARLOS DEL RIO, Professor and Chair, Hubert Department of Global 
Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, 
GeorgiaMARSHALL FORSTEIN, Associate Professor of Psychiatry, Department 
of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 
CARMINE GRASSO, Director (Retired), Care and Treatment Unit, 
 New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, Trenton 
SHANNON HOUSER,
 Associate Professor, Department of Health 
Services Administration, University of Alabama, Birmingham 
JENNIFER KATES, 
Vice President and Director, Global Health & HIV 
Policy, The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, Washington, DC
ERIKA G. MARTIN, 
Assistant Professor, Rockefeller College of Public 
Affairs and Policy, State University of New York at Albany
KENNETH H. MAYER, 
Visiting Professor, Harvard Medical School; 
Medical Research Director, Fenway Health, Boston, Massachusetts 
VICKIE M. MAYS, 
Professor, Departments of Psychology and Health 
Services, School of Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles
DAVID P. PRYOR,
 West Coast Medical Director, NBC Universal, 
Universal City, California
STEN H. VERMUND,
 Professor of Pediatrics, Amos Christie Chair in 
Global Health, and Director, Institute for Global Health, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee 
ADAM B. WILCOX,
 Associate Professor, Department of Biomedical 
Informatics, Columbia University, New York, New York
DOUGLAS WIRTH,
 President and Chief Executive Of˜cer, AmidaCare, 
New York, New York
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viProject Staff
MORGAN A. FORD, Study DirectorCAROL MASON SPICER, Associate Program Of˜cer 
COLIN F. FINK,
 Senior Program Assistant (since July 2011)
CHINA DICKERSON, Senior Program Assistant (September 2010ŒJuly 
2011)ROSE MARIE MARTINEZ,
 Director, Board on Population Health and 
Public Health PracticeHOPE HARE, Administrative AssistantMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiReviewersThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published 
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional 
standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. 
The review comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential to protect 
the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report:
Ayse Akincigil,
 Rutgers UniversityJohn Auerbach, Massachusetts Department of Public Health
Nanette D. Benbow,
 Chicago Department of Public Health
Sheila M. Bird, University Forvie Site
Francine Cournos,
 Columbia UniversityKaren B. DeSalvo, City of New Orleans, Health Department
Ronald Hershow,
 University of Illinois at Chicago
Nicholas P. Jewell,
 University of California, Berkeley
James G. Kahn,
 University of California, San Francisco
James S. Kahn,
 University of California, San Francisco
Michael Lindsay, 
Emory University School of MedicineJ. Marc Overhage, Siemens Medical Solutions USA, Inc.
Tomas J. Philipson,
 University of Chicago
Elise D. Riley,
 University of California, San Francisco
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
 REVIEWERS
Fritz J. Scheuren,
 University of Chicago
Judith Solomon, Center on Budget and Policy Priorities
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions 
or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before 
its release. The review of this report was overseen by Kristine M. Gebbie, 
Flinders University, and 
Stephen E. Fienberg, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Appointed by the National Research Council and Institute of Medicine, 
they were responsible for making certain that an independent examination 
of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for 
the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee 
and the institution.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixAcknowledgmentsThe Committee to Review Data Systems for Monitoring HIV Care (the 
committee) and the Institute of Medicine (IOM) staff would like to thank 
many individuals for providing information, data, discussions, presenta
-tions, and comments throughout this study. The insight, expertise, and 
information provided by these individuals were essential to the development 
of the conclusions and recommendations of this report.
To create this report, we needed the cooperation of the HIV care data 
monitoring systems from across the United States. The committee thanks 
the following people for responding to requests for information: Roxanne 
Andrews and Irene Fraser (Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality) 
for the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project; Chris Bina (Federal Bureau 
of Prisons) for the Bureau Electronic Medical Record; Linda Cummings 
(National Public Health and Hospital Institute); Peter Delany (Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration) for the National Survey 
on Drug Use and Health and the Minority Substance Abuse/HIV Preven-tion Initiative; Janet Durfee and Victoria Davey (Department of Veterans 
Affairs) for the Clinical Case Registry: HIV; Kelly Gebo (Johns Hopkins 
University) for the HIV Research Network (HIVRN); Esther Hing (Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention [CDC]) for the National Ambulatory 
Medical Care Survey and the National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care 
Survey; Michael Horberg (Kaiser Permanente [KP]) for KP electronic medi-cal records and databases; Jeffrey Jacques (ActiveHealth); Suzanne Kinsky 
(AIDS United) for AIDS United Access to Care; Mari Kitahata (University 
of Washington) for Centers for AIDS Research Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems and the North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Research and Design (NA-ACCORD); Amy Lansky (CDC) for the Na-tional HIV Surveillance System, the Medical Monitoring Project, the HIV 
Outpatient Study, and the SUN Study; Faye Malitz (Health Resources and 
Services Administration [HRSA]) for the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program 
and AIDS Drug Assistance Program; Kay Miller (Thomson Reuters) for the 
Thomson Reuters MarketScan Research Databases; Richard Moore (Johns 
Hopkins University) for NA-ACCORD and HIVRN; Elaine Olin (Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services [CMS]) for the Medicaid Statistical In-formation System; Brigg Reilley and Lisa Neel (Indian Health Service [IHS]) 
and Scott Giberson (U.S. Public Health Service) for the IHS Resource and 
Patient Management System, HIV/AIDS Management System, and Clinical 
Reporting System; Thomas Reilly (CMS) for the Medicare Chronic Con-dition Warehouse; Peter Shin and Sara Rosenbaum (George Washington 
University Medical Center) and Rene Sterling (HRSA) for the Uniform Data 
System; David Vos (Department of Housing and Urban Development) for 
Housing Opportunities for Persons with HIV/AIDS; Nancy Walczak (The 
Lewin Group) for the Ingenix Normative Health Information Database
®; Marcus Wilson (HealthCore) for HealthCore Integrated Research Database 
(HIRD®).The committee thanks the presenters for volunteering to share their 
expertise, knowledge, data, and opinions not only with the committee but 
also with the members of the public who participated in its four open ses-sions. The committee recognizes the following individuals from its open 
session meeting on February 6, 2011 (listed in order of their presentations): 
Jeffrey Crowley (White House Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy [ONAP]); 
Greg Millett (CDC); Michael Horberg (KP). The committee recognizes 
the following individuals from its open session meeting on April 28, 2011 
(listed in order of their presentations): Ron Valdiserri (U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services [HHS]); Amy Lansky (CDC); Faye Malitz 
(HRSA); Thomas Reilly (CMS); Ef˜e George (CMS); David Dore (Brown 
University); Mari Kitahata (University of Washington). The committee rec
-ognizes the following individuals from its open session meeting on July 8, 
2011 (listed in order of their presentations): Jamie Ferguson (KP); William 
Tierney (Indiana University School of Medicine); James Willig (Univer
-sity of Alabama, Birmingham). The committee recognizes the following 
individuals from its open session meeting on September 1, 2011 (in order 
of their presentations): Andrew Forsyth (HHS); Amy Lansky; Richard 
Wolitski (CDC).
Throughout the course of this study, the committee received input 
from outside sources that provided valuable information and resources 
and thanks the following people for their contributions to the study: Ruth 
Pederson (Colorado Health Network, Inc.); Richard Power (Bureau of 
HIV/AIDS, Florida State Department of Health); Suzanne Kinsky, Vignetta 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 xiCharles, and Maura Riordan (AIDS United); David Holtgrave and Cathy 
Maulsby (Johns Hopkins University); Susan Scheer (San Francisco Depart
-ment of Public Health); Manya Magnus (George Washington University 
School of Public Health and Health Services). Each of these individuals 
provided valuable information that greatly helped with the development 
of the report.Finally, the committee acknowledges the support of the IOM staff, in 
particular the efforts of Morgan Ford (study director) and Carol Mason 
Spicer (associate program of˜cer). In addition to planning and facilitating 
the meetings, they wrote much of the text for this report. The committee 
also appreciates the efforts of China Dickerson (senior program assistant, 
November 2010ŒAugust 2011) and Colin F. Fink (senior program assistant, 
August 2011Œpresent) for attending to the logistical requirements for the 
meetings and for aiding in the drafting of the report. The committee rec-ognizes Rose Marie Martinez (director, Board on Population Health and 
Public Health Practice) who attended meetings and aided greatly in the 
discussion of the conclusions and recommendations. Additional staff sup-port included assistance from: Hope Hare (administrative assistant), Amy 
Przybocki (˜nancial associate, November 2010ŒDecember 2011), Doris 
Romero (˜nancial associate, January 2012Œpresent), Laura DeStefano (Of-˜ce of Reports and Communication), and Florence Poillon (copy editor). 
The staff acknowledges William McLeod (senior librarian, The National 
Academies) who provided valuable research support at the onset of the 
study.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiContentsABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
 xixSUMMARY
 11 INTRODUCTION 19 Study Context, 20
 The Committee™s Approach to Its Charge, 31
 Report Organization, 32 References, 332  
INDICATORS RELATED TO CONTINUOUS HIV CARE
 AND ACCESS TO SUPPORTIVE SERVICES
 39 Indicators of Clinical HIV Care and Access to Mental Health, 
   
Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, 40
 Health-Related Disparities, 71
 Data Elements to Gauge the Impact of the NHAS and the ACA, 74
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 88
 References, 92 Chapter 2 Appendix Tables, 110
3  
SOURCES OF DATA ON HIV CARE TO ASSESS INDICATORS 
 OF HIV CARE AND ACCESS TO SUPPORTIVE SERVICES
 127 Identi˜cation of Data Systems, 127 Sources of HIV Care Data, 130
 Additional Data Systems for Monitoring HIV Care, 158
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv
 CONTENTS
 Similar Data Collection Efforts, 164
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 167
 References, 170 Chapter 3 Appendix Tables, 178
4 BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 237 Potential Reimbursement-Related Barriers to the Collection of 
   
HIV Care Data, 237
 Potential Reporting-Related Barriers to the Collection of 
   
HIV Care Data, 240
 Other Policy Barriers to the Collection of HIV Care Data, 248
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 264
 References, 2675  
THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 AND DATA SYSTEM INTEGRATION IN THE 
 COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 273 Utilization and Con˜guration of Health Information 
   
Technology to Improve the Collection of HIV Care Data, 273
 Models and Best Practices in Data System Integration, 286
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 291
 References, 2926  
EFFICIENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDICATORS AND 
DISSEMINATION OF DATA BY FEDERAL AGENCIES
 299 Ef˜cient Analysis of HIV Care Indicators by Federal Agencies, 299
 Dissemination of Data to Improve HIV Care Quality, 309
 Conclusions and Recommendations, 315
 References, 316APPENDIX  
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF COMMITTEE 
MEMBERS 319Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvTables, Figures, and Boxes
TABLES
S-1 Core Indicators for Clinical HIV Care and Mental Health, 
Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, with Rationale, 10
1-1 Insurance at First Outpatient Visit for Patients Attending Adult Care 
Sites in the HIV Research Network, CY2010, 23
2-1 HIV Care Quality Measures, 42Appendix 2-1
 Core and Additional Indicators for Clinical HIV Care and Mental 
Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, 110
Appendix 2-2
 Indicators of Clinical HIV Care and Mental Health, Substance 
Abuse, and Supportive Services, Mapped to Entry and Engagement 
in Care, 120
Appendix 2-3
 Co-Occurring Conditions and Etiological Cofactors with Link to 
Guidance for Optimal Management, 124
Appendix 3-1
 Summary of Data Systems for Monitoring HIV Care Identi˜ed by 
the Committee, 178Appendix 3-2a
 Data Elements for Core Clinical HIV Care Indicators, 202
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvi
 TABLES, FIGURES, AND BOXES
Appendix 3-2b
 Data Elements for Core Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and 
Supportive Services Indicators, 206Appendix 3-2c
 Data Elements for Additional Clinical HIV Care Indicators, 208
Appendix 3-2d
 Data Elements for Additional Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and 
Supportive Services Indicators, 214Appendix 3-2e
 Data Elements to Estimate Indicators for Subpopulations, 216
Appendix 3-2f
 Additional Data Elements for Monitoring HIV Care, 218
Appendix 3-3a
 Data Systems Mapped to Core Clinical HIV Care Indicators, 220
Appendix 3-3b
 Data Systems Mapped to Core Mental Health, Substance Abuse, 
and Supportive Services Indicators, 224Appendix 3-3c
 Data Systems Mapped to Additional Clinical HIV Care 
 Indicators, 226
Appendix 3-3d
 Data Systems Mapped to Additional Mental Health, Substance 
Abuse, and Supportive Services Indicators, 230Appendix 3-4
 Publicly Available Data Collection Instruments and 
 Information, 232Appendix 3-5
 CD4 and Viral Load Reporting by HIV Surveillance Reporting Area 
(as of June 15, 2010), 234
4-1 HIV Testing and Reporting Policies, 242
4-2 Potential Eligibility Criteria for Care Coverage for PLWHA, by 
Major Payer/Source, 250
4-3 Scope of State and Territorial Statutes and Regulations Governing 
HIV-Related Information, 260
5-1 Descriptions of Health IT Products and Functionalities, 274
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLES, FIGURES, AND BOXES
 xvii
FIGURESS-1 Continuum of HIV care arrow mapped to indicators of HIV care 
and supportive services, 6
2-1 Continuum of engagement in care, 482-2 Continuum of HIV care arrow, 48
2-3 Engagement in HIV care cascade, 49
2-4 Continuum of HIV care arrow mapped to indicators for HIV care 
and supportive services, 70
4-1 Federal reporting requirements for core and supplemental HIV/
AIDS grant awards administered by state health department HIV/
AIDS directors, 247
BOXESS-1 Statement of Task, 4
S-2 National HIV/AIDS Strategy Targets, 5
1-1 National HIV/AIDS Strategy Action Steps and Targets, 26
2-1 Healthy People 2020 Summary of Objectives: HIV, 45
2-2 PEPFAR Essential Reported Indicators, 46
3-1 Data Collection Activities Considered by the Committee, 129
4-1 HIPAA Privacy RuleŒCovered Entities, 252
5-1 Key Considerations for the Adoption of Health IT by HIV Care 
Providers, 279Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xixAbbreviations and AcronymsABC AbacavirACA Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act
ADAP AIDS Drug Assistance Program
ADR ADAP Data Report
AI/AN American Indian or Alaskan Native
AIDS acquired immune de˜ciency syndrome
AMPATH
 Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare
APR Annual Progress Report
ARRA American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009
ART
 antiretroviral therapyARV
 antiretroviralASPR Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response
BC British ColumbiaBEMR Bureau of Prisons Electronic Medical RecordBOP Federal Bureau of Prisons
CAH critical access hospitalCAPER Consolidated Annual Performance Evaluation Report
CCR Clinical Case Registry
CCW Chronic Condition Data Warehouse
CD4 CD4+ T cellCDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CDS clinical decision support
CFAR
 Centers for AIDS Research
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xx ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CHC community health centerCLIA Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments
CMS Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
CNICS CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems
CNS central nervous system
CPOE computerized physician order entryCRS Clinical Reporting System
ECHPP Enhanced Comprehensive HIV Prevention Planning 
ProjectEHR electronic health record
ELR electronic laboratory reporting system
EMR electronic medical record
eRx e-prescribingFDA Food and Drug AdministrationFPL federal poverty level
FQHC federally quali˜ed health center
FQHCLA federally quali˜ed health center ﬁlook-alikeﬂ
HAART
 highly active antiretroviral therapyHAB HIV/AIDS BureauHBV hepatitis B virus
HCCI Health Care Cost InstituteHCV hepatitis C virus
HEARTH
 Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition 
to Housing Act of 2009HHS U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
HIE health information exchange
HIPAA
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
HIRD® HealthCore Integrated Research DatabaseHITECH Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health
HITSP Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel 
(HHS)HIV human immunode˜ciency virus
HIVRN HIV Research NetworkHMIS Homeless Management Information SystemHMO health maintenance organizationHMS HIV Management System
HOPWA
 Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
HPTN HIV Prevention Trials Network
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
 xxi
HPV human papillomavirus
HRSA Health Resources and Services Administration
HUD U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
ICD-9 International Classi˜cation of Diseases, Ninth 
RevisionIDU injection drug useIHS Indian Health ServiceIOM Institute of MedicineIQA Information Quality Act/Data Quality Act
IPW inverse-probability weightingIT information technologyKFF Kaiser Family FoundationKP Kaiser PermanenteLaPHIE Louisiana Public Health Information Exchange
LSU HCSD Louisiana State University Health Care Services 
DivisionMAX Medicaid Analytic eXtract
MCBS Medicare Current Bene˜ciary SurveyMCO managed care organizationMMP Medical Monitoring ProjectMoCA Montreal Cognitive Assessment scale
MSA metropolitan statistical area
MSIS Medicaid Statistical Information System
MSM men who have sex with men
NA-ACCORD North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignNASTAD
 National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS 
DirectorsNHAS National HIV/AIDS Strategy
NHSS National HIV Surveillance System
NIH National Institutes of Health
NJDHSS New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services
NQF National Quality Forum
NRC National Research Council
NVSS National Vital Statistics System
NwHIN Nationwide Health Information NetworkNYC DOHMH New York City Department of Health and Mental 
HygieneMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxii
 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
OASIS Outcome and Assessment Information Set
OCR Of˜ce of Civil Rights
OI opportunistic infectionOMB Of˜ce of Management and BudgetONAP White House Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy
ONC Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology
PACHA
 Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS 
PCIP Primary Care Information Project (NYC DOHMH)
PCP pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
PEPFAR
 U.S. President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
PHI protected health informationPHR personal health record
PHS Public Health ServicePLWHA
 people living with HIV/AIDSPRO patient-reported outcomeQSOA quali˜ed service organization agreementRHIO regional health information organization
RNA ribonucleic acid
RPMS Resource and Patient Management System
RSR Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program Service Report
SPNS Special Projects of National Signi˜cance
STD sexually transmitted disease
STI sexually transmitted infection
SUN Study to Understand the Natural History of HIV/AIDS 
in the Era of Effective Therapy
TB tuberculosisUAB University of Alabama at BirminghamUSDA U.S. Department of AgricultureUSPSTF U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
VA
 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
VHA Veterans Health Administration
VL Viral load
VistA
 Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology 
ArchitectureMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Summary1BACKGROUNDThe number of people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) in the United 
States is growing each year largely due both to advances in treatment that 
allow HIV-infected individuals to live longer and healthier lives and to a 
steady number of new HIV infections each year. The U.S. Centers for Dis
-ease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that there were 1.2 million 
people living with HIV infection in the United States at the end of 2008, the 
most recent year for which national prevalence data are available. As a dis-ease that disproportionately affects populations who already have a range 
of care and supportive service needs, now more than ever HIV requires 
continuous and coordinated quality care. Furthermore, there continue to 
be challenges to curbing the toll of the epidemic. Each year, approximately 
16,000 individuals die from AIDS despite overall improvements in survival, 
and 50,000 individuals become newly infected with HIV. In 2011, the CDC 
estimated that about three in four people living with diagnosed HIV infec-tion are linked to care within 3 to 4 months of diagnosis and that only half 
are retained in ongoing care. Treatment with antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
can help to reduce the level of HIV virus in the blood, sometimes to viral 
suppression (i.e., to an undetectable level), resulting in improved health 
outcomes for PLWHA as well as reduced risk of HIV transmission. Yet, 
only 19Œ28 percent of PLWHA are virally suppressed. 
1 This summary does not include references. Citations to support text, conclusions, and 
recommendations made herein are given in the body of the report.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
The National HIV/AIDS Strategy and the Patient 
 Protection and Affordable Care ActIn the context of the continuing challenges posed by HIV, the White 
House Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy (ONAP) released a National HIV/
AIDS Strategy (NHAS) for the United States in July 2010. The primary 
goals of the NHAS are to
˜˚
reduce HIV incidence; 
˜˚
˚increase access to care and optimize health outcomes for PLWHA; 
and 
˜˚
reduce HIV-related health disparities. 
Federally run HIV programs traditionally have been administered in 
a siloed fashion due to differences in the missions of the agencies within 
which they originate or in funding stream requirements. Meeting the 
NHAS objectives will require increased synergy of HIV programs across 
federal agencies, and among federal agencies, states, and other jurisdic-tions. As such, the NHAS includes a fourth objective to increase coordi
-nation of HIV program activities across levels of government. Subsumed 
within this objective is the development of improved mechanisms to moni
-tor progress in achieving the NHAS goals. In the agency operational plans 
for the NHAS, this Institute of Medicine (IOM) report is named as one 
of the activities that ONAP is undertaking to address existing gaps in the 
collection, analysis, and integration of data on the care and treatment 
experiences of PLWHA. 
The NHAS is intended to build upon the Patient Protection and Afford
-able Care Act (ACA), whichŠif implemented as originally plannedŠis ex-pected to bring millions of uninsured individuals, including many PLWHA, 
into the health care system. Examples of provisions of the ACA that may 
increase access to care for PLWHA include changes in eligibility require
-ments for public (e.g., Medicaid) and private health insurance, reduced 
out-of-pocket costs for Medicare Part D prescription drugs, expansion of 
coverage for preventive health services, and increased care capacity in com
-munity health centers. 
CHARGE TO THE COMMITTEE 
ONAP requested that the IOM convene a committee to identify critical 
data and indicators related to continuous HIV care and access to supportive 
services, as well as to monitor the impact of the NHAS and the ACA on 
improvements in HIV care. In addition, the committee was tasked with 
identifying public and private data systems that capture the data needed to 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3estimate these indicators. The committee was also asked to address a series 
of speci˜c questions related to the collection, analysis, and dissemination of 
such data (Box S-1). The IOM convened a committee of 17 members with 
expertise in HIV clinical care and supportive services, health policy, data 
collection and analysis, informatics, and other relevant areas to respond to 
this charge. 
COMMITTEE™S APPROACH TO ITS CHARGENHAS targets for increasing access to care and improving health out
-comes for PLWHA and for reducing HIV-related health disparities by 2015 
(Box S-2) provided the basis for several of the indicators recommended 
by the committee.2 The committee also reviewed existing indicators of 
HIV care and measures of HIV care quality. These include Healthy People 
2020 objectives and President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) 
indicators that pertain to HIV care and supportive services, as well as 
performance measures for HIV care that were endorsed by the National 
Quality Forum, an organization that sets national consensus standards of 
performance in health care. The committee also reviewed current guidelines 
for HIV treatment. The committee identi˜ed indicators linked to bench-marks along the continuum of HIV care, from diagnosis through virologic 
suppression (Figure S-1). 
The committee compiled a list of 32 public and private data systems 
and data collection agencies, including ones highlighted in the project pro-posal from ONAP and others identi˜ed by the committee as potentially 
important sources of information on HIV care and supportive services. 
The committee reviewed both HIV-speci˜c data systems and data collec
-tion activities, such as epidemiologic studies of PLWHA and Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program data, and those that are not HIV speci˜c but capture 
information on care received by PLWHA, such as Medicaid and Medi
-care claims data. The committee requested information from individuals 
who are familiar with the data systems and data collection activities in 
the areas of HIV testing and linkage to care, clinical care, access to care, 
treatment and adherence, ˜nancial security, need for supportive services, 
demographics, risk behavior assessment, and patient experience with care. 
The committee then compared the compiled information against the data 
elements needed to estimate the indicators to identify the best sources of 
2 The committee interpreted its charge as focusing on the population of people living with 
HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) who have been diagnosed with HIV. Therefore, the committee did not 
identify indicators to monitor the National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS) objective related to 
reducing the occurrence of new HIV infections, although some of the indicators promote 
reduced HIV transmission as well as improved health outcomes for PLWHA. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
BOX S-1
 Statement of Task
The White House Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy has requested that the Insti
-tute of Medicine (IOM) convene a committee of experts to assess available public 
and private data systems that capture information about HIV care to investigate 
ways to maximize their usefulness and recommend approaches for supplementing 
current data sources and to identify and provide recommendations for the most 
critical data and indicators to gauge the impact of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy 
and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act in improving HIV/AIDS care.
1.  
What are the best sources of data (and which data elements should be 
used) from public and private HIV care databases to assess core indica
-tors related to continuous care and access to support services, such as 
housing, for people living with HIV?
 a.
  
What data collection items need to be revised or reconsidered in exist
-ing databases of care and services provided to people living with HIV 
and in demographic data about populations receiving these services? 
Are there proposed changes that can provide necessary data without 
adding additional burden to data collection?
 b.
  
What is the difference between claims data and clinical data found in 
medical records and do these differences encompass gaps in mea
-sures for HIV care? 
2.  
What similar data collection or standardization efforts are currently under 
way by public agencies or private industry that should be tapped? 
3.
  
How do we regularly obtain data (core indicators) that capture the care ex
-periences of people living with HIV without substantial new investments? 
4.  
What situations may impose barriers to the collection of core indicators?
 a.  
What policies, reimbursement issues or reporting issues need to be 
addressed to collect necessary data?
 b.
  
How can data be collected in a way that will not signi˜cantly increase 
provider burden?
5.
  
How can federal agencies ef˜ciently analyze care indicators and dissemi
-nate data to improve HIV care quality?
6.  
What models or best practices in data system integration can be gleaned 
from public agencies or private industry to make existing data systems 
and core indicators interoperable?
 a.  
Which among these models or combination of models would be most 
cost effective?
7.  
How should health information technology (including electronic medical 
records) be utilized or con˜gured in order to improve the collection of 
comprehensive data describing the care experiences of people living 
with HIV?
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5BOX S-2
 National HIV/AIDS Strategy Targets 
Targets for Increasing Access to Care and Improving Health Outcomes for 
People Living with HIV
By 2015, 
˜˚
˚increase the proportion of newly diagnosed patients linked to clinical care 
within 3 months of their HIV diagnosis from 65 to 85 percent. 
˜˚
˚ increase the proportion of Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients who 
are in care (at least two visits for routine HIV medical care in 12 months 
at least 3 months apart) from 73 to 80 percent.
˜˚
˚increase the percentage of Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients with 
permanent housing from 82 to 86 percent. 
Targets for Reducing HIV-Related Health Disparities and Inequities
By 2015, 
˜˚
˚ increase the proportion of HIV diagnosed gay and bisexual men with 
undetectable viral load by 20 percent. 
˜˚
˚ increase the proportion of HIV-diagnosed Black Americans with unde
-tectable viral load by 20 percent.
˜˚
˚increase the proportion of HIV diagnosed Latinos with undetectable viral 
load by 20 percent.
data for gauging the impact of the NHAS and ACA on improvements in 
HIV care.The committee™s information gathering for the remaining aspects of 
its charge consisted of presentations before the committee during its open 
sessions and review of the research literature. 
COMMITTEE™S RECOMMENDATIONS 
Core Indicators Related to Continuous HIV Care 
and Access to Supportive Services
The committee concluded that the primary challenges to optimal health 
outcomes for PLWHA include late diagnosis, delayed linkage to care for 
HIV, poor retention in care, delayed initiation of ART, and poor adherence 
to ART (i.e., discontinuing or intermittent use of ART), as well as untreated 
non-HIV comorbidities (e.g., substance abuse, hepatitis C), and unmet basic 
needs (e.g., housing, food, or transportation assistance needs). The commit
-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 Linkage
Engagement/
Retention 
Proportion with CD4+ cell 
count >
200 and wi
thout a 
clinical diagnosis of AIDS
In the Past 
12 Months
Since 
Diagnosis
Proportion who 
received 2 or more 
CD4  tests
Proportion screened 
for hepatitis C
Proportion immunized 
for influenza
Proportion who 
received 2 or more 
viral load tests
Proportion screened 
for chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, and 
syphilisProportion screened 
for tuberculosis
Proportion screened 
for hepatitis B
Proportion immunized 
for hepatitis B 
(if needed)
Proportion immunized 
for pneumococcal 
pneumonia
Proportion who 
received drug 
resistance testing 
prior to ART initiation
Proportion with a 
measured CD4+ cell 
count <500 who are 
not on ART
Proportion with HIV-
associated nephropathy, hepatitis 
B (when treatment is 
indicted), or  active 
tuberculosis who are 
not on ART
Proportion of HIV-
infected pregnant 
women who are not 
on ART
Proportion on 
ART for 12 or 
more months 
who have an 
undetectable 
viral load
All-cause 
mortality rate
Proportion linked to 
care for HIV within 3 
months of diagnosis
Engagement/
Retention 
Proportion with mental health disorder 
referred for mental health services who 
receive these services within 60 days
Proportion with substance use disorder 
referred for substance abuse services who 
receive these services within 60 days
Proportion with an unmet need for 
housing
food or nutrition
transportation
Proportion screened for mental health disorders 
at least once in preceding 12 months
Proportion screened for substance use 
disorders at least once in preceding 12 months
Proportion assessed for need for
housing
food or nutrition
transportation
Proportion in continuous 
care for 12 or more months 
with CD4+ cell count 
350Proportion in continuous 
care (2 or more visits in 
preceding 12 months at 
least 3 months apart)
FIGURE S-1 Continuum of HIV care arrow mapped to indicators of HIV care and supportive services. 
NOTE: Indicators in bold text correspond with the committee™s recommended core indicators, while the indicators in italics cor
-respond with the additional indicators. More information on the committee™s selection of both core and additional indicators can 
be found in Chapter 2. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7tee identi˜ed a set of core indicators that can be used to measure the degree 
to which these challenges are being addressed across the continuum of HIV 
care and to monitor the impact of the NHAS and ACA on improvements 
in HIV care (Table S-1 provides the committee™s rationale for each of the 
core indicators).
Recommendation 2-1. The Department of Health and Human Services 
should use the following core indicators to assess the impact of the 
National HIV/AIDS Strategy and the Patient Protection and Afford-able Care Act on improving HIV/AIDS care and access to supportive 
services for individuals with HIV:
Core Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
˚˚Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV with a CD4+ cell 
count >200 cells/mm
3 and without a clinical diagnosis of AIDS
˚˚Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV who are linked to 
clinical care for HIV within 3 months of diagnosis
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are in 
continuous care (two or more visits for routine HIV medical care 
in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received 
two or more CD4 tests in the preceding 12 months
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received 
two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection in continuous 
care for 12 or more months and with a CD4+ cell count ˜350 cells/mm3˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and a measured 
CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on ART
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have been 
on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the 
level of detection
˚˚All-cause mortality rate among people diagnosed with HIV 
infection 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive 
Services3˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and mental 
health disorder who are referred for mental health services and 
receive these services within 60 days
4˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and substance 
use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and 
receive these services within 60 days
5 ˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were 
homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the 
preceding 12 months6˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who experi
-enced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 
months73 As discussed in Chapter 2, the committee found that the indicators for supportive services 
may be particularly dif˜cult to measure. However, there is evidence from research that address
-ing need for housing, food security, and other supportive services is effective for retention in 
care and improving health outcomes among people with HIV. In addition, the committee was 
speci˜cally asked to address core indicators relating to ﬁaccess to support services, such as 
housing,ﬂ as well as those relating to continuous care. The fact that indicators for supportive 
services may be dif˜cult to estimate did not preclude the committee from including them as 
core indictors. 
4 Receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic 
given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time 
frame. Urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.
5 See footnote 4 above. 
6 The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development™s Homeless Management Infor
-mation System (HMIS) Data Standards provide guidance for classifying housing status in four 
categories: literally homeless (e.g., lack a regular nighttime residence, staying in an emergency 
shelter), following the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302, Sec. 103) 
de˜nition of homelessness, as amended by the Homeless Emergency Assistance and Rapid 
Transition to Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-22, div. B, Sec. 1003); 
imminently 
losing housing (e.g., being evicted or being discharged from an institution with no housing 
options identi˜ed); 
unstably housed and at-risk of losing housing
 (e.g., temporarily doubled up 
with others, moving frequently for economic reasons); and stably housed (http://www.hudhre.
info/documents/FinalHMISDataStandards_March2010.pdf, accessed March 12, 2012).7 According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, households with high food security have 
ﬁno reported indications of food-access problems or limitationsﬂ; households with marginal 
food security
 have ﬁone or two reported indicationsŠtypically of anxiety over food suf
-˜ciency or shortage of food in the house [with] little or no indication of changes in diets or 
food intakeﬂ; households with low food security have ﬁreports of reduced quality, variety, or 
desirability of diet [with] little or no indications of reduced food intakeﬂ; and households with 
very low food security have ﬁreports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and 
reduced food intake.ﬂ The lower two levels indicate food insecurity (http://www.ers.usda.gov/
brie˜ng/foodsecurity/labels.htm#cnstat, accessed March 12, 2012).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who had an un-met need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical 
care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months
In addition to the core indicators, the committee identi˜ed a set of 
additional indicators based on more granular process measures to provide 
a comprehensive assessment of the quality of HIV care. These additional 
indicators are included in Figure S-1 and discussed in detail in Chapter 2 
of the report. 
Demographic data on PLWHA have to be collected to monitor the im
-pact of the NHAS and ACA on improvements in HIV-related health dispari
-ties. The committee found that many crucial data elements, such as gender 
identity, sexual orientation, sexual risk behaviors, geographic marker of 
residence, income, primary means of reimbursement for medical services, 
and level of acculturation as re˚ected in primary language are not routinely 
collected in many of the federal data systems that it reviewed. Data on race 
and ethnicity often are not collected with a suf˜cient level of detail to make 
nuanced distinctions among the health needs of different racial and ethnic 
groups. On October 31, 2011, the U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services (HHS) issued new guidance on minimum standards for collection 
of data on race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status in 
national population health surveys that are sponsored or conducted by 
HHS. The guidance mandates the collection of more granular data on race 
and ethnicity, as well as data on ﬁbiologic sexﬂ and English pro˜ciency as 
a measure of primary language. HHS is also developing a plan to integrate 
the collection of data on sexual orientation and gender identity into HHS 
national surveys, and to collect data on socioeconomic status.
Recommendation 2-2. The Department of Health and Services and 
the Of˜ce of Management and Budget should continue to expand the 
demographic data elements to be captured by federal data systems rel-evant to HIV care to permit calculation of the indicators for subgroups 
of the population of people with diagnosed HIV infection, including, 
but not limited to, the following: 
 Age Race Ethnicity Sex (assigned at birth)  
Gender identity (e.g., male, female, transgender [male-to-female, 
female-to-male], bigender, gender queer)
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 TABLE S-1
 Core Indicators for Clinical HIV Care and Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, 
with RationaleCore Indicators for HIV Clinical Care
Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV with a CD4+ cell count >200 cells/mm
3 and without a clinical diagnosis of AIDSRationale: Improve health outcomes by reducing the number of people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) with late diagnosis.
Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV who are linked to clinical care for HIV within 3 months of diagnosis
Rationale: Timely linkage to care improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine HIV medical care in the preceding 
12 months at least 3 months apart)
Rationale: Continuous HIV care results in better outcomes, including decreased mortality, and reduced transmission of the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received two or more CD4 tests in the preceding 12 months
Rationale: Regular CD4 testing permits providers to monitor individuals™ immune function, determine when to start antiretroviral therapy (ART), 
and assess the need for prophylaxis for opportunistic infections.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months
Rationale: Regular viral load (plasma HIV RNA) testing is important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease and therapeutic response 
in individuals on ART.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a CD4+ cell count 
˛350 cells/mm3Rationale: Achieving and maintaining a CD4+ cell count 
˛350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating opportunistic infections and cancers.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and a measured CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm
3 who are not on ART*
Rationale: Appropriate initiation of ART improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have been on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of 
detectionRationale: The goal of ART is durable virologic suppression, which improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus.
All-cause mortality rate among people diagnosed with HIV infection*
Rationale: Mortality rate is the ultimate outcome measure for people diagnosed with HIV infection. Mortality among PLWHA should be inversely 
related to the quality of overall care delivered.
Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these 
services within 60 days**Rationale: Untreated mental health disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA 
and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these 
services within 60 days**Rationale: Untreated substance use disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA 
and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 
months*Rationale: Homelessness and housing instability negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA 
and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months*
Rationale: Food insecurity affects maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA and may increase the risk of 
transmitting the virus to others. Poor nutrition affects absorption of medications and can contribute to diet-sensitive comorbidities.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and 
related services at least once in the preceding 12 months*
Rationale: Unmet need for transportation to access HIV health care and related services negatively affects treatment access, service utilization, 
and health outcomes for PLWHA and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
*In contrast to the other indicators, the estimates for these indicators should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.
**Receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to 
see new patients within a shorter time frame. Urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11TABLE S-1
 Core Indicators for Clinical HIV Care and Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, 
with RationaleCore Indicators for HIV Clinical Care
Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV with a CD4+ cell count >200 cells/mm
3 and without a clinical diagnosis of AIDSRationale: Improve health outcomes by reducing the number of people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) with late diagnosis.
Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV who are linked to clinical care for HIV within 3 months of diagnosis
Rationale: Timely linkage to care improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are in continuous care (two or more visits for routine HIV medical care in the preceding 
12 months at least 3 months apart)
Rationale: Continuous HIV care results in better outcomes, including decreased mortality, and reduced transmission of the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received two or more CD4 tests in the preceding 12 months
Rationale: Regular CD4 testing permits providers to monitor individuals™ immune function, determine when to start antiretroviral therapy (ART), 
and assess the need for prophylaxis for opportunistic infections.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months
Rationale: Regular viral load (plasma HIV RNA) testing is important for monitoring clinical progression of the disease and therapeutic response 
in individuals on ART.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection in continuous care for 12 or more months and with a CD4+ cell count 
˛350 cells/mm3Rationale: Achieving and maintaining a CD4+ cell count 
˛350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of complicating opportunistic infections and cancers.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and a measured CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm
3 who are not on ART*
Rationale: Appropriate initiation of ART improves individual health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have been on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the level of 
detectionRationale: The goal of ART is durable virologic suppression, which improves health outcomes and reduces transmission of the virus.
All-cause mortality rate among people diagnosed with HIV infection*
Rationale: Mortality rate is the ultimate outcome measure for people diagnosed with HIV infection. Mortality among PLWHA should be inversely 
related to the quality of overall care delivered.
Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and mental health disorder who are referred for mental health services and receive these 
services within 60 days**Rationale: Untreated mental health disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA 
and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and receive these 
services within 60 days**Rationale: Untreated substance use disorders can negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA 
and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the preceding 12 
months*Rationale: Homelessness and housing instability negatively affect maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA 
and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who experienced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 months*
Rationale: Food insecurity affects maintenance in care, adherence to treatment, and health outcomes for PLWHA and may increase the risk of 
transmitting the virus to others. Poor nutrition affects absorption of medications and can contribute to diet-sensitive comorbidities.
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who had an unmet need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical care and 
related services at least once in the preceding 12 months*
Rationale: Unmet need for transportation to access HIV health care and related services negatively affects treatment access, service utilization, 
and health outcomes for PLWHA and may increase the risk of transmitting the virus to others.
*In contrast to the other indicators, the estimates for these indicators should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.
**Receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic given the current limited capacity of many providers to 
see new patients within a shorter time frame. Urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
 Sexual orientation (e.g., heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual)
  
Current geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, zip 
code, partial zip code, census block)  
Income or poverty level  
Primary means of reimbursement for medical services (including 
Medicaid, Medicare, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, private in
-surance or health maintenance organization, no coverage)
In addition, HHS should, to the extent practicable, extend its expanded 
data collection standards beyond national population-based health 
surveys to all HHS-sponsored data collection activities.
Sources of Data on HIV Care to Assess Core 
Indicators and Access to Supportive Services
Data on HIV care and supportive services are currently being collected 
by a number of public and private data systems. Although no single data 
system on its own provides all of the data needed to estimate the indica-tors recommended by the committee (listed above), these data systems as 
a whole are collecting relevant information that can serve as a collective 
platform for evaluating access to continuous and high-quality care in all 
populations of PLWHA. The committee identi˜ed 12 data systems in par
-ticular that collect data of use for estimating the core indicators to monitor 
progress toward meeting the goals of the NHAS and ACA:
National HIV Surveillance System (CDC)
Medical Monitoring Project (CDC) 
Ryan White Services Report (Health Resources and Services Adminis
-tration [HRSA])Ryan White AIDS Drug Assistance Program Reports (HRSA)
 
Medicaid Statistical Information System (Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services [CMS])
Chronic Condition Data Warehouse (CMS)
North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design 
CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems 
HIV Research Network 
Clinical Case Registry: HIV (Department of Veterans Affairs)
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 13Kaiser PermanenteNational Vital Statistics System
The committee identi˜ed two additional data systems that provide in
-formation of use in tracking the impact of the NHAS and ACA on care for 
two small but important subpopulations of PLWHA (American Indians and 
Alaskan Natives; federal prisoners), and a third that provides information 
relevant to housing assistance and other supportive services for PLWHA:
Resource and Patient Management System (Indian Health Service)
Bureau of Prisons Electronic Medical Record 
 
Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development)The committee™s review showed that each data system has limitations. 
For example, few contain all of the data elements needed to estimate all of 
the indicators recommended by the committee, especially those for mental 
health, substance abuse, and supportive services (housing, food security, 
transportation). In addition, most of the data systems are not fully repre-sentative of the population of PLWHA in the United States. In many cases 
(e.g., Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, Medicaid Statistical Information 
System [MSIS], Chronic Condition Data Warehouse [CCW], Clinical Case 
Registry: HIV), the population represented in the data system is de˜ned 
by program eligibility and cannot be expanded. Similarly, the purposes 
for which the data systems were designed preclude expansion of the data 
elements they collect to include all of those needed to estimate all of the 
indicators identi˜ed by the committee. Modest changes in individual data 
systems, however, could improve the usefulness of their data for tracking 
changes in HIV care and access to supportive services for PLWHA. For ex
-ample, a given data system might add one or more data elements or modify 
an existing data element to allow the system to provide data for estimating 
a subgroup of the indicators identi˜ed by the committee, such as those per-taining to supportive services, or to simplify identi˜cation of data represent-ing HIV-infected individuals (e.g., ˚agging HIV/AIDS as a chronic condition 
in the CCW). In cases where the population represented in a data system is 
not constrained by the program it serves (e.g., Medical Monitoring Project), 
steps might be taken either to make the population more representative of 
the national population of PLWHA or to include groups (e.g., homeless) 
who are less apt to be represented in other data systems.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Recommendation 3-1. The Department of Health and Human Ser-vices, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Housing 
and Urban Development, and other relevant federal agencies should 
review and, to the extent practicable, modify the federal data systems 
identi˜ed by the committee to better enable them to be used for moni-toring progress toward achieving the goals of the National HIV/AIDS 
Strategy. 
Currently there is variation among CDC reporting areas with respect to longitudinal reporting of CD4 and viral load test dates and results. Uniform longitudinal reporting of CD4 and viral load test dates and results from all 
jurisdictions would facilitate the use of data from the National HIV Surveil-lance System (NHSS) to estimate the core indicators for HIV care identi˜ed 
by the committee. In addition, collection of longitudinal data on the initia-tion and ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy for 
individuals diagnosed with HIV would provide the remaining data elements necessary to use the NHSS as a source of data to estimate all of the core 
clinical HIV care indicators. Use of NHSS data would permit estimation of 
the indicators for the majority of the population diagnosed with HIV in the 
United States, as well as for subpopulations based on race, ethnicity, sex, 
gender, age, geographic area, and country of origin. Capturing informa
-tion on sexual orientation, sources of coverage for medical treatment, and 
current geographic area of residence would facilitate use of NHSS data for 
evaluation of indicators for speci˜c subpopulations identi˜ed in the NHAS.Recommendation 3-2. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
should take steps to enhance the National HIV Surveillance System 
including 
issuing guidelines or criteria for National HIV Surveillance System 
reporting to include all CD4 and viral load test results
 ˚capturing longitudinal data pertaining to the initiation and ongoing 
prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy for individuals 
diagnosed with HIV (e.g., through pharmacy-based reporting)
 ˚obtaining information on sexual orientation and sources of cover-age for medical treatment (including, but not limited to, Medicaid, 
Medicare, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, other public funding, 
private insurance or health maintenance organization, no cover-age) and obtaining and employing current geographic marker of 
residence (e.g., current address, zip code, partial zip code, census 
block) for individuals in the National HIV Surveillance SystemMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 15Clinically based electronic health record (EHR) systems, such as those 
used by the Veterans Health Administration (VHA) and Kaiser Permanente, 
capture all, or most, of the data elements needed to estimate the clinical 
HIV care indicators recommended by the committee. They also generally 
capture at least some of the information needed to estimate the indicators 
pertaining to mental health and substance abuse, but they do not routinely 
capture data needed to estimate the indicators pertaining to supportive 
services. Another limitation of provider-based EHR systems is that indi
-vidually each represents only one segment of the population of PLWHA in 
the United States (e.g., those who receive care in the VHA system, Kaiser 
Permanente enrollees). Other data systems represent larger proportions of 
PLWHA nationally (e.g., NHSS, MSIS) and may contain information on 
mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services (e.g., Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program, MSIS), but they contain limited or no clinical data. 
The National Health Information Network Exchange is an example of a 
partnership between public and private entities to exchange health informa-tion for a variety of purposes. It could serve as a model for or a foundation 
upon which to build a broader data sharing partnership among public 
and private data systems both to permit better estimation of the indicators 
identi˜ed by the committee and to return information to private health care 
systems and providers for the purpose of improving health care for indi
-viduals with HIV. Building upon existing data sharing partnerships would 
help to reduce costs associated with implementation of such partnerships 
for the exchange of information relevant to the provision of HIV care. 
Recommendation 3-3. The Department of Health and Human Services, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Indian Health Service, the Fed
-eral Bureau of Prisons, and other relevant federal agencies should use 
existing data from private data systems, including data from electronic 
health records, to monitor the impact of the National HIV/AIDS Strat-egy and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act on improving 
HIV care. Federal agencies also should share data pertaining to HIV 
care with private health care systems and providers to improve the 
quality of care for individuals with HIV. Methods might include the 
development of a data sharing partnership between public and private 
data systems that include data pertaining to HIV care.
Barriers to the Collection of HIV Care Data
Grantees of federally funded HIV/AIDS programs are a vital source of 
HIV care and supportive services data, but are currently overburdened by 
the many reporting obligations they are required to ful˜ll as a condition of 
program funding. The reporting requirements for core and supplemental 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HIV/AIDS programs administered by health departments are often project 
speci˜c, even across related programming (e.g., HIV prevention and HIV/AIDS care), requiring staff to modify their reporting practices for each 
grant. Reporting is further complicated by the fact that programs operate 
on different grant cycles so that reports for related programs are due at dif-ferent times during the year. According to the Presidential Advisory Council 
on HIV/AIDS, the current reporting requirements for grantees of federally 
funded HIV/AIDS programs have not resulted in a set of metrics by which 
to thoroughly monitor the HIV epidemic or to evaluate federal HIV/AIDS 
programs. A smaller number of metrics that are aligned with NHAS goals 
could be used across federal agencies to monitor progress in managing the 
epidemic. As it was preparing this report, the committee learned that there 
is an effort under way by HHS to identify a set of HIV-related metrics to 
be used across funding agencies and reduce reporting burden for program 
grantees. The committee supports this current effort and recommends that 
it be maintained so that data needs can be periodically reprioritized based 
on changes in the HIV epidemic and to facilitate continued minimization 
of grantee reporting burden. 
Recommendation 4-1. The Department of Health and Human Services 
should maintain and institutionalize the existing effort to streamline 
data collection and reduce reporting requirements for federally funded 
HIV/AIDS programs. This will allow for periodic reprioritization of 
data needs, based on changes in the HIV epidemic that occur over time, 
and ensure the continuous availability of data to effectively monitor 
HIV care while minimizing reporting requirements for grantees. The 
data reprioritization should involve health departments, HIV provider 
organizations, and federal agencies that are major funders of HIV/AIDS programs, including HHS, the Department of Veterans Affairs, 
and the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
Providers of HIV care and supportive services contend with numerous 
federal laws and state statutes and regulations on the proper use and dis
-closure of patient information. Although important to patient privacy, the 
often inconsistent nature of these protections, which leave the decision of 
whether or not to disclose requested patient information open to various 
interpretations, may result in discrepancies in data sharing and reporting 
across states and providers. Such discrepancies may in˚uence the avail
-ability and quality of data needed to estimate indicators of HIV care and 
supportive services. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 17Recommendation 4-2. The Department of Health and Human Services 
should issue guidance to the HIV care community to clarify what is 
permissible patient information to share given federal and state privacy 
laws. 
The Role of Health Information Technology and Data 
System Integration in the Collection of HIV Care Data
Increased exchange of health-related information across providers of 
HIV care and supportive services has the potential to improve care coor
-dination and longitudinal tracking of care. Some integrated health care 
systems, such as the VHA and Kaiser Permanente, effectively manage in-formation across providers within their networks, but most PLWHA receive 
care and supportive services outside of these networks, and many receive 
care across multiple organizations. The committee identi˜ed local efforts 
in health information exchange that have resulted in improved monitoring 
of patient care and outcomes. However, these efforts have not been scaled 
broadly among entities serving PLWHA. 
Recommendation 5-1. The Department of Health and Human Services 
should review existing mechanisms for the con˜dential and secure 
exchange of health information to provide a platform to increase the 
exchange of such information among entities serving individuals with 
HIV. These entities may include, but are not limited to, state and local 
health departments, government agencies, and community-based or-ganizations funded to provide medical care, substance use and mental 
health services, and housing and other supportive services. 
InteroperabilityŠthe ability of different IT systems and software ap-plications to communicate, exchange, and use informationŠis not fully 
possible in the United States at this time due to a lack of infrastructure to 
support it. For the most part, the various sources of care and care coverage 
for PLWHA have their own health IT systems with disparate architectures 
and vocabularies, posing a challenge to the exchange of data across systems. 
Recommendation 5-2. The Department of Health and Human Services 
and the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology should provide technical assistance and policy guidance to 
state and local health departments, clinical providers, and other agen-cies serving individuals with HIV to improve the interoperability of 
data systems relevant to monitoring HIV care and supportive services. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Ef˜cient Analysis of HIV Care Indicators and 
Dissemination of Data by Federal Agencies
Estimation of the committee™s recommended indicators for clinical 
HIV care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services will 
often require combining data from multiple data systems. Making valid 
inferences about the indicators across different populations and over time 
using data from multiple data systems presents a range of analytic and lo
-gistical challenges. Such challenges will change over time and will have to 
be reevaluated periodically. 
Recommendation 6-1. At least once every 2 years, the Department of 
Health and Human Services should reevaluate mechanisms for combin-ing data elements to estimate key indicators of HIV care and access to 
supportive services, analyze the combined data, and identify and ad-dress barriers to the ef˜cient analysis of such data, including relevant 
statistical methodologies. To facilitate this process, HHS should engage 
a center of excellence representing broad areas of expertise that include 
information technology, statistical methodologies for combining data, 
and data system content.
Information on the indicators recommended by the committee will 
be of interest to a variety of stakeholders, including policy makers, health 
departments, HIV care providers, patients, and researchers. The dissemi-nated information can be used in numerous waysŠfrom informing policy 
decisions to supporting the development of research projectsŠthat have the potential to improve HIV care quality. 
Recommendation 6-2. The Department of Health and Human Services 
should report to the public at least once every 2 years on indicators of 
HIV care and access to supportive services to foster improvements in 
the quality of HIV care and in monitoring progress toward meeting the 
goals of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy.
The reporting interval of at least once every 2 years allows for regular 
reporting of the indicator data to monitor the NHAS while minimizing 
reporting burden and associated costs. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.191IntroductionIn September 2010, the White House Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy 
(ONAP) commissioned the Institute of Medicine (IOM) to convene a com-mittee of experts to assess available public and private data systems that 
capture HIV care information; investigate ways to maximize the usefulness 
of, and recommend approaches for supplementing, existing data systems; 
and provide recommendations for the most critical data and indicators to 
help gauge the impact of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS) and the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA, P.L. 111-148) on HIV 
care. 
The committee was asked to address seven additional questions in its 
response to this charge, which are as follows: 
1. What are the best sources of data (and which data elements should 
be used) from public and private HIV care databases to assess core 
indicators related to continuous care and access to supportive ser-vices, such as housing, for people living with HIV?
 a.  
What data collection items need to be revised or reconsidered in 
existing databases of care and services provided to people living 
with HIV and in demographic data about populations receiving 
these services? Are there proposed changes that can provide nec-essary data without adding additional burden to data collection? b.  
What is the difference between claims data and clinical data 
found in medical records and do these differences encompass 
gaps in measures for HIV care? 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
2. What similar data collection or standardization efforts are cur
-rently under way by public agencies or private industry that should 
be tapped? 
3. How do we regularly obtain data (core indicators) that capture the 
care experiences of people living with HIV without substantial new 
investments? 
4.
 What situations may impose barriers to the collection of core 
indicators? a.  
What policies, reimbursement issues or reporting issues need to 
be addressed to collect necessary data?
 b.  
How can data be collected in a way that will not signi˜cantly 
increase provider burden?
5. How can federal agencies ef˜ciently analyze care indicators and 
disseminate data to improve HIV care quality?
6. What models or best practices in data system integration can be 
gleaned from public agencies or private industry to make existing 
data systems and core indicators interoperable? a.  
Which among these models or combination of models would be 
most cost effective?
7. How should health information technology (including electronic 
medical records) be utilized and con˜gured in order to improve the 
collection of comprehensive data describing the care experiences of 
people living with HIV?The Committee to Review Data Systems for Monitoring HIV Care 
was formed to carry out this study. The 17-member committee comprises 
experts in clinical HIV care, mental health, health services research, pri-vate health insurance, health policy, housing policy, the Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program, biostatistics, epidemiology, health disparities, and bio
-medical informatics (see Appendix A, Biographical Sketches of Committee 
Members). 
This is the ˜rst of two reports to be prepared by this committee. In a 
forthcoming report, also requested by ONAP, the committee will address 
the broad question of how to obtain national estimates that characterize the 
health care of people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) in the United States. 
The second report will include discussion of challenges and best practices 
from previous large scale and nationally representative studies of PLWHA 
as well as other populations. 
STUDY CONTEXTThe number of PLWHA in the United States is increasing every year in 
large part due to the availability of effective antiretroviral therapy (ART), 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 21which has allowed PLWHA to live longer and healthier lives (CDC, 2011b), 
and to a steady number of new HIV infections occurring each year. Nearly 
1.2 million individuals age ˛13 were living with HIV infection (both AIDS 
and non-AIDS cases) at the end of 2008, the most recent year for which 
national prevalence data are available (CDC, 2011c). The total prevalent 
cases represent a 6.5 percent increase in the number of PLWHA from the 
estimate for 2006 (CDC, 2008, 2011c). Despite overall improvements in 
survival, there continue to be many challenges to curbing the HIV epidemic. 
For example, an estimated 50,000 people in the United States were newly 
infected with HIV each year from 2006 through 2009 (Prejean et al., 2011), 
and approximately 16,000 people with AIDS die each year (CDC, 2011c). 
Many PLWHA remain undiagnosed; 20 percent of the prevalent cases esti
-mated for 2008 were among those whose infection was undiagnosed. The 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that 77 per-cent of people who are diagnosed are linked to care within 3 to 4 months 
and that only 51 percent are retained in ongoing care (CDC, 2011c). ART 
can help to reduce the level of HIV virus in the blood, sometimes to viral 
suppression (i.e., to an undetectable level), resulting in improved health 
outcomes for PLWHA and reduced risk of HIV transmission (Cohen et al., 
2011; Granich et al., 2009).
1 
Yet, only 19Œ28 percent of PLWHA are virally 
suppressed (Gardner et al., 2011). 
The evolving and often complex health care needs of PLWHA highlight 
the importance of making available continuous and coordinated quality 
HIV care. It is estimated that by 2015, more than half of PLWHA in the 
United States will be 50 or older (Effros et al., 2008; Justice, 2010). With 
improved survival and the aging of the population of PLWHA, there is a 
need for care models that address changing patterns of comorbidity that 
include increasing rates of chronic ﬁnon-AIDSﬂ conditions, such as cardio-vascular disease, diabetes, hypertension, certain cancers, and psychosocial 
comorbidities, and the in˚uence of HIV infection and long-term treatment 
on the etiology and progression of disease (Chu and Selwyn, 2011; Justice, 
2010; Mugavero et al., 2011; Shiels et al., 2011). 
HIV care should also be oriented to address the full range of care and 
supportive service needs of PLWHA so that they may better manage their 
HIV infection. HIV disproportionately impacts populations with care 
and supportive service needs that, when unmet, reduce access and adher-ence to HIV care and treatment (Robertson et al., 2004; Weaver et al., 
1 Being in HIV care may help to reduce risk of HIV transmission in ways besides having a 
reduced viral load as a result of being on antiretroviral therapy (ART). For example, provider 
counseling and linkage to supportive services may help to promote behaviors (e.g., consistent 
use of ART, safer sex, use of clean syringes) that reduce risk of HIV transmission (Parashar et 
al., 2011; Sikkema et al., 2010).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
2009). The provision of wraparound services such as case management, 
mental health services, substance abuse treatment, and transportation and 
housing assistance for PLWHA improves linkage and retention in care 
(Ashman et al., 2002; Mugavero et al., 2011). To help reduce disparities 
among subgroups of PLWHA, care should also be responsive to the diver
-sity of the population by taking into account demographic variables such 
as sex, gender, age, socioeconomic status, race and ethnicity, and sexual 
orientation (Bhavan et al., 2008; Bogart et al., 2010; Christopoulos et al., 
2011; Moore, 2011). 
To monitor and improve HIV care and address care disparities, data 
on the care experiences of PLWHA have to be collected and analyzed. 
Several organizations, such as the New York State Department of Health 
AIDS Institute, Kaiser Permanente, the Veterans Health Administration, 
and the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (a federally funded program, ad
-ministered by the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), 
which is considered a payer of last resort for low-income, uninsured, and 
underinsured PLWHA), have developed measures to assess the quality 
of their HIV care delivery (Horberg et al., 2010). However, these efforts 
have not been coordinated, resulting in several unaligned measures of 
HIV care quality. Development of a more standard set of measures that 
could be applied across a variety of care delivery platforms would allow 
for better comparisons and longitudinal tracking of care (Horberg et al., 
2010).2 Sources of care and coverage for PLWHA are important to consider for 
assessing the impact of the insurance reform that is occurring as a result 
of the ACA (described later in this chapter) on HIV care. An analysis of 
data from a convenience sample of 20,555 PLWHA attending high-volume 
HIV care sites participating in the HIV Research Network showed that 
Medicaid was the source of insurance at ˜rst outpatient visit for the largest 
proportion of patients (32 percent) followed by the Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program (24 percent). Commercial health insurance and Medicare were the 
source of insurance at ˜rst outpatient visit for 17 percent and 14 percent of 
patients, respectively (Table 1-1) (Fleishman and Gebo, 2012).
3 A recent analysis of older data from the Medical Monitoring Project 
2 Recognizing the need for aligned HIV care quality measurement, in 2007 the National 
Committee for Quality Assurance in partnership with the American Medical Association, 
HRSA, and the Infectious Diseases Society of America and HIV Medicine Association es-tablished ﬁa single set of aligned HIV quality measures for care processes and intermediate 
outcomes for external accountability and individual quality improvementﬂ (Horberg et al., 
2010). Chapter 2 describes these measures in more detail. 
3 Data are from care sites located in Baltimore, Maryland; Tampa, Florida; Dallas, Texas; 
New York, New York (three sites); Rochester, New York; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Detroit, 
Michigan; San Diego, California; Oakland, California; and Portland, Oregon. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 23(MMP), a national survey of the health care experiences and needs of 
adult PLWHA receiving medical care in the United States, showed that 84 
percent of participants (3,040 of 3,643) had one or more types of health 
insurance coverage during the 12 months prior to the survey. Of those with 
health insurance, 45 percent had Medicaid, 37 percent had private health 
insurance or coverage through a health maintenance organization, and 30 
percent had Medicare (Blair et al., 2011).
4 There will likely be growth over 
the next few years in the number of PLWHA on Medicare as a result of the 
aging of this population and ACA provisions related to the Medicare Part 
D drug bene˜t (described later in this chapter). 
Continuous access to medications is an important component of HIV 
care. As noted above, ART is vital to help PLWHA achieve and main
-tain viral suppression and thereby improve health outcomes and reduce 
HIV transmission (Cohen et al., 2011; Granich et al., 2009). Continu-ous access to and adherence to ART also may decrease the occurrence of 
HIV drug resistance (Gardner et al., 2010; Sethi et al., 2003). The AIDS 
Drug Assistance Program (ADAP), a component of the Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program administered by states to cover the costs of Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA)-approved prescription drugs, is a common source 
of prescription drug coverage for low-income PLWHA. ADAPs provided 
medications to more than 135,000 clients in 2010 (NASTAD, 2011). In the 
MMP survey described previously, ADAPs were the primary method of pay
-ment for prescription medications for 25 percent of participants. Medicaid 
or Medicare and private health care coverage were the primary method of 
payment for 41 percent and 25 percent of participants, respectively (Blair 
et al., 2011). 
4 Survey respondents could select more than one source of health insurance coverage (Blair 
et al., 2011).TABLE 1-1
 Insurance at First Outpatient Visit for Patients Attending 
Adult Care Sites in the HIV Research Network, CY2010 
InsuranceNumber of Patients (%)Commercial 3,580 (17)
Medicaid 6,652 (32)
Medicare 2,946 (14)
Dual (Medicaid and Medicare)  
970   (5)
Uninsured (self pay)  
544   (3)
Ryan White
 4,955 (24)
Other/Unknown  
908   (4)
Total number of patients
20,555SOURCE: Fleishman and Gebo (2012).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
The National HIV/AIDS Strategy and the Patient
 Protection and Affordable Care ActONAP is tasked with coordinating efforts of the federal government to 
reduce the number of HIV infections in the United States (ONAP, 2011a). 
Noting the continuing challenges to curbing the domestic HIV epidemic, 
ONAP released its NHAS in July 2010. The primary goals of the NHAS 
are to (1) reduce the number of people who become infected with HIV; (2) 
increase access to care and optimize health outcomes for PLWHA; and (3) 
reduce HIV-related health disparities (ONAP, 2010). The NHAS identi˜es 
action steps for each of the three primary goals and identi˜es quantitative 
targets to be achieved by 2015 (see Box 1-1).5Because increased coordination and collaboration among HIV care 
programs is necessary to meeting the goals of the NHAS, the strategy also 
includes an objective to achieve a more coordinated national response to 
the epidemic among federal, state, territorial, local, and tribal govern-ments (ONAP, 2010). As described in the IOM report 
Crossing the Quality 
Chasm: A New Health Care System for the 21st Century, the U.S. health 
care system as currently structured is uncoordinated and inef˜cient. Care 
providers often operate as silos ﬁproviding care without the bene˜t of com-plete information about the patient™s condition, medical history, services 
provided in other settings, or medications prescribed by other cliniciansﬂ 
(IOM, 2001). HIV care in particular is provided through a patchwork of 
payers with different eligibility requirements that cause many PLWHA to 
shift in and out of eligibility for care coverage over the course of their ill-ness (IOM, 2005, 2011b). Better coordination and communication across 
HIV providers and programs could improve continuity of care for PLWHA, 
who often have complex, long-term treatment and supportive service needs 
(Mugavero et al., 2011). The work of this IOM committee is named in the 
operational plans for the NHAS as one of the key activities that ONAP is 
undertaking ﬁto address gaps in data collection, analysis, and integration 
of the care and treatment experiences of people living with HIVﬂ within 
the NHAS goal to achieve a more coordinated national response to the HIV epidemic (ONAP, 2011b).
The NHAS is intended to complement the implementation of the ACA 
(ONAP, 2011b). If implemented as originally designed, the ACA will pro
-5 In addition, an overview of the operational plans for lead agencies implementing the 
National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS), including the departments of Health and Human 
Services and its subagencies, Housing and Urban Development, Justice, Labor, Veterans 
Affairs, and the Social Security Administration, was released in February 2011 (ONAP, 
2011b). The report outlines key activities that agencies are undertaking for each of the three 
NHAS goals as well as to increase coordination of HIV programs and improve mechanisms 
to monitor and report on progress toward achieving national goals. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 25vide health coverage to over 30 million uninsured citizens by 2021 (CBO, 
2011), including many PLWHA, and will establish private insurance market 
regulations. A few of the changes from the ACA that are likely to impact 
PLWHA are as follows: 
˜˚
Expansion of the Medicaid Program: The Medicaid program, cur-rently the largest single source of care coverage for people with 
HIV, will eliminate current categorical eligibility requirements such 
as being pregnant or disabled. Coverage will be expanded to in-clude all non-Medicare eligible individuals with incomes up to 133 
percent of the federal poverty level (FPL) beginning in 2014. People 
living with HIV who meet the new income threshold will no longer 
have to wait for an AIDS diagnosis or other diagnosis of disability 
to become eligible for Medicaid (KFF, 2011; NASTAD, 2010).
6˜˚
Phasing out the Medicare Part D Prescription Drug Coverage 
Gap: Medicare Part D prescription drug bene˜t recipients must 
pay out-of-pocket for the full cost of prescription drugs while in a 
coverage gap (i.e., between the time recipients and their drug plans 
have spent a certain amount of money for covered medications and 
the time catastrophic coverage begins).7 Prior to the ACA, PLWHA 
on ART were likely to have expenditures within the coverage gap 
unless they were receiving low-income subsidies (KFF, 2006). The 
ACA gradually phases down the coverage gap so that by 2020, 
bene˜ciaries will be responsible for 25 percent of the costs for 
brand name and generic drugs while in the coverage gap (CMS, 
2012; KFF, 2011), making medications more affordable to PLWHA 
who have Medicare Part D drug coverage. In addition, starting in 
2011, ADAP prescription drug bene˜ts began counting toward 
enrollees™ Medicare Part D ﬁtrue-out-of-pocketﬂ (TrOOP) spend
-ing limit, which determines when catastrophic coverage begins. 
This change will shift some of the costs of prescription drugs from 
ADAP to Medicare (HRSA, 2010). 
˜˚
Increased Private Health Insurance Access and Consumer Protec-tions: The ACA will increase access to private health insurance and 
protect bene˜ciaries from being denied coverage and other unfavor-6 As of April 2010, states had the option to phase in expansion of Medicaid to the newly 
eligible as long as the state does not offer coverage to (1) individuals with higher income before 
those with lower income or (2) to parents, unless their children are enrolled in Medicaid or 
other coverage. A cost-neutrality requirement for the expansion of Medicaid to nondisabled 
persons with HIV through a waiver process (i.e., that it cost the federal government no 
more than it would have with the waiver) has been a barrier to states taking up this option 
(NASTAD, 2010). 
7 Up to $4,700 in out-of-pocket costs in 2012 (CMS, 2012). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
BOX 1-1
 National HIV/AIDS Strategy Action Steps and Targets 
Reducing New HIV infections 
Action Steps




concentrated.




effective, evidence-based approaches. 




Targets
By 2015,










-sions in relation to the number of people living with HIV, by 30 percent. 

who know their serostatus. 
Increasing Access to Care and Improving Health Outcomes for People Liv
-ing with HIV
Action Steps


coordinated quality care when they are diagnosed with HIV.






providers of clinical care and related services for people living with HIV. 



those who have challenges meeting their basic needs, such as housing.
Targets
By 2015,



within 3 months of their HIV diagnosis from 65 to 85 percent. 




in care (at least two visits for routine HIV medical care in 12 months at least 
3 months apart) from 73 to 80 percent.



permanent housing from 82 to 86 percent. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 27able industry practices. Beginning in 2010, private health insurers 
were no longer able to deny coverage to children with preexisting 
conditions such as HIV/AIDS (KFF, 2011). In 2014, a guaranteed 
availability of insurance provision ensures the issuance and renew-ability of health insurance regardless of health status, and without 
increased premiums, for people with preexisting conditions. In the 
meantime, temporary preexisting insurance plans with subsidized 
premiums are available to adults with a preexisting medical condi-tion who have been uninsured for at least 6 months (KFF, 2011). 
Also starting in 2014, states will set up health insurance exchanges 
designed to make health coverage easier to buy and more afford-able. Premiums for insurance will be offered on a sliding scale for 
people at 133 to 400 percent of the FPL who are not eligible for 
Medicaid based on income. Private insurance companies could no 
Reducing HIV-Related Health Disparities and Health Inequities
Action Steps










communities.



Targets
By 2015,



-detectable viral load by 20 percent. 




-able viral load by 20 percent.




load by 20 percent. 
Achieving a More Coordinated National Response to the HIV Epidemic in 
the United States




-ment and between federal agencies and state, territorial, local, and tribal 
governments.






achieving national goals.

BOX 1-1  Continued
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
longer cancel or rescind coverage (except in the case of fraud) or 
impose a lifetime cap on the amount of coverage an individual can 
receive starting in 2010 (HHS, 2011b; KFF, 2011).
8 ˜˚
Expansion of Coverage for Preventive Health Services: As of Sep-tember 2010, the ACA requires new private health insurance plans 
to cover the cost of preventive services that have been determined 
by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) to have high 
or moderate certainty of substantial or moderate net (popula-tion) bene˜t (USPSTF, 2010) and of immunizations recommended 
by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (CDC, 
2011a). The ACA also requires coverage for an annual wellness 
visit under Medicare, eliminates cost sharing for recommended 
preventive services covered by Medicare, and gives state Medicaid 
programs ˜nancial incentives to cover preventive services (Cassidy, 
2010). Preventive services recommended by the USPSTF that are 
of particular interest to PLWHA include screening examinations 
for sexually transmitted infections (STIs), certain cancers, depres-sion, diabetes and other conditions, as well as several vaccina-tions (USPSTF, 2010).
9 In response to recommendations outlined 
in the IOM report Clinical Preventive Services for Women: Closing 
the Gaps (IOM, 2011a), in August 2011 the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) announced new guidelines for 
health insurers and health plans specifying that women receive 
certain preventive services without copayment, coinsurance, or 
deductible. The guidelines, which go into effect in August 2012 
with changes becoming effective for most new health plans on 
January 1, 2013, build on the ACA provisions to increase access 
to preventive services for all Americans. The new guidelines require full coverage for HIV screening and counseling for all sexually ac
-tive women, human papillomavirus (HPV) testing, STI counseling, 
8 It is important to note that while some of the provisions of the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) apply to all health plans, certain requirements (e.g., coverage of 
preventive services without cost sharing) are not applicable to a grandfathered plan as long as 
the plan or insurance coverage remains a grandfathered plan. A grandfathered health plan is 
a group health plan or insurance coverage in which an individual was enrolled on March 23, 
2010, the date the ACA was enacted.
9 Furthermore, an ﬁessential bene˜ts packageﬂ that is planned to go into effect in 2014 would 
require all quali˜ed health bene˜ts plans to offer at least the bene˜ts in the package, which will 
include items and services in the following 10 categories: (1) ambulatory patient services, (2) 
emergency services, (3) hospitalization, (4) maternity and newborn care, (5) mental health and 
substance use disorder services, including behavioral health treatment, (6) prescription drugs, 
(7) rehabilitative and habilitative services and devices, (8) laboratory services, (9) preventive 
and wellness services and chronic disease management, and (10) pediatric services, including 
oral and vision care (KFF, 2011; H.R. 3590, SEC 1302).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 29and FDA-approved contraceptive methods and counseling, among 
other services (HHS, 2011a). 
˜˚
Expansion of Care Capacity at Community Health Centers: Com-munity health centers (CHCs), including federally quali˜ed health 
centers (FQHCs),10 are an important source of care for PLWHA 
who may be isolated from traditional forms of medical care (e.g., 
undocumented and recent immigrants,11 people living in rural 
areas), as well as people who are low income, uninsured, and 
members of racial and ethnic minority groups. To increase access to 
preventive care and primary health care, the ACA provides funding 
to increase the service capacity of CHCs/FQHCs from 20 million 
to 40 million patients by 2015 (McKay, 2011). 
As noted in the operational plans for the NHAS, federal agencies and 
their state, local, and community partners need to ensure that HIV health 
care providers and PLWHA are included in initiatives to improve quality 
of care and integration of care services as the ACA is implemented (ONAP, 
2011b). The ACA will help to address several features of the current health 
system that restrict access to care and care coverage for PLWHA.
12 This 
will occur by expanding access to Medicaid, Medicare (prescription drug 
coverage), and private insurance programs, as well as by increasing access 
to preventive services and bolstering support to CHCs. It is important to 
10 Federally Quali˜ed Health Centers (FQHCs) include health centers funded under Section 
330 of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS) Act; FQHC ﬁlook-alikes,ﬂ or FQHCLAs, that 
have been identi˜ed by the Health Resources and Services Administration and certi˜ed by 
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) as meeting the de˜nition of ﬁHealth 
Centerﬂ under Section 330; and outpatient health programs or facilities operated by tribal 
organizations. 
11 Some quali˜ed immigrants are not eligible for Medicaid until they have been in the United 
States for 5 years (CMS, 2012).
12 While preparing this report, the committee was mindful that provisions of the ACA that 
would impact access to care for PLWHA may not be implemented as originally planned. How
-ever, the indicators and data systems identi˜ed by the committee in this report to monitor the 
impact of the ACA on HIV care remain valid even if the ACA is not fully implemented. Indeed 
the committee™s charge was to identify indicators to gauge the impact on HIV care not only 
of the ACA but also of the NHAS, for which implementation plans developed by applicable 
federal agencies currently are underway. Furthermore, many states have already expanded 
access to health insurance for their residents in response to ACA provisions, and states may 
maintain these changes even in the absence of national-level reforms. For example, the ACA 
allowed states the option to begin phasing in Medicaid expansion to cover non-elderly indi
-viduals with income up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level ( FPL) beginning in April 
2010, and many states have done so. The committee™s recommended indicators could be used 
to monitor improvements in HIV care within states over time as a result of these changes, even 
if such changes do not occur nationally. The indicators are also applicable to state-speci˜c 
policies, such as shifts to Medicaid managed care, and New York™s current Medicaid redesign, 
which will include a new payment structure.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
note that changes resulting from the ACA will not bene˜t all PLWHAŠfor 
example, undocumented immigrants who are ineligible for many key provi
-sions of the legislation.
The Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program is an example of an effective 
integrated model of care for PLWHA. Primary and specialty care as well 
as psychosocial services are coordinated within a single ﬁmedical home.ﬂ 
Therefore, the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program model of care helps to 
overcome challenges posed by the fragmented health care system that may 
impede retention in care for many PLWHA (Gallant et al., 2011). Care for 
many PLWHA will likely shift from the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program to 
Medicaid as the ACA expands Medicaid to cover adults who were previ
-ously uninsured. However, the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program and other 
safety net providers will continue to ˜ll gaps in medical and social services 
not covered by Medicaid. The Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program also will 
continue to be an important source of care and supportive services for 
PLWHA who remain uninsured under the ACA (such as undocumented 
immigrants). 
The Role of Health Information Technology and Data System Integration
When applied appropriately, health information technology (health 
IT) can help to improve health care quality, prevent medical errors, reduce 
health care costs, and increase administrative ef˜ciencies (HHS, 2011c; 
IOM, 2001). The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clini
-cal Health (HITECH) Act, a key component of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA, P.L. 111-5) , has allowed HHS to estab
-lish several programs to improve health care delivery through investment 
in health IT, such as electronic health records (EHRs) (HHS, 2011d). For 
example, incentive funds authorized under the ARRA are helping eligible 
primary care as well as medical and surgical specialists with high EHR 
implementation costs that have been an obstacle to their widespread use 
(Hogan and Kissam, 2010). The health IT infrastructure being established 
as a result of the HITECH Act is key to carrying out goals of the ACA to 
improve quality of care through expanded measurement and reporting, 
reduce costs and improve ef˜ciency of care delivery and administrative 
processes, and improve access to care and coverage (Buntin et al., 2010). 
Although the government investment in health IT is encouraging, im-plementation has thus far occurred at a slow pace. For health IT to be used 
to its fullest capabilities to monitor HIV care, several barriers to adoption 
and utilization in settings that provide care and services to PLWHA have 
to be addressed. These include costs and staf˜ng needed to implement and 
maintain IT applications, privacy and con˜dentiality concerns, and a vari-ety of other factors described in more detail later in this report. Most im-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 31portantly, the bene˜ts of health IT cannot fully be realized without system 
interoperability or an infrastructure that supports the secure exchange of 
health information across providers, including physician practices, insur-ance providers, hospitals, and other entities (Edwards et al., 2010).13 To 
a large extent, the health IT systems currently employed in clinician and 
provider of˜ces capture patient information in different ways (e.g., using 
different terminology standards) and thus cannot ﬁtalkﬂ to each other. 
The existence of heterogeneous HIV data systems makes understanding 
interoperability essential. The exchange of health information across care 
sites is especially important for PLWHA who may transition across pro
-grams throughout the course of their illness (as previously described) and 
see different types of providers for the management of HIV and comorbid 
conditions. 
THE COMMITTEE™S APPROACH TO ITS CHARGEThe committee reviewed information from a number of sources during 
the course of its deliberations, including the scienti˜c literature, previous 
IOM reports, and presentations by experts invited to speak with the com-mittee on topics pertaining to its charge. As described in greater detail in the 
following chapters, the committee also reviewed existing HIV care indica
-tors and measures of HIV care quality to inform its selection of core indi-cators. The committee requested information from individuals who work 
with various sources of data on HIV care and supportive services about 
the information collected to identify the best sources of data for estimating 
indicators. The committee reviewed data systems that are HIV speci˜c (e.g., epidemiologic studies of PLWHA), as well as data systems that are not HIV 
speci˜c (e.g., Medicaid, Medicare, private health insurance data systems) 
that include data relevant to monitoring HIV care. 
Consistent with the NHAS objective to increase access to care and im-prove health outcomes for PLWHA, the committee focused on identifying 
core indicators and data systems to track linkage and access to appropriate 
HIV care and related supportive services among diagnosed PLWHA. The 
committee also considered how indicators could be used to monitor HIV-
related health disparities. Reducing the occurrence of new HIV infections, 
another NHAS objective, is critical to curbing the HIV epidemic in the 
United States. However, this report does not identify indicators and data 
systems to monitor reductions in new HIV infections because the committee 
interpreted its charge to apply to the population of PLWHA with diagnosed 
13 In health care, interoperability refers to the ability of different information technology 
systems and software applications to communicate; to exchange data accurately, effectively, 
and consistently; and to use the information that has been exchanged (HHS, 2008).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HIV infection. In addition, the committee chose to focus this report on 
adult PLWHA, although the core indicators for clinical HIV care and men
-tal health and substance abuse could be applied to adolescents as well.
14 
As the committee was preparing this report, there was a concurrent ef-fort under way by HHS to identify domain areas from which standardized 
indicators can be identi˜ed to monitor federally funded HIV/AIDS preven-tion, treatment, and care services.15 The project was motivated by a need 
to develop a common set of metrics to streamline the collection of data to 
measure NHAS objectives and reduce reporting requirements for grantees 
of federally funded HIV/AIDS programs (Forsyth et al., 2011; Valdiserri 
and Forsyth, 2011). Because the aims of the HHS effort overlapped with 
the charge to the committee to identify core indicators to gauge the impact 
of the NHAS and ACA on HIV care, the committee deemed it necessary to 
include the HHS effort in its information gathering. HHS representatives 
who are familiar with the HHS effort were invited to one of the committee™s 
meetings to discuss the types and sources of indicators under consideration. 
The committee also received periodic updates on HHS™s progress over the 
course of the study. 
Providers of HIV care and supportive services are required to meet 
many reporting obligations related to compliance with federal grants, dis-ease surveillance, and other activities. These reporting obligations require 
substantial staff time and may constrain provider capacity to engage in 
other activities such as the provision of HIV care and supportive services 
(IOM, 2010, 2011b). Taking into account the ongoing effort by HHS to 
streamline data reporting requirements for HHS grantees, the committee 
made an effort to be parsimonious in its identi˜cation of core indicators 
to gauge the impact of the NHAS and ACA on improvements in HIV care. 
REPORT ORGANIZATION
Chapter 2 of this report addresses the parts of the committee™s state
-ment of task that pertain to data elements and core indicators related to 
continuous care and access to supportive services for PLWHA. The relative 
merits of each type of data are discussed, as well as whether the differences 
among data types (in particular, claims data and clinical data) encompass 
14 Although new cases of HIV in children (i.e., individuals under age 13) continue to occur, 
their frequency has diminished substantially with the implementation of routine HIV screening of pregnant women and the provision of ART to HIV-infected pregnant women, which greatly 
reduces the risk of mother-to-child transmission (Branson et al., 2006; CDC, 2002). 
15 As of January 24, 2012, these domain areas included HIV+ diagnosis; early HIV diagnosis; 
initial linkage to care; sustained engagement in care; initiation of antiretroviral treatment; 
viral load suppression; and housing (personal communication, Andrew Forsyth, Department 
of Health and Human Services, January 24, 2012). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 33gaps in measures for HIV care. The chapter also presents the committee™s 
choice of core indicators related to continuous HIV care and access to 
supportive services and identi˜es and recommends the most critical data 
and indicators to gauge the impact of the NHAS and the ACA. Chapter 
3 discusses sources of data for estimating the core indicators identi˜ed in 
Chapter 2, considers ways to maximize their usefulness, and recommends 
approaches for supplementing current data systems to gauge the impact 
of the NHAS and the ACA on HIV care. Chapter 3 also discusses similar 
data collection and standardization efforts that should be utilized, as well 
as how to regularly obtain data to capture the care experiences of PLWHA 
without substantial new investments. Chapter 4 discusses potential barriers 
to the collection of the data needed to estimate the core indicators recom-mended by the committee, including policy, reimbursement, and reporting 
issues that must be addressed to collect the necessary data. The chapter also 
considers how core indicator data can be collected without signi˜cantly 
increasing provider burden. Chapter 5 discusses ways in which health IT 
can be utilized and con˜gured to improve the collection of HIV care data, 
as well as models and best practices in data system integration to make 
existing data systems that capture HIV care data interoperable. Chapter 
6 describes how federal agencies can ef˜ciently analyze indicators of HIV 
care and disseminate data to improve the quality of HIV care. Each chapter 
ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations pertaining to 
aspects of the statement of task discussed in that chapter. 
REFERENCESAshman, J. J., R. Conviser, and M. B. Pounds. 2002. Associations between HIV-positive in
-dividuals receipt of ancillary services and medical care receipt and retention. AIDS Care 14(Suppl 1):S109-S118. 
Bhavan, K. P., V. N. Kampalath, and E. T. Overton. 2008. The aging of the HIV epidemic. 
Current HIV/AIDS Reports
 5:150-158.Blair, J. M., A. D. McNaghten, E. L. Frazier, J. Skarbinski, P. Huang, and J. D. Heffel˜nger. 
2011. Clincial and behavioral characteristics of adults receiving care for HIV infectionŠ
Medical Monitoring Project, United States, 2007. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report 60(20):1-17.Bogart, L. M., G. Wagner, F. H. Galvan, and D. Banks. 2010. Conspiracy beliefs about HIV 
are related to antiretroviral treatment nonadherence among African American men with 
HIV. 
Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndrome
 53(5):648-655.Branson, B. M., H. H. Hands˜eld, M. A. Lampe, R. S. Janssen, A. W. Taylor, S. B. Lyss, and 
J. E. Clark. 2006. Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, 
and pregnant women in health-care settings. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 55(RR14):1-17.Buntin, M. B., S. H. Jain, and D. Blumenthal. 2010. Health information technology: Laying 
the infrastructure for national health reform. 
Health Affairs 29(6):1214-1219.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Cassidy, A. 2010. 
Preventive Services Without Cost Sharing. New Private Health Plans Must 
Pay for Screenings and Other Preventive Services. Will the Bene˜ts Outweigh the Costs?
 http://www.healthaffairs.org/healthpolicybriefs/brief.php?brief_id=37 (accessed February 
29, 2012).CBO (Congressional Budget Of˜ce). 2011. CBO™s Analysis of the Major Health Care Legisla
-tion Enacted in March 2010. http://www.cbo.gov/publication/25155 (accessed February 
29, 2012).CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2002. HIV testing among pregnant 
womenŠUnited States and Canada, 1998-2001. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 51(45):1013-1016.CDC. 2008. 
New Estimates of U.S. HIV Prevalence, 2006
. CDC Fact Sheet. 
October.
CDC. 2011a. ACIP Recommendations. http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/ACIP-list.htm (ac
-cessed February 29, 2012). 
CDC. 2011b. HIV surveillanceŠUnited States, 1981-2008. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report 60(21):689-693.CDC. 2011c. Vital signs: HIV prevention through care and treatmentŠUnited States. 
Morbid-ity and Mortality Weekly Report
 60(47):1618-1623.Christopoulos, K. A., M. Das, and G. N. Colfax. 2011. Linkage and retention in HIV care 
among men who have sex with men in the United States. Clinical Infectious Diseases 52(Suppl 2): S214-S222.
Chu, C., and P. Selwyn. 2011. An epidemic in evolution: The need for new models of HIV care 
in the chronic disease era. Journal of Urban Health: Bulletin of the New York Academy 
of Medicine 88(3):556-566.CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services). 2012. 
Closing the Coverage Gap
ŠMedicare Prescription Drugs Are Becoming More Affordable.
 http://medicare.gov/pub
-lications/pubs/pdf/11493.pdf (accessed February 29, 2012).Cohen, M. S., Y. Q. Chen, M. McCauley, T. Gamble, M. C. Hosseinipour, N. Kumarasamy, 
J. G. Hakim, J. Kumwenda, B. Grinsztein, J. H. S. Pilotto, S. V. Godbole, S. Mehendale, 
S. Charjvalertsak, B. R. Santos, K. H. Mayer, I. F. Hoffman, S. H. Eshelman, E. Piwowar-
Manning, L. Wang, J. Makhema, L. A. Mills, G. de Bruyn, I. Sanne, J. Eron, J. Gallant, 
D. Havlir, S. Swindells, H. Ribaudo, V. Elharrar, D. Burns, T. E. Taha, K. Nielsen-Saines, 
D. Celentano, M. Essex, and T. R. Fleming. 2011. Prevention of HIV-1 infection with 
early antiretroviral therapy. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 365:493-505.Edwards, A., I. Hollin, J. Barry, and S. Kachnowski. 2010. Barriers to cross-institutional 
health information exchange: A literature review. 
Journal of Healthcare Information 
Management 24(3):22-34.Effros, R. B., C. V. Fletcher, K. Gebo, J. B. Halter, W. R. Hazzard, F. M. Horne, R. E. Huebner, 
E. N. Janoff, A. C. Justice, D. Kuritzkes, S. G. Nay˜eld, S. F. Plaeger, K. E. Schmader, 
J. R. Ashworth, C. Campanelli, C. P. Clayton, B. Rada, N. F. Woolard, and K. P. High. 
2008. Aging and infectious diseases: Workshop on HIV infection and aging: What is 
known and future research directions. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 47(4):542-553.Fleishman, J., and K. Gebo. 2012. HIV Research Network. Report to the committee. January 27. 
Forsyth, A., A. Lansky, and R. Wolitski. 2011. 
Achieving the Vision of the NHAS: An Up
-date of ECHPP and 12 Cities Activities. PowerPoint presentation before the committee. Washington, DC, September 1.
Gallant, J. E., A. A. Adimora, J. K. Carmichael, M. Horberg, M. Kitahata, E. B. Quinlivan, 
J. L. Raper, P. Selwyn, and S. B. Williams. 2011. Essential components of effective HIV 
care: A policy paper of the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America and the Ryan White Medical Providers Coalition. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases 53(11):1043-1050.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 35Gardner, E. M., K. H. Hullsiek, E. E. Telzak, S. Sharma, G. Peng, W. J. Burman, R. D. 
MacArthur, M. Chesney, G. Friedland, S. B. Mannheimer, and T. Beirn. 2010. Antiret
-roviral medication adherence and class-speci˜c resistance in a large prospective clinical 
trial. AIDS 24(3):395-403.Gardner, E. M., M. P. McLees, J. F. Steiner, C. del Rio, and W. J. Burman. 2011. The spectrum 
of engagement in HIV care and its relevance to test-and-treat strategies for prevention of 
HIV infection. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 52:793-800. 
Granich, R. M., C. F. Gilks, C. Dye, K. M. De Cock, and B. G. Williams. 2009. Universal 
voluntary HIV testing with immediate antiretroviral therapy as a strategy for elimination 
of HIV transmission: A mathematical model. Lancet 373(9657):48-57.HHS (Department of Health and Human Services). 2008. The National Alliance for Health 
Information Technology report to the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology on De˜ning Key Health Information Technology Terms. 
http://cdm266901.cdmhost.com/cdm/singleitem/collection/p266901coll4/id/2086/rec/8
 (ac-cessed May 23, 2012).HHS. 2011a. Affordable Care Act Ensures Women Receive Preventive Services at No Addi
-tional Cost. News release. http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2011pres/08/20110801b.html 
(accessed February 29, 2012).HHS. 2011b. How the Affordable Care Act Helps People Living with HIV/AIDS: 2011 and 
Beyond. http://www.healthcare.gov/news/factsheets/2011/11/hiv-aids11092011a.html
 (accessed May 22, 2012).
HHS. 2011c. 
Health Information Technology: Understanding HIPAA Privacy.
 http://www.
hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/healthit/index.html (accessed February 
29, 2012).HHS. 2011d. 
HITECH Programs
. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/community/
healthit_hhs_gov__hitech_programs/1487 (accessed February 29, 2012).
Hogan, S. O., and S. M. Kissam. 2010. Measuring meaningful use. Health Affairs 29(4): 
601-606.Horberg, M. A., J. A. Aberg, L. W. Cheever, P. Renner, E. O™Brien Kaleba, and S. M. Asch. 
2010. Development of national and multiagency HIV care quality measures. Clinical 
Infectious Diseases 51(6):732-738.HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2010. Letter to Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program Grantees
. November 23. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/pinspals/adaptroopltr1011.pdf (accessed February 29, 2012).IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2001. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health System for 
the 21st Century.
 Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2005. 
Public Financing and Delivery of HIV/AIDS Care: Securing the Legacy of Ryan 
White. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2010. 
HIV Screening and Access to Care: Exploring Barriers and Facilitators to Ex
-panded HIV Testing
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2011a. Clinical Preventive Services for Women: Closing the Gaps.
 Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.IOM. 2011b. HIV Screening and Access to Care: Exploring the Impact of Policies on Access 
to and Provision of HIV Care.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Jha, A. K., D. Doolan, D. Grandt, T. Scott, and D. W. Bates. 2008. The use of health in
-formation technology in seven nations. 
International Journal of Medical Informatics
 77(12):848-854.Justice, A. C. 2010. HIV and aging: Time for a new paradigm. 
Current HIV/AIDS Reports 7(2):69-76.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
KFF (Kaiser Family Foundation). 2006. The Role of Part D for People with HIV/AIDS: Cover-age and Costs of Antiretrovirals Under Medicare Drug Plans.
 http://www.kff.org/hivaids/
upload/7548.pdf (accessed January 18, 2012). 
KFF. 2011. 
Focus on Health Reform: Summary of the New Health Reform Law.
 Publication 
number 8061.McKay, E. G. 2011. 
HIV and Health Care Reform: Implications for Safety Net Clinics. http://www.regionalprimarycare.org/spotlight-on-health-reform/documents/PolicyandPractice-
HealthReformHIVClinics2-18-11.pdf (accessed February 29, 2012).
Moore, R.D. 2011. Epidemiology of HIV infection in the United States: Implications for link-age and retention in care. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 52(Suppl 2):S208-S213.
Mugavero, M. J., W. E. Norton, and M. S. Saag. 2011. Health care system and policy factors 
in˚uencing engagement in HIV medical care: Piecing together the fragments of a frac-tured health care delivery system. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 52:S238-S246.NASTAD (National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors). 2010. 
HIV/Hepatitis 
Health Reform Watch. 
Volume 3, August 9. http://www.nastad.org/Docs/Public/
 InFocus/2010811_Health%20Reform%20Watch%20Volume%203.pdf (accessed Febru
-ary 29, 2012).NASTAD. 2011. 
National ADAP Monitoring Project Annual Report. May. http://www.nastad.
org/Files/020035_2011%20NASTAD%20National%20ADAP%20Monitoring%20
 Project%20Annual%20Report.pdf (accessed February 29, 2012).ONAP (White House Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy). 2010. 
National HIV/AIDS Strategy 
for the United States. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/uploads/NHAS.pdf 
(accessed February 29, 2012).ONAP. 2011a. 
About ONAP
. http://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/onap/about (ac
-cessed February 29, 2012).ONAP. 2011b. 
Implementing the National HIV/AIDS Strategy: Overview of Agency Op-erational Plans. http://aids.gov/federal-resources/policies/national-hiv-aids-strategy/nhas-operational-plan-overview.pdf (accessed February 29, 2012).
Parashar, S., A. K. Palmer, N. O™Brien, K. Chan, A. Shen, S. Coulter, J. S. Montaner, and R. S. 
Hogg. 2011. Sticking to it: The effect of maximally assisted therapy on antiretroviral 
treatment adherence among individuals living with HIV who are unstably housed. AIDS 
Behavior 15(8):1612-1622. 
Prejean, J., R. Song, A. Hernandez, R. Ziebell, T. Green, F. Walker, L. S. Lin, Q. An, J. 
Mermin, A. Lansky, and H. I. Hall. 2011. Estimated HIV incidence in the United States, 
2006-2009. PlosOne 6(8):e17502.Robertson, M. J., R. A. Clark, E. D. Charlebois, J. Tulsky, H. L. Long, D. R. Bangsberg, and 
A. R. Moss. 2004. HIV seroprevalence among homeless and marginally housed adults in 
San Francisco. American Journal of Public Health 94(7):1207-1217.Sethi, A. K., D. D. Celentano, S. J. Gange, R. D. Moore, and J. E. Gallant. 2003. Association 
between adherence to antiretroviral therapy and human immunode˜ciency virus drug 
resistance. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 37(8):1112-1118.Shiels, M. S., R. M. Pfeiffer, M. H. Gail, H. I. Hall, J. M. Li, A. K. Chaturvedi, K. Bhatia, 
T. S. Uldrick, R. Yarchoan, J. J. Goedert, and E. A. Engels. 2011. Cancer burden in the 
HIV-infected population in the United States. 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 103(9):753-762.Sikkema, K. J., M. H. Watt, A. S. Drabkin, C. S. Meade, N. B. Hansen, and B. W. Pence. 2010. 
Mental health treatment to reduce HIV transmission risk behavior: A positive prevention 
model. AIDS Behavior
 14(2):252-262.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 37USPSTF (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force). 2010. 
USPSTF A and B Recommendations. List of Preventive Services that Have a Rating of A or B that Are Relevant for Implementing 
the Affordable Care Act. http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf/uspsabrecs.
htm (accessed February 29, 2012).
Valdiserri, R., and A. Forsyth. 2011. 
DHHS/OHAP Consultation on HIV/AIDS Core In-dicators, Data Streamlining, and Federal Reporting Requirements. Washington, DC, 
September 19.Weaver, M. R., C. J. Conover, R. J. Proescholdbell, P. S. Arno, A. Ang, K. K. Uldall, and 
S. L. Ettner. 2009. Cost-effectiveness analysis of integrated care for people with HIV, 
chronic mental illness and substance abuse disorders. 
Journal of Mental Health Policy 
and Economics 12(1):33-46.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.392Indicators Related to Continuous HIV 
Care and Access to Supportive Services
This chapter addresses the committee™s charge to ﬁprovide recommen
-dations for the most critical data and indicators to gauge the impact of 
the National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS) and the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act (ACA) in improving HIV/AIDS careﬂ in the United 
States (statement of task). The chapter presents the committee™s choice of 
core and additional indicators related to continuous HIV care and access 
to supportive services, such as housing, for people living with HIV/AIDS 
(PLWHA); the process by which the committee identi˜ed and prioritized the 
indicators; the committee™s rationale for selecting each indicator; and the 
data (elements) needed to measure the indicators. The committee recognizes 
the importance of efforts to increase access to HIV testing and the number 
of HIV-infected individuals who are aware of their serostatus (IOM, 2010, 
2011b,c), as well as the need to reduce the transmission of HIV through 
efforts to reduce risk behaviors among all persons. Based on its statement 
of task, however, the committee focused its attention on linkage and access 
to and provision of appropriate HIV care and related supportive services 
for people already diagnosed with HIV/AIDS.
11 Although the committee did not focus on indicators speci˜cally related to reducing the 
transmission of HIV by people in care for HIV (e.g., condom use), some indicators, such as 
those related to undetectable viral load, also promote transmission reduction. Preliminary 
results from a large HIV Prevention Trials Network randomized clinical trial (HPTN 052) 
indicate that early use of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in PLWHA reduces sexual transmission 
of HIV to an uninfected partner by 96 percent (Cohen et al., 2011). Likewise, the committee 
did speci˜cally address the use of ART to reduce mother-to-child transmission in pregnant 
women with HIV as part of the prenatal care provided to HIV-infected pregnant women.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
The chapter also discusses different types of data relevant to patient 
care and their usefulness for evaluating the continuity (and quality) of HIV 
care and access to supportive services. The relative merits of each type of 
data are discussed, as well as whether the differences among data types 
(in particular claims data and clinical data) ﬁencompass gaps in measures 
for HIV careﬂ (statement of task question 1b). The chapter ends with the 
committee™s conclusions and recommendations for ﬁthe most critical data 
and indicators for gauging the impact of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy 
(ONAP, 2010) and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act [P.L. 
111-148] in improving HIV/AIDS care.ﬂINDICATORS OF CLINICAL HIV CARE AND ACCESS TO MENTAL 
HEALTH, SUBSTANCE ABUSE, AND SUPPORTIVE SERVICES
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) letter report 
Leading Health Indica
-tors for Healthy People 2020 (IOM, 2011d, p. 8) de˜ned the term ﬁindica-torﬂ as ﬁa measurementﬂ and ﬁleading health indicatorsﬂ as ﬁquantitative 
expressions of health-related concepts that re˚ect major public health con-cerns.ﬂ For the purposes of the present report, indicators of HIV care 
and access to supportive services are de˜ned as quantitative expressions 
(measurements) pertaining to the state of HIV care and the availability 
of supportive services for PLWHA (and subgroups thereof) in the United 
States. ﬁCore indicatorsﬂ are those indicators deemed by the committee to 
be fundamental both to assessing the extent to which persons diagnosed 
with HIV are connected to appropriate medical care, are maintained in 
care over time, and have access to needed supportive services in the United 
States and to gauging the impact of the NHAS and the ACA in improving 
HIV/AIDS care.Indicators may include process measures and outcome measures. Pro-cess measures pertain to processes of care, such as regular visits for routine 
care, lab tests and screening performed, and therapies initiated. Outcome 
measures pertain to the actual health outcomes or status of patients. Mor-tality and morbidity are ultimate outcome measures for tracking access to 
quality HIV care for people diagnosed with HIV. Intermediate outcome 
measures include CD4+ T-cell counts (CD4 counts) and plasma HIV RNA 
levels (viral loads), which re˚ect disease progression and infectivity. Pro
-cess measures are important indicators of quality of care and treatments 
received, which research has shown are directly associated with good clini-cal outcomes (Kitahata, 1996; Kitahata et al., 2000, 2003; Landon et al., 
2005). For example, regular monitoring of CD4 counts implies good-quality HIV care, with the expectation of good outcomes.
Indicators often are de˜ned in terms of a percentage, proportion, or 
other relative measure and are not synonymous with the data elements 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 41necessary to assess them. Multiple data elements may be required to gener-ate an indicator. For example, ﬁthe proportion of PLWHA in the United 
States who have a CD4+ cell count above 
Xﬂ is an indicator, while the data 
needed to assess that indicator are CD4 counts (speci˜cally the number 
of people with a CD4+ cell count above 
X) and the total number of HIV-
infected individuals in the United States.BackgroundA number of important sets of performance measures (Horberg et al., 
2010), health objectives (HHS, 2010), and indicators (PEPFAR, 2009) re
-lated to HIV screening and care have been developed or revised in recent 
years. The NHAS also identi˜es several speci˜c targets, in addition to its 
three general goals of ﬁreducing the number of people who become in-fected with HIV; increasing access to care and optimizing health outcomes 
for people living with HIV; and reducing HIV-related health disparitiesﬂ 
(ONAP, 2010, p. 1). These sources provide a basis for the committee™s 
development of a set of indicators for measuring HIV care and access to 
mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services in the United States 
(Appendix Table 2-1).
2HIV Care Quality MeasuresMichael Horberg and colleagues (2010) describe the development of a 
set of 17 performance measures for HIV care (Table 2-1), most of which 
have been endorsed by the National Quality Forum (NQF), a nonpro˜t or-ganization that sets national consensus standards on performance in health 
care (see NQF, 2011a).
The measures represent a consensus among members of a working 
group of experts convened by the National Committee for Quality Assur-ance, in conjunction with the Health Resources and Services Administration 
(HRSA), the Physician Consortium for Performance Improvement of the 
American Medical Association, and the HIV Medicine Association of the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. The effort to produce a single set of 
2 All indicators considered by the committee are population-aggregated individual measures, 
such as the proportion linked to care within 3 months of diagnosis and mortality rate. 
The committee recognizes the importance of system-level indicators, such as the structural 
dimensions of system comprehensiveness, capacity, integration, and accessibility described 
in the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) System Assessment Project 
(Conviser, 2007). System-level indicators are important because they are related to getting 
diagnosed individuals linked to, engaged in, and retained in care. However, the committee 
understood its charge to be recommendations for indicators to measure the quality as well as 
the continuity of HIV care received by PLWHA in the United States.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
TABLE 2-1
 HIV Care Quality MeasuresMeasureLevel of 
 Care 
 ImpactedaLevel of Evidence
bProcess of care
 1.  
Retention in care (seen at least twice 
annually at least 60 days apart)PLevel II and QM 2.  
CD4+ cell count measurement (mea-sured at least twice annually)
PLevel II and QMScreening 3.  
Gonorrhea/chlamydia screening (at least 
once)PLevel II 4.  
Syphilis screening (annually)
PLevel II and QM 5.  
Injection drug use screening (annually)
PLevel II 6.  
High-risk sexual behavior screening 
(annually)PLevel I and QM
 7.  
Tuberculosis screening (at least once)
PLevel I and QM
 8.  
Hepatitis B screening (at least once)
PLevel III and QM 9.  
Hepatitis C screening (at least once)
PLevel III and QMImmunization10.  
In˚uenza immunization (annually)BLevel III11.  
Pneumococcal immunization (at least 
once)BLevel II and QM12.  
Hepatitis B vaccination ˜rst dose re
-ceived (if appropriate)
PLevel II and QM13.  
Hepatitis B vaccination series completed 
(if appropriate)SLevel II and QMProphylactic therapy14.  
PCP prophylaxis if CD4+ cell count 
<200 cells/µLBLevel I and QM
ART prescription
15.  
Appropriately prescribed ART
PLevel I and QM
Viral control (at least 6 months post-ART 
initiation)16.  
Achieving maximal viral control if 
prescribed ART
SLevel II and QM17.  
Achieving maximal viral control if 
prescribed ART or treatment plan 
documentation if maximal viral control 
not achievedPLevel II and QMNOTE: ART, antiretroviral therapy; PCP, 
Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia.aLevels of care are as follows: P, physician; S, system; B, both.
bLevels of evidence are as follows: I, evidence from ˛1 randomized controlled trial; II, evidence 
from ˛1 clinical trial, multiple cohort studies, or multiple times series or dramatic results of 
uncontrolled experiments; III, expert opinion only; QM, previous quality measure data indi-cating gaps in care.SOURCE: Adapted from Horberg et al., 2010, Table 1.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 43national performance standards for HIV care was precipitated by a prolif-eration of HIV performance measures developed by different bodies over a 
number of years (Horberg et al., 2010)3 and heeds the call from the 2004 
IOM report Measuring What Matters: Allocations, Planning, and Quality 
Assessment for the Ryan White CARE Act
 for a standard set of quality 
measures that are applicable across the range of delivery systems (IOM, 
2004). Most of the performance measures endorsed by NQF are process 
measures. Research has shown that patients who receive more routine of
-˜ce visits; appropriate initiation and prescription of antiretroviral therapy 
(ART); and appropriate screenings, prophylaxis, and immunizations have 
better outcomes than those who do not (Kitahata, 1996; Kitahata et al., 
2000, 2003; Landon et al., 2005).
4 However, other factors (e.g., untreated 
non-HIV comorbidities, including mental illness; contextual factors such as 
food and/or housing insecurity) can result in poorer outcomes even under 
conditions of the most expert care and perfect treatment adherence. For 
this reason, outcome measures (e.g., the results of CD4 counts, mortality) 
are more de˜nitive markers of successful management of HIV disease, al-though even with outcome indicators there are numerous factors that can 
affect HIV quality care and may not be able to be assessed. In addition, 
despite their usefulness, outcome measures generally are more dif˜cult to 
obtain than process measures, although the increasing use of electronic 
health records (EHRs) has signi˜cantly advanced the collection of health 
outcomes data.Taken together, process measures and outcome measures provide a 
strong basis for the development of associated HIV care indicators and are 
important for assessing the impact of the NHAS and ACA in improving 
HIV/AIDS care in the United States. With appropriate care and treatment, 
HIV is a chronic disease with long disease progression time. Policies that 
improve HIV care may have an immediate impact on some process indica-tors (such as frequency of CD4 testing), but a delayed impact on certain 
outcome indicators (particularly mortality and secondary infections). The 
goal of any public health intervention is to improve outcomes, but process 
indicators can provide early feedback about whether the policy guiding 
3 See, e.g., New York State Department of Health AIDS Institute, HIV Quality of Care 
Program, (NYSDHAI, 2011); Veterans Health Administration, HIV-QUERI (Bozzette et al., 
2000); Kaiser Permanente (Horberg et al., 2011); Ryan White Program, HRSA, HIV/AIDS 
Bureau, HIVQUAL (HRSA, 2011a,b).4 Studies such as these suggest that provider experience in caring for PLWHA improves 
quality of care and patient outcomes. As the number of individuals with HIV who are in care 
continues to increase, and with the evolution of HIV as a chronic condition, there will be a 
continued need for HIV care to move away from infectious disease (HIV) specialists toward 
nonspecialist primary care providers who have experience in treating HIV patients (IOM, 
2011c). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
that intervention works. This may be especially important for particular 
subpopulations of PLWHA, for whom conditions may moderate the effect 
of a given intervention. For example, a particular group might be linked to 
care sooner and receive more quality care, but have less change in mortality 
(compared to other groups) due to chronic housing and social service needs 
or even different sets of HIV-related risk environments or risk clusters.
Process indicators also can provide insights into why a policy is or is 
not working. If mortality remains the same despite improvements in certain 
areas (e.g., linking people to care, routine CD4 testing, appropriate ART 
initiation), the collection of additional process indicators may highlight 
other areas that need to be addressed (e.g., screening and immunization 
for certain coinfections).
Healthy People 2020 Objectives
Healthy People 2020 is the most recent incarnation of an initiative be-gun more than 30 years ago to identify data-based objectives for improving 
health among Americans (HHS, 2011a). Healthy People 2020 identi˜es 18 
objectives relating to HIV: 14 relate to HIV prevention, testing, and diag
-nosis, and 4 relate to health care, survival, and death following diagnosis 
(HHS, 2010). In keeping with the committee™s focus on HIV care following 
diagnosis, three of the latter four objectives (HIV.9, HIV.10, and HIV.12), 
in addition to one pertaining to mother-to-child transmission (HIV.8), 
served as a basis for associated HIV care indicators (see Box 2-1). 
PEPFAR Indicators
Indicators developed by the U.S. President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Relief (PEPFAR) provided another basis for the indicators recommended 
by the committee. Originally authorized by the U.S. Congress in 2003 and 
reauthorized in 2008, PEPFAR is an unprecedented federal government 
investment to address the HIV/AIDS epidemic around the world. Now a 
cornerstone of President Obama™s Global Health Initiative, PEPFAR pro
-vides support for national programs and strategies in more than 85 host 
countries to treat adults and children currently living with HIV/AIDS and 
to reduce the transmission of HIV (PEPFAR, 2011). PEPFAR has developed 
a set of essential reported indicators to gather information for planning, 
monitoring, and management purposes (PEPFAR, 2009).
The PEPFAR indicators that pertain to the treatment of PLWHA and 
the provision of supportive services, such as food assistance, also provided 
a basis for the committee™s development of core indicators related to con
-tinuous care and access to supportive services for PLWHA in the United 
States (Box 2-2).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 45NHAS Goals
As discussed in Chapter 1, the NHAS lists three primary goals: (1) 
reduction of HIV transmission; (2) increased access to care and optimized 
health outcomes for PLWHA; and (3) reduction of HIV-related health dis
-parities (ONAP, 2010, p. 1). Within these three general goals, the NHAS 
identi˜es a number of speci˜c measurable objectives to be met by 2015. Of 
particular interest for the committee™s work are the speci˜c targets pertain
-ing to increased access to HIV care, improved health outcomes, and reduced 
HIV-related health disparities.
The NHAS (ONAP, 2010, p. 21) lists three targets regarding increased 
access to care:˜˚
Increase the proportion of newly diagnosed patients linked to 
clinical care within 3 months of their HIV diagnosis from 65 to 85 
percent. 
˜˚
Increase the proportion of Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients 
who are in continuous care (at least two visits for routine HIV 
BOX 2-1
 Healthy People 2020 Summary of Objectives: HIV
Diagnosis of HIV Infection and AIDS 
[HIV-1ŒHIV-7] 
HIV-8. Reduce the number of perinatally acquired HIV and AIDS cases 
Death, Survival and Medical Healthcare After Diagnosis of HIV Infection 
and AIDS 






-sion to AIDS 
HIV-10. Increase the proportion of HIV-infected adolescents and adults who re
-ceive HIV care and treatment consistent with current standards
HIV-11. Increase the proportion of persons surviving more than 3 years after a 
diagnosis with AIDSHIV-12. Reduce deaths from HIV infection 

Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
medical care in 12 months at least 3 months apart) from 73 to 80 
percent. 
˜˚
Increase the percentage of Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients 
with permanent housing from 82 to 86 percent. (This serves as a 
measurable proxy of [ONAP™s] efforts to expand access to [U.S.] 
Department of Housing and Urban Development [HUD] and other 
housing supports to all needy people living with HIV.)
Although the NHAS does not specify it explicitly, the text makes clear 
that the continuous care target for Ryan White clients serves as a measur
-able proxy of efforts to ensure that all diagnosed HIV-infected persons are 
maintained in care (ONAP, 2010, pp. 23-25).
The NHAS (ONAP, 2010, p. 31) also lists three targets in support of 
the goal of reducing HIV-related health disparities:
BOX 2-2
 PEPFAR Essential Reported Indicators
Prevention
P1.2.D Number of HIV-positive pregnant women who received antiretrovirals to 
reduce risk of mother-to-child transmission
CareC2.1.D Number of HIV-positive adults and children receiving a minimum of one 
clinical service
C2.4.D Percentage of HIV-positive patients who were screened for tuberculosis 
(TB) in HIV care or treatment settings
C2.5.D Percentage of HIV-positive patients in HIV care or treatment (pre-ART or 
ART) who started TB treatment
C5.1.D Number of eligible clients who received food and/or other nutrition services
Treatment
T1.2.D Number of adults and children with advanced HIV infection receiving ART 
[CURRENT
]

Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 47˜˚
Increase the proportion of HIV-diagnosed gay and bisexual men 
with undetectable viral load by 20 percent. 
˜˚
Increase the proportion of HIV-diagnosed blacks with undetectable 
viral load by 20 percent. 
˜˚
Increase the proportion of HIV-diagnosed Latinos with undetect
-able viral load by 20 percent.As discussed in more detail later, these six speci˜c strategy targets pro
-vided the basis for several of the indicators recommended by the committee. 
Since the issue of continuity of care clearly is not limited to Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program clients, the continuity-of-care indicator identi˜ed by 
the committee is directed toward the general population of PLWHA but 
can also be applied to Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program clients or any other 
subpopulation. The same is true for the indicators relating to permanent 
housing and undetectable viral load.Selection of Indicators of HIV Care and Access to Supportive Services
In addition to the HIV-related performance measures, health objec
-tives, indicators, and NHAS goals discussed in the preceding sections, the 
committee™s selection of core indicators ﬁto gauge the impact of the Na
-tional HIV/AIDS Strategy and the Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act in improving HIV/AIDS careﬂ (statement of task) was informed by 
the identi˜cation of two overarching goals for the provision of HIV care: 
(1) to optimize health outcomes for PLWHA and (2) to reduce the risk of 
transmitting the virus to others. These goals of HIV care are best achieved 
through full engagement of PLWHA in clinical HIV care, as depicted in 
Figures 2-1 and 2-2.
Primary barriers to optimal outcomes for PLWHA include late diag
-nosis, delayed linkage to care, poor retention in care, delayed initiation 
of ART, and poor adherence to ART (i.e., discontinuing or intermittent 
ART), as well as untreated non-HIV comorbidities and unmet basic needs 
(Castilla et al., 2002; Gardner et al., 2011; Justice, 2006; Lo et al., 2002). 
Figure 2-3 shows the number of people lost to care at various points along 
the care continuum. Identi˜cation of benchmarks and points at which di-agnosed PLWHA are lost along the continuum of engagement in HIV care 
from diagnosis to death served as a basis for the committee™s selection of 
process and outcome indicators of quality clinical HIV care. Throughout its deliberations, the committee, in keeping with its charge to recommend in-dicators that ﬁcapture the care experiences of people living with HIV with-out substantial new investmentsﬂ and mindful of the need not to increase 
reporting burden unduly, sought to balance the numerous facets of quality 
HIV care against the need for parsimony in its selection of core indicators; 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Figure 2-1Bitmapped--poor qualityFIGURE 2-1 Continuum of engagement in care.
SOURCE: Cheever, 2007.
TestingDiagnosisPrimary CareTreatmentVirologic  SuppressionNew  Figure 2-2FIGURE 2-2 Continuum of HIV care arrow.
SOURCE: Adapted from Das, 2011.
hence, the core indicators re˚ect more general aspects of clinical HIV care, 
while more speci˜c aspects are included in the additional indicators. In ad
-dition, the committee was speci˜cally asked to address indicators related 
to access to supportive services, such as housing. Consideration of signi˜-cant mediators of continuous engagement and optimal health outcomes in 
HIV care, including receipt of needed mental health and substance abuse 
services, homelessness and housing instability, food insecurity, and lack of 
transportation needed to access medical and supportive services, informed 
the committee™s selection of core and additional indicators in these areas. 
A recent series of IOM reports discusses policies, facilitators, and bar
-riers surrounding expanded HIV testing and access to care (IOM, 2010, 
2011b,c). The present report focuses on adults who have been diagnosed 
with HIV and on indicators pertaining to the provision of HIV care and 
supportive services from diagnosis forward. Although the indicators for 
clinical HIV care and mental health and substance abuse are targeted to-ward adults, they apply to adolescents (˛13 years) as well. There are tens 
of thousands of new diagnoses annually among the group of individuals 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 4913 and older, with the highest rates between the ages of 20 and 49 years 
(CDC, 2012, Table 1a).
5 In contrast, the use of ART to reduce or prevent 
perinatal transmission of the virus has resulted in a relatively small number 
of newly diagnosed pediatric HIV cases in the United States each year. In 
2008, 218 children under the age of 13 were diagnosed with HIV; by 2010, 
the number had dropped to 185 (CDC, 2012, Table 1a). 
Although some of the indicators, such as screening for sexually trans-mitted infections (STIs) and mental health and substance use disorders, 
generally do not apply to children under the age of 13, others, such as 
mortality rate, apply equally to all ages; indicators that re˚ect treatment 
guidelines apply to children as well, once they are adapted to re˚ect pedi-atric guidelines for HIV care (HHS, 2011e).
The indicators crafted by the committee re˚ect the current science and 
guidelines for the practice of HIV care at the time of writing. Although 
the speci˜c details of the indicators (e.g., threshold CD4+ cell counts) may 
evolve over time as the science and practice of HIV care changes, the prin-5 Although there is a low rate of new HIV diagnoses among 13- to 14-year-olds (CDC, 2012, 
Table 1a), adolescents 13 and older fall within the same treatment guidelines as adults (HHS, 
2011d) and therefore are included in the group. In addition, the current Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention HIV screening guidelines also focus on individuals age 13 and older 
(Branson et al., 2006).
1,106,400874,056655,542437,028262,217209,7731,178,350941,950725,302480,395426,590328,4750200,000400,000600,000800,0001,000,0001,200,0001,400,000HIV-InfectedHIV-DiagnosedLinked to HIV CareRetained in HIV CareOn ARTSuppressed Viral Load (˜200 copies /mL)Population of People Living withHIV/AIDS in the United StatesGardnerMMWR19%28%100%40%100%79%59%24%80%62%41%36%FIGURE 2-3 Engagement in HIV care cascade.
SOURCE: Adapted from CDC, 2011c; Gardner et al., 2011.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
ciples embodied in the indicators (e.g., early diagnosis, linkage and reten-tion in care, timely initiation of ART) continue to pertain.
6Core Indicators Related to Clinical HIV Care
DiagnosisThe ˜rst benchmark along the continuum of HIV care is diagnosis. 
Although the number of persons diagnosed with HIV earlier in the course 
of their infection has increased (CDC, 2009), there is evidence that many 
PLWHA continue to be diagnosed late. For example, the Centers for Dis
-ease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimates that in 2009 32 percent of 
all HIV cases reported by 46 states with con˜dential name-based reporting 
received a diagnosis of AIDS less than 12 months after their initial HIV 
diagnosis (CDC, 2012, Table 10a). CDC also estimates that approximately 
20 percent of PLWHA in the United States are unaware that they have HIV 
(CDC, 2011a,b),7 putting them at risk for being diagnosed late, by which 
time symptoms may have already developed and treatment may not be as 
effective. Given the importance of care and treatment for improving health 
outcomes, timely diagnosis is a crucial ˜rst step in the provision of quality 
HIV care. In addition, research shows that individuals who are aware that 
they have HIV are less likely to transmit the virus to others (Pinkerton et 
al., 2008).At the time of HIV diagnosis, patients should be evaluated to assess the 
stage of the disease and establish a baseline to help determine management 
plans and goals (HHS, 2011d, p. 4), including the need for mental health 
and substance abuse treatment and supportive services. Newly diagnosed 
patients also should receive recommended testing and screening, including 
CD4 and viral load testing, screening for concurrent infections and anti-retroviral (ARV) drug resistance, and routine laboratory tests (Aberg et al., 
2009, p. 662, Table 5; HHS, 2011d, p. 4; Kaplan et al., 2009).
6 The committee considered guidelines for HIV treatment in its development of the indicators 
for clinical HIV care, including the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents
, dated October 
14, 2011, that were current at the time the report went to press (HHS, 2011d). A revised 
version of the Guidelines was issued March 27, 2012, and readers may wish to take account 
of the revised Guidelines when considering the indicators.7 Michael Campsmith and colleagues (2010) used an extended back-calculation approach 
based on the number of HIV diagnoses by calendar year and disease severity (i.e., whether 
the individual received an AIDS diagnosis in the same calendar year as the HIV diagnosis) to 
estimate the total number of infections (known diagnosed cases plus estimated undiagnosed 
cases). They then subtracted the estimated number of deaths (obtained from national HIV/AIDS surveillance data) to arrive at an estimated prevalence of undiagnosed cases (232,700 
95% CI = 221,200-244,200).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 51CD4 count at diagnosis provides a baseline against which subsequent 
tests can be compared. Along with the presence or absence of an AIDS 
de˜ning illness, it serves as an indicator of the health status of the indi-vidual at HIV diagnosis. Higher CD4 counts at diagnosis indicate better 
health status and a shorter time between infection and diagnosis. Early 
diagnosis results in better health outcomes and decreased likelihood of viral 
transmission.The committee recommends the following indicator as a measure of 
the health status of individuals at diagnosis and the timeliness of diagnosis.˜˚
˚Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV with a CD4+ cell 
count >200 cells/mm
3 and without a clinical diagnosis of AIDS
The indicator also can be used as a measure of the success of testing 
efforts within a population: an increase in the rate of early diagnosis indi-cates more successful testing efforts. Aggregate measures, such as median 
CD4 counts at diagnosis, also may be used to track the success of expanded 
testing efforts within a given population, with higher median CD4 counts 
being indicative of more people being tested sooner following infection.
Linkage to and Continuity of CareTimely linkage to care following diagnosis is the second benchmark 
in HIV care. Currently only 64 to 77 percent of individuals newly diag-nosed with HIV are linked to HIV care within 3 to 4 months of diagnosis 
(see CDC, 2011c; Gardner et al., 2011; Marks et al., 2010; Torian and 
Wiewel, 2011). A study of time-limited case management intervention 
focused on linkage to HIV care demonstrated improved linkage to care 
over the standard-of-care arm, which received only passive referral to a 
local HIV care provider in addition to information about HIV and local 
care resources (Gardner et al., 2005). The more quickly newly diagnosed 
individuals enter HIV care, the better their health outcomes are apt to be. 
ART may be initiated more promptly, with an attendant reduction in viral 
load, which leads to improved health outcomes and a reduction in HIV 
transmission. In addition, prompt receipt of prevention services, such as 
screening and treatment for STIs and mental health and substance use disor
-ders, risk reduction counseling and behavioral interventions, assistance with 
partner noti˜cation, and housing assistance and other supportive services, 
is important for reducing transmission of the virus and improving health 
outcomes among PLWHA (CDC, 2010b; 
Crepaz, et al., 2006; Kamb et 
al., 1998; Shain et al., 1999; Weinhardt et al., 1999; Wolitski et al., 2005). 
The NHAS sets a target of linkage to care within 3 months of diagnosis 
(ONAP, 2010, p. 21), as does CDC™s HIV Prevention Strategic Plan (CDC, 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
2007). Although newly diagnosed PLWHA ideally would be linked to care 
within 1 month of diagnosis, the 3-month time frame is more realistic and 
dovetails with existing literature and public health goals.
Given the importance of timely linkage to HIV care in optimizing 
health outcomes of PLWHA and in reducing transmission of the virus, the 
committee recommends the following core indicator.
˜˚
˚Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV who are linked to 
clinical care for HIV within 3 months of diagnosis
Retention in or continuity of care is another key aspect of engagement 
in HIV care. As previously noted, regular of˜ce visits for ongoing care, ap
-propriate initiation and monitoring of ART, and monitoring of CD4 and 
viral load levels, as well as provision of recommended screening, prophy-laxis, and treatment for comorbid conditions, are important for ensuring 
optimal health outcomes for HIV-infected individuals. Missed visits during 
the ˜rst year of care are associated with an increasing risk of death as the 
number of missed visits increases (Giordano et al., 2007; Mugavero et al., 
2009; Park et al., 2007). Given that approximately 50 percent of diag-nosed PLWHA are not engaged in regular care (CDC, 2011c; Gardner et 
al., 2011; Giordano et al., 2007), increasing the proportion of diagnosed 
HIV-infected individuals in continuous care is important to the success of 
the NHAS.Measuring continuity of care requires specifying what constitutes ap-propriate ongoing care. However, clinical care guidelines may not be con
-sistent and may also evolve over time to re˚ect updates in clinical practice. 
HIV Care Quality Measures recommend HIV-infected patients be seen at 
least twice within a 12-month period, at least 60 days apart, and receive 
CD4 testing at least once every 6 months (Horberg et al., 2010). With re
-gard to Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients, the NHAS de˜nes continu
-ous care as at least two visits within a 12-month period at least 3 months 
apart (ONAP, 2010, p. 21). 
Regular HIV-related laboratory tests, such as CD4 and viral load test
-ing, provide evidence of continuity of clinical HIV care (Perkins et al., 
2008). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) guidelines 
recommend CD4 and viral load testing every 3 to 6 months prior to ini-tiating ART and extend the interval to every 6 to 12 months in clinically 
stable patients with a suppressed viral load on ART (HHS, 2011d, p. i). 
Although not directly representative of of˜ce visits, because patients may 
have of˜ce visits in addition to those associated with laboratory testing or 
receive laboratory testing independent of an of˜ce visit, regular monitoring 
of patients™ CD4 and viral load levels can serve as proxies for care visits 
when evaluating continuity of care.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 53The committee recommends the following core indicator for tracking 
retention in HIV care.˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are in 
continuous care (two or more visits for routine HIV medical care 
in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)
Improvements in linkage to and retention in care are particularly im-portant for a number of subpopulations of PLWHA that are at heightened 
risk for delayed entry into and poor retention in care, although the at-risk 
groups do not re˚ect consistent racial, ethnic, or sex differences (CHAIN 
Fact Sheet, 2004; Dennis et al., 2011; Meditz et al., 2011; Mugavero et al., 
2007), because the individuals affected often vary with local resources and 
considerations. However, groups of particular concern, including homeless 
and unstably housed individuals, HIV-infected adolescents, those living in 
rural areas of the South, and some racial or ethnic minorities, are often 
burdened with a set of complex social factors such as a lack of resources 
(Denning and DiNenno, 2010); fears about their HIV status being revealed 
and the resultant stigma and discrimination (Sayles et al., 2009); or distrust 
of the medical system (Bogart et al., 2010; Whetten et al., 2006a).
Quality of HIV CareQuality of HIV care is distinct from continuity of care, since a patient 
might be seen regularly but not receive quality HIV careŠthat is, care in 
accordance with accepted practice guidelines or measures. A number of the 
indicators identi˜ed by the committee could serve to measure quality of care 
as well as linkage to and continuity of care. For example, regular monitor-ing of patients™ CD4 and viral load levels (discussed in the previous section) 
can provide information about their continuity of care, as well as about the 
quality of their HIV care. The core indicators that relate to quality of care 
and health outcomes are presented in the following discussion.
CD4 and Viral Load Testing
 As process measures, CD4 and viral load 
testing in accordance with recommended guidelines not only demonstrate 
continuity of care but also are acceptable indicators of quality HIV care. 
Regular CD4 testing improves health outcomes in PLWHA by permitting 
providers to monitor individuals™ immune function, determine when to 
initiate ART, assess immunologic response to ART, and assess the need for 
initiation or discontinuation of prophylaxis for opportunistic infections 
(OIs) (HHS, 2011d, p. 7). Regular viral load testing is also important for 
monitoring clinical progression of the disease, particularly therapeutic re-sponse in individuals on ART (HHS, 2011d, p. 9). Decreased viral load, or 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
undetectable viral load in individuals on ART, is associated with improved 
health outcomes and reduced transmission of the virus.
The appropriate number and intervals for ﬁregularﬂ CD4 and viral 
load testing vary with the health status and needs of each individual. 
HHS Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected 
Adults and Adolescents recommend testing every 3 to 6 months, with ad-ditional testing at the time of ART initiation or modi˜cation (HHS, 2011d, 
pp. 6-10).8 The interval between tests may be increased to every 6 to 12 
months for clinically stable individuals on ART with viral suppression. For 
the purpose of tracking the impact of the NHAS and the ACA on HIV care 
in the United States, the committee chose to de˜ne regular testing as two 
or more tests in the preceding 12 months. Although the committee recog-nizes that one test per year could serve as a minimum standard to identify 
individuals who clearly have fallen out of care, in most cases it would be 
inappropriate to consider this frequency of testing to be indicative of op
-timal treatment.
Accordingly the committee recommends the following core indicators 
for regular CD4 and viral load testing.
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received 
two or more CD4 tests in the preceding 12 months 
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received 
two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months 
ART Initiation and Adherence
 Appropriate initiation of ART, the third 
benchmark of quality HIV care, is crucial to increased longevity and re-duced morbidity among PLWHA and important for reducing transmission 
of the virus to others (HHS, 2011d). For this reason, a signi˜cant measure 
of the quality of HIV care is the proportion of PLWHA who are started on 
the correct drug regimen at the appropriate time. Although approximately 
77 to 80 percent of individuals being treated with ART have an undetect
-able viral load, many PLWHA are not on ART (CDC, 2011c; Gardner et 
al., 2011). According to estimates, only 24 to 36 percent of PLWHA are 
receiving ART and only 19 to 28 percent of PLWHA overall have an un
-detectable viral load (CDC, 2011c; Gardner et al., 2011). As indicated in 
Figure 2-3, the gap lies in undetected cases of HIV infection, inadequate 
linkage to and retention in care for those who are diagnosed, and delayed 
or absent initiation of ART.
The current HHS Guidelines (HHS, 2011d, p. 27) specify that indi-8 The Guidelines also recommend viral load testing 2 to 8 weeks following ART initiation 
or modi˜cation and, if needed, every 4 to 8 weeks thereafter until suppression to <200 copies/mL (HHS 2011d, p. 6).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 55viduals with a CD4+ cell count below 350 cells/mm3 or those who have a 
history of an AIDS-de˜ning illness should be started on ART. The 
Guide-lines further recommend that ART be initiated in people whose CD4+ cell 
counts are between 350 and 500 cells/mm3, but the HHS panel was divided 
on whether to recommend ART for patients with CD4+ cell counts greater 
than 500 cells/mm
3. In formulating a core indicator for initiation of ART, 
the committee followed the HHS panel™s recommended threshold of 500 
cells/mm3.˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and a measured 
CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on ART
Initial results from the HIV Treatment Prevention Network™s 
HPTN 
052 clinical trial funded by the National Institutes of Health indicate that 
early initiation of ART in PLWHA reduces sexual transmission of HIV in 
serostatus-discordant couples by 96 percent (Cohen et al., 2011). In an 
August 2011 letter to HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius, the Presidential 
Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS (PACHA) emphasized the importance of 
these ﬁtreatment as preventionﬂ ˜ndings, stating that ﬁHHS-supported 
HIV clinical treatment guidelines must be revised to re˚ect these ˜ndingsﬂ 
(PACHA, 2011). If HHS were to revise its guidelines according to PACHA™s 
recommendation, the committee would support similar revision of its ART-
initiation indicator. Movement toward universal treatment for PLWHA has 
begun. The San Francisco and, more recently, New York City departments 
of health now recommend initiation of ART regardless of individuals™ CD4 
count (Charlebois et al., 2011; NYC DOHMH, 2011). If a policy of uni-versal treatment becomes widespread, a more appropriate indicator of ART 
initiation would be the time from diagnosis to ART initiation.
With the advent of more potent antiretroviral drugs, the goal of ART 
is durable virologic suppression, the fourth benchmark of quality HIV care. 
Adherence to a prescribed antiretroviral drug regimen is an important fac-tor in successful treatment with ART. Failure to take antiretroviral medica
-tions as prescribed not only decreases the drugs™ effectiveness in reducing 
individuals™ viral load but also may increase the risk of HIV transmission to 
others and may lead to the emergence of ARV-resistant strains of the virus, 
undermining the durability of the present drug regimens. People on ART 
may fail to take their drugs as prescribed for a variety of reasons, including 
inability to pay for the medications, undesirable side effects, serious mental 
illness, lack of food, stigma, and forgetfulness. It is important to work with 
nonadherent patients to identify and address the causes of nonadherence 
(Cooperman et al., 2012; de Bruin et al., 2010; Henderson et al., 2011; 
HHS, 2011d, pp. 122-125; Reisner et al., 2009; Simoni et al., 2006, 2010).Although adequate adherence is an important factor in achieving viral 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
suppression, viral suppression itself is the most important outcome mea-sure for successful ART. HIV-infected individuals with a viral load below 
the level of detection experience signi˜cantly improved health outcomes 
(HHS, 2011d, p. 9). In addition, as reinforced by the results of the HPTN 
052 clinical trial, individuals with virologic suppression are much less likely 
to infect others (Cohen et al., 2011). Current estimates indicate that 13 to 
20 percent of individuals on ART still have a detectable viral load (CDC, 
2011c; Gardner et al., 2011). Imperfect viral load suppression among 
treated individuals motivates the committee™s identi˜cation of the following 
core indicator of successful treatment with ART. 
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have been 
on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the 
level of detection
This indicator serves not only as a measure of the status of the epidemic 
in terms of optimal health outcomes and decreased risk of HIV transmission 
but also as a surrogate measure of treatment adherence and the prescription of effective drug regimens. An alternate indicator would be the time from 
diagnosis to virologic suppression.
Additional Outcome Indicators In aggregate, CD4 and viral load test re-sults provide information about the status of the epidemic nationally or in 
speci˜c subpopulations or geographic areas. Although virologic suppression 
is the primary outcome indicator for individuals on ART, the committee 
recommends two additional outcome indicators for monitoring the provi-sion of quality HIV care to PLWHA.
Maintaining a CD4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3 reduces the risk of 
complicating OIs and cancers among PLWHA (HHS, 2011d, pp. 28-31). 
Since 64 to 76 percent of PLWHA currently are not on ART (CDC, 2011c; 
Gardner et al., 2011), the following indicator serves as an outcome measure for this group, as well as for those who are on ART, but have not achieved 
virologic suppression.˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection in continuous 
care for 12 or more months and with a CD4+ cell count ˜350 cells/mm3If a large number of previously undiagnosed individuals with late-stage 
HIV disease entered care, the CD4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3 indicator 
might drop, suggesting poor system performance. However, this change 
could be interpreted correctly in the full context of all the indicators.
Mortality rate is the ultimate outcome measure for people diagnosed 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 57with HIV infection and serves as another aggregate-level measure of HIV 
care. Mortality among PLWHA should be inversely related to the quality of 
overall care delivered. To avoid the dif˜culties inherent in identifying and 
reporting which deaths among PLWHA resulted directly or indirectly from 
HIV infection, the committee recommends the use of all-cause mortality in 
the following indicator. 
˜˚
˚All-cause mortality rate among people with diagnosed HIV infectionTaken together, the committee recommends the preceding indicators as 
core indicators related to continuous and quality clinical care for PLWHA. 
Core indicators pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, and support-ive services, such as housing, that affect the health outcomes of PLWHA 
are discussed in the following section.
Core Indicators Related to Mental Health, 
Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
A number of factors, including mental health symptoms and disorders, 
substance abuse, lack of well-being, and poor quality of life, as well as dif˜-culty securing and maintaining basic needs of housing, food, and access and transportation to medical care and supportive services, have been shown 
to have a signi˜cant, negative impact on the health status and health out-comes of PLWHA (see, e.g., Conviser and Pounds, 2002a,b; Gaynes et al., 
2007; Kidder et al., 2007; Leaver et al., 2007; Lo et al., 2002; Pence, 2009; 
Royal et al., 2009; Stall et al., 2003; Weiser et al., 2009a,b). The com
-mittee identi˜ed screening and treatment for mental health and substance 
use disorders, as well as access to needed housing, food, and transporta-tion assistance, to be suf˜ciently important facilitators of improved health 
outcomes for PLWHA to recommend as indicators of HIV care. Obtaining 
data to estimate these indicators, especially those pertaining to supportive 
services, poses challenges different from those that attend the clinical HIV 
care indicators, nevertheless they are amenable to objective quanti˜cation. 
Mental Health and Substance AbuseSubstantial evidence indicates that mental health symptoms and disor-ders, including neurocognitive disorders, and substance use disorders are 
signi˜cantly increased in people with HIV (see Hinkin et al., 2002; Lansky 
et al., 2009; Milloy et al., 2010; Owe-Larsson et al., 2009; WHO, 2008), 
and these disorders affect treatment adherence to antiretroviral medications (Ettenhofer et al., 2009; Hinkin et al., 2002; Tucker et al., 2003; Waldrop-
Valverde et al., 2006) and continuity of care, secondary transmission, and 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
overall health outcomes (Samet et al., 2007; Ulett et al., 2009; Zaller et al., 
2007). For this reason, screening HIV-infected patients for mental health 
and substance use symptoms and disorders is essential to providing care 
that will lead to the best health outcomes.
ﬁMental health disordersﬂ refers to a broad range of conditions that 
might affect treatment and health outcomes for PLWHA, including 
anxiety 
and mood (e.g., depression) disorders, psychoses, and subthreshold condi-tions (i.e., mental conditions not meeting full diagnostic criteria for mental 
disorders). Mental health symptoms refer to conditions of psychological 
distress, which may be acute or chronic and are known to be related to 
negative health outcomes. Moderate to severe depression is particularly 
prevalent among PLWHA and is associated with failure to access ART, 
failure to adhere to ART, increased morbidity and mortality, and potentially 
increased HIV-related risk behavior (Crepaz and Marks, 2002; Horberg 
et al., 2008; Kalichman, 2000; Kumar and Encinosa, 2010; Penzak et al., 
2000). The prevalence of HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders is greater 
than 50 percent, and perhaps higher in older HIV patients (Valcour et al., 
2011), making age-speci˜c analysis of relevant indicators particularly in-formative. Even mild symptomatic cognitive impairment is associated with 
nonŒcentral nervous system (nonŒCNS) morbidity and overall HIV mortal
-ity (Vivithanaporn et al., 2010). Early detection and treatment of depres
-sion, psychological distress, and cognitive impairment among PLWHA are 
important because they often negatively impact daily routine functioning 
and the ability to ef˜caciously adhere to medication routines. In addition, 
symptomatic impairment, whether mild neurocognitive disorder or asymp-tomatic neurocognitive impairment, has been linked to all-cause mortality 
(Valcour et al., 2011). More serious HIV-related neurocognitive disorders 
can result in dementia, which can also impede good health outcomes with-out necessary interventions. 
Mental health disorders and symptoms can be associated with HIV in 
two ways: ˜rst, individuals with mental health disorders may be at greater 
risk for acquiring, as well as transmitting, HIV; second, HIV-infected in
-dividuals are at greater risk for developing neurocognitive disorders. In 
addition, HIV-infected patients, as they live longer and age, increasingly 
have high rates of medical comorbidity associated with the normal aging 
process as well as side effects from their ART (Bisson et al., 2003; Goulet et 
al., 2007). There is evidence as well that mental health and neurocognitive 
disorders are increased among older PLWHA (Justice et al., 2004; Valcour 
et al., 2011), making screening especially important for this subpopulation. 
Although some HIV-related cognitive disorders have decreased in incidence 
or severity with the use of ART, the overall prevalence is increased among 
older PLWHA.
With evidence mounting that mental health and neurocognitive disor
-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 59ders are common in spite of ART, screening for depression and other mental 
health disorders as well as changes in cognition and the accompanying 
functional impairments may be an important factor in achieving suf˜ciently 
high adherence rates to maintain undetectable viral load and immunologic 
competency. Since many medical comorbidities, such as hepatitis C (and 
other) infection in the central nervous system (CNS), endocrine disorders, 
advanced cerebrovascular disease, and medications, can cause cognitive 
changes, the screening for medical causes of cognitive dysfunction is also 
imperative in order to maximize health outcomes. Although complete men-tal health and neuropsychological testing often are not clinically available 
outside of academic HIV treatment centers, a number of user-friendly 
screening tools are available for use in the clinic to help identify patients 
who should be referred to specialty services or for more extensive evalua-tion. Basic screening tools include the nine-item Patient Health Question-naire (PHQ-9) for depression (P˜zer, 2011), the Modi˜ed HIV Dementia 
Scale (AETC, 2011, Figure 1) and the culture neutral International Demen-tia Scale (Sacktor et al., 2005, Figure 1), the Montreal Cognitive Assess-ment scale (MoCA, 2011), and the Exit 25 for severe cognitive disorders 
(UTHSC, 2011).
Unhealthy substance abuse or misuse behaviors, such as chronic and 
heavy intake of alcohol and illicit drug use, particularly injection drug 
use, are signi˜cantly related to the acquisition of HIV infection and for 
some PLWHA serve as a way to cope with and manage HIV-related symp
-toms (Brion et al., 2011). Heavy and chronic abuse of alcohol and other 
substances is also signi˜cantly related to increased risk of acquiring new 
HIV infections, since they can impair judgment and reduce inhibitions, 
potentially resulting in unsafe sex and other HIV-related transmission risk 
behaviors. Substance abuse is also linked with poorer health outcomes for 
HIV-infected individuals (Carrico, 2011), complicates health care outcomes, 
and decreases adherence to ART regimens. In a prospective cohort study of 
140 HIV-infected patients at a county hospital HIV clinic during the year 
following initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), Carol 
Golin and colleagues (2002) found that nearly all of the patients™ adher-ence levels were suboptimal and that interventions that assessed and treated substance abuse and incorporated assistance with antiretroviral adherence 
were more likely to result in optimal care levels. Not only can substance 
use negatively affect treatment adherence and hence outcomes (Tucker et 
al., 2003); the use of certain substances, such methamphetamine, also has 
been shown to increase HIV viral replication in animal models (Gavrilin 
et al., 2002) and to increase neuronal damage and cognition impairment 
in humans (Langford et al., 2003; Rippeth et al., 2004). Judith Cook and 
colleagues (2008) found that the use of crack cocaine was associated with 
a faster progression of HIV.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Recent studies have found that multidisciplinary approaches to care 
that address psychiatric conditions and substance abuse and its sequelae, 
such as hepatitis C coinfection, resulted in improved access to and retention 
in care and better uptake rates of initiation of ART (Litwin et al., 2005; 
Palepu et al., 2006; Sherer et al., 2002). Screening, Brief Intervention, 
and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) and Alcohol, Smoking, and Substance 
Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST) are user-friendly screening tools that 
permit early diagnosis and intervention in alcohol and drug use disorders 
in HIV and other health care settings (Babor et al., 2007; Humeniuk et 
al., 2008; SAMHSA, 2011). Other tools such as the Alcohol Use Dis-orders Identi˜cation Test (AUDIT) or CAGE (an acronym derived from 
its four questions 
that stands for ﬁ
cut down,ﬂ ﬁannoyed,ﬂ ﬁ
guilty,ﬂ and 
ﬁeye-openerﬂ) questions also can be used to screen for alcohol dependency 
(NIAAA, 2005). Use of such tools in conjunction with a complete alcohol 
and drug history, including over-the-counter and alternative medicines as 
well as illicit drugs, is vital for increasing optimal antiretroviral treatment, 
reducing secondary HIV transmission, elucidating cognitive changes, and 
identifying individuals who might bene˜t from specialized adjunct treat-ment in addition to the management of their HIV disease.
The committee recommends two core indicators relating to mental 
health and substance abuse.˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and mental 
health disorder who are referred for mental health services and 
receive these services within 60 days
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and substance 
use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and 
receive these services within 60 days
Studies have shown that referrals for mental health and substance 
abuse services that can be accessed in a short period of time after they 
have been recommended have some of the best outcomes and high levels 
of patient satisfaction (Kowal et al., 2011). In cities such as Baltimore and 
San Francisco, treatment on demand for substance use has been instituted 
to reduce the human and economic harm associated with alcohol and illicit 
drug use and to increase the bene˜ts of better treatment (Drug Strategies, 
2000; Friedmann et al., 2003; Sears et al., 2009). Detroit found that treat-ment on demand reduced homicides and larceny and resulted in high rates 
of patient satisfaction (Trent, 2004)
. The committee considered receipt of 
specialty mental health and substance abuse services within 30 days of 
referral, with urgent cases being seen as soon as possible, to re˚ect optimal 
care because it is anticipated that individuals with suf˜ciently severe men-tal health or substance use disorders to merit referral should receive those 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 61services in a short window of time to reduce the likelihood of suboptimal 
adherence to ART and to decrease the risk for secondary transmission of 
HIV infection (and preventable new infections). However, the committee 
concluded that receipt of specialty services within 60 days was more realis-tic given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients 
within a shorter time frame. 
Housing, Food Security, and Transportation
Assessment of food and housing needs and referral to appropriate ser-vices are essential to improving HIV care, improving health outcomes, and 
reducing health disparities among the HIV-infected population (Anema et 
al., 2009; McMahon et al., 2011; Reily et al., 2011; Weiser et al., 2009a,b). 
Studies suggest that as many as half of all persons diagnosed with HIV in 
the United States will face homelessness or experience an unstable housing 
situation at some point over the course of their illness (Aidala et al., 2007; 
Song, 1999). Estimates indicate that 140,000 PLWHA currently are in need 
of housing assistance (NAHC, 2012). Needs assessments have found that 
rates of food insecurity and nutritional needs range from 20 to more than 
50 percent among samples of PLWHA in medical care or social service set
-tings, with rates higher among PLWHA who are not in care.
For the purpose of this report, ﬁhousing instabilityﬂ refers to homeless-ness, imminent risk of homelessness, and unstable housing as de˜ned for 
reporting in HUD™s Homeless Management Information Systems (HMIS), 
which are used by all jurisdictions receiving HUD funding to address home-lessness and risk of homelessness (HUD, 2010). The broad distinction is 
between persons who have stable, permanent housing in the community 
and individuals or families who lack the resources or support networks to 
retain or obtain permanent housing. Guidance is provided for classifying 
housing status in four categories: literally homeless (e.g., lack a regular 
nighttime residence, staying in an emergency shelter);9 imminently losing 
housing (e.g., being evicted or being discharged from an institution with no 
housing options identi˜ed); 
unstably housed and at-risk of losing housing
 (e.g., temporarily doubled up with others, moving frequently for economic 
reasons); and stably housed (HUD, 2010, pp. 54-56). HUD currently is 
taking the lead in interagency efforts to develop a common vocabulary of 
homelessness and to standardize housing status questions among several 
9 This category is based on the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302, 
Sec. 103) de˜nition of homelessness, as amended by the Homeless Emergency Assistance and 
Rapid Transition to Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-22, div. B, Sec. 1003). HUD 
issued its ˜nal rule for the de˜nition of homelessness on December 5, 2011 (Federal Register 76[233]:75944-76019).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
federal agencies, including HHS (e.g., Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services, HRSA) and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
ﬁFood insecurityﬂ refers to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) 
de˜nition as ﬁlimited or uncertain availability of nutritionally adequate and safe foods or limited or uncertain ability to acquire acceptable foods in 
socially acceptable waysﬂ (ERS, 2009, citing Anderson, 1990). Since 2006, 
the USDA has applied four classi˜cations to the range of food (in)security. 
High food security means ﬁno reported indications of food-access prob-lems or limitationsﬂ; marginal food security means ﬁone or two reported 
indicationsŠtypically of anxiety over food suf˜ciency or shortage of food 
in the house [with] little or no indication of changes in diets or food in-takeﬂ; low food security means ﬁreports of reduced quality, variety, or de
-sirability of diet [with] little or no indications of reduced food intakeﬂ; and 
very low food security means ﬁreports of multiple indications of disrupted 
eating patterns and reduced food intakeﬂ (ERS, 2011). Persons who are 
classi˜ed with low and very low food security are considered food insecure 
(ERS, 2011).Housing instability, food insecurity, and other supportive service needs 
affect HIV outcomes in direct and indirect ways. Lack of shelter or severely 
inadequate housing increases exposure to infectious agents, allergens, and 
neurotoxins that compromise health (Shaw, 2004). Poor nutrition affects 
the ability to maintain healthy body weight and increases the risk or com-plicates the management of other chronic diseases such as heart disease, 
diabetes, and cancer. In addition, some ARVs need to be taken with food, 
and diarrhea, which is often associated with homelessness, is associated 
with underabsorbtion of ARVs (Brantley et al., 2003; Bushen et al., 2004; 
Dillingham et al., 2011).As the NHAS points out, persons who face daily challenges meeting 
their basic needs for housing and food are much less likely to maintain a 
stable HIV treatment regimen (ONAP, 2010, p. 28). Housing instability is 
one of the major factors limiting access to and maintenance in HIV care 
and adherence to treatments (Aidala et al., 2007; Ghose et al., 2011; Kidder 
et al., 2007; Leaver et al., 2007). Persons who are food insecure are also 
less likely to be in care, stay in care, or be adherent to treatment than their 
counterparts whose food and nutrition needs are met (Anema et al., 2009; 
Ashman et al., 2002; Riley et al., 2011).Whether via physiological or psychosocial mechanisms, homelessness 
or unstable housing is associated with lower CD4 counts, higher viral 
loads, and higher rates of comorbidities among PLWHA, controlling for a 
wide range of individual and medical care variables (Clements-Nolle et al., 
2008; Kidder et al., 2007; Knowlton et al., 2006; LeGrand et al., 2010). 
Homelessness has been an independent predictor of mortality in all stud-ies that have investigated the impact of housing status on the survival of 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 63HIV-infected persons (Lieb et al., 2002; McMahon et al., 2011; Riley et 
al., 2005a,b; Schwarcz et al., 2009; Walley et al., 2008). Food insecurity 
also is associated with poor clinical outcomes and higher mortality in the 
United States, as well as in low-resource countries (Campa et al., 2005; 
Hendricks and Gorbach, 2009; Kalichman et al., 2010; McMahon et al., 
2011; Vogenthaler et al., 2010; Weiser et al., 2009a,b).
However, research has also shown that addressing the need for hous
-ing and other supportive services is both effective and cost-effective for 
improving health care access and health outcomes of HIV-infected people. 
A systematic review of 17 housing-related studies (Leaver et al., 2007) 
found a signi˜cant positive association between increased housing stability 
and better health-related outcomes, including connection to HIV medical 
care and adherence to treatment. In a randomized trial commissioned by 
the CDC and HUD, provision of rental assistance was associated with re-duced emergency room use and improved mental health and clinical health 
outcomes for HIV-infected clients (Wolitski et al., 2010). Food and nutri
-tion programs have improved adherence to and the effectiveness of HIV 
medications among food-insecure patients. Nonmedical supportive services 
including food assistance can serve to attract clients who need other services 
and can facilitate their entry into and maintenance in HIV medical care (see 
Ashman et al., 2002; Conover and Whetten-Goldstein, 2002; Conviser, 
2007; Conviser and Pounds, 2002a,b; Messeri et al., 2002).
Another crucial supportive service for many PLWHA is transportation. 
Lack of reliable transportation has long been recognized as limiting access 
to and utilization of medical care, especially the use of prevention services 
and medical monitoring of chronic conditions (see, e.g., Arcury et al., 2005; Baldwin et al., 2004; Littenberg et al., 2006; Valet et al., 2009). Lack of 
transportation is a major barrier to regular and timely health care visits for 
PLWHA as well, especially in rural areas where distances to providers are 
often very long and public transportation is absent (Conover and Whetten-Goldstein, 2002; HRSA, 2009; Napravnik et al., 2006; Reif et al., 2005; 
Sarnquist et al., 2011; Stewart et al., 2011).
In rural areas, particularly in the southern United States, which ac-counts for almost 70 percent of all rural cases of HIV, transportation can be 
a signi˜cant barrier to care, including quality HIV-related medical services 
(Arcury et al., 2005; Cohn et al., 2001; HRSA, 2009; Kempf et al., 2010). 
HIV care providers can be as much as 2 hours away in rural West Virginia 
and as much as 200 miles away in parts of Montana (NRHA, 2006). Long 
travel hours, inclement weather, and lack of travel resources may be critical 
issues for PLWHA in rural areas and need to be addressed for these indi
-viduals to achieve timely linkage to and continuity of care (Krawczyk et al., 
2006b; Weis et al., 2010). Transportation concerns are especially important 
in southern states because the greatest number of new infections in African 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Americans, particularly women, is occurring there (Mays et al., 2011). 
Studies of HIV in the South have indicated the need for transportation, 
particularly since some individuals seek care further from their neighbor-hoods in order to avoid stigma and discrimination (Mays et al., 2011; Reif 
et al., 2005; Vermund et al., 2010).
Transportation issues often pose barriers to appropriate care for 
PLWHA in urban areas as well. Services research in Boston (Lo et al., 
2002), Chicago (Kenagy et al., 2003), Detroit (Andersen et al., 2007), 
MinneapolisŒSt. Paul (Othieno, 2007), New York City (Halkitis et al., 
2008; Messeri et al., 2002), and several multisite studies covering diverse 
geographic areas (Ashman et al., 2002; Cunningham et al., 1999; Rumptz 
et al., 2007) has shown that transportation needs are consistently associ-ated with failure to keep scheduled medical appointments and generally 
worse engagement with HIV primary care. Medicaid bene˜ciaries and Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS Program clients may be eligible for transportation assis-tance for medical visits. However, costs are seldom fully covered and there 
are other medical transportation barriers as well. Public transportation 
may have restricted coverage and times of operation, require long walks 
or some other form of transport to bus stops or transit stations, and have 
long wait times in potentially inclement weather. Transportation services 
for medically fragile or wheelchair-bound individuals may be limited, and 
clients often face scheduling challenges. Reliance on social networks for 
help with transportation to HIV care or services may be closed to PLWHA 
due to stigma and fear of disclosure associated with visits for HIV care or 
services (HRSA, 2009).Routine assessment of transportation needs and provision of trans-portation assistance are effective for promoting timely entry into care and 
retention in care for persons living with HIV (Ashman et al., 2002; Chin 
et al., 2009; Conover and Whetten-Goldstein, 2002; Messeri et al., 2002; 
Rumptz et al., 2007). Transportation assistance also facilitates appropri
-ate follow-through and use of mental health and substance abuse services 
(Whetten et al., 2006b). Because their transportation needs tend to be 
greater, assistance with transportation shows greater impact on medical 
care outcomes among HIV-infected women, ethnic minorities, and recently 
incarcerated individuals (Andersen et al., 2007; Burks et al., 2011; Halkitis 
et al., 2010; Kenagy et al., 2003; Sarnquist et al., 2011; Scheyett et al., 
2010). Medical and social service providers recognize transportation assis-tance as an effective mechanism for promoting retention in care for PLWHA 
(Amico, 2011).Given the importance of adequate housing, food, and transportation 
to the health outcomes of PLWHA, the committee identi˜ed three core 
indicators related to access to services that promote housing stability, food 
security, and transportation. Tracking the proportion of PLWHA who 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 65require assistance to meet their needs in these areas provides information 
about whether available services are meeting those needs. The committee 
recommends the following indicators.
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were 
homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the 
preceding 12 months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who experi
-enced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who had an un-met need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical 
care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months
Additional Indicators Related to Clinical HIV Care
In addition to the core indicators for HIV care, the committee identi˜ed 
a number of additional indicators, based on other, more granular, process 
measures, that provide a comprehensive measure of the quality of HIV care 
(Appendix Table 2-1). 
Testing and Screening for Concurrent Infections 
In addition to CD4 and viral load testing, individuals newly diagnosed 
with HIV should receive a complete medical workup (Aberg et al., 2009; 
HHS, 2011d), including testing for tuberculosis (TB); STIs, in particular, 
syphilis, as well as gonorrhea and chlamydia (by nucleic acid ampli˜ca-tion test); and hepatitis B and C. Testing for these concurrent infections is 
important because HIV-infected individuals may be more likely to transmit 
HIV and other STIs to others and because comorbid conditions are more 
likely to affect the health of PLWHA. For this reason, the committee identi
-˜ed the following additional indicators pertaining to testing and screening.
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have had 
a documented tuberculosis screening test with results interpreted 
at least once since HIV diagnosis
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have had 
documented chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screenings at least 
once in the preceding 12 months
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with HIV infection who have had hepatitis B 
screening performed at least once since HIV diagnosis or for whom 
there is documented immunityMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have had 
hepatitis C screening performed at least once in the preceding 12 
months.The time frame speci˜ed for repeat testing or screening varies among 
diseases and the risk of infection. STI screening is recommended annually 
for sexually active individuals. Hepatitis B screening is recommended only 
once since diagnosis because immunity is conferred either by previous infec
-tion or by vaccination subsequent to a negative screening test, precluding 
the need for repeat screening. Routine testing or screening should continue 
to be administered at appropriate intervals in accordance with recom
-mended treatment guidelines (CDC, 2010b) and recognized performance 
measures (Horberg et al., 2010; NQF, 2011b).
PLWHA also should receive recommended screening and routine pri
-mary care in accordance with accepted practice guidelines (see, e.g., Aberg 
et al., 2009). In particular, quality HIV care should include monitoring for 
a number of co-occurring, chronic medical conditions associated with HIV 
infection or treatment, including hyperlipidemia, diabetes, osteoporosis, re-nal disease, cancers, and depression. PLWHA are at increased risk for such 
conditions, and as HIV-infected individuals live longer, screening, monitor
-ing, and treatment of these chronic conditions have become increasingly 
important elements of HIV care. Although the committee recognizes the 
importance of screening, monitoring, and treating such conditions in the 
provision of quality HIV care, it did not include indicators related to these 
practices, since the number of co-occurring conditions made speci˜cation 
of indicators for every condition impracticable and the practice guidelines 
for the conditions are the same for individuals with and without HIV. Oral 
health is another important aspect of care for PLWHA. Oral problems can 
be caused by either a weakened immune system or by certain types of ART, 
resulting in discomfort; potential dif˜culty with eating, maintenance of 
good nutrition, and adherence to ART; and potential psychosocial problems 
(Chapple and Hamburger, 2000; Coulter et al., 2002; NYSDHAI, 2001). 
Appendix Table 2-3 lists some of the co-occurring conditions most com
-monly associated with HIV, along with their etiologic cofactors and refer
-ences to published guidelines for optimal management.
Immunizations and Prophylaxis 
Appropriate immunizations and prophylaxis are other important ele-ments of quality HIV care. The effect of HIV infection on the immune 
system places PLWHA at greater risk for serious complications of seasonal 
in˚uenza, pneumococcal pneumonia, and the occurrence of OIs, including 
pneumocystis pneumonia, TB, and viral hepatitis. Immunosuppression in 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 67PLWHA increases susceptibility to OIs, which not only increase morbid
-ity and mortality among PLWHA but also may cause an increase in HIV 
viral load, thereby further weakening the immune system (Lawn et al., 
2001). Although the use of ART greatly reduces the risk of acquiring OIs 
(Candiani et al., 2007; Kaplan et al., 2000; Ledergerber et al., 1999), 
PLWHA should receive appropriate immunizations and prophylactic mea
-sures in accordance with recommended guidelines to maximally protect 
individuals against OIs and their sequelae (Aberg et al., 2009; Kaplan et al., 
2000, 2009). Because of the large number of OIs, the committee chose not 
to develop indicators speci˜c to OI prophylaxis, opting instead to empha-size the importance of following established guidelines for the management 
of OIs (Kaplan et al., 2009).The committee did, however, identify the following indicators pertain
-ing to recommended immunizations for PLWHA (HHS, 2009; Horberg et 
al., 2010; Kaplan et al., 2009, p. 77).
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have re-ceived an in˚uenza immunization during the preceding 12 months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have 
received a pneumococcal immunization at least once since HIV 
diagnosis˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have re-ceived a hepatitis B vaccination, or who have documented immunityThe need for revaccination varies with the effectiveness of the vaccine 
at preventing future infection.Additional Indicators for ART Initiation 
In addition to providing guidance for initiating ART based on CD4 
count (one of the core indicators recommended by the committee), HHS 
Guidelines specify that ART should be initiated in patients with HIV-
associated nephropathy and in patients coinfected with hepatitis B virus 
(HBV) when treatment for HBV is indicated (HHS, 2011d, pp. 27, 30).
10 The Guidelines also recommend initiation of ART in patients with active 
TB within 2 to 4 weeks of starting treatment for TB for patients with CD4+ 
cell counts ˝500 cells/mm3, and 8 weeks for those with CD4+ cell counts 
>500 cells/mm3 (HHS 2011d, p. 118). 
The Guidelines further specify that combination ART should be ini
-tiated in pregnant women with HIV (regardless of CD4 count) to help 
10 Guidance for initiation of ART in response to hepatitis C coinfection is more ambiguous 
(HHS, 2011d, pp. 114-116; Kaplan et al., 2009, p. 89; Shafran, 2007).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
prevent mother-to-child transmission of HIV (HHS, 2011d, pp. 27, 32; 
2011f, p. 8). In conjunction with caesarian instead of vaginal delivery and 
avoidance of breastfeeding, the use of ART during pregnancy has reduced 
the rate of perinatal HIV transmission from 25-30 percent to less than 2 
percent (CDC, 2006).
In keeping with the HHS Guidelines, the committee identi˜ed the fol-lowing additional indicators for the initiation of ART. 
˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and HIV-
associated nephropathy, hepatitis B (when treatment is indicted), 
or active tuberculosis who are not on ART
˜˚
˚Proportion of pregnant women with diagnosed HIV infection who 
are not on ART
ARV Resistance Testing
The HHS Guidelines also indicate that ARV drug resistance testing 
should be performed prior to the initiation of ART, or if previously per
-formed, repeat testing should be considered (HHS, 2011d, p. 11). A 2006 
study showed that 15 percent of individuals newly diagnosed with HIV ex-perience antiretroviral drug resistance (Wheeler et al., 2010), which is one 
barrier to effective treatment. Drug resistance testing prior to the initiation 
of ART helps to determine the appropriate treatment regimen and therefore 
improves health outcomes and reduces viral transmission. HHS Guidelines (HHS, 2011d, p. 42) list additional factors that in˚uence selection of indi-vidual ART regimens, including the presence or absence of
comorbid conditions (e.g., cardiovascular disease, chemical dependency, 
liver disease, psychiatric disease, renal diseases, or tuberculosis); potential 
adverse drug effects; potential drug interactions with other medications; 
pregnancy or pregnancy potential; . . . gender and pretreatment CD4 count 
if considering nevirapine (NVP); HLA-B*5701 testing if considering aba-cavir (ABC); coreceptor tropism assay if considering maraviroc (MVC); 
patient adherence potential; and convenience (e.g., pill burden, dosing 
frequency, and food and ˚uid considerations).
Since the decision about which ART regimen is appropriate varies 
among patients and would be impossible to quantify and because new 
therapies may be developed, the best measure of whether appropriate 
therapy has been prescribed is the individual™s response to it. Nevertheless, 
the importance of ARV drug resistance testing as a ˜rst step in selecting 
an ART regimen led the committee to identify the following indicator of 
quality HIV care.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 69˜˚
˚Proportion of ART-naïve people with diagnosed HIV infection who 
receive drug resistance testing (genotypic) prior to ART initiation
Additional Indicators Related to Mental Health, 
Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
Unlike the additional clinical HIV care indicators, which supplement 
the core indicators by tracking other important aspects of HIV care, the 
additional indicators for mental health, substance abuse, and supportive 
services are directly related to the core indicators in that they track iden-ti˜cation of PLWHA who have a need for those services through annual 
screening.˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were 
screened for mental health disorders at least once during the pre-ceding 12 months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were 
screened for substance use disorders at least once during the pre-ceding 12 months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were as-sessed for need for housing at least once during the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were 
assessed for need for food or nutrition at least once during the 
preceding 12 months˜˚
˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were as-sessed for need for transportation at least once during the preced-ing 12 monthsSumming UpTaken together, the core and additional indicators for clinical HIV care 
and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services identi˜ed by 
the committee provide a means for assessing the impact of public health 
policies across the HIV care continuum. Figure 2-4 shows the continuum of 
care arrow depicted in Figure 2-2 with the indicators mapped to it.
Appendix Table 2-2 also maps the indicators (and the related data 
elements) to the continuum of care and indicates which indicators relate 
to outcome measures, process measures, or both. Appendix Table 2-1 pro
-vides a summary of the indicators, including the data elements (and proxy/alternative data elements) needed to estimate them and a brief rationale 
for each.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 Linkage
Engagement/
Retention 
Proportion with CD4+ cell 
count >
200 and wi
thout a 
clinical diagnosis of AIDS
In the Past 
12 Months
Since 
Diagnosis
Proportion who 
received 2 or more 
CD4  tests
Proportion screened 
for hepatitis C
Proportion immunized 
for influenza
Proportion who 
received 2 or more 
viral load tests
Proportion screened 
for chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, and 
syphilisProportion screened 
for tuberculosis
Proportion screened 
for hepatitis B
Proportion immunized 
for hepatitis B 
(if needed)
Proportion immunized 
for pneumococcal 
pneumonia
Proportion who 
received drug 
resistance testing 
prior to ART initiation
Proportion with a 
measured CD4+ cell 
count <500 who are 
not on ART
Proportion with HIV-
associated nephropathy, hepatitis 
B (when treatment is 
indicted), or  active 
tuberculosis who are 
not on ART
Proportion of HIV-
infected pregnant 
women who are not 
on ART
Proportion on 
ART for 12 or 
more months 
who have an 
undetectable 
viral load
All-cause 
mortality rate
Proportion linked to 
care for HIV within 3 
months of diagnosis
Engagement/
Retention 
Proportion with mental health disorder 
referred for mental health services who 
receive these services within 60 days
Proportion with substance use disorder 
referred for substance abuse services who 
receive these services within 60 days
Proportion with an unmet need for 
housing
food or nutrition
transportation
Proportion screened for mental health disorders 
at least once in preceding 12 months
Proportion screened for substance use 
disorders at least once in preceding 12 months
Proportion assessed for need for
housing
food or nutrition
transportation
Proportion in continuous 
care for 12 or more months 
with CD4+ cell count 
350Proportion in continuous 
care (2 or more visits in 
preceding 12 months at 
least 3 months apart)
FIGURE 2-4 Continuum of HIV care arrow mapped to indicators for HIV care and supportive services.
SOURCE: Adapted from Das, 2011.
NOTE: Indicators written in bold text correspond to the committee™s recommended core indicators; the indicators written in italics 
correspond to the additional indicators identi˜ed by the committee. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 71HEALTH-RELATED DISPARITIES
As indicated by the NHAS targets (Box 1-1), subpopulations of 
PLWHA, including Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients, black Ameri
-cans, Latinos, and gay and bisexual men, are of particular interest when 
evaluating HIV care. Other important subpopulations include additional 
vulnerable populations of race and ethnicity, sex and gender, age, lower 
socioeconomic status, high mobility, and those in certain geographic areas. 
Signi˜cant disparities exist among racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities 
with respect to HIV risk, incidence, and access to and continuity of care 
and treatment (Espinoza et al., 2008; Gebo et al., 2005; Hall et al., 2008; 
Mays et al., 2011; Prejean et al., 2008, 2011; Robison et al., 2008). Sev-eral studies report differences in the quality of care received by racial and 
ethnic minorities compared to whites (Garland et al., 2010; Korthuis et al., 
2008). Differences exist in the care experiences of these groups, including 
differences in access to health care services; differences in the presentation 
of health care information and advice as a function of patient-provider 
interactions; and perceived bias and discrimination, although the mecha-nisms of how these work are not well understood (Baicker et al., 2004; 
Cooper-Patrick et al., 1999; Doescher et al., 2001; Johnson et al., 2004a,b; 
Schneider et al., 2002). Blacks are more likely to receive care from health 
care facilities that have fewer clinical resources and to have longer travel 
times to care; they also are less likely to see the same provider in follow-up 
care visits (Doescher et al., 2001; Probst et al., 2007). In studies comparing 
the care experiences of African Americans and whites, African Americans 
rate their care visits as less participatory and more dominated by their pro-vider (Johnson et al., 2004b).
In addition to race and ethnicity, an individual™s country of origin and 
citizenship status are factors that may be related to HIV-related disparities. 
For example, in 2006, almost one-quarter of all new HIV infections in 
Latinos living in the United States were among Puerto Ricans. This ˜nding 
may indicate a higher risk of HIV for Puerto Ricans or higher rates of HIV 
detection. Puerto Ricans may have had higher rates of testing secondary to 
higher rates of health insurance and access to health care when compared 
to other subpopulations of Latinos (Garland et al., 2010). Latinos from 
Mexico and Central America have been found to have higher rates of late 
diagnosis of HIV infection (Garland et al., 2010). Research has shown that 
foreign-born or unacculturated Latinos are less likely to have been tested 
for HIV, not only because of less access to health care but also due to a lack 
of knowledge about HIV as a disease (Chen et al., 2010).
Evidence also suggests that culturally and linguistically speci˜c care 
increased adherence to treatment among Latinos, which then signi˜cantly 
improved CD4 counts and decreased viral loads (Oh et al., 2009; Silverberg Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
et al., 2009; Sullivan et al., 2007). Good results with adherence have been 
noted with urban foreign-born Latinos from Mexico and Central America 
when culturally appropriate care was delivered by bicultural and bilingual 
health care staff (Enriquez et al., 2008). It therefore appears that knowledge 
of linguistic and cultural differences among subpopulations of PLWHA
 can 
make a difference in the design of appropriate care approaches that can aid 
in adherence.
Age, sex, and geographic location are other demographic characteris-tics associated with disparities in HIV care. Studies have reported disparities 
in the receipt of HAART by age (Agwu et al., 2011; Wohl et al., 2011). 
Women, racial minorities, and people without private health insurance are 
less likely to keep an initial appointment for HIV care and therefore are less 
likely to establish care (Mugavero et al., 2007). Another study suggests that 
although white women with HIV began ART sooner than other groups, 
there is some evidence that women tended to have a higher incidence of 
HIV-related and AIDS-de˜ning illnesses than men, with nonwhite women 
experiencing higher morbidity than those in other groups (Meditz et al., 
2011). The study also showed a correlation between geographic location 
(southern United States) and higher morbidity. There is some evidence that 
the socioeconomic position of nonwhite women in the South is a determi-nant of increased morbidity in that group (Aziz and Smith, 2011; Meditz 
et al., 2011).To the extent that lower socioeconomic status plays a role in racial, 
ethnic, and gender disparities in access to HIV care and better outcomes, 
implementation of the ACA may be expected to reduce disparities by 
increasing access to health care within certain of those subpopulations. 
Medicaid provides coverage for 47 percent of PLWHA estimated to be 
receiving regular medical care, making it the largest single source of cover-age for HIV care in the United States (Kates, 2011). By raising the income 
threshold to qualify for Medicaid coverage to 133 percent of the federal 
poverty level, the ACA will signi˜cantly increase access to Medicaid, with 
an anticipated increase in health care utilization and improved health out-comes (Finkelstein et al., 2011). However, undocumented and recent im
-migrants will remain ineligible for Medicaid coverage, which may increase 
health disparities by citizenship. 
All of the indicators identi˜ed by the committee for tracking clinical 
HIV care and mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services can 
be applied to speci˜c subpopulations of PLWHA to evaluate and track 
disparities among those groups. For example, several indicators and sub-populations are speci˜cally targeted in the NHAS under the primary goal 
of reducing HIV-related disparities and health inequities (ONAP, 2010, 
p. 1). The NHAS speci˜es targets for increasing the proportion of PLWHA 
with an undetectable viral load among black Americans, Latinos, and gay 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 73and bisexual men by 2015 (ONAP, 2010, p. 31; see also Box 1-1). Indi
-cators speci˜c to these NHAS targets can be generated by applying the 
relevant core indicator identi˜ed by the committeeŠthat is, the proportion 
of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have been on ART for 12 or 
more months and have a viral load below the level of detectionŠto these 
subpopulations.˜˚
˚Proportion of black Americans with diagnosed HIV infection who 
have been on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load 
below the level of detection
˜˚
˚Proportion of Latinos with diagnosed HIV infection who have been 
on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the 
level of detection
˜˚
˚Proportion of gay and bisexual men with diagnosed HIV infection 
who have been on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral 
load below the level of detectionOther indicators, such as a continuity-of-care indicatorŠthat is, the 
proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are in continu
-ous care (two or more visits for routine HIV medical care in the preceding 
12 months at least 3 months apart)Šcould be applied to these and other 
subpopulations of interest. For example, applying the continuity-of-care 
indicator to the population of Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients 
would generate the information to track the NHAS target of increasing 
ﬁthe proportion of Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients who are in 
care (at least 2 visits for routine HIV medical care in 12 months at least 3 
months apart) from 73% to 80%ﬂ by 2015 (ONAP, 2010, p. 21). Simi
-larly, applications of the committee-identi˜ed indicators to different racial 
or ethnic, foreign-born, gender, and socioeconomic subpopulations would 
be of interest as well. 
Access to quality HIV care also varies based on geographic area of 
residence, in terms of rural, urban, and suburban populations and region 
of the country (South, Northeast, Midwest, etc.) (Krawczyk et al., 2006a,b; 
Reif et al., 2005). People in rural areas, for example, have a more dif-˜cult time accessing appropriate HIV care. Barriers to accessing HIV care 
for people in rural areas include greater stigma regarding HIV infection; 
increased fear of HIV status being disclosed; reduced availability of local 
HIV-knowledgeable providers; and dif˜culty traveling to obtain HIV care 
elsewhere (Heckman et al., 1998; Mays et al., 2011; Ohl et al., 2010; Reif 
et al., 2005; Schur et al., 2002; Vermund et al., 2010). Barriers to access
-ing quality HIV care can result in poorer health outcomes for PLWHA in 
rural areas. A recent study of individuals initiating HIV care within the 
Veterans Health Administration (VHA) found that delayed entry into care 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
accounted for higher mortality among PLWHA in rural areas compared to 
those in urban areas, although, once in care, care utilization was equivalent 
between the two groups (Ohl et al., 2010). PLWHA in the southern United 
States also have been shown to be less apt to initiate treatment than those 
from other regions of the country. Lower socioeconomic status may play 
a role in these differences (Krawczyk et al., 2006a,b; Meditz et al., 2011; 
Weis et al., 2010).
Indicators for tracking health disparities in rural areas (and different 
geographic regions) can be derived from those identi˜ed by the committee. 
Examples of such indicators include the following:
˜˚
Proportion of people living in rural areas and newly diagnosed with 
HIV who are linked to clinical care for HIV within 3 months of 
diagnosis˜˚
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are living 
in rural areas and have been on ART for 12 or more months and 
have a viral load below the level of detection
˜˚
Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are living 
in rural areas who are in continuous care (two or more visits for 
routine HIV medical care in the preceding 12 months at least 3 
months apart)Equivalent framing of any of the other indicators pertaining to HIV 
care and needed services in terms of different subpopulations of PLWHA 
would help to inform both the evaluation and the impact of policies on 
disparities in those areas as well.
DATA ELEMENTS TO GAUGE THE IMPACT 
OF THE NHAS AND THE ACA
The committee identi˜ed three general groups of data elements for 
gauging the impact of the NHAS and the ACA in improving HIV care. 
Although the data elements identi˜ed include those needed to estimate 
the previously discussed indicators that capture the care experiences of 
PLWHA, the lists are not identical. The committee recognized some data 
elements, such as stigma, discrimination, and patient satisfaction with 
care, to be important but did not recommend related indicators because 
of the dif˜culties in de˜ning, objectively quantifying, and measuring those 
elements.11 The three groups of data identi˜ed by the committee are health 
11
 Although obtaining data to estimate indicators for housing, food, and transportation poses 
challenges, those needs are objectively quanti˜able using standardized de˜nitions such as those 
provided in the text. By contrast, experiences of stigma, discrimination, and satisfaction with 
care are not quanti˜able in the same way.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 75care data, including data on diagnoses, test results, and health care service 
utilization; data pertaining to access to housing, food, and transportation; 
and demographic data, which, as in the case of zip code, can provide infor
-mation regarding risk environment, permitting those areas to be targeted in 
terms of linkage of care, STI services, and the like. Health care data inform 
indicators related to linkage to and continuity of care, as well as quality 
of care. Data pertaining to supportive services inform indicators related 
to access to those services. Demographic and other personal data inform 
indicators related to payer sources and disparities (racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities; geographic) in HIV-related health care.
The following section provides an introduction to the primary types of 
health care, supportive services, and demographic data and lays the foun-dation for the later discussion of the data elements necessary for assessing 
each of the indicators identi˜ed by the committee. 
Types of Data
The health, service utilization, and demographic data elements needed 
to assess the indicators are found in several general data types, including 
claims data, clinical data, surveillance and vital records data, and survey or 
interview data. Relevant data may be used for ˜nancial, legal, or epidemio-logic purposes, such as billing third-party payers, certifying birth or death, 
and disease tracking to establish public health interventions, as well as the 
provision of individual patient care.
Claims DataClaims data, also known as billing data, are records of interactions 
between patients and various parts of the health care system designed 
to solicit reimbursement from private or public third-party payers (e.g., 
private health insurance, Medicare, Medicaid). These data include patient-identi˜able demographic data (e.g., patient address, sex, date of birth), 
diagnosis and procedure codes, claims for laboratory tests and other types 
of studies, and some claims for prescription drugs.
There are numerous advantages to the use of claims data for health care 
research and the evaluation of performance measures (Ferver et al., 2009; 
Jollis et al., 1993). They represent a large quantity of data that is relatively 
easy and inexpensive to obtain. The large amount of data is especially 
useful for compiling information on rare conditions and may facilitate the 
identi˜cation of trends or practices that would otherwise be missed. Some 
claims data systems include demographic information, such as income level 
and employment status, that is not generally available from other health 
care data systems. Claims data also are, or easily can be made, anonymous 
and hence can be used without patient authorization. The anonymity of the 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
data also make claims data particularly good source of data pertaining to 
sensitive diagnoses such as HIV/AIDS or mental illness. Claims data also 
are available electronically, which facilitates their use for research.
Claims data have a number of disadvantages as well. One major disad-vantage is that claims data are designed for billing and not for use in health 
care research (Ferver et al., 2009; Jollis et al., 1993). Only the data neces-sary to ˜le the claim are captured, which leaves the data lacking in suf˜cient 
clinical detail to be maximally useful in research on health outcomes for 
example. There is a single International Classi˜cation of Diseases, Ninth 
Revision (ICD-9) code for prostate cancer, for example, which indicates the 
diagnosis but provides no information as to the stage of the disease at the 
time of diagnosis or treatment (see, e.g., West et al., 2010). Likewise, claims 
data cannot directly provide information on disease progression, treatment 
failure, or treatment intention (e.g., therapeutic or palliative) (Jollis et al., 
1993). With respect to HIV, for example, claims data may provide reason
-able information on how many CD4 and viral load tests are performed in a 
given period, but they will not provide information on the results of those 
tests and so are not of use in identifying treatment failure or tracking the 
effect of various therapeutic interventions on CD4 counts and viral load 
over time. For chronic conditions the ﬁdate of onsetﬂ may be listed as the 
date of service at each subsequent visit or the visit may be attributed to one 
medical problem (diagnosis) when several in fact are present. Similarly, sev
-eral procedures may be ﬁbundledﬂ into a single claim (Ferver et al., 2009).Since the purpose of claims data is to generate reimbursement, there 
is a ˜nancial disincentive to capture any data that are not directly related 
to that end (Ferver et al., 2009). If itemizing diagnoses or procedures will 
not increase the amount of reimbursement, there is no incentive to do so; 
indeed, the additional reporting time required creates a disincentive. This 
may be especially problematic for patients with multiple comorbid condi-tions, including HIV. Similarly, data on procedures not submitted for re
-imbursement may not be captured. For example, data on HIV testing may 
be underrepresented if the test kits are paid for by a health department. 
Conversely, there is an increased incentive to include tests and procedures 
that can be reimbursed, which also must be taken into account when in-terpreting the data.
Another signi˜cant disadvantage of using claims data for research is 
how labor intensive it can be to analyze the data. It often requires someone 
with strong training in data management to perform the necessary recod-ing and data manipulation. For example, the rows of data may be patient 
records and some patients have multiple records (rows). Extensive recoding 
is needed to reformat the data into the patient or episode level. In addition, 
it may be necessary to use sample records (e.g., rather than analyzing all 
Medicaid records) because it would be too computationally taxing to run 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 77all of the data. Again, this type of sampling requires someone with very 
strong technical skills. 
Other disadvantages arise with claims data as well. Coding inaccuracies 
of various types may render the data problematic for research purposes. 
Not only may typographical coding errors occur, but misunderstandings 
about diagnoses and incorrect or misreported diagnoses also may occur. 
In addition, questionable billing practices can lead to inaccurate coding or 
ﬁupcodingﬂ in order to increase reimbursement in certain cases (Ferver et 
al., 2009). All of these factors are potentially problematic for the use of 
claims data to generate estimates of the percentage of individuals with a 
speci˜c condition or receiving certain tests or procedures.
Clinical Data
Clinical data are collected for or pertain directly to the health and wel-fare of individual patients. The primary source of clinical data is individu-als™ personal health records compiled by health care providers during the 
course of caring for those individuals. Health records include information 
on individuals™ health status, ˜ndings from physical examinations, and 
information on individuals™ medical history. The records also document 
diagnoses, tests or studies that are ordered and the results, diagnostic and 
therapeutic procedures, medications prescribed, when medication was ad-ministered (for inpatients), information on allergies or side effects, and the 
like. Health records also may contain information concerning consultations 
and referrals. Health records commonly include certain demographic infor-mation, such as address, date of birth, sex, and insurance status. However, 
certain types of demographic information, including race and ethnicity, 
gender identity, and sexual orientation, may not be recorded at all; may 
be based on provider observation rather than patient self-report; or may 
be reported or recorded in different ways, making it dif˜cult to code uni-formly. In addition, medical records generally do not include information 
on individuals™ socioeconomic position (e.g., income, wealth, education) 
(Krieger, 1992).
Medical records provide more detailed information, such as labora-tory test and treatment results, than that available through claims data 
and hence are preferable for use in health care research, especially research 
focusing on quality of care and health outcomes. In addition, clinical data 
are apt to give a more accurate picture than claims data of patients™ health 
status (Roos et al., 1991; Tang et al., 2007).
Although medical records may provide more detailed and compre-hensive information about the health care received by speci˜c individuals, 
they also have a number of disadvantages from a research perspective. One 
problem lies in the accuracy and completeness of the health record. Clini-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
cians vary not only in their accuracy regarding diagnoses but also in the 
accuracy and completeness of the information they elicit and record from 
a patient™s medical history and physical examination (Roos et al., 1991). 
Nevertheless, there is good reason to believe that the accuracy and com-prehensiveness of the clinical information are greater than found in claims 
data (Roos et al., 1991).
Other dif˜culties involve the extraction of pertinent data from patient 
health records and the challenge of linking individual-level data across 
providers for patients with multiple providers (e.g., primary care provider, 
HIV specialist, mental health provider). This process can be labor intensive, 
expensive, and time consuming, which makes claims data an attractive 
surrogate for medical records data in health care research. The increased 
use of EHRs, especially following enactment of the Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, as part of 
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-5), has 
simpli˜ed the process of data extraction, although challenges remain for 
extraction as well as for data linking and system interoperability across pro
-viders. Integrated care systems with comprehensive EHRs, such as Kaiser 
Permanente (KP) and the VHA, avoid these challenges to a certain extent. 
EHRs can pose other dif˜culties as well, such as system failures, decreased 
interdisciplinary communication, and overreliance on checkboxes (in lieu 
of critical thinking) (NIH, NCRR, 2006).
Despite such potential drawbacks, EHRs also can improve the quality 
of documentation, increase the accuracy of shared information, and im-prove patient safety (e.g., through checking for possible drug interactions) 
(Tang et al., 2007). Use of EHR data for quality measurement also reduces 
provider burden by reusing clinical data already being entered as part of 
patient care (Tang et al., 2007). However, providers™ notes remain as ﬁfree 
textﬂ that needs to be combed to ˜nd pertinent pieces of clinical informa-tion. This information extraction may be done manually, adding time and 
expense to the project as well as potentially introducing inaccuracies from 
errors during the extraction process. In some cases, it also is possible to 
mechanize the extraction of data from free text.
Pharmacy records are a source of data on prescriptions that have been 
˜lled. Although claims data may also provide this information, pharmacy 
data are available even when patients lack prescription drug coverage. Al-though ˜lling a prescription does not ensure that the medication actually 
is being taken or taken as directed, there is some correlation between re˜ll 
data and treatment adherence (Pladevall et al., 2004). As is the case with 
claims data, the extraction of person-level (rather than record-level) data 
is technically dif˜cult. People may visit multiple pharmacies, which would 
make it dif˜cult to compile data at the patient level. In addition, there is apt 
to be variation in the use and interoperability of electronic record systems. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 79The challenges may be mitigated, but not eliminated, for pharmacies that 
are integrated into health care systems such as KP or the VHA.
Surveillance and Vital Records Data
Disease registries and surveillance systems, such as the CDC™s National 
HIV Surveillance System (NHSS), a population-based registry of individuals 
diagnosed with HIV in the United States (CDC, 2010a), are useful sources 
of certain health and demographic data. Such population-based registries 
serve epidemiologic and public health functions, permitting the tracking 
of a disease™s prevalence and incidence over time and within speci˜ed 
geographic areas. Disease registries and surveillance systems include demo-graphic and health data relevant to their function, including, for example, 
disease diagnosis and staging, risk factors, individual™s name, address, age, 
sex, and race and ethnicity. In addition, some HIV surveillance systems in
-clude selected clinical test results and drug treatment information. Since the 
NHSS and state and local HIV surveillance systems as a group are inclusive 
of the majority of individuals diagnosed with HIV in the United States and 
contain a wealth of information relevant to HIV care, they are important 
sources of data on PLWHA.
Vital records, which include information on births and deaths, are an
-other source of data. Of particular interest for HIV care are mortality data 
on PLWHA. Although vital records systems may have developed procedures 
for uniform reporting on cause of death, challenges to the accuracy of cause of death information persist. Whether the proximate cause of death is at-tributable to a secondary or tertiary cause of interest, such as HIV, may 
be subject to diagnostic or reporting errors or not recorded at all. For this 
reason, all-cause mortality may provide a more accurate measure of mortal-ity with in a population diagnosed with a particular disease. 
Survey and Interview DataSurveys or interviews are additional sources of data that can be used 
to evaluate health care quality and outcomes. Well-designed surveys can be 
used to help track and identify trends in health insurance, health services, 
hospitalizations, cost, access, and quality of care; to capture patients™ ex-periences with their health care services; and to evaluate the ability of the 
nation™s health system to meet the public™s health needs (NCHS, 2012). In 
addition, they can be used as tools in clinical care to assist providers in de-livering needed health services and as quality measurement tools to assess 
clinical performance (Kass-Bartelmes, 2002).
There are a number of advantages to using surveys for data collection 
(Marsden and Wright, 2010)
. A well-designed sampling scheme allows data Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
gathering on a good cross-sectional snapshot of all residents, including 
those who are not in care (i.e., those who are by de˜nition excluded from 
clinical and administrative data sets). Surveys also permit collection of data 
on indicators or variables that are not recorded in claims, clinical, surveil-lance, or other types of data (e.g., barriers to accessing care) and systematic 
assessment of data elements that providers may not uniformly report (e.g., 
socioeconomic position, educational attainment) for all patients. Ques-tions can be tailored to ˜t information needs (e.g., a consistent measure of 
homelessness, food security, or education, rather than relying on the differ
-ent ways in which clinicians may collect that information in their clinical 
records). In addition, interviews can elicit qualitative data about complex 
issues that are hard to quantify objectively, such as stigma, discrimination, 
or reasons some subpopulations are less likely to access care. New surveys 
can be ˜elded to collect data on emerging issues, and long-term trends can 
be assessed using panel data.
There are disadvantages to the use of surveys and interviews as well 
(Marsden and Wright, 2010)
. Losses to follow-up and nonresponse, which 
may be more common among hard-to-reach populations such as those who 
are homeless or unstably housed or struggling with mental health or drug 
use problems, may introduce bias and compromise the representativeness of 
results. In addition, it may be dif˜cult to collect accurate self-reported data 
for a variety of reasons, including forgetfulness and reluctance to disclose 
sensitive information (although some survey modes such as computer-
assisted questionnaires may help in that regard). Finally, primary data col
-lection can be costly and labor intensive, although there are ways to make it less so (e.g., adding modules to existing surveys such as the National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey, contracting with companies that have 
existing sample pools).
SummaryThe differences between clinical data such as test results and claims 
data can result in gaps in measures of HIV care. Claims data provide in
-formation about the number of PLWHA who are in care and the frequency 
with which they are seen, although it may not always be possible to gauge 
whether a visit for an unrelated health concern also included HIV care, nor 
are claims data designed to measure care quality. Claims data also can yield 
information about what tests and other procedures are being provided to 
an individual and the frequency with which they are being done. However, 
claims data provide no information on the results or outcomes of the tests 
or procedures. Similarly claims data or pharmacy records may provide 
information about whether prescriptions for ART medications are being 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 81˜lled and at what interval, but such information serves only as a proxy for 
data on treatment adherence.Claims data provide important, although potentially incomplete, in-formation about quality of HIV care with regard to continuity of care (fre-quency of visits), provision of appropriate screening and monitoring (types 
and frequency of laboratory tests), and, to a certain extent, timely initiation 
and prescription of appropriate ART (medical and pharmacy records). Such 
data are important for assessing whether PLWHA are receiving quality HIV 
care. Other factors, such as substance use, mental health disorders, housing 
instability, and food insecurity, can negatively affect health outcomes even 
when individuals receive and adhere to quality HIV care and treatment. For 
this reason, clinical data pertaining to health outcomes, such as lower viral 
loads and higher CD4 counts, are important for tracking the overall suc-cess of HIV care in improving health outcomes for PLWHA and controlling 
the epidemic. Such clinical data (e.g., CD4 count results) also are currently 
needed to supplement other types of data when assessing the timeliness of 
ART initiation.
Data from surveys and interviews can ˜ll additional data gaps by 
providing information on hard-to-reach populations, such as homeless 
individuals and PLWHA who are not in care, and permitting collection 
of data not routinely collected by health care providers, such as need for 
and access to supportive services and subjective experiences of stigma and 
discrimination and satisfaction with care providers.
For these reasons, different types of data (e.g., claims, clinical, surveil-lance, survey) are needed to estimate the core indicators related to continu-ous, quality clinical HIV care and access to mental health, substance abuse, 
and supportive services for people living with HIV and hence to assess the 
impact of the NHAS and the ACA in terms of improving care for PLWHA. 
Because the data needed to estimate the indicators identi˜ed by the com-mittee are likely to come from different sources, attention to the use of 
consistent de˜nitions (e.g., homelessness, food insecurity, race, ethnicity, 
gender) in the collection of data is important. 
Data Elements for Assessing Indicators
Appendix Table 2-1 lists the data elements needed to estimate each 
of the indicators identi˜ed by the committee. Many of the data elements 
are used to estimate more than one indicator, making the total number of 
required data elements fewer than it might initially appear. In some cases, 
suitable proxies may exist that can be substituted for the speci˜ed data ele-ments when they cannot be obtained from a speci˜c data system of inter-est. The following sections discuss the data elements in groups pertaining 
to their use. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DenominatorsAll of the indicators rely on the population of PLWHA or a subpopula
-tion thereof (e.g., a clinical marker of some type, such as ART or pregnancy 
status) for their denominators. The goal is to select as comprehensive and 
nationally representative a population of PLWHA as possible when assess
-ing indicators for the full population of PLWHA in the United States. Dis
-cussion of the current availability of nationally representative data for the 
population of PLWHA in the United States follows in Chapter 3. Similarly, 
when assessing indicators for speci˜c subpopulations of PLWHA, the goal, 
again, is to begin with as comprehensive and nationally representative a 
population as possible and then to apply the limiting element, such as race 
or ethnicity, to the group.
As noted, blacks, Latinos, gay and bisexual men, and Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program clients are subpopulations speci˜cally identi˜ed in 
NHAS targets. Additional subpopulations of interest include other racial 
and ethnic groups, women, individuals living in rural areas or different 
geographic areas, individuals of varying socioeconomic position or levels 
of acculturation, and individuals with different payer status. Demographic 
data needed to assess the application of indicators to such subpopulations 
include race and ethnicity; gender identity; sexual orientation; zip code 
or other identi˜er for current geographic area of residence; payer status 
(e.g., private, Medicaid, Medicare, VA, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program); 
socioeconomic position; and level of acculturation (e.g., primary language 
spoken). These data can be collected, based on individual self-report, in 
clinical records, surveys, and administrative records for claims or program 
eligibility records.One dif˜culty faced in evaluating, tracking, and reporting on the qual-ity of the care and treatment of these subpopulations is the lack of data 
collected on a number of these demographic characteristics. Although data 
systems relating to HIV care generally capture data on age, sex assigned 
at birth, and certain information on race and ethnicity and current area 
of residence, many fewer capture complete information on payer status, 
sexual minority status, gender identity, nativity status, and primary lan
-guage preferred.It is important that complete data on both race and ethnicity be col
-lected not only to evaluate and track health disparities but also because of 
the essential role they play in clinical care decisions. For example, Latinos, 
African Americans, American Indians, and some subpopulations of Asian 
and Paci˜c Islanders are at higher risk for diabetes and its complications 
than are whites, raising concerns about the use of some ARVs with higher 
associations of metabolic syndromes. In a small study of 43 ART-naïve La
-tinos, Latinos were found to have greater unfavorable changes in metabolic 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 83parameters and body composition in response to ART initiation than either 
blacks or whites (Gibert et al., 2009). Also since some Latinos present late 
in the course of the HIV disease continuum, they are more likely to have 
OIs related to their countries of origin (Garland, 2010).
Standardization of the collection of data on race and ethnicity is im-portant to permit the collection and sharing of this information across 
federal agencies and other bodies. In 1997, the Of˜ce of Management and 
Budget (OMB) issued revised minimum standards for the collection of race 
and ethnicity data, specifying ˜ve racial (American Indian or Alaska Na-tive, Asian, black or African American, Native Hawaiian or other Paci˜c 
Islander, and white) and two ethnic (Hispanic or Latino; not Hispanic 
or Latino) categories in an effort to increase standardization of race and 
ethnicity data in administrative reporting and statistical activities within 
federal agencies (OMB, 1977, 1997b). In addition, OMB encourages the 
collection of more granular data on ethnicity when they can be aggregated 
back to the minimum categories (OMB, 1997a). This effort has improved 
the collection of such data within many health information systems, but not all nonfederal data collection activities use these categories (IOM, 2009) or 
even require the collection of data on race and ethnicity. In addition, there 
may be differences in the way these data are collected. For example, race 
may be collected by providers based on their observations, which can differ 
from a patient™s description of his or her race. Furthermore, OMB does not 
specify standardized collection of more granular data, for example, pertain
-ing to country of origin, which is important for clinical decision making 
and nuanced monitoring of health disparities.
In response to Section 4302 of the ACA, new HHS guidance on data 
collection standards for race, ethnicity, sex, primary language, and dis
-ability status, effective October 31, 2011, set minimum standards for the 
collection of such data in population-based health surveys conducted or 
sponsored by HHS (HHS, 2011g). The HHS data standards mandate the 
collection of more granular data on race and ethnicity as speci˜ed in the 
guidance, as well as the collection of data on ﬁbiologic sexﬂ and English 
pro˜ciency as a measure of primary language. The guidance also recom-mends the wording for collection of data on the speci˜c language spoken 
at home should an agency wish to collect such data.
12HHS is also in the process of developing a national progression plan 
to integrate the collection of data on sexual orientation and gender iden-tity into its national surveys (HHS, 2011c,g) and to collect data on socio-economic status. Collection of standardized demographic data on gender 
12 The guidance includes a data standard for the collection of disability status, which might 
apply to PLWHA in cases when the disease process results in one or more of the disabling 
conditions speci˜ed. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
identity and sexual orientation is important to track access to, and qual-ity of, HIV care among sexual minority subpopulations of PLWHAŠfor 
example, by estimating the proportion of gay and bisexual men with an 
undetectable viral load as speci˜ed in the NHAS (ONAP, 2010, p. 31). A 
2011 IOM report assessing the current state of knowledge about the health 
of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people provides working de˜ni
-tions of gender identity and sexual orientation (IOM, 2011a, pp. 25-29). 
ﬁGender identity refers to a person™s basic sense of being a man or boy, a 
woman or girl, or another gender (e.g., transgender, bigender, or gender 
queerŠa rejection of the traditional binary classi˜cation of gender)ﬂ (IOM, 
2011a, p. 25). ﬁ[S]exual orientation refers to an enduring pattern of or 
disposition to experience sexual or romantic desires for, and relationships 
with, people of one™s same sex, the other sex, or both sexesﬂ (i.e., homo
-sexual, heterosexual, bisexual) (IOM, 2011a, p. 27). Although useful and 
important, these categories will not capture the group of MSM who do not 
self-identify as homosexual or bisexual or gender different. For this reason, 
the collection of data on sex of sexual partner(s) is also important.
Minimizing the burden of data collection is an important consideration, 
but it must be balanced against the importance of the information for clini
-cal decision making and the evaluation and monitoring of treatment and 
care, which may differ in quality based on many of the aforementioned 
demographic data elements. The committee supports the HHS efforts to 
increase the scope and granularity of demographic data collected in na-tional population-based health surveys and recommends that the expanded 
data collection standards be extended to all HHS-sponsored data collection 
activities to the extent practicable.Although OMB and HHS standards apply to federal data collection, 
private health insurance plans vary in their collection of these data. KP, 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 3, collects data on race and ethnicity 
and sexual orientation. Although the data are incomplete, KP is actively 
working to complete the missing data (KP response to IOM request for 
information, March 30, 2011). The Ingenix Normative Health Informa-tion Database®, which includes claims from private commercial insurance 
plans, self-funded employer group health plans, and Medicare Advantage 
plans, also contains data on race and ethnicity, but the data are incomplete. 
These data are available for 50 to 94 percent of private commercial and 
self-funded employer group bene˜ciaries, depending on plan, but no infor-mation on race and ethnicity is available for Medicare Advantage plans. 
Ingenix does not capture data on sexual orientation (Ingenix response to 
IOM request for information, April 27, 2011). The HealthCore Integrated 
Research Database (HIRD
®), which includes longitudinal administrative 
claims data representing commercially insured members of 15 Blue Cross 
Blue Shield health plans across the United States, does not contain data on 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 85race and ethnicity or sexual orientation. Although the HIV/AIDS epidemic 
has disproportionately affected traditionally disadvantaged and vulnerable 
populations, who are generally covered by public insurance, the reduction 
in work disability with the advent of ART makes employer-based insur
-ance an increasingly relevant source of information on PLWHA. As such, 
the routine collection of standardized data on race and ethnicity, as well as 
sexual orientation and gender identity, by private insurers would facilitate 
their usefulness for tracking changes in access to and the provision of HIV 
care. 
Core Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
The data elements required to assess the core indicators for clinical 
HIV care are date of HIV diagnosis, date of ˜rst visit for HIV care, dates 
of subsequent routine HIV care visits, dates and results of ongoing CD4 
and viral load tests, date of diagnosis of AIDS or AIDS-de˜ning condition 
(if applicable), dates of ART initiation and ongoing prescription or dispens
-ing of drugs, and date of death. Most of these data are available through 
surveillance or claims data systems, although some clinical data might have 
to be obtained from patient medical records.
The date of ˜rst visit for HIV care may be dif˜cult to obtain. Claims 
data capture of˜ce visits for HIV care if they are coded as such, but data 
sources generally only capture the date an individual was ˜rst seen for HIV 
care within a given system, not the ˜rst-ever date of HIV care (see Chapter 
3 for additional discussion). Individuals™ medical records may contain the 
approximate date of ˜rst HIV care, but the information is apt to be incom-plete, and the process of mining it is time consuming.
The date of ˜rst CD4 and viral load tests may be used as a proxy for 
the date of ˜rst visit for HIV care. One dif˜culty with this approach arises 
when the tests are not recorded on the same date that the ˜rst appointment 
occurred. For the purpose of measuring linkage to care, however, the dif
-ference of a day or two between the date of the ˜rst visit and the test date 
is seldom important. A more signi˜cant problem occurs when the tests are 
ordered at the time of diagnosis. In this case, the ˜rst CD4 or viral load test 
date is less likely to re˚ect linkage to care. Although the date of ˜rst visit 
for HIV, as well as lab test dates, can be obtained from claims data, the lab 
test dates also are available from surveillance data, which may make them 
preferable since most of the other data elements required to assess the core 
indicators can be obtained from surveillance data as well (see Chapter 3).
As indicated in Chapter 3, a number of data systems collect informa-tion for a speci˜ed reporting period. In such cases, yes/no documentation 
of CD4 or viral load tests, use of ART, or diagnosis of AIDS within the 
reporting period can be used if speci˜c test, prescription, or diagnosis dates 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
are not available. Documentation of CD4 or viral load tests also may serve 
as a proxy for HIV care visits to indicate continuity of care.
Outside of medical records, in particular EHRs, obtaining data on 
ART initiation is challenging, because it requires linking evidence of ART 
prescription or dispensing with CD4 test results. When speci˜c dates for 
CD4 counts and ART prescription or dispensing are not available, some 
combination of results using the most recent CD4 test within the report-ing period and yes/no documentation of whether the individual is on ART 
within the reporting period can be used.Additional Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
Assessment of the additional indicators for HIV care requires a number 
of the same data elements needed to assess the core HIV care indicators: 
date of HIV diagnosis, CD4 test results at diagnosis or ˜rst visit for HIV 
care, date of ART initiation, and dates of ART prescription or dispensing. 
Data elements that are speci˜c to the additional HIV care indicators include dates and results of TB tests; dates of chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis 
screenings; date of hepatitis B screening or date of documented immunity; 
dates of hepatitis C tests; dates of in˚uenza immunizations; date of pneu-mococcal immunization; and date of hepatitis B vaccination or date of 
documented immunity. Test or screening and immunization dates (or a close 
proxy) may be obtained from either clinical or claims databases. The in-formation needed is documented evidence that the speci˜ed screenings and 
immunizations took place after HIV diagnosis and, where relevant, at the 
appropriate intervals. Clinical data on TB test results and documentation of hepatitis B immunity would have to be obtained from medical records or, 
in the case of TB, possible linkage with public health surveillance systems.Other data elements needed to assess additional indicators relating to 
ART include dates of drug resistance testing, diagnosis or test results for 
HIV-related nephropathy, and pregnancy test results (or documentation of 
pregnancy). Dates or evidence of drug resistance testing may be obtained 
from claims databases, but diagnosis of nephropathy and documentation 
of pregnancy are not available from claims data. Yes/no documentation of 
these conditions may be obtained from other administrative data systems, 
as well as from EHRs or other medical records. Evidence of concurrent 
ART usage is needed as well to evaluate the relevant indicators. 
Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive 
ServicesData elements for assessing the core indicators for mental health and 
substance abuse include dates of mental health screening, as well as dates 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 87of diagnosis or referral and ˜rst visit for mental health services, and the 
equivalent dates for substance abuse screening, referral, and ˜rst visit for 
services. Referral dates for mental health and substance use disorders are 
not readily available outside of EHRs and other medical records, and dates 
of ˜rst treatment may be dif˜cult to acquire because individuals may be 
referred to outside providers or the services may be ﬁcarved outﬂ (i.e., 
fee-for-service, provided by a different managed care plan than the rest of 
the individual™s medical care, or paid out of pocket). Suitable proxies for 
estimating the relevant indicators include evidence of assessment for mental 
health or substance abuse disorders and any visits for treatment services 
during the same reporting period. Pharmacy data showing evidence of 
prescriptions relevant to the treatment of mental health or substance abuse 
disorders also may serve as a proxy for receipt of care for these conditions. 
As discussed in Chapter 4, privacy laws may pose particular challenges for 
obtaining data to estimate the core indicators for access to mental health 
and substance abuse services. 
Data elements for assessing the core indicators for supportive services 
include housing and food security status (e.g., as previously de˜ned) and 
need for transportation services to access medical care and related services. 
Obtaining data to estimate the indicators for supportive services is par-ticularly challenging since most data systems related to HIV care do not 
capture this type of data and have no reporting requirement in these areas. 
Evidence of reported need for (or access to) housing, food, or transporta
-tion assistance during the reporting period can be used if information about 
housing instability, food insecurity, or unmet transportation need is not 
available. Surveys are promising vehicles for obtaining data to estimate the 
supportive services indicators.Additional Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and 
Supportive ServicesThe additional indicators pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, 
and supportive services for housing, food, and transportation assistance 
involve documentation of assessment of need for relevant treatment or 
supportive services. If assessment dates are not available, then yes/no docu
-mentation of assessment (e.g., within a speci˜ed reporting period) would 
be a suitable proxy.
Additional Data Elements of InterestAs previously noted, the committee identi˜ed several data elements that 
re˚ect important aspects of the care experiences of PLWHA but are not 
required to estimate the indicators related to continuous HIV care and ac
-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
cess to supportive services. These additional data elements include access to 
dental care, emergency department or inpatient use, sexual risk behaviors, 
and partner HIV status (see Appendix Table 3-2f).
Other data elements pertain to individuals™ experience of discrimina
-tion or stigma as PLWHA (Sengupta et al., 2011), individuals™ level of 
satisfaction with their HIV care experience, and individuals™ assessment of 
their health-related quality of life (HHS, 2011a,b). Such experiences are 
important to the success of treatment and health outcomes of PLWHA, 
since they can affect the willingness of individuals to enter and remain in 
care and adhere to ART (see, e.g., Valdiserri, 2002). They also may affect 
individuals™ mental state and the likelihood that they will initiate or con-tinue substance use (Mays and Cochran, 2001).
Stigma and discrimination, along with numerous other factors (e.g., 
housing instability, food insecurity), are major sources of chronic stress, 
which can precipitate or exacerbate mental health and substance use 
disorders. Stress also can compromise immunological functioning and 
may alter the progression of HIV disease. Studies of HIV samples have 
con˜rmed the relevance of stress-in˚uenced biomarkers in physiological 
mechanisms of HIV (Glover et al., 2010; Kopnisky et al., 2004; Kumar 
et al., 2003). For example, norepinephrine, a neurotransmitter of the 
autonomic nervous system released in response to stress, has been shown 
to accelerate HIV replication (Chipimo et al., 2011; Cole, 2008; Miles et 
al., 2011).The NHAS highlights HIV stigma and discrimination, calling for a 
reduction of stigma and discrimination against PLWHA as one of its action 
steps (ONAP, 2010, p. 35). Data on subjective experiences such as these are 
dif˜cult to quantify objectively, however, which complicates the collection 
and meaningful application of data in these areas. Surveys and interviews 
can be particularly effective collection tools for this type of data, which 
can be used to supplement data obtained from clinical and administrative 
sources.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
˜˚
Measures of continuous HIV care as well as access to and quality 
of care can be monitored by a limited number of core indicators. 
Primary challenges to optimal outcomes for PLWHA include late 
diagnosis, delayed linkage to care for HIV, poor retention in care, 
delayed initiation of ART, and poor adherence to ART (i.e., dis
-continuing or intermittent ART), as well as untreated non-HIV 
comorbidities and unmet basic needs. Core indicators can measure 
the extent to which these challenges are being addressed across the 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 89care continuum and can be used to gauge the impact of the NHAS 
and the ACA in improving HIV/AIDS care in the United States.
  
Recommendation 2-1. The Department of Health and Human Ser-vices should use the following core indicators13 to assess the impact 
of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy and the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act on improving HIV/AIDS care and access to 
supportive services for individuals with HIV:
 Core Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
˚˚Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV with a CD4+ cell 
count >200 cells/mm
3 and without a clinical diagnosis of AIDS
˚˚Proportion of people newly diagnosed with HIV who are linked to 
clinical care for HIV within 3 months of diagnosis
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who are in 
continuous care (two or more visits for routine HIV medical care 
in the preceding 12 months at least 3 months apart)
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received 
two or more CD4 tests in the preceding 12 months
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who received 
two or more viral load tests in the preceding 12 months
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection in continuous 
care for 12 or more months and with a CD4+ cell count ˛350 cells/mm3˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and a measured 
CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on ART
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who have been 
on ART for 12 or more months and have a viral load below the 
level of detection
˚˚All-cause mortality rate among people diagnosed with HIV 
infection13 The rationale for each of the indicators is summarized in Appendix Table 2-1.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
  
Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Sup-portive Services
˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and mental 
health disorder who are referred for mental health services and 
receive these services within 60 days
14˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and substance 
use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and 
receive these services within 60 days
15˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who were 
homeless or temporarily or unstably housed at least once in the 
preceding 12 months˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who experi
-enced food or nutrition insecurity at least once in the preceding 12 
months˚˚Proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection who had an un-met need for transportation services to facilitate access to medical 
care and related services at least once in the preceding 12 months
˜˚
The differences among clinical, claims, and other types of data can 
result in gaps in measures for HIV care. Both clinical and claims 
data are needed to provide a complete picture of the quality of 
HIV care. Data from surveys and interviews can ˜ll additional 
data gaps by providing information on hard-to-reach populations, 
such as homeless individuals and PLWHA who are not in care, and 
permitting collection of data not routinely collected by health care 
providers, such as need for and access to supportive services, and 
data on subjective experiences, such as HIV stigma and discrimina
-tion. Various types of data are needed to estimate the core indica
-tors related to continuous, quality HIV care and access to mental 
health, substance abuse, and supportive services for people living 
with HIV, and hence to assess the impact of NHAS and ACA on 
improving HIV/AIDS care.
˜˚
Demographic data are essential to fully understanding HIV care 
challenges especially among groups disproportionately affected 
14 Receipt of care within 30 days would re˚ect optimal care, but 60 days is more realistic 
given the current limited capacity of many providers to see new patients within a shorter time 
frame. Urgent cases should be seen as soon as possible.
15 See footnote 14.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 91by the HIV epidemic. Many of these crucial data elements, such 
as gender identity, sexual orientation, sexual risk behaviors, geo
-graphic marker of residence, income, primary means of reimburse-ment for medical services, and level of acculturation as re˚ected in 
primary language, are not routinely collected. Other data elements 
such as race and ethnicity often are not collected with a suf˜cient 
level of detail to make nuanced distinctions among the health needs 
of different racial and ethnic groups. New HHS guidance, effective 
October 31, 2011, on minimum data collection standards for race, 
ethnicity, sex, primary language, and disability status mandates the 
collection of more granular data on race and ethnicity, as well as 
the collection of data on ﬁbiologic sexﬂ and English pro˜ciency as 
a measure of primary language. These standards apply to all na
-tional population health surveys sponsored or conducted by HHS. 
HHS is also in the process of developing a national progression 
plan to integrate the collection of data on sexual orientation and 
gender identity into HHS national surveys and to collect data on 
socioeconomic status.  
Recommendation 2-2. The Department of Health and Human Ser-vices and the Of˜ce of Management and Budget should continue to 
expand the demographic data elements to be captured by federal 
data systems relevant to HIV care to permit calculation of the in-dicators for subgroups of the population of people with diagnosed 
HIV infection, including, but not limited to, the following: 
˚˚Age˚˚Race˚˚Ethnicity˚˚Sex (assigned at birth)˚˚
˚Gender identity (e.g., male, female, transgender [male-to-female, female-to-male], bigender, gender queer)
˚˚Sexual orientation (e.g., heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual)
˚˚
˚Current geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, 
zip code, partial zip code, census block)
˚˚Income or poverty level˚˚
˚Primary means of reimbursement for medical services (including 
Medicaid, Medicare, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, private 
insurance or health maintenance organization, no coverage)
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
  
In addition, HHS should, to the extent practicable, extend its ex-panded data collection standards beyond national population-based 
health surveys to all HHS-sponsored data collection activities.
REFERENCESAberg, J. A., J. E. Kaplan, H. Libman, P. Emmanuel, J. R. Anderson, V. E. Stone, J. M. Oleske, 
J. S. Currier, and J. E. Gallant. 2009. Primary care guidelines for the management of 
persons infected with human immunode˜ciency virus: 2009 update by the HIV Medicine 
Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clinical Infectious Diseases 49(5):651-681.AETC (AIDS Education and Training Centers). 2011. 
HIV-Associated Dementia and Other 
Neurocognitive Disorders. http://www.aidsetc.org/aidsetc?page=cg-802_dementia (ac
-cessed December 16, 2011).
Agwu, A. L., J. A. Fleishman, P. T. Korthuis, G. K. Siberry, J. M. Ellen, A. H. Gaur, R. 
Rutstein, and K. A. Gebo. 2011. Disparities in antiretroviral treatment: A comparison 
of behaviorally-HIV-infected youth and adults in the HIV Research Network. 
Journal of 
Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes 58(1):100-107.Aidala, A. A., G. Lee, D. M. Abramson, P. Messeri, and A. Siegler. 2007. Housing need, 
housing assistance, and connection to HIV medical care. AIDS and Behavior 11(6 
Suppl):101-115.Amico, K. R. 2011. Standard of care for antiretroviral therapy adherence and retention in 
care from the perspective of care providers attending the 5th International Conference 
on HIV Treatment Adherence. 
Journal of the International Association of Physicians in 
AIDS Care
 10(5):291-296.Andersen, M., E. Hockman, G. Smereck, J. Tinsley, D. Milfort, R. Wilcox, T. Smith, C. 
Connelly, L. Adams, and R. Thomas. 2007. Retaining women in HIV medical care. 
Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care
 18(3):33-41.Anderson, S. A. 1990. Core indicators of nutritional state for dif˜cult to sample populations. 
Journal of Nutrition 120:1557S-1600S.Anema, A., N. Vogenthaler, E. A. Frongillo, S. Kadiyala, and S. D. Weiser. 2009. Food inse
-curity and HIV/AIDS: Current knowledge, gaps, and research priorities. Current HIV/AIDS Reports
 6(4):224-231.Arcury, T. A., J. S. Preisser, W. M. Gesler, and J. M. Powers. 2005. Access to transportation 
and health care utilization in a rural region. 
Journal of Rural Health 21(1):31-38.Ashman, J. J., R. Conviser, and M. B. Pounds. 2002. Associations between HIV-positive indi
-viduals™ receipt of ancillary services and medical care receipt and retention. AIDS Care 14(Suppl 1):S109-S118.Aziz, M., and K. Y. Smith. 2011. Challenges and successes in linking HIV-infected women to 
care in the United States. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 52(Suppl 2):S231-S237.
Babor, T. F., B. G. McRee, P. A. Kassebaum, P. L. Grimaldi, K. Ahmed, and J. Bray. 2007. 
Screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment (SBIRT): Toward a public health 
approach to the management of substance abuse. 
Substance Abuse 28(3):7-30.Baicker, K., A. Chandra, J. S. Skinner, and J. E. Wennberg. 2004. Who you are and where 
you live: How race and geography affect the treatment of Medicare bene˜ciaries. Health 
Affairs (Suppl Variation, October):VAR33-44, doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.var.33.
Baldwin, L., S. H. Taplin, H. Friedman, and R. Moe. 2004. Access to multidisciplinary cancer 
care: Is it linked to the use of breast-conserving surgery with radiation for early-stage 
breast carcinoma? American Cancer Society 100(4):701-709.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 93Bisson, G., R. Gross, V. Miller, I. Weller, A. Walker, on behalf of the Writing Group. 2003. 
Monitoring of long-term toxicities of HIV treatments: An international perspective. AIDS 17(17):2407-2417.Bogart, L. M., G. Wagner, F. H. Galvan, and D. Banks. 2010. Conspiracy beliefs about HIV 
are related to antiretroviral treatment nonadherence among African American men with 
HIV.
 Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes
 53(5):648-655.Bozzette, S. A., B. Phillips, S. Asch, A. L. Gifford, L. Lenert, T. Menke, E. Ortiz, D. Owens, 
and L. Deyton. 2000. Quality Enhancement Research Initiative for human immunode-˜ciency virus/acquired immunode˜ciency syndrome: Framework and plan. HIV-QUERI 
executive committee. Medical Care
 38(6 Suppl 1):I60-I69.
Branson, B. M., H. H. Hands˜eld, M. A. Lampe, R. S. Janssen, A. W. Taylor, S. B. Lyss, and 
J. E. Clark. 2006. Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, 
and pregnant women in health-care settings. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 55(RR14):1-17.Brantley, R. K., K. R. Williams, T. M. Silva, M. Sistrom, N. M. Thielman, H. Ward, A. A. 
Lima, and R. L. Guerrant. 2003. AIDS-associated diarrhea and wasting in northeast 
Brazil is associated with subtherapeutic plasma levels of antiretroviral medications and 
with both bovine and human subtypes of 
Cryptosporidium parvum
. Brazilian Journal 
Infectious Diseases 7(1):16-22.Brion, J. M., C. D. Rose, P. K. Nicholas, R. Sloane, I. B. Corless, T. G. Lindgren, D. J. 
Wantland, J. K. Kemppainen, E. F. Sefcik, K. M. Nokes, K. M. Kirksey, L. Eller, M. J. 
Hamilton, W. L. Holzemer, C. J. Portillo, M. R. Mendez, L. M. Robinson, S. Moezzi, M. 
Rosa, S. Human, M. Maryland, J. Arudo, A. V. Ros, T. P. Nicholas, Y. Cuca, E. Huang, 
C. Bain, L. Tyer-Viola, S. M. Zang, M. Shannon, A. Peters-Lewis, and S. Willard. 2011. 
Unhealthy substance-use behaviors as symptom-related self-care in persons with HIV/AIDS. Nursing & Health Sciences 13(1):16-26.Burks, D. J., R. Robbins, and J. P. Durtschi. 2011. American Indian gay, bisexual and two-
spirit men: A rapid assessment of HIV/AIDS risk factors, barriers to prevention and 
culturally-sensitive intervention. Culture, Health & Sexuality
 13(3):283-298.Bushen, O. Y., J. A. Davenport, A. B. Lima, S. C. Piscitelli, A. J. Uzgiris, T. M. Silva, R. 
Leite, M. Kosek, R. A. Dillingham, A. Girao, A. A. Lima, and R. L. Guerrant. 2004. 
Diarrhea and reduced levels of antiretroviral drugs: Improvement with glutamine or 
alanyl-glutamine in a randomized controlled trial in northeast Brazil. 
Clinical Infectious 
Diseases 38(12):1764-1770.Campa, A., Z. Yang, S. Lai, L. Xue, J. C. Phillips, S. Sales, J. B. Page, and M. K. Baum. 2005. 
HIV-related wasting in HIV-infected drug users in the era of highly active antiretroviral 
therapy. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 41(8):1179-1185.Campsmith, M. L., P. H. Rhodes, H. I. Hall, and T. A. Green. 2010. Undiagnosed HIV preva
-lence among adults and adolescents in the United States at the end of 2006. Journal of 
Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes 53(5):619-624. 
Candiani, T. M., J. Pinto, C. A. Cardoso, I. R. Carvalho, A. C. Dias, M. Carneiro, and E. A. 
Goulart. 2007. Impact of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) on the incidence 
of opportunistic infections, hospitalizations and mortality among children and adoles-cents living with HIV/AIDS in Belo Horizonte, Minas Gerais State, Brazil. Cadernos de 
Saude Publica
 23(Suppl 3):S414-S423.
Carrico, A. W. 2011. Substance use and HIV disease progression in the HAART era: Implica
-tions for the primary prevention of HIV. 
Life Sciences
 88(21-22):940-947.Castilla, J., P. Sobrino, L. De La Fuente, I. Noguer, L. Guerra, and F. Parras. 2002. Late di
-agnosis of HIV infection in the era of highly active antiretroviral therapy: Consequences 
for AIDS incidence. AIDS 16(14):1945-1951.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2006. Achievements in public health: Re-duction in perinatal transmission of HIV infectionŠUnited States, 1985-2005. Morbidity 
and Mortality Weekly Report
 55(21):592-597.CDC. 2007. Goals and objectives of the CDC HIV Prevention Strategic Plan: Extended 
through 2010. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/resources/reports/psp/pdf/psp.pdf (accessed De
-cember 19, 2011).
CDC. 2009. Late HIV testingŠ34 states, 1996. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 58(24):661-665.CDC. 2010a. 
HIV Infection Reporting
. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/reporting.
htm (accessed January 6, 2012).
CDC. 2010b. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2010. 
Morbidity and Mortal
-ity Weekly Report
 59(RR12):1-110.CDC. 2011a. 
HIV in the United States
. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/resources/factsheets/PDF/
us.pdf (accessed December 20, 2011).
CDC. 2011b. HIV surveillanceŠUnited States, 1981-2008. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report 60(21):689-729.CDC. 2011c. Vital signs: HIV prevention through care and treatmentŠUnited States. 
Morbid-ity and Mortality Weekly Report
 60(47):1618-1623.CDC. 2012. Diagnoses of HIV infection and AIDS in the United States and dependent ar
-eas, 2010. HIV Surveillance Report. Volume 22. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/
resources/reports/2010report/index.htm (accessed March 21, 2012).
CHAIN (Community Health Advisory & Information Network) Fact Sheet. 2004. Factors 
Associated with Delayed Care Seeking among HIV-Infected Individuals in New York 
City. http://www.nyhiv.com/pdfs/Delayed%20Entry%20Fact%20Sheet_v7.pdf (accessed 
December 15, 2011).Chapple, I. L. C., and J. Hamburger. 2000. The signi˜cance of oral health in HIV disease. 
Sexually Transmitted Infections
 76(4):236-243.Charlebois, E. D., M. Das, T. C. Porco, and D. V. Havlir. 2011. The effect of expanded anti
-retroviral treatment strategies on the HIV epidemic among men who have sex with men 
in San Francisco. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 52(8):1046-1049.Cheever, L. W. 2007. Engaging HIV-infected patients in care: Their lives depend on it. 
Clinical 
Infectious Diseases 44(11):1500-1502.Chen, N., E. Erbelding, H. C. Yeh, and K. Page. 2010. Predictors of HIV testing among 
Latinos in Baltimore City. 
Journal of Immigrant and Minority Health 12(6):867-874.Chin, J. J., M. Botsko, E. Behar, and R. Finkelstein. 2009. More than ancillary: HIV social 
services, intermediate outcomes and quality of life. 
AIDS Care
 21(10):1289-1297.Chipimo, P., M. Tuba, and K. Fylkesnes. 2011. Conceptual models for mental distress among 
HIV-infected and uninfected individuals: A contribution to clinical practice and research 
in primary-health-care centers in Zambia. BMC Health Services Research 11(January):7 
(12 pages).Clements-Nolle, K., R. Marx, M. Pendo, E. Loughran, M. Estes, and M. Katz. 2008. Highly 
active antiretroviral therapy use and HIV transmission risk behaviors among individuals 
who are HIV infected and were recently released from jail. American Journal of Public 
Health 98(4):661-666.Cohen, M. S., Y. Q. Chen, M. McCauley, T. Gamble, M. C. Hosseinipour, N. Kumarasamy, 
J. G. Hakim, J. Kumwenda, B. Grinsztein, J. H. S. Pilotto, S. V. Godbole, S. Mehendale, 
S. Charjvalertsak, B. R. Santos, K. H. Mayer, I. F. Hoffman, S. H. Eshelman, E. Piwowar-
Manning, L. Wang, J. Makhema, L. A. Mills, G. de Bruyn, I. Sanne, J. Eron, J. Gallant, 
D. Havlir, S. Swindells, H. Ribaudo, V. Elharrar, D. Burns, T. E. Taha, K. Nielsen-Saines, 
D. Celentano, M. Essex, and T. R. Fleming. 2011. Prevention of HIV-1 infection with 
early antiretroviral therapy. 
New England Journal of Medicine
 365:493-505.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 95Cohn, S.E., M. L. Berk, S. H. Berry, N. Duan, M. R. Frankel, J. D. Klein, M. M. McKinney, 
A. Rastegar, S. Smith, M. F. Shapiro, and S. A. Bozzette. 2001. The care of HIV-infected 
adults in rural areas of the United States. Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syn-dromes 28(4):385-392.Cole, S. W. 2008. Psychosocial in˚uences on HIV-1 disease progression: Neural, endocrine, 
and virologic mechanisms. Psychosomatic Medicine 70(5):562-568.Conover, C. J., and K. Whetten-Goldstein. 2002. The impact of ancillary services on primary 
care use and outcomes for HIV/AIDS patients with public insurance coverage. AIDS 
Care 14(Suppl 1):S59-S71.
Conviser, R. 2007. Catalyzing system changes to make HIV care more accessible. 
Journal of 
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved
 18(3 Suppl):224-243.
Conviser, R., and M. B. Pounds. 2002a. Background for the studies on ancillary services and 
primary care use. AIDS Care
 14(Suppl 1):S7-S14.
Conviser, R., and M. B. Pounds. 2002b. The role of ancillary services in client-centred systems 
of care. AIDS Care
 14(Suppl 1):S119-S131.
Cook, J. A., J. K. Burke-Miller, M. H. Cohen, R. L. Cook, D. Vlahov, T. E. Wilson, E. T. 
Golub, R. M. Schwartz, A. A. Howard, C. Ponath, M. W. Plankey, A. M. Levine, and 
D. D. Grey. 2008. Crack cocaine, disease progression, and mortality in a multicenter 
cohort of HIV-1 positive women. 
AIDS 22(11):1355-1363.Cooper-Patrick, L., J. J. Gallo, J. J. Gonzales, H. T. Vu, N. R. Powe, C. Nelson, and D. E. 
Ford. 1999. Race, gender, and partnership in the patient-physician relationship. 
Journal 
of the American Medical Association
 282(6):583-589.Cooperman, N. A., M. Heo, K. M. Berg, X. Li, A. H. Litwin, S. Nahvib, and J. H. Arnsten. 
2012. Impact of adherence counseling dose on antiretroviral adherence and HIV viral 
load among HIV-infected methadone maintained drug users. 
AIDS Care:1-8. DOI:10.1080/09540121.2011.644231.Coulter, I. D., K. C. Heslin, M. Marcus, R. D. Hays, J. Freed, C. Der-Martirosian, N. Guzmán-
Becerra, W. E. Cunningham, R. M. Andersen, and M. F. Shapiro. 2002. Associations of 
self-reported oral health with physical and mental health in a nationally representative 
sample of HIV persons receiving medical care. 
Quality of Life Research
 11(1):57-70.Crepaz, N., and G. Marks. 2002. Towards an understanding of sexual risk behavior in 
people living with HIV: A review of social, psychological, and medical ˜ndings. 
AIDS 16(2):135-139.Crepaz, N., C. M. Lyles, R. J. Wolitski, W. F. Passin, S. M. Rama, J. H. Herbst, D. W. Purcell, 
R. M. Malow, and R. Stall, for the HIV/AIDS Prevention Research Synthesis (PRS) Team. 
2006. Do prevention interventions reduce HIV risk behaviours among people living with 
HIV? A meta-analytic review of controlled trials. 
AIDS 20(2):143-157.Cunningham, W. E., R. M. Andersen, M. H. Katz, M. D. Stein, B. J. Turner, S. Crystal, S. 
Zierler, K. Kuromiya, S. C. Morton, P. St. Clair, S. A. Bozzette, and M. F. Shapiro. 1999. 
The impact of competing subsistence needs and barriers on access to medical care for 
persons with human immunode˜ciency virus receiving care in the United States. Medical 
Care 37(12):1270-1281.Das, M. 2011. Intensifying HIV Prevention in the Communities Where HIV Is Most Heavily 
Concentrated. PowerPoint presentation at the 2011 National HIV Prevention Confer-ence, Atlanta, GA, August 15.
de Bruin, M., W. Viechtbauer, H. P. Schaalma, G. Kok, C. Abraham, and H. J. Hospers. 2010. 
Standard care impact on effects of highly active antiretroviral therapy adherence inter-ventions: A meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Archives of Internal Medicine 170(3):240-250.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Denning, P., and E. DiNenno. 2010. 
Communities in Crisis: Is There a Generalized HIV Epi-demic in Impoverished Urban Areas in the United States?
 Abstract WEPDD101 XVIII 
International AIDS Conference, Vienna, Austria, July 18-23. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/
topics/surveillance/resources/other/pdf/poverty_poster.pdf (accessed January 9, 2012).
Dennis, A. M., S. Napravnik, A. C. Sena, and J. J. Eron. 2011. Late entry to HIV care among 
Latinos compared with non-Latinos in a southeastern U.S. cohort. Clinical Infectious 
Diseases 53(5):480-487.Dillingham, R., P. Leger, C. A. Beauharnais, E. Miller, A. Kashuba, S. Jennings, K. Dupnik, 
A. Samie, E. Eyma, R. Guerrant, J. Pape, and D. Fitzgerald. 2011. AIDS diarrhea and 
antiretroviral drug concentrations: A matched-pair cohort study in Port au Prince, Haiti. 
American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
 84(6):878-882.Doescher, M. P., B. G. Saver, K. Fiscella, and P. Franks. 2001. Racial/ethnic inequities in 
continuity and site of care: Location, location, location. Health Services Research 36(6 
Pt 2):78-89.Drug Strategies. 2000. Smart Steps: Treating Baltimore™s Drug Problem
. http://www.drugstrat
-egies.com/pdf/baltimore.pdf (accessed May 17, 2012).
Enriquez, M., R. Farnan, A. L. Cheng, A. Almeida, D. Del Valle, M. Pulido-Parra, and G. 
Flores. 2008. Impact of a bilingual/bicultural care team on HIV-related health outcomes. 
Journal of the Association of Nurses in AIDS Care 19(4):295-301.ERS (Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture). 2009. Food Security in 
the United States: Measuring Household Food Security
. http://www.ers.usda.gov/Brie˜ng/
FoodSecurity/measurement.htm (accessed August 3, 2011).
ERS. 2011. Food Security in the United States: De˜nitions of Hunger and Food Security. http://www.ers.usda.gov/Brie˜ng/FoodSecurity/labels.htm (accessed August 3, 2009).
Espinoza, L., H. I. Hall, R. M. Selik, and X. Hu. 2008. Characteristics of HIV infection 
among Hispanics, United States, 2003-2006. Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency 
Syndromes 49(1):94-101.Ettenhofer, M. L., C. H. Hinkin, S. A. Castellon, R. Durvasula, J. Ullman, M. Lam, H. Myers, 
M. J. Wright, and J. Foley. 2009. Aging, neurocognition, and medication adherence in 
HIV infection. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry 17(4):281-290.Ferver, K., B. Burton, and P. Jesilow. 2009. The use of claims data in healthcare research. 
Open 
Public Health Journal 2:11-24.Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. J. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. Allen, 
K. Baicker, and the Oregon Health Study Group. 2011. 
The Oregon Health Insurance 
Experiment: Evidence from the First Year
. National Bureau of Economic Research, 
Working paper 17190. Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w17190 (accessed 
January 6, 2012).Friedmann, P. D., S. C. Lemon, M. D. Stein, and T. A. D™Aunno. 2003. Accessibility of addic
-tion treatment: Results from a national survey of outpatient substance abuse treatment 
organizations. Health Services Research 38(3):887-903.Gardner, E. M., M. P. McLees, J. F. Steiner, C. Del Rio, and W. J. Burman. 2011. The spectrum 
of engagement in HIV care and its relevance to test-and-treat strategies for prevention of 
HIV infection. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 52(6):793-800.Gardner, L. I, L. R. Metsch, P. Anderson-Mahoney, A. M. Loughlin, C. del Rio, S. Strathdee, 
S. L. Sansom, H. A. Siegal, A. E. Greenberg, S. D. Holmberg, and the Antiretroviral 
Treatment Access Study (ARTAS) Study Group. 2005. Ef˜cacy of a brief case man
-agement intervention to link recently diagnosed HIV-infected persons to care. 
AIDS 19(4):423-431.Garland, J. M., A. S. Andrade, and K. R. Page. 2010. Unique aspects of the care of HIV-positive 
Latino patients living in the United States. 
Current HIV/AIDS Reports
 7(3):107-116.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 97Gavrilin, M. A., L. E. Mathes, and M. Podell. 2002. Methamphetamine enhances cell-
associated feline immunode˜ciency virus replication in astrocytes. Journal of Neurovirol-ogy 8(3):240-249.Gaynes, B. N., A. J. Rush, M. H. Trivedi, S. R. Wisniewski, G. K. Balasubramani, D. C. 
Spencer, T. Petersen, M. Klinkman, D. Warden, L. Nicholas, and M. Fava. 2007. Major 
depression symptoms in primary care and psychiatric care settings: A cross-sectional 
analysis. Annals of Family Medicine 5(2):126-134.Gebo, K. A., J. A. Fleishman, R. Conviser, E. D. Reilly, P. T. Korthuis, R. D. Moore, J. 
Hellinger, P. Keiser, H. R. Rubin, L. Crane, F. J. Hellinger, and W. C. Mathews. 2005. 
Racial and gender disparities in receipt of highly active antiretroviral therapy persist in 
a multistate sample of HIV patients in 2001. 
Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency 
Syndromes 38(1):96-103.Ghose, T., D. T. Swendeman, and S. M. George. 2011. The role of brothels in reducing HIV 
risk in Sonagachi, India. Qualitative Health Research
 21(5):587-600.Gibert, C. L., J. C. Shlay, S. Sharma, G. Bartsch, G. Peng, and C. Grunfeld, for the Terry Beirn 
Community Programs for Clinical Research on AIDS and the International Network for 
Strategic Initiatives in Global HIV Trials. 2009. Racial differences in changes of meta
-bolic parameters and body composition in antiretroviral therapy-naive persons initiating 
antiretroviral therapy. 
Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes
 50(1):44-53.Giordano, T. P., A. L. Gifford, A. C. White, Jr., M. E. Suarez-Almazor, L. Rabeneck, C. 
Hartman, L. I. Backus, L. A. Mole, and R. O. Morgan. 2007. Retention in care: A chal
-lenge to survival with HIV infection. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 44(11):1493-1499.Glover, D. A., E. F. Garcia-Aracena, P. Lester, E. Rice, and M. J. Rothram-Borus. 2010. Stress 
biomarkers as outcomes for HIV+ prevention: Participation, feasibility and ˜ndings 
among HIV+ Latina and African American mothers. AIDS and Behavior 14(2):339-350.Golin, C. E., H. Liu, R. D. Hays, L. G. Miller, C. K. Beck, J. Ickovics, A. H. Kaplan, and N. S. 
Wenger. 2002. A prospective study of predictors of adherence to combination antiretro
-viral medication. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine
 17(10):756-765.Goulet, J. L., S. L. Fultz, D. Rimland, A. Butt, C. Gibert, M. Rodriguez-Barradas, K. Bryant, 
and A. C. Justice. 2007. Aging and infectious diseases: Do patterns of comorbidity vary 
by HIV status, age, and HIV severity? 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 45(12):1593-1601.Halkitis, P., J. Palamar, and P. Mukherjee. 2008. Analysis of HIV medication adherence in 
relation to person and treatment characteristics using hierarchical linear modeling. AIDS 
Patient Care and STDs 22(4):323-335.Halkitis, P. N., S. A. Kupprat, and P. P. Mukherjee. 2010. Longitudinal associations between 
case management and supportive services use among black and Latina HIV-positive 
women in New York City. 
Journal of Women™s Health
 9(1):99-108.Hall, H. I., R. Song, P. Rhodes, J. Prejean, Q. An, L. M. Lee, J. Karon, R. Brookmeyer, E. H. 
Kaplan, M. T. McKenna, and R. S. Janssen. 2008. Estimation of HIV incidence in the 
United States. Journal of the American Medical Association 300(5):520-529.Heckman, T. G., A. M. Somlai, J. Peters, J. Walker, L. Otto-Salaj, C. A. Galdabini, and J. A. 
Kelly. 1998. Barriers to care among persons living with HIV/AIDS in urban and rural 
areas. AIDS Care
 10(3):365-375.Henderson, K. C., J. Hindman, S. C. Johnson, R. J. Valuck, and J. J. Kiser. 2011. Assessing 
the effectiveness of pharmacy-based adherence interventions on antiretroviral adherence 
in persons with HIV. 
AIDS Patient Care and STDs
 25(4):221-228.Hendricks, K., and S. Gorbach. 2009. Nutrition issues in chronic drug users living with HIV 
infection. NIDA Addiction Science and Clinical Practice
 5(1):16-23.HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). 2009. Recommended Immuniza-tions for HIV Positive Adults. http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/content˜les/Recommended_
 Immunizations_FS_en.pdf (accessed January 6, 2012).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HHS. 2010. Healthy People 2020 Summary of Objectives. http://www.healthypeople.
gov/2020/topicsobjectives2020/pdfs/HIV.pdf (accessed December 20, 2011).
HHS. 2011a. About Healthy People. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/about/default.aspx 
(accessed December 19, 2011).
HHS. 2011b. Health-Related Quality of Life and Well-Being
. http://www.healthypeople.
gov/2020/about/QoLWBabout.aspx (accessed December 7, 2011).
HHS. 2011c. 
Improving Data Collection for the LGBT Community.
 http://www.healthcare.
gov/news/factsheets/2011/06/lgbt06292011a.html (accessed December 6, 2011).
HHS. 2011d. Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for 
the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents.
 October 14. 
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/AdultandAdolescentGL002534.pdf (accessed Janu-ary 6, 2012).HHS. 2011e. Panel on Antiretroviral Therapy and Medical Management of HIV-Infected 
Children. Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in Pediatric HIV Infection. National Institutes of Health. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/content˜les/PediatricGuidelines.pdf 
(accessed January 6, 2012).
HHS. 2011f. Panel on Treatment of HIV-Infected Pregnant Women and Prevention of Peri
-natal Transmission.
 Recommendations for Use of Antiretroviral Drugs in Pregnant 
HIV-1-Infected Women for Maternal Health and Interventions to Reduce Perinatal HIV 
Transmission in the United States
. http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ContentFiles/PerinatalGL.pdf 
(accessed January 6, 2012).
HHS. 2011g. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Implementation Guidance on 
Data Collection Standards for Race, Ethnicity, Sex, Primary Language, and Disability 
Status. http://aspe.hhs.gov/datacncl/standards/ACA/4302/index.pdf (accessed December 
6, 2011).
HHS. 2012. Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents. Guidelines for 
the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents
. March 27. 
http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/content˜les/lvguidelines/adultandadolescentgl.pdf (accessed May 
18, 2012).Hinkin, C. H., S. A. Castellon, R. S. Durvasula, D. J. Hardy, M. N. Lam, K. I. Mason, D. 
Thrasher, M. B. Goetz, and M. Stefaniak. 2002. Medication adherence among HIV+ 
adults: Effects of cognitive dysfunction and regimen complexity. 
Neurology 59(12): 
1944-1950.Horberg, M. A., M. J. Silverberg, L. B. Hurley, W. J. Towner, D. B. Klein, S. Bersoff-
Matcha, W. G. Weinberg, D. Antoniskis, M. Mogyoros, W. T. Dodge, R. Dobrinich, 
C. P. Quesenberry, and D. A. Kovach. 2008. Effects of depression and selective sero
-tonin reuptake inhibitor use on adherence to highly active antiretroviral therapy and on 
clinical outcomes in HIV-infected populations. 
Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency 
Syndromes 47(3):384-390.Horberg, M. A., J. A. Aberg, L. W. Cheever, P. Renner, E. O™Brien Kaleba, and S. M. Asch. 
2010. Development of national and multiagency HIV care quality measures. Clinical 
Infectious Diseases 51(6):732-738.Horberg, M., L. Hurley, W. Towner, R. Gambatese, D. Klein, D. Antoniskis, W. Weinberg, P. 
Kadlecik, C. Remmers, R. Dobrinich, C. Quesenberry, M. Silverberg, and M. Johnson. 
2011. HIV quality performance measures in a large integrated health care system. AIDS 
Patient Care and STDs 25(1):21-28.HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2009. New Strategies for Rural Care. 
HRSA Care Action (April). http://hab.hrsa.gov/newspublications/careactionnewsletter/april2009.pdf (accessed December 20, 2011).HRSA. 2011a. HAB HIV Performance Measures. http://hab.hrsa.gov/deliverhivaidscare/habperformmeasures.html (accessed December 6, 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 99HRSA. 2011b. HIVQUAL Continuous Quality Program. http://hab.hrsa.gov/deliverhivaids care/hivqual.html (accessed December 6, 2011).
HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). 2010. Homeless Management 
Information System (HMIS) Data Standards, Revised Notice. Of˜ce of Community 
Planning and Development, March. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/FinalHMISData
 Standards_March2010.pdf (accessed December 9, 2011).Humeniuk, R., V. Dennington, and R. Ali. 2008. 
World Health Organization ASSIST Phase III 
Study Group. The Effectiveness of a Brief Intervention for Ilicit Drugs Linked to the Al-cohol, Smoking, and Substance Involvement Screening Test (ASSIST) in Primary Health 
Care Settings: A Technical Report of Phase III Findings of the WHO Assist Randomized 
Control Trial
. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2004. Measuring What Matters: Allocation, Planning, and Qual-ity Assessment for the Ryan White Care Act
. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.IOM. 2009. Race, Ethnicity, and Language Data: Standardization for Health Care Quality 
Improvement. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2010. 
HIV Screening and Access to Care: Exploring Barriers and Facilitators to Ex
-panded HIV Testing
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2011a. 
The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building a 
Foundation for Better Understanding. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2011b. HIV Screening and Access to Care: Exploring the Impact of Policies on Access 
to and Provision of HIV Care
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2011c. HIV Screening and Access to Care: Health Care System Capacity for Increased 
HIV Testing and Provision of Care
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
IOM. 2011d. Leading Health Indicators for Healthy People 2020. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press.
Johnson, R. L., D. Roter, N. R. Powe, and L. A. Cooper. 2004a. Patient race/ethnicity and 
quality of patient-physician communication during medical visits. American Journal of 
Public Health 94(12):2084-2090.Johnson, R. L., S. Saha, J. J. Arbelaez, M. C. Beach, and L. A. Cooper. 2004b. Racial and 
ethnic differences in patient perceptions of bias and cultural competence in health care. 
Journal of General Internal Medicine
 19(2):101-110.Jollis, J. G., M. Ancukiewicz, E. R. DeLong, D. B. Pryor, L. H. Muhlbaier, and D. B. 
Mark. 1993. Discordance of databases designed for claims payment versus clinical 
information systems. Implications for outcomes research. Annals of Internal Medicine 119(8):844-850.Justice, A. C. 2006. Prioritizing primary care in HIV: Comorbidity, toxicity, and demography. 
Topics in HIV Medicine
 14(5):159-163.Justice, A. C., K. A. McGinnis, J. H. Atkinson, R. K. Heaton, C. Young, J. Sadek, T. 
Madenwald, J. T. Becker, J. Conigliaro, S. T. Brown, D. Rimland, S. Crystal, and M. 
Simberkoff. 2004. Psychiatric and neurocognitive disorders among HIV-positive and neg
-ative veterans in care: Veterans aging cohort ˜ve-site study. 
AIDS 18(Suppl 1):S49-S59.
Kalichman, S. 2000. HIV transmission risk behaviors of men and women living with HIV-
AIDS: Prevalence, predictors, and emerging clinical interventions. Clinical Psychology: 
Science and Practice
 7(1):32-47.Kalichman, S. C., C. Cherry, C. Amaral, D. White, M. O. Kalichman, H. Pope, C. Swetsze, M. 
Jones, and R. Macy. 2010. Health and treatment implications of food insuf˜ciency among 
people living with HIV/AIDS, Atlanta, Georgia. Journal of Urban Health 87(4):631-641.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Kamb, M. L., M. Fishbein, J. M. Douglas, Jr., F. Rhodes, J. Rogers, G. Bolan, J. Zenilman, 
T. Hoxworth, C. K. Malotte, M. Iatesta, C. Kent, A. Lentz, S. Graziano, R. H. Byers, 
and T. A. Peterman, for the Project RESPECT Study Group. 1998. Ef˜cacy of risk-
reduction counseling to prevent human immunode˜ciency virus and sexually transmitted 
diseases: A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of the American Medical Association
 280(13):1161-1167.Kaplan, J. E., D. Hanson, M. S. Dworkin, T. Frederick, J. Bertolli, M. L. Lindegren, S. 
Holmberg, and J. L. Jones. 2000. Epidemiology of human immunode˜ciency virus-associated opportunistic infections in the United States in the era of highly active anti-retroviral therapy. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 30(Suppl 1):S5-S14.
Kaplan, J. E., C. Benson, K. H. Holmes, J. T. Brooks, A. Pau, and H. Masur. 2009. Guide
-lines for prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections in HIV-infected adults and 
adolescents: Recommendations from CDC, the National Institutes of Health, and the 
HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 
Morbidity and 
Mortality Weekly Report 
58(RR-4):1-207.Kass-Bartelmes, B. L. 2002. 
AHRQ Tools and Resources for Better Health Care
. Agency 
for Healthcare Research Quality. http://www.ahrq.gov/qual/tools/toolsria.htm (accessed 
January 6, 2012).Kates, J. 2011. Medicaid and HIV: A National Analysis.
 Washington, DC: Henry J. Kaiser 
Family Foundation. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/8218.pdf (accessed January 11, 
2012).Kempf, M. C., J. McLeod, A. K. Boehme, M. W. Walcott, L. Wright, P. Seal, W. E. Norton, 
J. E. Schumacher, M. Mugavero, and L. Moneyham. 2010.
 A qualitative study of the 
barriers and facilitators to retention-in-care among HIV-positive women in the rural 
southeastern United States: Implications for targeted interventions. AIDS Patient Care 
STDS 24(8):515-20.Kenagy, G. P., N. L. Linsk, D. Bruce, R. Warnecke, A. Gordon, F. Wagaw, and A. Densham. 
2003. Service utilization, service barriers, and gender among HIV-positive consumers in 
primary care. AIDS Patient Care and STDs
 17(5):235-244.Kidder, D. P., R. J. Wolitski, S. Royal, A. Aidala, C. Courtenay-Quirk, D. R. Holtgrave, D. 
Harre, E. Sumartojo, and R. Stall. 2007. Access to housing as a structural intervention 
for homeless and unstably housed people living with HIV: Rationale, methods, and imple
-mentation of the housing and health study. 
AIDS and Behavior
 11(6 Suppl):149-161.
Kitahata, M. 1996. Physicians™ experience and survival in patients with AIDS. New England 
Journal of Medicine 335(5):349-351.Kitahata, M. M., S. E. Van Rompaey, and A. W. Shields. 2000. Physician experience in the care 
of HIV-infected persons is associated with earlier adoption of new antiretroviral therapy. 
Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes
 24(2):106-114.Kitahata, M. M., S. E. Van Rompaey, P. W. Dillingham, T. D. Koepsell, R. A. Deyo, W. Dodge, 
and E. H. Wagner. 2003. Primary care delivery is associated with greater physician ex
-perience and improved survival among persons with AIDS. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine 18(2):95-103.Knowlton, A., J. Arnsten, L. Eldred, J. Wilkinson, M. Gourevitch, S. Shade, K. Dowling, and 
D. Purcell. 2006. Individual, interpersonal, and structural correlates of effective HAART 
use among urban active injection drug users. Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency 
Syndromes 41(4):486-492.Kopnisky, K. L., D. M. Stoff, and D. M. Rausch. 2004. Workshop report: The effects of psy
-chological variables on the progression of HIV-1 disease. 
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity
 18(3):246-261.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 101
Korthuis, P. T., S. Saha, J. A. Fleishman, M. M. McGrath, J. S. Josephs, R. D. Moore, K. A. 
Gebo, J. Hellinger, and M. C. Beach. 2008. Impact of patient race on patient experi
-ences of access and communication in HIV care. Journal of General Internal Medicine 23(12):2046-2052.Kowal, J., J. R. Swenson, T. D. Aubry, H. D. Marchand, and C. Macphee. 2011. Improving 
access to acute mental health services in a general hospital. Journal of Mental Health 20(1):5-14.Krawczyk, C. S., E. Funkhouser, J. M. Kilby, and S. H. Vermund. 2006a. Delayed access to 
HIV diagnosis and care: Special concerns for the southern United States. AIDS Care 18(Suppl 1):S35-S44.Krawczyk, C. S., E. Funkhouser, J. M. Kilby, R. A. Kaslow, A. K. Bey, and S. H. Vermund. 
2006b. Factors associated with delayed initiation of HIV medical care among infected 
persons attending a southern HIV/AIDS clinic. 
Southern Medical Journal
 99(5):472-481.
Krieger, N. 1992. Overcoming the absence of socioeconomic data in medical records: Valida
-tion and application of a census-based methodology. 
American Journal of Public Health 82(5):703-710.Kumar, V., and W. Encinosa. 2010. Effects of HIV medication complexity and depression 
on adherence to HIV medication. The Patient: Patient-Centered Outcomes Research 3(1):59-69.Kumar, M., A. M. Kumar, D. Waldrop, M. H. Antoni, and C. Eisdorfer. 2003. HIV-1 infection 
and its impact on the HPA axis, cytokines, and cognition. 
Stress 6(3):167-172.Landon, B. E., I. B. Wilson, K. McInnes, M. B. Landrum, L. R. Hirschhorn, P. V. Marsden, 
and P. D. Cleary. 2005. Physician specialization and the quality of care for human im
-munode˜ciency virus infection. Archives of Internal Medicine
 165(10):1133-1139.Langford, D., A. Adame, A. Grigorian, I. Grant, J. A. McCutchan, R. J. Ellis, T. D. Marcotte, 
and E. Masliah. 2003. Patterns of selective neuronal damage in methamphetamine-user 
AIDS patients. 
Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes
 34(5):467-474.Lansky, A., A. Drake, and H. T. Pham. 2009. HIV-associated behaviors among injecting-drug 
usersŠ23 cities, United States, May 2005-February 2006. Morbidity and Mortality 
Weekly Report
 58(13):329-332. (Reprinted in 
JAMA 302[4]:376-377.)Lawn, S. D., S. T. Butera, and T. M. Folks. 2001. Contribution of immune activation to the 
pathogenesis and transmission of human immunode˜ciency virus type 1 infection. Clini-cal Microbiology Reviews 14(4):753-777.Leaver, C. A., G. Bargh, J. R. Dunn, and S. W. Hwang. 2007. The effects of housing status on 
health-related outcomes in people living with HIV: A systematic review of the literature. 
AIDS and Behavior
 11(6 Suppl):85-100.
Ledergerber, B., M. Egger, M. Opravil, A. Telenti, B. Hirschel, M. Battegay, P. Vernazza, P. 
Sudre, M. Flepp, H. Furrer, P. Francioli, and R. Weber. 1999. Clinical progression and 
virological failure on highly active antiretroviral therapy in HIV-1 patients: A prospective 
cohort study. Swiss HIV Cohort Study. 
Lancet 353(9156):863-868.LeGrand, A., Y. Yomb, M. Bourrelly, N. Lorente, and A. NKom. 2010. MSM law in franco
-phone Africa and the ˜ght against AIDS: The hypocrisy of certain countries. HIV/AIDS 
Policy and Law Review 14(3):13-17.Lieb, S., R. G. Brooks, R. S. Hopkins, D. Thompson, L. K. Crockett, T. Liberti, A. A. Jani, J. P. 
Nadler, V. M. Virkud, K. C. West, and G. McLaughlin. 2002. Predicting death from HIV/
AIDS: A case-control study from Florida public HIV/AIDS clinics. Journal of Acquired 
Immune De˜ciency Syndromes 30(3):351-358.Littenberg, B., K. Strauss, C. D. MacLean, and A. R. Troy. 2006. The use of insulin declines 
as patients live farther from their source of care: Results of a survey of adults with type 
2 diabetes. BMC Public Health 6 (July):198 (8 pages).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Litwin, A. H., I. Soloway, and M. N. Gourevitch. 2005. Integrating services for injection drug 
users infected with hepatitis C virus with methadone maintenance treatment: Challenges 
and opportunities. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 40(Suppl 5):S339-S345.
Lo, W., T. MacGovern, and J. Bradford. 2002. Association of ancillary services with primary 
care utilization and retention for patients with HIV/AIDS. AIDS Care 14(Suppl 1): 
S45-S57.Marks, G., L. I. Gardner, J. Craw, and N. Crepaz. 2010. Entry and retention in medical care 
among HIV-diagnosed persons: A meta-analysis. 
AIDS 24(17):2665-2678.Marsden, P. V., and J. D. Wright, eds. 2010. 
Handbook of Survey Research, 2nd Edition. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 
Mays, V. M., and S. D. Cochran. 2001. Mental health correlates of perceived discrimination 
among lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults in the United States. 
American Journal of Public 
Health 91(11):1869-1876.Mays, V. M., R. Maas, J. Ricks, and S. D. Cochran. 2011. HIV and African American women 
in the South: Employing a population-level HIV prevention and interventions. In Hand-book of Health Psychology, Second Edition
, edited by A. Baum, T. Revenson, and J. 
Singer. London: Psychology Press.
McMahon, J., C. Wanke, N. Terrin, S. Skinner, and T. Knox. 2011. Poverty, hunger, education, 
and residential status impact survival in HIV. 
AIDS Behavior
 15(7):1503-1511.Meditz, A. L., S. MaWhinney, A. Allshouse, W. Feser, M. Markowitz, S. Little, R. Hecht, E. S. 
Daar, A. C. Collier, J. Margolick, J. M. Kilby, J. P. Routy, B. Conway, J. Kaldor, J. Levy, 
R. Schooley, D. A. Cooper, M. Altfeld, D. Richman, and E. Connick. 2011. Sex, race, 
and geographic region in˚uence clinical outcomes following primary HIV-1 infection. 
Journal of Infectious Diseases
 203(4):442-451.Messeri, P. A., D. M. Abramson, A. A. Aidala, F. Lee, and G. Lee. 2002. The impact of ancil
-lary HIV services on engagement in medical care in New York City. 
AIDS Care 14(Suppl 
1):S15-S29.Miles, M. S., M. R. Isler, B. B. Banks, S. Sengupta, and G. Corbie-Smith. 2011. Silent endur
-ance and profound loneliness: Socioemotional suffering in African Americans living with 
HIV in the rural south. Qualitative Health Research
 21(4):489-501.Milloy, M. J., T. Kerr, R. Zhang, M. Tyndall, J. Montaner, and E. Wood. 2010. Inability to 
access addiction treatment and risk of HIV infection among injection drug users recruited from a supervised injection facility. 
Journal of Public Health 32(3):342-349.MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment). 2011. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment. http://www.mocatest.org/ (accessed December 16, 2011).
Mugavero, M. J., C. Castellano, D. Edelman, and C. Hicks. 2007. Late diagnosis of HIV infec-tion: The role of age and sex. 
American Journal of Medicine 120(4):370-373.Mugavero, M. J., H. Y. Lin, J. H. Willig, A. O. Westfall, K. B. Ulett, J. S. Routman, S. 
Abroms, J. L. Raper, M. S. Saag, and J. J. Allison. 2009. Missed visits and mortality 
among patients establishing initial outpatient HIV treatment. 
Clinical Infectious Diseases
 48(2):248-256.NAHC (National AIDS Housing Coalition). 2012. HOPWA 2013 Budget Request: NAHC 
Recommends $380 Million. http://nationalaidshousing.org/PDF/2013HOPWANeedPaper.
pdf (accessed January 9, 2012).
Napravnik, S., J. J. Eron, Jr., R. G. McKaig, A. D. Heine, P. Menezes, and E. Quinlivan. 2006. 
Factors associated with fewer visits for HIV primary care at a tertiary care center in the 
Southeastern U.S. AIDS Care
 18(Suppl 1):S45-S50.
NCHS (National Center for Health Statistics). 2012. About Health Care Surveys. http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/dhcs/about_dhcs.htm (accessed June 7, 2012).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 103
NIAAA (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism). 2005. Screening for al
-cohol and alcohol related problems. Alcohol Alert, no. 65. http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/ publications/aa65/AA65.htm (accessed January 6, 2012).NIH, NCRR (National Institutes of Health, National Center for Research Resources). 2006. 
Electronic Health Records Overview. McLean, VA: MITRE Corporation. http://www.
ncrr.nih.gov/publications/informatics/ehr.pdf (accessed January 6, 2012).
NQF (National Quality Forum). 2011a. About NQF. http://www.qualityforum.org/About_
NQF/About_NQF.aspx (accessed January 6, 2012).
NQF. 2011b. 
NQF Endorsed Standards. http://www.qualityforum.org/Measures_List.
aspx?#k=HIV&p=2&s=n&so=a (accessed January 6, 2012).
NRHA (National Rural Health Association). 2006. Rural HIV care. http://199.237.254.34/opporty/pdf/HIV_Transportation.pdf (accessed January 5, 2012).
NYC DOHMH (New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene). 2011. 
2011 Ad
-visory #27: Health Department Releases New HIV Treatment Recommendations
. http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/cd/2011/11md27.pdf
 (accessed May 15, 2012).
NYSDHAI (New York State Department of Health AIDS Institute). 2001. 
HIV and Oral 
Health: General Principles. http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinical-guidelines/hiv-and-oral-
health/general-principles/ (accessed January 6, 2012).
NYSDHAI. 2011. New York State Quality of Care Program
. http://www.hivguidelines.org/
quality-of-care/nys-hiv-quality-of-care-program/ (accessed January 6, 2012).Oh, D. L., F. Sara˜an, A. Silvestre, T. Brown, L. Jacobson, S. Badri, and R. Detels. 2009. 
Evaluation of adherence and factors affecting adherence to combination antiretroviral 
therapy among white, Hispanic, and black men in the MACS cohort. 
Journal of Acquired 
Immune De˜ciency Syndromes 52(2):290-293.Ohl, M., J. Tate, M. Duggal, M. Skanderson, M. Scotch, P. Kaboli, M. Vaughan-Sarrazin, 
and A. Justice. 2010. Rural residence is associated with delayed care entry and increased 
mortality among veterans with human immunode˜ciency virus infection. Medical Care 48(12):1064-1070.OMB (Of˜ce of Management and Budget). 1977. 
Statistical Policy Directive No. 15, Race and 
Ethnic Standards for Federal Statistics and Administrative Reporting. http://wonder.cdc.
gov/wonder/help/populations/bridged-race/Directive15.html (accessed August 11, 2011).OMB. 1997a. Recommendations from the Interagency Committee for the Review of the Racial 
and Ethnic Standards to the Of˜ce of Management and Budget concerning changes to 
the standards for the classi˜cation of federal data on race and ethnicity. 
Federal Register (3110-01):36873-36946.OMB. 1997b. Revisions to the standards for the classi˜cation of federal data on race and 
ethnicity. 
Federal Register 62:58781-58790.ONAP (Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy). 2010. National HIV/AIDS Strategy for the United 
States. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/uploads/NHAS.pdf (accessed Janu
-ary 6, 2012).Othieno, J. 2007. Twin cities care system assessment: Process, ˜ndings, and recommendations. 
Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 18(3 Suppl):189-213.
Owe-Larsson, M. B., L. Säll, E. Salamon, and C. Allgulander. 2009. HIV infection and psy
-chiatric illness. African Journal of Psychiatry
 12(2):115-128.PACHA (Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS). 2011. Letter to HHS Secretary 
Kathleen Sebelius (August 8). http://aids.gov/federal-resources/policies/pacha/meetings/august-2011/august-2011-pacha-letter-secretary.pdf, (accessed January 6, 2012).
Palepu, A., D. M. Cheng, T. Kim, D. Nunes, J. Vidaver, J. Alperen, R. Saitz, and J. H. Samet. 
2006. Substance abuse treatment and receipt of liver specialty care among persons 
coinfected with HIV/HCV who have alcohol problems. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment
 31(4):411-417.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Park, W. B., P. G. Choe, S. H. Kim, J. H. Jo, J. H. Bang, H. B. Kim, N. J. Kim, M. Oh, and 
K. W. Choe. 2007. One-year adherence to clinic visits after highly active antiretroviral 
therapy: A predictor of clinical progress in HIV patients. 
Journal of Internal Medicine
 261(3):268-275.Pence, B. W. 2009. The impact of mental health and traumatic life experiences on antiret
-roviral treatment outcomes for people living with HIV/AIDS. Journal Antimicrobial 
Chemotherapy 63(4):636-640.Penzak, S. R., Y. S. Reddy, and S. R. Grimsley. 2000. Depression in patients with HIV infec
-tion. HIV Update 57.PEPFAR (U.S. President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief). 2009. 
Next Generation Indicators 
Reference Guide. http://www.pepfar.gov/documents/organization/81097.pdf (accessed 
December 15, 2011).PEPFAR. 2011. 
About PEPFAR
. http://www.pepfar.gov/about/index.htm (accessed December 
15, 2011).Perkins, D., B. E. Meyerson, D. Klinkenberg, and B. T. Laffoon. 2008. Assessing HIV care 
and unmet need: Eight data bases and a bit of perseverance. AIDS Care 20(3):318-326.P˜zer. 2011. 
Welcome to the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ) Screeners
. http://www.
phqscreeners.com/ (accessed December 15, 2011).
Pinkerton, S. D., D. R. Holtgrave, and C. L. Galletly. 2008. Infections prevented by increas
-ing HIV serostatus awareness in the United States, 2001 to 2004. Journal of Acquired 
Immune De˜ciency Syndromes 47(3):354-357.Pladevall, M., L. K. Williams, L. A. Potts, G. Divine, H. Xi, and J. E. Lafata. 2004. Clinical 
outcomes and adherence to medications measured by claims data in patients with diabe-tes. Diabetes Care 27(12):2800-2805.Prejean, J., R. Song, Q. An, and H. I. Hall. 2008. Subpopulation estimates from the HIV 
incidence surveillance systemŠUnited States, 2006. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report
 57(36):985-989. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm5736a1.htm 
(accessed December 20, 2011).
Prejean, J., R. Song, A. Hernandez, R. Ziebell, T. Green, F. Walker, L. S. Lin, Q. An, J. 
Mermin, A. Lansky, and H. I. Hall. 2011. Estimated HIV incidence in the United States, 
2006-2009. PLoS One 6(8):e17502.Probst, J. C., S. B. Laditka, J. Y. Wang, and A. O. Johnson. 2007. Effects of residence and race 
on burden of travel for care: Cross sectional analysis of the 2001 U.S. National House
-hold Travel Survey. 
BMC Health Services Research
 7 (March):40 (13 pages).
Reif, S., C. E. Golin, and S. R. Smith. 2005. Barriers to accessing HIV/AIDS care in North 
Carolina: Rural and urban differences. 
AIDS Care
 17(5):558-565.Reisner, S. L., M. J. Mimiaga, M. Skeer, B. Perkovich, C. V. Johnson, and S. A. Safren. 2009. 
A review of HIV antiretroviral adherence and intervention studies among HIV-infected 
youth. Topics in HIV Medicine
 17(1):14-25.Riley, E. D., D. R. Bangsberg, D. Guzman, S. Perry, and A. R. Moss. 2005a. Antiretroviral 
therapy, hepatitis C virus, and AIDS mortality among San Francisco™s homeless and 
marginally housed. Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes
 38(2):191-195.Riley, E. D., A. R. Moss, R. A. Clark, S. L. Monk, and D. R. Bangsberg. 2005b. Cash bene˜ts 
are associated with lower risk behavior among the homeless and marginally housed in 
San Francisco. Journal of Urban Health 82(1):142-150.Riley, E. D., K. Moore, J. L. Sorensen, J. P. Tulsky, D. R. Bangsberg, and T. B. Neilands. 
2011. Basic subsistence needs and overall health among human immunode˜ciency virus-infected homeless and unstably housed women. American Journal of Epidemiology 174(5):515-522.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 105
Rippeth, J. D., R. K. Heaton, C. L. Carey, T. D. Marcotte, D. J. Moore, R. Gonzalez, T. 
Wolfson, and I. Grant. 2004. Methamphetamine dependence increases risk of neuropsy
-chological impairment in HIV infected persons. Journal of the International Neuropsy-chological Society 10(1):1-14.Robison, L. S., A. O. Westfall, M. J. Mugavero, M. C. Kempf, S. R. Cole, J. J. Allison, J. H. 
Willig, J. L. Raper, C. M. Wilcox, and M. S. Saag. 2008. Short-term discontinuation of 
HAART regimens more common in vulnerable patient populations. 
AIDS Research and 
Human Retroviruses
 24(11):1347-1355.Roos, L. L., S. M. Sharp, and M. M. Cohen. 1991. Comparing clinical information with claims 
data: Some similarities and differences. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 44(9):881-888.Royal, S. W., D. P. Kidder, S. Patrabansh, R. J. Wolitski, D. R. Holtgrave, A. Aidala, S. Pals, 
and R. Stalle. 2009. Factors associated with adherence to highly active antiretroviral ther-apy in homeless or unstably housed adults living with HIV. 
AIDS Care
 21(4): 448-455.Rumptz, M. H., C. Tobias, S. Rajabiun, J. Bradford, H. Cabral, R. Young, and W. E. Cunning
-ham. 2007. Factors associated with engaging socially marginalized HIV-positive persons 
in primary care. 
AIDS Patient Care and STDs
 21(Suppl 1):S30-S39.
Sacktor, N. C., M. Wong, N. Nakasujja, R. L. Skolasky, O. A. Selnes, S. Musisi, K. Robertson, 
J. C. McArthur, A. Ronald, and E. Katabira. 2005. The international HIV dementia scale: 
A new rapid screening test for HIV dementia. 
AIDS 19(13):1367-1374.Samet, J. H., A. Y. Walley, and C. Bridden. 2007. Illicit drugs, alcohol, and addiction in human 
immunode˜ciency virus. Panminerva Medica 49(2):67-77.SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration). 2011. Screen-ing, Brief Intervention, and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT)
. http://www.samhsa.gov/
prevention/SBIRT/index.aspx (accessed November 21, 2011).
Sarnquist, C. C., S. Soni, H. Hwang, B. B. Topol, S. Mutima, and Y. A. Maldonado. 2011. 
Rural HIV-infected women™s access to medical care: Ongoing needs in California. 
AIDS 
Care 23(7):792-796.Sayles, J. N., M. D. Wong, J. J. Kinsler, D. Martins, and W. E. Cunningham. 2009. The 
association of stigma with self-reported access to medical care and antiretroviral ther
-apy adherence in persons living with HIV/AIDS. Journal of General Internal Medicine 24(10):1101-1108.Scheyett, A., S. Parker, C. Golin, B. White, C. P. Davis, and D. Wohl. 2010. HIV-infected 
prison inmates: Depression and implications for release back to communities. AIDS and 
Behavior 14(2):300-307.Schneider, E. C., A. M. Zaslavsky, and A. M. Epstein. 2002. Racial disparities in the quality 
of care for enrollees in Medicare managed care. Journal of the American Medical As-sociation 287(10):1288-1294.Schur, C. L., M. L. Berk, J. R. Dunbar, M. F. Shapiro, S. E. Cohn, and S. A. Bozzette. 2002. 
Where to seek care: An examination of people in rural areas with HIV/AIDS. Journal of 
Rural Health
 18(2):337-347.Schwarcz, S. K., L. C. Hsu, E. Vittinghoff, A. Vu, J. D. Bamberger, and M. H. Katz. 2009. 
Impact of housing on the survival of persons with AIDS. 
BMC Public Health
 9 (July):220 
(18 pages).Sears, C., T. Davis, J. Guydish, and A. Gleghorn. 2009. Investigating the effects of San Fran
-cisco™s Treatment on Demand Initiative on a publicly-funded substance abuse treatment 
system: A time series analysis. 
Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 41(3):297-304.Sengupta, S., B. Banks, D. Jonas, M. S. Miles, and G. C. Smith. 2011. HIV interventions to 
reduce HIV/AIDS stigma: A systematic review. 
AIDS and Behavior
 15(6):1075-1087.Shafran, S. D. 2007. Early initiation of antiretroviral therapy: The current best way to reduce 
liver-related deaths in HIV/hepatitis C virus-coinfected patients. 
Journal of Acquired 
Immune De˜ciency Syndromes 44(5):551-556.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Shain, R. N., J. M. Piper, E. R. Newton, S. T. Perdue, R. Ramos, J. D. Champion, and F. A. 
Guerra. 1999. A randomized, controlled trial of a behavioral intervention to prevent 
sexually transmitted disease among minority women. New England Journal of Medicine 340(2):93-100.Shaw, M. 2004. Housing and public health. 
Annual Review of Public Health
 25 (April):397-418.
Sherer, R., K. Stieglitz, J. Narra, J. Jasek, L. Green, B. Moore, S. Shott, and M. Cohen. 2002. 
HIV multidisciplinary teams work: Support services improve access to and retention in 
HIV primary care. 
AIDS Care
 14(Suppl 1):S31-S44.
Silverberg, M. J., W. Leyden, C. P. Quesenberry, and M. A. Horberg. 2009. Race/ethnicity 
and risk of AIDS and death among HIV-infected patients with access to care. 
Journal of 
General Internal Medicine
 24(9):1065-1072.Simoni, J. M., C. R. Pearson, D. W. Pantalone, G. Marks, and N. Crepaz. 2006. Ef˜cacy of 
interventions in improving Highly Active Antiretroviral Therapy adherence and HIV-1 
RNA viral load: A meta-analytic review of randomized controlled trials. Journal of Ac-quired Immune De˜ciency Syndrome
s 43(Suppl 1):S23-S35.
Simoni, J. M., K. R. Amico, L. Smith, and K. Nelson. 2010. Antiretroviral adherence interven-tions: Translating research ˜ndings to the real world clinic. 
Current HIV/AIDS Reports 7(1):44-51.Song, J. 1999. 
HIV/AIDS & Homelessness: Recommendations for Clinical Practice and 
Public Policy. Nashville, TN: Health Care for the Homeless Clinicians™ Network, 
National Health Care for the Homeless Council. http://www.nhchc.org/wp-content/
uploads/2011/10/AIDS-Homelessness.pdf (accessed January 9, 2012).
Stall, R., T. C. Mills, J. Williamson, T. Hart, G. Greenwood, J. Paul, L. Pollack, D. Binson, 
D. Osmond, and J. A. Catania. 2003. Association of co-occurring psychosocial health 
problems and increased vulnerability to HIV/AIDS among urban men who have sex with 
men. American Journal of Public Health 93(6):939-942.Stewart, K. E., M. M. Phillips, J. F. Walker, S. A. Harvey, and A. Porter. 2011. Social services 
utilization and need among a community sample of persons living with HIV in the rural 
south. AIDS Care
 23(3):340-347.Sullivan, P. S., M. L. Campsmith, G. V. Nakamura, E. B. Begley, J. Schulden, and A. K. 
Nakashima. 2007. Patient and regimen characteristics associated with self-reported 
nonadherence to antiretroviral therapy. 
PLoS One 2(6):e552 (6 pages).Tang, P. C., M. Ralston, M. F. Arrigotti, L. Qureshi, and J. Graham. 2007. Comparison of 
methodologies for calculating quality measures based on administrative data versus clini
-cal data from an electronic health record system: Implications for performance measures. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
 14(1):10-15.Torian, L. V., and E. W. Wiewel. 2011. Continuity of HIV-related medical care, New York 
City, 2005-2009: Do patients who initiate care stay in care? 
AIDS Patient Care and 
STDs 25(2):79-88.Trent, C. R. 2004. 
Treatment on Demand: A Public Policy Initiative of the City of Detroit
. Workshop, September 27-28, Detroit, MI. 
Tucker, J. S., M. A. Burnam, C. D. Sherbourne, F.-Y. Kung, and A. L. Gifford. 2003. Sub
-stance use and mental health correlates of nonadherence to antiretroviral medications in 
a sample of patients with human immunode˜ciency virus infection. American Journal of 
Medicine 114(7):573-580.Ulett, K. B., J. H. Willig, H.-Y. Lin, J. S. Routman, S. Abroms, J. Allison, A. Chatham, J. L. 
Raper, M. S. Saag, and M. J. Mugavero. 2009. The therapeutic implications of timely 
linkage and early retention in HIV care. AIDS Patient Care and STDs
 23(1):41-49.UTHSC (University of Texas Health Science Center). 2011. 
The Executive Interview (Exit 25)
. http://www.dementia-assessment.com.au/frontotemporal/EXIT25_Executive_Interview.
pdf (accessed December 16, 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 107
Valcour, V., R. Paul, S. Chiao, L. A. Wendelken, and B. Miller. 2011. Screening for cognitive im
-pairment in human immunode˜ciency virus. Clinical Infectious Diseases 53(8):836-842.Valdiserri, R. O. 2002. HIV/AIDS stigma: An impediment to public health. 
American Journal 
of Public Health 92(3):341-342.Valet, R. S., T. T. Perry, and T. V. Hartert. 2009. Rural health disparities in asthma care and 
outcomes. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
 123(6):1220-1225.Vermund, S. H., S. L. Hodder, J. E. Justman, B. A. Koblin, T. D. Mastro, K. H. Mayer, D. P. 
Wheeler, and W. M. El-Sadr. 2010. Addressing research priorities for prevention of HIV 
infection in the United States. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 50(Suppl 3):S149-S155.
Vivithanaporn, P., G. Heo, J. Gamble, H. B. Krentz, A. Hoke, M. J. Gill, and C. Power. 2010. 
Neurologic disease burden in treated HIV/AIDS predicts survival: A population-based 
study. 
Neurology 75(13):1150-1158.Vogenthaler, N. S., C. Hadley, S. J. Lewis, A. E. Rodriguez, L. R. Metsch, and C. del Rio. 
2010. Food insuf˜ciency among HIV-infected crack-cocaine users in Atlanta and Miami. 
Public Health Nutrition 13(9):1478-1484.Waldrop-Valverde, D., R. L. Ownby, F. L. Wilkie, A. Mack, M. Kumar, and L. Metsch. 2006. 
Neurocognitive aspects of medication adherence in HIV-positive injecting drug users. 
AIDS and Behavior
 10(3):287-297.Walley, A. Y., D. M. Cheng, H. Libman, D. Nunes, C. R. Horsburgh, Jr., R. Saitz, and J. H. 
Samet. 2008. Recent drug use, homelessness and increased short-term mortality in HIV-
infected persons with alcohol problems. AIDS 22(3):415-420.Weinhardt, L. S., M. P. Carey, B. T. Johnson, and N. L. Bickman. 1999. Effects of HIV coun
-seling and testing on sexual risk behavior: A meta-analytic review of published research, 
1985-1997. American Journal of Public Health 89(9):1397-1405.Weis, K. E., A. D. Liese, J. Hussey, J. J. Gibson, and W. A. Duffus. 2010. Associations of rural 
residence with timing of HIV diagnosis and stage of disease at diagnosis, South Carolina 
2001-2005. Journal of Rural Health 26(2):105-112.Weiser, S. D., D. R. Bangsberg, S. Kegeles, K. Ragland, M. B. Kushel, and E. A. Frongillo. 
2009a. Food insecurity among homeless and marginally housed individuals living with 
HIV/AIDS in San Francisco. 
AIDS and Behavior
 13(5):841-848.Weiser, S. D., E. A. Frongillo, K. Ragland, R. S. Hogg, E. D. Riley, and D. R. Bangsberg. 
2009b. Food insecurity is associated with incomplete HIV RNA suppression among 
homeless and marginally housed HIV-infected individuals in San Francisco. 
Journal of 
General Internal Medicine
 24(1):14-20.West, J., Y. Khan, D. M. Murray, and K. B. Stevenson. 2010. Assessing speci˜c secondary 
ICD-9-CM codes as potential predictors of surgical site infections. American Journal of 
Infection Control 38(9):701-705.Wheeler, W. H., R. A. Ziebell, H. Zabina, D. Pieniazek, J. Prejean, U. R. Bodnar, K. C. Mahle, 
W. Heneine, J. A. Johnson, and H. I. Hall. 2010. Prevalence of transmitted drug resis
-tance associated mutations and HIV-1 subtypes in new HIV-1 diagnoses, U.S.Š2006. 
AIDS 24(8):1203-1212.Whetten, K., J. Leserman, R. Whetten, J. Ostermann, N. Thielman, M. Swartz, and D. Stangl. 
2006a. Exploring lack of trust in care providers and the government as a barrier to health 
service use. 
American Journal of Public Health 96(4):716-721. 
Whetten, R., K. Whetten, B. W. Pence, S. Reif, C. Conover, and S. Bouis. 2006b. Does dis
-tance affect utilization of substance abuse and mental health services in the presence of 
transportation services? AIDS Care
 18(Suppl 1):27-34.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. 
HIV/AIDS and Mental Health (EB124/6). Re-port by the Secretariat. http://www.who.int/gb/ebwha/pdf_˜les/EB124/B124_6-en.pdf 
(accessed January 6, 2012).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Wohl, A. R., W. H. Garland, J. Wu, C. W. Au, A. Boger, R. Dierst-Davies, J. Carter, F. Carpio, 
and W. Jordan. 2011. A youth-focused case management intervention to engage and 
retain young gay men of color in HIV care. 
AIDS Care
 23(8):988-997.Wolitski, R. J., R. S. Janssen, I. M. Onorato, D. W. Purcell, and N. Crepaz. 2005. An over
-view of prevention with people living with HIV. In 
Positive Prevention: Reducing HIV 
Transmission Among People Living with HIV/AIDS
, edited by Seth Kalichman. New 
York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers. Pp. 1-28.
Wolitski, R. J., D. P. Kidder, S. L. Pals, S. Royal, A. Aidala, R. Stall, D. R. Holtgrave, D. Harre, 
and C. Courtenay-Quirk. 2010. Randomized trial of the effects of housing assistance on 
the health and risk behaviors of homeless and unstably housed people living with HIV. 
AIDS and Behavior
 14(3):493-503.Zaller, N., F. S. Gillani, and J. D. Rich. 2007. A model of integrated primary care for 
HIV-positive patients with underlying substance use and mental illness. 
AIDS Care 19(9):1128-1133.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 109
APPENDIX TABLE 2-1 follows on next page
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110
 APPENDIX TABLE 2-1
 Core and Additional Indicators for Clinical HIV Care and Mental Health, Substance 
Abuse, and Supportive ServicesCore Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people newly 
diagnosed with HIV with a 
CD4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical 
diagnosis of AIDS
˜˚
Date of HIV diagnosis
˜˚
˚CD4 test results at diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV care
˜˚
˚No diagnosis of AIDS or AIDS-
de˜ning illness (e.g., OIs)
Reported rates of cases newly 
diagnosed with HIV and a CD4+ 
cell count >200 cells/mm
3 and no 
clinical diagnosis of AIDS within 
time period can be used if speci˜c 
CD4 test dates and results are not 
available.Early diagnosis improves health 
outcomes and reduces transmission of 
the virus to others.Proportion of people newly 
diagnosed with HIV who 
are linked to clinical care 
for HIV within 3 months of 
diagnosis˜˚
Date of HIV diagnosis
˜˚
Date of ˜rst visit for HIV care 
Date of ˜rst/second CD4 or viral 
load test can be used if date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV care is not available.
Timely linkage to clinical HIV care 
for PLWHA who are newly diagnosed 
improves individual health outcomes 
and reduces transmission of the virus 
to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
are in continuous care (two 
or more visits for routine 
HIV medical care in the 
preceding 12 months at least 
3 months apart)
˜˚
Dates of routine HIV-care visits
Dates of CD4 or viral load tests 
can be used if dates of visits for 
routine HIV care are not available.
PLWHA who are in continuous 
HIV care experience better health 
outcomes, including decreased 
mortality, and are less apt to transmit 
the virus to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
received two or more CD4 
tests in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
Dates of CD4 tests
Yes/no documentation of CD4 
tests within 12-month reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c dates 
of CD4 tests are not available.Regular CD4 testing improves health 
outcomes in PLWHA by permitting 
providers to monitor individuals™ 
immune function; determine when to 
start antiretroviral therapy (ART)
in untreated patients; assess 
immunologic response to ART, and 
assess the need for initiation or 
discontinuation of prophylaxis for 
opportunistic infections. 
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
received two or more viral 
load tests in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
Dates of viral load tests
Yes/no documentation of viral load 
tests within 12-month reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c 
dates of viral load tests are not 
available.Regular viral load (plasma HIV 
RNA) testing is important for 
monitoring clinical progression of the 
disease and therapeutic response in 
individuals on ART. Decreased viral 
load, and undetectable viral load in 
individuals on ART, is associated 
with improved health outcomes and 
reduced transmission of the virus.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection in 
continuous care for 12 or 
more months and with a 
CD4+ cell count >350 cells/mm3˜˚
Dates of routine HIV-care visits
˜˚
Dates of CD4 tests
˜˚
˚Results of at least one CD4 test 
within time period speci˜ed
Dates of CD4 or viral load tests 
can be used if dates of visits for 
routine HIV care are not available.
Achieving and maintaining a CD4+ 
cell count 
˙350 cells/mm3 reduces the 
risk of complicating opportunistic 
infections and cancers. 
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
and a measured CD4+ cell 
count <500 cells/mm
3 who 
are not on ART*
˜˚
Dates of CD4 tests
˜˚
Results of CD4 tests
˜˚
˚Dates of ART prescription or 
dispensingResults from most recent CD4 test 
within reporting period can be 
used if speci˜c dates of tests not 
available. Yes/no documentation 
of whether on ART can be used if 
prescription/ dispensing dates are 
not available.Appropriate initiation of ART 
improves health outcomes and 
reduces transmission of the virus to 
others.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 111
APPENDIX TABLE 2-1
 Core and Additional Indicators for Clinical HIV Care and Mental Health, Substance 
Abuse, and Supportive ServicesCore Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people newly 
diagnosed with HIV with a 
CD4+ cell count >200 cells/mm3 and without a clinical 
diagnosis of AIDS
˜˚
Date of HIV diagnosis
˜˚
˚CD4 test results at diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV care
˜˚
˚No diagnosis of AIDS or AIDS-
de˜ning illness (e.g., OIs)
Reported rates of cases newly 
diagnosed with HIV and a CD4+ 
cell count >200 cells/mm
3 and no 
clinical diagnosis of AIDS within 
time period can be used if speci˜c 
CD4 test dates and results are not 
available.Early diagnosis improves health 
outcomes and reduces transmission of 
the virus to others.Proportion of people newly 
diagnosed with HIV who 
are linked to clinical care 
for HIV within 3 months of 
diagnosis˜˚
Date of HIV diagnosis
˜˚
Date of ˜rst visit for HIV care 
Date of ˜rst/second CD4 or viral 
load test can be used if date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV care is not available.
Timely linkage to clinical HIV care 
for PLWHA who are newly diagnosed 
improves individual health outcomes 
and reduces transmission of the virus 
to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
are in continuous care (two 
or more visits for routine 
HIV medical care in the 
preceding 12 months at least 
3 months apart)
˜˚
Dates of routine HIV-care visits
Dates of CD4 or viral load tests 
can be used if dates of visits for 
routine HIV care are not available.
PLWHA who are in continuous 
HIV care experience better health 
outcomes, including decreased 
mortality, and are less apt to transmit 
the virus to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
received two or more CD4 
tests in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
Dates of CD4 tests
Yes/no documentation of CD4 
tests within 12-month reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c dates 
of CD4 tests are not available.Regular CD4 testing improves health 
outcomes in PLWHA by permitting 
providers to monitor individuals™ 
immune function; determine when to 
start antiretroviral therapy (ART)
in untreated patients; assess 
immunologic response to ART, and 
assess the need for initiation or 
discontinuation of prophylaxis for 
opportunistic infections. 
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
received two or more viral 
load tests in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
Dates of viral load tests
Yes/no documentation of viral load 
tests within 12-month reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c 
dates of viral load tests are not 
available.Regular viral load (plasma HIV 
RNA) testing is important for 
monitoring clinical progression of the 
disease and therapeutic response in 
individuals on ART. Decreased viral 
load, and undetectable viral load in 
individuals on ART, is associated 
with improved health outcomes and 
reduced transmission of the virus.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection in 
continuous care for 12 or 
more months and with a 
CD4+ cell count >350 cells/mm3˜˚
Dates of routine HIV-care visits
˜˚
Dates of CD4 tests
˜˚
˚Results of at least one CD4 test 
within time period speci˜ed
Dates of CD4 or viral load tests 
can be used if dates of visits for 
routine HIV care are not available.
Achieving and maintaining a CD4+ 
cell count 
˙350 cells/mm3 reduces the 
risk of complicating opportunistic 
infections and cancers. 
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
and a measured CD4+ cell 
count <500 cells/mm
3 who 
are not on ART*
˜˚
Dates of CD4 tests
˜˚
Results of CD4 tests
˜˚
˚Dates of ART prescription or 
dispensingResults from most recent CD4 test 
within reporting period can be 
used if speci˜c dates of tests not 
available. Yes/no documentation 
of whether on ART can be used if 
prescription/ dispensing dates are 
not available.Appropriate initiation of ART 
improves health outcomes and 
reduces transmission of the virus to 
others.continued *In contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 APPENDIX TABLE 2-1
 ContinuedIndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have been on ART for 
12 or more months and 
have a viral load below the 
level of detection
˜˚
˚Dates of ART prescription or 
dispensing˜˚
˚Dates of viral load tests 
˜˚
˚Results of viral load tests 
Results from most recent viral load 
test within reporting period can be 
used if speci˜c dates of tests not 
available. Yes/no documentation 
of whether on ART can be used 
if prescription or dispensing 
dates are not available. Rates of 
undetectable viral load among 
all persons diagnosed with HIV 
infection can be used as system 
level indicator.
With the advent of more potent 
antiretroviral drugs, the goal of ART 
is durable virologic suppression. An 
undetectable viral load improves 
health outcomes for PLWHA and 
reduces transmission of the virus.
All-cause mortality rate 
among people diagnosed with 
HIV infection*˜˚
˚Date of deathMortality rate within states or 
jurisdictionMortality is the ultimate outcome 
measure for assessing HIV/AIDS care 
among PLWHA. Mortality should 
be inversely related to the quality of 
overall care delivered.Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection and 
mental health disorder who 
are referred for mental health 
services and receive these 
services within 60 daysa ˜˚
˚Date of diagnosis or evidence of 
mental health disorder˜˚
˚Date of mental health referral
˜˚
˚Date of ˜rst visit for mental 
health servicesEvidence of mental health 
assessment and any visits for 
mental health services during the 
same reporting period can be used 
if speci˜c dates of mental health 
referral and mental health visits 
are not available.Untreated mental health disorders can 
negatively affect maintenance in care, 
adherence to treatment, and health 
outcomes for PLWHA, reducing 
treatment effectiveness and increasing 
risk of transmitting the virus to 
others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection and 
substance use disorder who 
are referred for substance 
abuse services and receive 
these services within 60 days
b˜˚
˚Date of diagnosis or evidence of 
substance use disorder˜˚
˚Date of referral for substance 
abuse services
˜˚
˚Date of ˜rst visit for substance 
abuse services
Evidence of substance use 
assessment and any visits for 
substance abuse services during the 
same reporting period can be used 
if speci˜c dates of substance abuse 
referral and substance abuse visits 
are not available.Untreated substance use disorders can 
negatively affect maintenance in care, 
adherence to treatment, and health 
outcomes for PLWHA, reducing 
treatment effectiveness and increasing 
risk of transmitting the virus to 
others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
were homeless or temporarily 
or unstably housedc at least 
once in the preceding 12 
months*˜˚
˚Housing statusEvidence of reported need for 
housing assistance during the 
reporting period can be used if 
information about housing status 
is not available. 
Housing instability can negatively 
affect maintenance in care, adherence 
to treatment, and health outcomes 
for PLWHA, reducing treatment 
effectiveness and increasing risk of 
transmitting the virus to others. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 113
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have been on ART for 
12 or more months and 
have a viral load below the 
level of detection
˜˚
˚Dates of ART prescription or 
dispensing˜˚
˚Dates of viral load tests 
˜˚
˚Results of viral load tests 
Results from most recent viral load 
test within reporting period can be 
used if speci˜c dates of tests not 
available. Yes/no documentation 
of whether on ART can be used 
if prescription or dispensing 
dates are not available. Rates of 
undetectable viral load among 
all persons diagnosed with HIV 
infection can be used as system 
level indicator.
With the advent of more potent 
antiretroviral drugs, the goal of ART 
is durable virologic suppression. An 
undetectable viral load improves 
health outcomes for PLWHA and 
reduces transmission of the virus.
All-cause mortality rate 
among people diagnosed with 
HIV infection*˜˚
˚Date of deathMortality rate within states or 
jurisdictionMortality is the ultimate outcome 
measure for assessing HIV/AIDS care 
among PLWHA. Mortality should 
be inversely related to the quality of 
overall care delivered.Core Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection and 
mental health disorder who 
are referred for mental health 
services and receive these 
services within 60 daysa ˜˚
˚Date of diagnosis or evidence of 
mental health disorder˜˚
˚Date of mental health referral
˜˚
˚Date of ˜rst visit for mental 
health servicesEvidence of mental health 
assessment and any visits for 
mental health services during the 
same reporting period can be used 
if speci˜c dates of mental health 
referral and mental health visits 
are not available.Untreated mental health disorders can 
negatively affect maintenance in care, 
adherence to treatment, and health 
outcomes for PLWHA, reducing 
treatment effectiveness and increasing 
risk of transmitting the virus to 
others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection and 
substance use disorder who 
are referred for substance 
abuse services and receive 
these services within 60 days
b˜˚
˚Date of diagnosis or evidence of 
substance use disorder˜˚
˚Date of referral for substance 
abuse services
˜˚
˚Date of ˜rst visit for substance 
abuse services
Evidence of substance use 
assessment and any visits for 
substance abuse services during the 
same reporting period can be used 
if speci˜c dates of substance abuse 
referral and substance abuse visits 
are not available.Untreated substance use disorders can 
negatively affect maintenance in care, 
adherence to treatment, and health 
outcomes for PLWHA, reducing 
treatment effectiveness and increasing 
risk of transmitting the virus to 
others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
were homeless or temporarily 
or unstably housedc at least 
once in the preceding 12 
months*˜˚
˚Housing statusEvidence of reported need for 
housing assistance during the 
reporting period can be used if 
information about housing status 
is not available. 
Housing instability can negatively 
affect maintenance in care, adherence 
to treatment, and health outcomes 
for PLWHA, reducing treatment 
effectiveness and increasing risk of 
transmitting the virus to others. 
continued *In contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.
 a Receipt of services within 30 days would be the ideal for optimal care, and more urgent cases should be seen sooner.
 b See footnote 
a above. 
 c The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development™s 
Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) Data Standards provides guid-ance for classifying housing status in four categories: literally homeless (e.g., lack a regular nighttime residence, staying in an emergency shelter), 
following the McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. 11302, Sec. 103) de˜nition of homelessness, as amended by the Homeless 
Emergency Assistance and Rapid Transition to Housing (HEARTH) Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-22, div. B, Sec. 1003); imminently losing housing (e.g., 
being evicted or being discharged from an institution with no housing options identi˜ed); unstably housed and at-risk of losing housing (e.g., tem-porarily doubled up with others, moving frequently for economic reasons), and stably housed (http://www.hudhre.info/documents/FinalHMISData
 Standards_March2010.pdf, accessed March 12, 2012).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
experienced food or nutrition 
insecurityd at least once in the 
preceding 12 months* ˜˚
˚Food security statusEvidence of reported need for food 
assistance during the reporting 
period can be used if information 
about food security status is not 
available. 
Food insecurity can negatively affect 
maintenance in care, adherence to 
treatment, and health outcomes 
for PLWHA, reducing treatment 
effectiveness and increasing risk 
of transmitting the virus to others. 
Poor nutrition affects absorption of 
medications and can contribute to 
diet-sensitive comorbidities.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who had an unmet need for 
transportation services to 
facilitate access to medical care 
and related services at least once 
in the preceding 12 months*
˜˚
˚Transportation need
Evidence of reported need for 
transportation assistance during 
the reporting period can be used 
if information about access to 
transportation is not available.Unmet need for transportation 
to access clinical HIV care and 
related services can negatively affect 
treatment access, service utilization, 
and health outcomes for PLWHA, 
reducing treatment effectiveness and 
increasing risk of transmitting the 
virus to others.
Additional Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had a documented 
tuberculosis (TB) screening test 
with results interpreted at least 
once since HIV diagnosis˜˚
˚ 
Date of HIV diagnosis/treatment 
or documentation of infection 
prior to test
˜˚
˚Date and results of TB screeningYes/no documentation of TB test 
and results in medical record or yes/
no documentation of TB test results 
within reporting period can be used 
if speci˜c dates of HIV diagnosis 
and TB screening are not available.
All PLWHA with diagnosed active 
tuberculosis should receive ART to 
improve health outcomes. Screening 
for TB permits earlier diagnosis and 
initiation or ART.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had documented 
chlamydia, gonorrhea, and 
syphilis screenings at least 
once in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of chlamydia, gonorrhea, 
and syphilis screenings
Yes/no documentation of 
chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis 
screening within reporting period 
can be used if speci˜c dates of 
screening tests are not available.
Infection with co-occurring sexually 
transmitted infections (STIs) increases 
the risk of transmitting HIV to 
others. Screening for STIs permits 
earlier diagnosis and risk reduction.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had hepatitis B 
screening performed at least 
once since HIV diagnosis 
or for whom there is 
documented immunity
˜˚
˚Date of hepatitis B screening or 
date of documented immunityYes/no documentation of hepatitis 
B screening within reporting 
period or documented immunity 
can be used if speci˜c dates of 
HIV diagnosis and hepatitis B 
assessment are not available.
Individuals coinfected with HIV and 
hepatitis B virus are at greater risk for 
developing chronic hepatitis and for 
accelerated liver damage and serious 
liver-related morbidity and mortality. 
Early detection of hepatitis B coinfection 
permits earlier treatment and improved 
outcomes. Individuals who are screened 
and negative for immunity should be 
vaccinated, eliminating the need for 
repeated screening.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had hepatitis C 
screening performed at least 
once in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of hepatitis C screeningYes/no documentation of hepatitis 
C screening within reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c dates 
of screening tests are not available.HIV and hepatitis C coinfection is 
associated with accelerated liver 
damage. Early detection of co-occurring hepatitis C coinfection 
permits earlier treatment and 
improved outcomes.
APPENDIX TABLE 2-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 115
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
experienced food or nutrition 
insecurityd at least once in the 
preceding 12 months* ˜˚
˚Food security statusEvidence of reported need for food 
assistance during the reporting 
period can be used if information 
about food security status is not 
available. 
Food insecurity can negatively affect 
maintenance in care, adherence to 
treatment, and health outcomes 
for PLWHA, reducing treatment 
effectiveness and increasing risk 
of transmitting the virus to others. 
Poor nutrition affects absorption of 
medications and can contribute to 
diet-sensitive comorbidities.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who had an unmet need for 
transportation services to 
facilitate access to medical care 
and related services at least once 
in the preceding 12 months*
˜˚
˚Transportation need
Evidence of reported need for 
transportation assistance during 
the reporting period can be used 
if information about access to 
transportation is not available.Unmet need for transportation 
to access clinical HIV care and 
related services can negatively affect 
treatment access, service utilization, 
and health outcomes for PLWHA, 
reducing treatment effectiveness and 
increasing risk of transmitting the 
virus to others.
Additional Indicators for Clinical HIV Care
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had a documented 
tuberculosis (TB) screening test 
with results interpreted at least 
once since HIV diagnosis˜˚
˚ 
Date of HIV diagnosis/treatment 
or documentation of infection 
prior to test
˜˚
˚Date and results of TB screeningYes/no documentation of TB test 
and results in medical record or yes/
no documentation of TB test results 
within reporting period can be used 
if speci˜c dates of HIV diagnosis 
and TB screening are not available.
All PLWHA with diagnosed active 
tuberculosis should receive ART to 
improve health outcomes. Screening 
for TB permits earlier diagnosis and 
initiation or ART.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had documented 
chlamydia, gonorrhea, and 
syphilis screenings at least 
once in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of chlamydia, gonorrhea, 
and syphilis screenings
Yes/no documentation of 
chlamydia, gonorrhea, or syphilis 
screening within reporting period 
can be used if speci˜c dates of 
screening tests are not available.
Infection with co-occurring sexually 
transmitted infections (STIs) increases 
the risk of transmitting HIV to 
others. Screening for STIs permits 
earlier diagnosis and risk reduction.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had hepatitis B 
screening performed at least 
once since HIV diagnosis 
or for whom there is 
documented immunity
˜˚
˚Date of hepatitis B screening or 
date of documented immunityYes/no documentation of hepatitis 
B screening within reporting 
period or documented immunity 
can be used if speci˜c dates of 
HIV diagnosis and hepatitis B 
assessment are not available.
Individuals coinfected with HIV and 
hepatitis B virus are at greater risk for 
developing chronic hepatitis and for 
accelerated liver damage and serious 
liver-related morbidity and mortality. 
Early detection of hepatitis B coinfection 
permits earlier treatment and improved 
outcomes. Individuals who are screened 
and negative for immunity should be 
vaccinated, eliminating the need for 
repeated screening.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who have had hepatitis C 
screening performed at least 
once in the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of hepatitis C screeningYes/no documentation of hepatitis 
C screening within reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c dates 
of screening tests are not available.HIV and hepatitis C coinfection is 
associated with accelerated liver 
damage. Early detection of co-occurring hepatitis C coinfection 
permits earlier treatment and 
improved outcomes.
continued *In contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.
 d According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, households with high food security have ﬁno reported indications of food-access problems or 
limitationsﬂ; households with marginal food security have ﬁone or two reported indicationsŠtypically of anxiety over food suf˜ciency or shortage 
of food in the house [with] little or no indication of changes in diets or food intakeﬂ; households with low food security have ﬁreports of reduced 
quality, variety, or desirability of diet [with] little or no indications of reduced food intakeﬂ; and households with very low food security have ﬁre
-ports of multiple indications of disrupted eating patterns and reduced food intake.ﬂ The lower two levelsŠlow and very low food securityŠrefer 
to food insecurity (http://www.ers.usda.gov/brie˜ng/foodsecurity/labels.htm#cnstat, accessed February 3, 2012).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
have received an in˚uenza 
immunization during the 
preceding 12 months˜˚
˚Date of in˚uenza immunizationYes/no documentation of in˚uenza 
immunization within reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c date 
of in˚uenza immunization is not 
available.HIV-infected individuals are 
considered to be at greater risk 
for serious in˚uenza-related 
complications. CDC recommends 
annual prophylactic vaccination 
(inactive) for in˚uenza.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
have received a pneumococcal 
immunization at least once 
since HIV diagnosis˜˚
˚Date of HIV diagnosis/treatment 
or documentation of infection 
prior to immunization
˜˚
˚Date of pneumococcal 
immunizationYes/no documentation of 
pneumococcal immunization 
in medical record or yes/no 
documentation of pneumo coccal 
immunization within reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c 
dates of HIV diagnosis and 
pneumococcal immunization are 
not available.HIV-infected individuals are 
considered to be at greater risk for 
contracting and developing serious 
complications from pneumococcal 
pneumonia. CDC recommends 
prophylactic vaccination as soon as 
possible following diagnosis, followed 
by a one-time revaccination 5 years 
later.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
have received a hepatitis B 
vaccination, or who have 
documented immunity
˜˚
˚Date of hepatitis vaccine/date of 
documented immunity
Yes/no documentation of hepatitis 
B vaccination or documented 
immunity can be used if speci˜c 
dates of HIV diagnosis and 
hepatitis B vaccination are not 
available.HIV and hepatitis B coinfection is 
associated with accelerated liver 
damage and the develop ment of 
chronic hepatitis and serious liver-
related morbidity and mortality. CDC 
recommends prophylactic vaccination 
against hepatitis B for susceptible 
individuals with HIV.
Proportion of ART-naïve 
people with diagnosed HIV 
infection who receive drug 
resistance testing (genotypic) 
prior to ART initiation
˜˚
˚Date of drug resistance testing
˜˚
˚Date of ART initiation
Documentation of drug resistance 
testing for persons receiving 
ART can be used if dates of drug 
resistance testing and/or ART 
initiation are not available.Drug resistance testing prior to 
the initiation of ART permits the 
identi˜cation of the appropriate 
treatment regimen and therefore 
improves health outcomes and 
reduces viral transmission.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection and 
HIV-associated nephropathy, 
hepatitis B (when treatment is 
indicted), or active TB, who 
are not on ART*
˜˚
˚Diagnosis or test results for HIV-
associated nephropathy, hepatitis 
B, and TB˜˚
˚ART status (whether on ART 
or ART prescription/dispensing 
dates)Number of people with any of 
these conditions who are not on 
ART can be used if information 
about all three conditions is not 
available.HHS recommends that HIV-infected 
individuals with HIV-associated 
nephropathy, hepatitis B virus 
coinfection (when treatment is 
indicated), or active TB receive ART 
to improve health outcomes.Proportion of pregnant 
women with diagnosed HIV 
infection who are not on 
ART*
˜˚
˚Pregnancy status 
˜˚
˚ART status (whether on ART 
or ART prescription/dispensing 
dates)Number of births during reporting 
period to women not on ART can 
be used if complete information 
about pregnancy status is not 
available.Use of combination ART in HIV-
positive pregnant women signi˜cantly 
reduces mother-to-child transmission 
of the virus.Additional Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
were screened for mental 
health disorders at least once 
during the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of mental health screening
Yes/no evidence of screening for 
mental health disorders or referral 
for treatment during reporting 
period can be used if dates of 
mental health screening are not 
available.Undiagnosed, and therefore 
untreated, mental health disorders 
can negatively affect adherence to 
treatment and health outcomes for 
PLWHA and increase their risk of 
transmitting the virus to others.APPENDIX TABLE 2-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 117
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
have received an in˚uenza 
immunization during the 
preceding 12 months˜˚
˚Date of in˚uenza immunizationYes/no documentation of in˚uenza 
immunization within reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c date 
of in˚uenza immunization is not 
available.HIV-infected individuals are 
considered to be at greater risk 
for serious in˚uenza-related 
complications. CDC recommends 
annual prophylactic vaccination 
(inactive) for in˚uenza.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
have received a pneumococcal 
immunization at least once 
since HIV diagnosis˜˚
˚Date of HIV diagnosis/treatment 
or documentation of infection 
prior to immunization
˜˚
˚Date of pneumococcal 
immunizationYes/no documentation of 
pneumococcal immunization 
in medical record or yes/no 
documentation of pneumo coccal 
immunization within reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c 
dates of HIV diagnosis and 
pneumococcal immunization are 
not available.HIV-infected individuals are 
considered to be at greater risk for 
contracting and developing serious 
complications from pneumococcal 
pneumonia. CDC recommends 
prophylactic vaccination as soon as 
possible following diagnosis, followed 
by a one-time revaccination 5 years 
later.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
have received a hepatitis B 
vaccination, or who have 
documented immunity
˜˚
˚Date of hepatitis vaccine/date of 
documented immunity
Yes/no documentation of hepatitis 
B vaccination or documented 
immunity can be used if speci˜c 
dates of HIV diagnosis and 
hepatitis B vaccination are not 
available.HIV and hepatitis B coinfection is 
associated with accelerated liver 
damage and the develop ment of 
chronic hepatitis and serious liver-
related morbidity and mortality. CDC 
recommends prophylactic vaccination 
against hepatitis B for susceptible 
individuals with HIV.
Proportion of ART-naïve 
people with diagnosed HIV 
infection who receive drug 
resistance testing (genotypic) 
prior to ART initiation
˜˚
˚Date of drug resistance testing
˜˚
˚Date of ART initiation
Documentation of drug resistance 
testing for persons receiving 
ART can be used if dates of drug 
resistance testing and/or ART 
initiation are not available.Drug resistance testing prior to 
the initiation of ART permits the 
identi˜cation of the appropriate 
treatment regimen and therefore 
improves health outcomes and 
reduces viral transmission.
Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection and 
HIV-associated nephropathy, 
hepatitis B (when treatment is 
indicted), or active TB, who 
are not on ART*
˜˚
˚Diagnosis or test results for HIV-
associated nephropathy, hepatitis 
B, and TB˜˚
˚ART status (whether on ART 
or ART prescription/dispensing 
dates)Number of people with any of 
these conditions who are not on 
ART can be used if information 
about all three conditions is not 
available.HHS recommends that HIV-infected 
individuals with HIV-associated 
nephropathy, hepatitis B virus 
coinfection (when treatment is 
indicated), or active TB receive ART 
to improve health outcomes.Proportion of pregnant 
women with diagnosed HIV 
infection who are not on 
ART*
˜˚
˚Pregnancy status 
˜˚
˚ART status (whether on ART 
or ART prescription/dispensing 
dates)Number of births during reporting 
period to women not on ART can 
be used if complete information 
about pregnancy status is not 
available.Use of combination ART in HIV-
positive pregnant women signi˜cantly 
reduces mother-to-child transmission 
of the virus.Additional Indicators for Mental Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services
IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
were screened for mental 
health disorders at least once 
during the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of mental health screening
Yes/no evidence of screening for 
mental health disorders or referral 
for treatment during reporting 
period can be used if dates of 
mental health screening are not 
available.Undiagnosed, and therefore 
untreated, mental health disorders 
can negatively affect adherence to 
treatment and health outcomes for 
PLWHA and increase their risk of 
transmitting the virus to others.continued*In contrast to the other indicators, the estimate for this indicator should decrease with improved access to care and supportive services.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 IndicatorData Elements NeededProxy/Alternative Data Elements
RationaleProportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
were screened for substance 
use disorders at least once 
during the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of screening for substance 
useYes/no evidence of screening for 
substance use disorders or referral 
for treatment during reporting 
period can be used if dates of 
substance use screening are not 
available.Undiagnosed, and therefore 
untreated, substance use disorders 
can negatively affect adherence to 
treatment and health outcomes for 
PLWHA and increase the risk of 
transmitting the virus to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection who 
were assessed for need for 
housing at least once during 
the preceding 12 months˜˚
˚Date of housing needs 
assessmentYes/no evidence of housing 
assessment or referral for housing 
assistance during reporting period 
can be used if dates of housing 
assessment are not available.
Assessment of housing stability is 
important because housing instability 
can negatively affect adherence to 
treatment and health outcomes for 
PLWHA and increase the risk of 
transmitting the virus to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who were assessed for need 
for food or nutrition at least 
once during the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚Date of food security assessment
Yes/no evidence of food security 
assessment or referral for food or 
meal assistance during reporting 
period can be used if speci˜c dates 
of assessment are not available.Assessment of food security is 
important because food insecurity 
can negatively affect adherence to 
treatment; effectiveness of treatment, 
including ART; and health outcomes 
for PLWHA and increase the risk of 
transmitting the virus to others.Proportion of people with 
diagnosed HIV infection 
who were assessed for need 
for transportation at least 
once during the preceding 12 
months˜˚
˚ 
Date of transportation needs 
assessmentYes/no evidence of assessment for 
transportation need or referral 
for transportation services during 
reporting period can be used if 
speci˜c dates of  assessment are 
not available.Assessment of transportation need 
is important because an unmet need 
for transportation to access clinical 
HIV care and related services can 
negatively affect treatment access and 
health outcomes for PLWHA and 
increase the risk of transmitting the 
virus to others.
APPENDIX TABLE 2-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 119
APPENDIX TABLE 2-2 follows on next page
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120
 APPENDIX TABLE 2-2
 Indicators of Clinical HIV Care and Mental 
 Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, Mapped to Entry and 
 Engagement in CareDiagnosisLinkageEngagement & 
RetentionPrimary CareTreatment
Virologic 
SuppressionMediatorsDisparitiesIndicators and Type (Process/Outcome)

Outcome

Outcome




Proportion 
with a CD4+ 
cell count >200 
cells/mm3 and without 
a clinical 
diagnosis of 
AIDSProportion 
linked to care 
for HIV within 
3 months of 
diagnosisProportion in 
continuous 
care (two or 
more visits in 
the preceding 
12 months at 
least 3 months 
apart)Proportion in 
continuous 
care for 12 or 
more months 
with CD4+ cell 
count ˜350 
cells/mm3In the preceding 12 
months:Proportion who 
received two or 
more CD4 tests
Proportion who 
received two or 
more viral load 
tests
screened for 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, and 
syphilis
screened for 
hepatitis C
immunized for 
in˚uenzaSince diagnosis:
screened for 
tuberculosis
screened for 
hepatitis B
immunized for 
hepatitis B (if 
needed)
immunized for 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia
received drug 
resistance testing 
(genotypic) prior 
to ART initiation
Proportion with a 
measured CD4+ cell 
count <500 cells/
mm3 who are not 
on ART
 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B (when 
treatment is 
indicated), or active 
tuberculosis who 
are not on ART


infected pregnant 
women who are not 
on ART
Proportion on ART 
for 12 or more 
months who have 
an undetectable 
viral load
All-cause mortality 
rateProportion with 
mental health 
disorder referred 
for mental health 
services who 
received these 
services within 60 
daysProportion with 
substance use 
disorder referred 
for substance abuse 
services who receive 
these services within 
60 days
Proportion with an 
unmet need for   housing   food   transportationIn the preceding 12 
months:
for mental health 
disorders
for substance use 
disorders
for need for   
housing   
food   
transportation
related to 
diagnosis, linkage, 
engagement and 
retention, primary 
care, treatment, 
and virologic 
suppression, 
strati˜ed by 
subpopulation
strati˜ed by 
subpopulationNOTE: The committee™s recommended core indicators are written in bold text.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 121
APPENDIX TABLE 2-2
 Indicators of Clinical HIV Care and Mental 
 Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services, Mapped to Entry and 
 Engagement in CareDiagnosisLinkageEngagement & 
RetentionPrimary CareTreatment
Virologic 
SuppressionMediatorsDisparitiesIndicators and Type (Process/Outcome)

Outcome

Outcome




Proportion 
with a CD4+ 
cell count >200 
cells/mm3 and without 
a clinical 
diagnosis of 
AIDSProportion 
linked to care 
for HIV within 
3 months of 
diagnosisProportion in 
continuous 
care (two or 
more visits in 
the preceding 
12 months at 
least 3 months 
apart)Proportion in 
continuous 
care for 12 or 
more months 
with CD4+ cell 
count ˜350 
cells/mm3In the preceding 12 
months:Proportion who 
received two or 
more CD4 tests
Proportion who 
received two or 
more viral load 
tests
screened for 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, and 
syphilis
screened for 
hepatitis C
immunized for 
in˚uenzaSince diagnosis:
screened for 
tuberculosis
screened for 
hepatitis B
immunized for 
hepatitis B (if 
needed)
immunized for 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia
received drug 
resistance testing 
(genotypic) prior 
to ART initiation
Proportion with a 
measured CD4+ cell 
count <500 cells/
mm3 who are not 
on ART
 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B (when 
treatment is 
indicated), or active 
tuberculosis who 
are not on ART


infected pregnant 
women who are not 
on ART
Proportion on ART 
for 12 or more 
months who have 
an undetectable 
viral load
All-cause mortality 
rateProportion with 
mental health 
disorder referred 
for mental health 
services who 
received these 
services within 60 
daysProportion with 
substance use 
disorder referred 
for substance abuse 
services who receive 
these services within 
60 days
Proportion with an 
unmet need for   housing   food   transportationIn the preceding 12 
months:
for mental health 
disorders
for substance use 
disorders
for need for   
housing   
food   
transportation
related to 
diagnosis, linkage, 
engagement and 
retention, primary 
care, treatment, 
and virologic 
suppression, 
strati˜ed by 
subpopulation
strati˜ed by 
subpopulationcontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 APPENDIX TABLE 2-2
 ContinuedDiagnosisLinkageEngagement & 
RetentionPrimary CareTreatment
Virologic 
SuppressionMediatorsDisparitiesData Elements
diagnosis
results at 
diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV 
care
AIDS or AIDS-
de˜ning illness 
(e.g., OIs)
diagnosis
visit for 
HIV care (or 
proxy of ˜rst 
or second 
CD4 or viral 
load test date)
routine HIV-
care visits

tests
least one CD4 
test within 
time period 
speci˜ed
tests
load tests
diagnosis/treatment or 
documentation 
of infection
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilis 
screenings
C screening 

of tuberculosis 
screening 

screening or date 
of documented 
immunity
immunization
pneumococcal 
immunization
vaccine/date 
of documented 
immunity
resistance testing


initiation
tests
tests

prescription or 
dispensing
test results for 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B, and 
tuberculosis


prescription or 
dispensing
load tests
load tests

or evidence of 
mental health 
disorder
for mental health 
services
for mental health 
services
or evidence of 
substance use 
disorder
for substance 
abuse services

for substance 
abuse services


status

need 

health screening
screening for 
substance use
housing, food 
security, and 
transportation 
needs assessment
for indicators and 
mediators
elements pertaining 
to subpopulations:  Race  Ethnicity  Sex  Gender identity  Sexual orientation  Date of birth   Zip code/other 
geographic markerMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 123
APPENDIX TABLE 2-2
 ContinuedDiagnosisLinkageEngagement & 
RetentionPrimary CareTreatment
Virologic 
SuppressionMediatorsDisparitiesData Elements
diagnosis
results at 
diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV 
care
AIDS or AIDS-
de˜ning illness 
(e.g., OIs)
diagnosis
visit for 
HIV care (or 
proxy of ˜rst 
or second 
CD4 or viral 
load test date)
routine HIV-
care visits

tests
least one CD4 
test within 
time period 
speci˜ed
tests
load tests
diagnosis/treatment or 
documentation 
of infection
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilis 
screenings
C screening 

of tuberculosis 
screening 

screening or date 
of documented 
immunity
immunization
pneumococcal 
immunization
vaccine/date 
of documented 
immunity
resistance testing


initiation
tests
tests

prescription or 
dispensing
test results for 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B, and 
tuberculosis


prescription or 
dispensing
load tests
load tests

or evidence of 
mental health 
disorder
for mental health 
services
for mental health 
services
or evidence of 
substance use 
disorder
for substance 
abuse services

for substance 
abuse services


status

need 

health screening
screening for 
substance use
housing, food 
security, and 
transportation 
needs assessment
for indicators and 
mediators
elements pertaining 
to subpopulations:  Race  Ethnicity  Sex  Gender identity  Sexual orientation  Date of birth   Zip code/other 
geographic markerMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
ConditionEtiological CofactorsGuidance for Optimal Management
Cervical/anal 
dysplasiaHuman 
papillomavirus 
(HPV); HIV*

of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-
Infected Adults and Adolescents (http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/content˜les/
Adult_OI.pdf)Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Cigarette smoking
and HIV (http://www.hiv.va.gov/provider/
manual-primary-care/copd.asp)DiabetesHIV*; highly active 
antiretroviral therapy 
(HAART)
*; diet; 
genetics; exercise
(http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/31/Supplement_1.toc)HepatomaHepatitis B virus; 
hepatitis C virus

Guidelines for the Clinical Management 
and Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis 
B and C Coinfection in HIV Infected 
Adults (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/j.1468-1293.2007.00535.x/pdf)
Management of Chronic Hepatitis B 
(http://www.easl.eu/assets/application/
˜les/b73c0da3c52fa1d_˜le.pdf)
and HIV Co-Infection: Recommendations 
from an HIV-HBV International Panel 
 (www.hem-aids.ru/system/˜les/
attachments/1659/aids_aids_pdf_183.pdf)HyperlipidemiaHIV; HAART; diet; 
genetics; exercise
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of 
High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (ATP 
III Final Report) (http://www.nhlbi.nih.
gov/guidelines/cholesterol/atp3_rpt.htm)
Management of Dyslipidemia in Human 
Immunode˜ciency Virus (HIV)-Infected 
Adults Receiving Antiretroviral Therapy: 
Recommendations of the HIV Medicine 
Association of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America and the Adult 
AIDS Clinical Trials Group (http://cid.
oxfordjournals.org/content/37/5/613.full)APPENDIX TABLE 2-3
 Co-Occurring Conditions and Etiological 
Cofactors with Link to Guidance for Optimal Management
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INDICATORS
 125
ConditionEtiological CofactorsGuidance for Optimal Management
OsteoporosisHIV*; HAART
*,**; lack of sun exposure; 
genetics; diet; 
substance use
Management of Persons Infected with 
Human Immunode˜ciency Virus: 2009 
Update by the HIV Medicine Association 
of the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
content/49/5/651.full)Renal diseaseHypertension; 
HAART
**; HIV
Chronic Kidney Disease in HIV-Infected 
Patients (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
content/40/11/1559.full)HypogonadismAdvanced HIV 
disease
Management of Persons Infected with 
Human Immunode˜ciency Virus: 2009 
Update by the HIV Medicine Association 
of the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
content/49/5/651.full)HepatitisChronic hepatitis B 
or C; antiretroviral 
hepatotoxicity
Management of Persons Infected with 
Human Immunode˜ciency Virus: 2009 
Update by the HIV Medicine Association 
of the Infectious Diseases Society of 
America (http://cid.oxfordjournals.org/
content/49/5/651.full)
Guidelines for the Management and 
Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B 
and C Coinfection in HIV-Infected 
Adults (http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/j.1468-1293.2007.00535.x/pdf)Sexually transmitted 
infectionsSyphilis; gonorrhea; 
chlamydia; herpes 
simplex; enteric 
infections (via fecal 
contact)


Guidelines, 2010 (http://www.cdc.gov/
std/treatment/2010/STD-Treatment-
2010-RR5912.pdf)Tuberculosis and 
other opportunistic 
infectionsHIV-associated 
immunode˜ciency

of Opportunistic Infections in HIV-
Infected Adults and Adolescents (http://www.aidsinfo.nih.gov/content˜les/
Adult_OI.pdf)APPENDIX TABLE 2-3
 ContinuedcontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
ConditionEtiological CofactorsGuidance for Optimal Management
Mental health 
disordersAnxiety, depression, 
post-traumatic stress; 
stigma; discrimination

hivguidelines.org/clinical-guidelines/hiv-and-mental-health/)
Substance-Using HIV-Infected Patients 
(http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinical-
guidelines/hiv-and-substance-use/mental-health-disorders-among-substance-using-hiv-infected-patients/) 
Substance use 
disordersAnxiety, depression, 
post-traumatic stress; 
stigma; discrimination

hivguidelines.org/clinical-guidelines/hiv-and-substance-use/)
Substance-Using HIV-Infected Patients 
(http://www.hivguidelines.org/clinical-
guidelines/hiv-and-substance-use/mental-health-disorders-among-substance-using-hiv-infected-patients/)Oral healthCandida; oral hairy 
leukoplakia; herpes 
simplex
 (http://www.hivguidelines.org/
clinical-guidelines/hiv-and-oral-health/)* Connection between condition and cofactor not proven.
** Tenofovir most commonly associated with this ˜nding.
APPENDIX TABLE 2-3
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1273Sources of Data on HIV Care to 
Assess Indicators of HIV Care and 
Access to Supportive Services
In this chapter the committee describes data from public and private 
data systems to assess the indicators for HIV care and mental health, sub
-stance abuse, and supportive services identi˜ed in Chapter 2. The chapter 
identi˜es what the committee determined to be the best sources of data 
for assessing the indicators, discusses ways to maximize their usefulness, 
and recommends approaches for supplementing current data systems to 
gauge the impact of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS) and the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) in improving HIV care 
(statement of task heading text and question 1). The chapter also describes 
other data collection and standardization efforts that could be utilized to 
monitor improvements in HIV care and how to regularly obtain data that 
capture the care experiences of people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) 
without substantial new investments (statement of task questions 2 and 3). 
The chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations.
IDENTIFICATION OF DATA SYSTEMS
To identify the best public and private sources of data to estimate 
the indicators related to continuous HIV care and access to services for 
PLWHA, the committee ˜rst compiled an initial list of 32 public and pri
-vate data systems or data collection agencies, including those that are HIV 
speci˜c and those that are not HIV speci˜c but include information on 
PLWHA. The list included data collection efforts and systems highlighted 
in the project proposal as well as others identi˜ed by committee members 
as important or potential sources of information on PLWHA, including care 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
and services provided to them. Box 3-1 summarizes the data systems and 
collection activities identi˜ed by the committee for further consideration.
Requests for information were sent to individuals familiar with 29 of 
the data systems and agencies. Several other potential sources of dataŠac-countable care organizations, the Enhanced Comprehensive HIV Preven-tion Planning (ECHPP) Project, and the 12 Cities ProjectŠwere still being 
implemented at the time of the inquiry.
1 Information was obtained from 27 
of the data systems or agencies contacted. The committee was unable to ob-tain information from Aetna and the HMO (Health Maintenance Organiza
-tion) Research Network. The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration provided information on several data collection activities. 
In total, the committee reviewed information on 31 different data collec-tion activities. The committee requested background information (e.g., the 
population for which data are collected; the method and frequency of data 
collection; whether the data are public, private, or proprietary) and details 
about the data elements captured by each of the data systems in the areas 
of HIV testing and linkage to care, clinical care, access to care, treatment 
and adherence, ˜nancial security, demographics, risk behavior assessment, 
and patient experience with care.
The data systems vary with respect to their design; the size, nature, 
and representativeness of population; the source and type of data; and the 
speci˜c data elements included. The committee took account of these fac-tors when considering which data systems, individually and in aggregate, 
would be most helpful for estimating the indicators presented in Chapter 2 
and for assessing the impact of the NHAS and the ACA in improving HIV 
care in the United States.
The committee identi˜ed 12 data systems it considered to be most use-ful for tracking the impact of the NHAS and the ACA on HIV care in the 
United States: 
˜˚
National HIV Surveillance System
˜˚
Medical Monitoring Project˜˚
Ryan White Services Report
˜˚
Ryan White AIDS Drug Assistance Program Reports
˜˚
Medicaid Statistical Information System
˜˚
Chronic Condition Data Warehouse
˜˚
North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and 
Design˜˚
CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems 
˜˚
HIV Research Network˜˚
Clinical Case Registry: HIV
1 Complete descriptions of ECHPP and the 12 Cities Project are provided later in this chapter.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 129
BOX 3-1
 Data Collection Activities Considered by the Committee
HIV CareŒSpeci˜c Data Systems
Public

















Report)














-tive Therapy




Private










Data Systems with Information that Includes People Living with HIV
Public













Data System











Private











Normative Health Information Database®], Wellpoint [HealthCore Inte
-grated Research Database®])



Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
˜˚
Kaiser Permanente˜˚
National Vital Statistics System
Two additional data systems provide useful information for track
-ing the impact of the initiatives on HIV care for two small but important 
subpopulations of HIV-infected individuals (American Indians and Alaska 
Natives; federal prisoners) and a third provides information relevant to 
housing assistance and other supportive services for PLWHA:
˜˚
Resource and Patient Management System
˜˚
Bureau of Prisons Electronic Medical Record˜˚
Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
Appendix Table 3-1 provides an overview of the data systems, includ
-ing their strengths and limitations, potential enhancements to consider, 
and implications of the ACA for each. Although no single data system 
can fully track the progress of the NHAS and the ACA, the committee 
concluded that a combination of these 15 data systems can provide a col-lective platform for helping to evaluate these initiatives and for estimating 
the indicators identi˜ed to measure the quality of HIV care and access to 
supportive services. Appendix Tables 3-2a through 3-2e show which of 
the data elements associated with the indicators are available in each data 
system. Appendix Table 3-2f shows which data systems capture additional 
data elements that were identi˜ed by the committee to be of interest, but 
not required to estimate the indicators. Appendix Tables 3-3a through 
3-3d summarize the indicators that can be estimated using information 
available from each of the data systems. Some of the data collection instru
-ments are publicly available on the Internet (see Appendix Table 3-4); these 
provide more complete information on the data captured by the relevant 
data system.SOURCES OF HIV CARE DATA
National HIV Surveillance System
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) maintains the 
National HIV Surveillance System (NHSS), which provides data about the 
HIV/AIDS epidemic for program planning and resource allocation. Started 
in 1981, the surveillance system is conducted in all 50 states and the Dis-trict of Columbia, as well as American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, the U.S. 
Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands. In addition, the three 
freely associated states (the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of 
the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau) report HIV surveillance 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 131
data to CDC. CDC funds and assists state and local health departments to 
collect the information, and the state and local HIV surveillance systems 
represent valuable additional sources of data pertinent to HIV care.2 The 
NHSS is a population-based census of all persons diagnosed and reported 
with HIV infection in the United States, including both those individuals 
receiving HIV care and those who are not in care.3 Since April 2008, all 50 states and the District of Columbia, as well 
as American Samoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Palau, Puerto 
Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands, have been using the same con˜dential 
name-based reporting standards for newly diagnosed cases of HIV. Al
-though the NHSS only includes data from those con˜dential name-based 
reporting systems that have been collecting HIV data for at least 4 years in 
the national aggregate numbers it publishes (CDC, 2010),4 all states and 
areas report HIV surveillance data to CDC, and the data for each report-ing area are included in the annual HIV Surveillance Report. As such, the 
population in the surveillance system is one of the most nationally repre-sentative and provides the largest available sample of diagnosed PLWHA 
in the United States.
Another advantage of the NHSS is the use of standardized de˜nitions 
of variables and reporting methods. In terms of data elements of interest 
to the committee,5 the system includes date of HIV/AIDS diagnosis; infor-mation on CD4+ cell count and plasma HIV RNA (viral load) closest to 
diagnosis; and optional ˜elds for HIV and substance abuse treatment refer
-ral, pregnancy status, and antiretroviral therapy (ART) status at the time of 
reporting. Data gathered also can be used to monitor disparities with regard 
to race, ethnicity, sex, gender, age, geographic area, and country of birth.
In addition, most jurisdictions report all CD4 count and viral load lab 
2 State, territorial, and local HIV surveillance systems may include data from code-based 
reports initiated prior to name-based reporting and anonymous results that have not been 
name ascertained and hence are not included in the NHSS. The proportion of these uncounted 
cases can be calculated precisely by the reporting areas that have made the transition to name-based reporting.
3 The national surveillance system is meeting its completeness standard of 
˛85 percent for all 
diagnosed cases being reported to the system (CDC response to IOM request for information, 
April 4, 2011).4 The 2009 national aggregate data published in 2012 includes data from the 46 states and 
5 dependent areas that had implemented con˜dential name-based reporting by January 2007 
(CDC, 2012, Commentary). Two additional states will be represented in the national aggregate 
data reported next year. The 
HIV Surveillance Report
 for 2012, to be issued in 2014, will be 
the ˜rst to include aggregate data from all 50 states (CDC, 2010).
5 Although the data systems considered by the committee capture many useful data elements, 
only those data elements identi˜ed by the committee to be of speci˜c interest for tracking 
the impact of the NHAS and ACA are discussed in the text. Appendix Table 3-4 lists the 
publicly available data collection instruments for the data systems discussed, which provide a 
comprehensive picture of the data elements captured by each.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
results,6 which permits the tracking of individuals™ health status over time. 
In those cases, additional information can be extrapolated or calculated 
from available data. For example, the time between diagnosis and initial 
(or second) CD4 and viral load test can serve as a surrogate for the length 
of time between diagnosis and entry into care, and the number of routine 
HIV care visits per year may be estimated from the number of HIV-related 
lab reports per year. One limitation of the NHSS, as noted in the NHAS 
(ONAP, 2010, p. 18), is the fact that although most jurisdictions report all 
lab results, such as CD4 and viral load results, not all do. Another limi-tation is the problem of incomplete or inaccurate reporting by clinicians 
treating PLWHA and by state and local health departments. Studies have 
raised questions about the accuracy and completeness of NHSS data. A 
study comparing self-reported dates of HIV diagnosis with those reported 
to the NHSS indicates that 56 percent of the date pairs agreed on the year 
of diagnosis, with another 17 percent differing by 1 year and 19 percent 
by 3 or more years (Hall et al., 2005). Thirty percent of self-reported dates 
were earlier than those reported in surveillance data (Hall et al., 2005). An-other study comparing date of ˜rst diagnosis based on self-report, medical 
record, and surveillance system data showed 51 percent agreement between 
self-reported year of diagnosis and the surveillance system and 70 percent 
agreement between the years reported in medical records and in surveillance 
(McCoy et al., 2010). Another 21 percent of self-reported dates differed by 
1 year, while 23 percent differed by 3 or more years (McCoy et al., 2010). 
On average the self-reported dates were earlier than those recorded in the 
surveillance data (McCoy et al., 2010).
According to one study of reporting completeness, 81 percent of HIV 
diagnoses are reported within 12 months of diagnosis (Hall et al., 2006). 
This ˜gure corresponds with the observation of McCoy and colleagues that 
only 81 percent of the cases in their study could be matched to surveil-lance data (McCoy et al., 2010). Incomplete reporting may be explained 
by lack of timeliness in reporting, failure to comply with case reporting, or 
an assumption that previously diagnosed cases already had been reported 
(McCoy et al., 2010). Structures are in place to improve the accuracy and 
6 As of June 15, 2010, 33 of 59 reporting areas (50 states, District of Columbia, 5 U.S. 
dependent areas, and 3 freely associated states) were reporting all CD4 and viral load test 
results (see Appendix Table 3-5), including 30 states, District of Columbia, Guam, and Puerto 
Rico (Personal communication, Amy Lansky, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 
October 6, 2011). One additional state (Kentucky) reported all CD4 results, but only detectable 
viral load results, and 7 additional states reported all viral load results, but not all CD4 results. More states are moving toward reporting all CD4 and viral load test results. Massachusetts, 
for example, mandated all CD4 and all HIV viral load results be electronically reported by 
clinical and commercial laboratories as of January 2012 (Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health, 2012).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 133
timeliness of reporting. For example, increased use of electronic laboratory 
reporting is expected to increase the completeness and timeliness of HIV 
surveillance reporting (Overhage et al., 2008).Despite current gaps in accuracy and reporting, the NHSS is one of 
the most representative HIV data systems that exists and offers a wealth 
of information. In terms of the data elements required to assess the core 
indicators for clinical HIV care, the NHSS, as previously noted, currently 
captures the individual™s date of diagnosis and the dates and results of the 
individual™s ˜rst and most recent viral load test and the CD4 test at, or 
closest to, the date that the individual was determined to be HIV-infected 
or to have AIDS (see Appendix Table 3-2a), as well as the ˜rst CD4+ cell 
count <200 cells/mm3. The ongoing CD4 and viral load test dates avail-able for most reporting areas may be used as a surrogate for dates of ˜rst 
and ongoing visits for routine HIV care in those jurisdictions. These data 
permit estimation of the indicators for linkage to and continuity of care, 
regular CD4 and viral load testing, and individuals in care who achieve or 
maintain a CD4+ cell count of greater than 350 cells/mm3 (see Appendix 
Table 3-3a).
A revised version of the Adult HIV Con˜dential Case Report was ap-proved by the Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB) in June 2011. The 
form includes a section that asks whether the individual ﬁhas ever taken 
any antiretrovirals (ARVs),ﬂ ARV medications taken, and dates ARVs were 
taken (date begun, date of last use). This information, which is collected 
ﬁif required by Health Department,ﬂ is required for state and local health 
department that participate in CDC™s HIV Incidence Surveillance (HIS) and 
Variant, Atypical and Resistant HIV Surveillance (VARHS) activities and 
is optional for all other surveillance areas (CDC response to IOM request 
for information, October 20, 2011). When available, the ARV information 
may permit estimation of the core indicators pertaining to ART initiation 
and subsequent durable virologic suppression. However, there currently 
is no mechanism by which the NHSS can routinely capture ARV usage 
longitudinally. Longitudinal individual-level ART data in conjunction with 
longitudinal CD4 and viral load test dates and results would more reliably 
permit calculation of the relevant core indicators. Enhancement of NHSS 
data in this way would allow its use to evaluate all of the core HIV care 
indicators for the majority of the population diagnosed with HIV in the 
United States.
7 Information is also captured on pregnancy status at the time 
the form is completed, which may be used to estimate the additional clinical 
7 Since the NHSS captures date of death, it can provide the data necessary to calculate the 
core indicator pertaining to all cause mortality among PLWHA. However, as discussed in 
more detail later in this report, the National Vital Statistics System also collects and calculates 
annual data on HIV mortality.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
care indicator pertaining to proportion of pregnant women with HIV who 
are receiving ART.
NHSS data also permit calculation of the core HIV care indicators for 
subpopulations of PLWHA based on age, race and ethnicity,
8 sex assigned 
at birth, current gender identity, geographic distribution, and country of 
birth. Although CDC does not currently capture information speci˜cally 
about individuals™ sexual orientation, which relates to the NHAS target 
and associated indicator pertaining to the proportion of diagnosed gay or 
bisexual men with undetectable viral load, combining data on sex assigned 
at birth with data collected on sex of sexual partner(s) (sex with male) can 
serve as a close proxy.
As is common with disease surveillance in the United States, the HIV 
surveillance system also does not collect information about income level. 
Unlike the previous version of the Adult HIV Con˜dential Case Report 
form, which included an optional section asking about the individual™s 
primary source of reimbursement for medical treatment (Medicaid, private 
insurance or HMO, no coverage, other public funding, clinical trial or 
government program, unknown), the current form does not collect that 
information. Collection of such data, especially if the Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program were added to the list of reimbursement source checkboxes 
provided on the form, would permit the use of NHSS data to estimate the 
indicators for the subpopulations speci˜cally identi˜ed in the NHAS and 
would help to facilitate the evaluation of data across data systems as dis
-cussed in Chapter 6.
Uniform reporting to CDC of ongoing CD4 and viral load test dates 
and results from all jurisdictions and collection of longitudinal information 
on ARV usage would permit the use of data from the NHSS to assess all of 
the core indicators for HIV care identi˜ed by the committee. Use of national 
surveillance system data would permit evaluation of the indicators for the 
vast majority of the population diagnosed with HIV in the United States, 
as well as for subpopulations based on race, ethnicity, sex, gender, age, and 
country of origin. In addition, capturing information on sexual orientation 
and maintaining current geographic areas of residence for HIV-infected 
individuals in the system would further enhance the ability of the NHSS 
to be used to evaluate the impact of the NHAS and health care reform on 
HIV care in the United States.
8 Like the other federal data systems, NHSS captures data on race and ethnicity as speci˜ed 
by OMB (1977, 1997a,b).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 135
Medical Monitoring ProjectInitiated in 2005 in response to an Institute of Medicine (IOM, 2004) 
report, the Medical Monitoring Project (MMP) is a CDC-sponsored popu-lation-based surveillance system designed to collect comprehensive clinical 
and behavioral service need, utilization, and outcomes data on a nationally 
representative sample of adults (˛18 years of age) living with HIV/AIDS 
who are receiving medical care from outpatient facilities in the United 
States and Puerto Rico (Blair et al., 2011). MMP is the ˜rst project since 
the HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study (Bozzette et al., 1998) almost 
15 years ago that is designed to obtain comprehensive information about 
HIV care from a nationally representative population of PLWHA who are 
receiving care. MMP employs a probability proportional to size sampling 
design to obtain cross-sectional probability samples of its target population. 
A sample of about 400 individuals from each of 26 project areas (approxi-mately 10,400 people) was selected each year for the 2007 and 2008 data 
collection cycles.9 Data are obtained from individual patient interviews and 
medical record review.
MMP captures most of the data elements needed to assess all of the 
indicators identi˜ed by the committee (see Appendix Tables 3-2a to 3-2e 
and 3-3a to 3-3c), including data on supportive services, which makes it 
an attractive source of data. In terms of demographic data, the interview 
component of MMP captures self-reported data on race, ethnicity, sex at 
birth, gender identity (male, female, transgender), and sexual orientation 
(homosexual, heterosexual, bisexual). In addition to the comprehensive-ness of the data currently captured, the nature of the interview component 
of MMP allows ˚exibility to modify the questionnaire to capture different 
data elements that are subsequently determined to be useful. Starting with 
the 2011 cycle, for example, MMP is capturing data on stigma and dis-crimination, making it the only data system to do so among those examined 
by the committee.
An additional strength of MMP is its design to generate results that are 
nationally representative of the population of HIV-infected adults in care 
in the United States, which makes it a potentially valuable tool for track
-ing changes in access to and quality of HIV care in the country. Although 
MMP only includes HIV-infected individuals who are in care, the sample 
is not limited to those receiving care through a speci˜c payer (Medicaid, 
Medicare, Veterans Health Administration [VHA], private or HMO) as is 
the case with a number of other data systems.
Despite its strengths, MMP also has several limitations. One signi˜cant 
9 Details of the sampling method are described in the MMP 2009 protocol (CDC, 2009) and 
summarized in Blair et al. (2011) and on the MMP website (CDC, 2011b).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
concern about MMP is its low participation rate. For the 2007 data col-lection cycle, 10,192 individuals were determined to be eligible for partici
-pation. The median participation rate was 40 percent, ranging from 3 to 
76 percent depending on the project area. Interview data ultimately were 
reported for 3,643 of the 3,944 participants interviewed; medical record 
abstraction data were not reported (Blair et al., 2011). As a result of the 
low participation rate, the data for the 2007 collection cycle may not be 
nationally or locally representative of HIV-infected adults receiving care 
in the United States. Steps have been taken to improve participation rates 
beginning with the 2009 collection cycle, and CDC anticipates that future 
data will permit nationally representative results (Blair et al., 2011).
10 It 
is not clear, however, that the efforts will completely resolve the issues of 
nonresponse bias. For example, studies have found that PLWHA who are 
harder to reach and/or engage for study participation are more likely to be 
homeless or unstably housed; to be struggling with mental health or drug 
use problems; to be socially isolated; and to have high rates of missed ap-pointments. Speci˜c efforts to engage such populations are needed to ensure 
their representation in the study.
A second concern about MMP is the potential for social desirability 
response bias in the responses to the interview questions. Since many of the 
the interviews are conducted ﬁin person,ﬂ respondents may be reluctant to 
answer accurately if doing so means providing what they perceive to be less 
ﬁsocially appropriateﬂ responses to sensitive questions (Blair et al., 2011). 
Providing participants with a means to enter their responses to sensitive 
questions directly into the computer or on the response form is one way 
to help counteract social desirability response bias. This approach would 
avoid the necessity of sharing their responses with the interviewer and could 
improve the accuracy of the information collected (Carr et al., 1983; Greist 
et al., 1973; Kobak et al., 1996; Lawrence et al., 2010; Lucas et al., 1977; 
Metzger et al., 2000; Petrie and Abell, 1994; Waruru et al., 2005; Willig, 
2011), although a study of clients at an addiction treatment center found 
no signi˜cant differences in the reliability of information on drug, alcohol, 
or tobacco use collected through computerized interviews, face-to-face in-terviews, or self-report formats (Skinner and Allen, 1983).A third concern is the potential inaccuracy of clinical data (lab values, 
vaccinations, ART prescription) collected through participant self-report 
(Blair et al., 2011). Although a problem for reports of ˜ndings based 
on clinical information obtained solely from interviews (e.g., Blair et al. 
2011), medical record abstraction is another component of MMP (CDC, 
2009, pp. 22-25), which permits comparison with and corroboration of 
10 Some interview and medical record abstraction data from MMP™s 2009-2010 cycle have 
been reported (CDC, 2011d).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 137
the self-reported clinical data. It is important that data from the medical 
record abstraction component of the protocol be available to permit such 
cross-checking and con˜rmation of self-reported information. The 2009 
MMP protocol speci˜es that in project areas that have the surveillance 
authority to abstract medical records of selected patients without their 
consent, medical record abstraction should be completed for all sampled 
patients, including those who decline to participate in the interview or who 
cannot be located for interview (CDC, 2009, p. 25). In project areas with 
a more narrow de˜nition of surveillance, where record abstraction cannot 
be completed without patient consent, minimal data can be collected on 
all sampled patients. The minimum data set contains the same ˜elds as the 
NHSS case report form, and therefore these data can be collected in all 
project areas under HIV/AIDS surveillance authority.
Despite its current limitations, the research infrastructure, design, 
and implementation efforts that are in place make MMP a promising 
tool for monitoring care among HIV-infected adults receiving care in 
the United States. The committee supports the current efforts of CDC to 
improve individual participation and completion rates. Other strategies 
to increase participation might include providing additional incentives 
for study participants11 and participating clinics or reducing the time 
required to complete the full interview by selectively eliminating certain 
questions.12 In addition, implementation of the ﬁminimum data setﬂ re
-cords abstraction could help to provide some data for individuals who 
decline to participate.Beginning with the 2012 data collection cycle, medical record abstrac-tion will focus only on the 12 months preceding the interview; earlier clini-cal data will no longer be captured (Personal communication, Amy Lansky, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, October 20, 2011). Although 
limiting medical record abstraction to the preceding 12 months likely will 
expedite collection of the data, certain data elements required to estimate 
some HIV care indicators may no longer be captured. For example, data 
on hepatitis B screening, vaccination, and immunity would not be captured 
if the relevant testing and immunization took place more than 12 months 
prior. Another option for reducing the number of questions in the standard 
interview without undermining the breadth of information provided might 
be to eliminate (some of) the self-reported clinical data if the same infor-11 The 2009 MMP protocol speci˜es that individual participants will receive approximately 
$40 in cash or cash equivalent for participating in the interview (CDC, 2009, p. 21).
12 Currently the MMP protocol offers two interview instruments: the Standard Question-naire, which is the default and takes approximately 45 minutes to complete, and the Short 
Questionnaire, which is reserved for individuals who speak neither English nor Spanish or 
are too sick to respond to the Standard Questionnaire and takes approximately 20 minutes 
to complete. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
mation already is being harvested through medical record abstraction. In 
addition, as electronic health records (EHRs) become more prevalent, MMP 
may be able to increase the scope of medical abstraction while retrieving 
and processing the data in a timely way. Such enhancements would help 
to make MMP better able to ful˜ll its promise as an expanded surveillance 
system for monitoring HIV care in the United States.
The potential for MMP to provide comprehensive information for 
tracking improvements in access to and quality of HIV care and sup-portive services in the United States is great; however, the low completion 
rate to date and the potential for nonresponse bias raise concerns about 
the representativeness of the data, especially for the homeless or unstably 
housed population and those with mental health and/or substance use 
disorders. Implementation of strategies to improve participation rates, es-pecially among hard-to-reach populations, and to expedite the processing 
and availability of the data obtained through medical record abstraction 
would signi˜cantly increase the value of the project.
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program Data
According to the Health Resources and Services Administration 
(HRSA), approximately 529,000 people currently receive at least one medi
-cal, health, or related support service through the Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program each year (HHS, 2011a). The AIDS Drug Assistance Program 
(ADAP), under Part B of the Ryan White Program, reported 213,764 clients 
enrolled during FY 2009, including 33,672 new enrollees, and 190,936 
clients served (NASTAD, 2011, Table 5). The Ryan White Program is the 
third-largest federally funded program serving PLWHA (after Medicare and 
Medicaid) and the largest that serves only PLWHA (KFF, 2009b). Twenty-
nine percent ($5.4 billion) of federal spending for HIV care was allocated 
to the Ryan White Program in FY 2011 (Kates, 2011, p. 1). The majority 
of Ryan White Program clients are low income, with approximately 70 
percent at or below the federal poverty level (FPL) (HRSA, 2010, p. 45, 
Table 6). 
HRSA launched a new reporting scheme in 2009, replacing the Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS Program Annual Data Report 
with the Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program Service Report (RSR). The RSR captures individual 
client-level data annually for individuals who receive one or more Ryan 
WhiteŒfunded services (client report), as well as grantee and service pro-vider information (grantee report and service provider report). The RSR 
client report generates a unique client identi˜er for every Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program client based on the client™s name, birth date, and other 
characteristics; the identi˜er is then encrypted before being sent to HRSA, 
further protecting the client™s privacy. Use of unique client identi˜ers not 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 139
only permits tracking of individual clients across providers, generating 
more accurate client counts, but also permits the capture of individual-level 
demographic, clinical, and service utilization data, which can be used to 
assess quality of care received.13The client report captures many of the data elements needed to assess 
the core clinical HIV care indicators identi˜ed by the committee (Appendix 
Tables 3-2a, 3-3a). The client report captures the year of birth (but not the 
full date); date of death; dates of ambulatory or outpatient HIV care visits; 
and the dates and results of all CD4 counts and viral load tests within the 
reporting period. In addition, the client report captures the year, but not the 
full date, of HIV diagnosis and whether the individual has been prescribed 
ART at any time within the reporting period, but not the date of ART 
initiation or subsequent prescriptions. Finally, the client report records the 
date of the client™s ˜rst ambulatory or outpatient care visit with the pro
-vider. However, the visit need not be for HIV care, nor is it necessarily the 
client™s ˜rst HIV care visit following diagnosis, which is required to assess 
the indicator pertaining to linkage to care.The RSR client report also captures data relevant to the indicators 
related to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services (see 
Appendix Tables 3-2b, 3-3b, 3-3d): screening for both mental health and 
substance use within the reporting period; number of mental health service 
visits; number of substance abuse service visits (inpatient and outpatient) 
in each quarter of the reporting period; housing status (stable permanent, 
temporary, unstable); and receipt of housing, food, and (medical) trans
-portation services in each quarter of the reporting period (HRSA, 2011). 
The report does not provide information on referral for mental health or 
substance abuse services (e.g., whether the services were received within 
60 days of referral); direct (e.g., dates) assessment of housing, food, or 
transportation need; or the proportion of clients who are food insecure or 
have an unmet need for transportation services, although such information 
might be inferred from the number of clients who are receiving food or 
transportation services. 
The client report also collects data speci˜c to a number of the addi
-tional clinical HIV care indicators (Appendix Tables 3-2c, 3-3c). These data 
include whether a client has been screened for tuberculosis (TB) during the 
12-month reporting period or since being diagnosed with HIV; whether a 
client was screened for syphilis during the reporting period (excluding those under 18 years of age who are not sexually active); whether a client was 
screened for hepatitis B and C during the reporting period or since diagnosis 
13 Although the Ryan White client-level data will be de-duplicated, the process will identify 
some false negatives and false positives, as is the case with any identi˜er based on personal 
characteristics.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
with HIV; and whether a client has completed the hepatitis B vaccination se
-ries. In addition, data are collected on the pregnancy status of HIV-infected 
female clients, the stage of pregnancy at which they entered prenatal care, 
and whether they were prescribed ART to prevent maternal-to-child trans
-mission of HIV. Data relevant to the additional clinical HIV care indicators 
that are not captured by the client report include dates of chlamydia and 
gonorrhea screenings; dates of in˚uenza and pneumococcal immunizations; 
and data pertaining to ART drug resistance testing and ART initiation in 
individuals with HIV nephropathy, hepatitis B or C, or TB.
Although the data elements collected by the client report are not identi-cal to those enumerated for the indicators identi˜ed by the committee, they 
provide information that may serve as a proxy for estimating many of the 
indicators. In addition, the RSR client report captures demographic data 
that specify subpopulations within Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients 
including race and ethnicity; gender (male, female, transgender, unknown; 
and for transgender, male-to-female, female-to-male, unknown); geographic 
code (˜rst three digits of client zip code); income as a percentage of the FPL; 
and sources of health insurance.
ADAPs independently report data to HRSA, and ADAP reporting also 
is undergoing revision. The October 1, 2012 through March 31, 2013, data 
collection period is the ˜rst to capture individual client-level data for the 
ADAP Data Report (ADR), replacing the ADAP Quarterly Report. Like 
the RSR, the ADR will employ unique client identi˜ers using the same al-gorithm and encryption process as those used for the RSR. The encrypted 
client identi˜ers are meant to carry across the reports. In the future, al-though the reports will remain separate, client-level data from the RSR and 
the ADR will be merged into a single system, and the two reports will be 
linked for those clients receiving ADAP and other Ryan WhiteŒfunded ser
-vices (Personal communication, Faye Malitz, Health Resources and Services 
Administration, October 25, 2011).
Appendix Tables 3-2a through 3-2e summarize the data elements per
-taining to the committee™s indicators that are captured by the 
ADAP Quar-terly Report and the ADR, including those that are new for the ADR. 
Appendix Tables 3-3a through 3-3d map the committee™s indicators to the 
various data elements that are or will be captured by the ADAP reports.14 The ADAP reports do not supplement the data already captured in the RSR 
in terms of those needed to evaluate the committee™s indicators. However, 
for the population of ADAP clients who do not receive other Ryan White 
14 No data elements from the ADAP Quarterly Report that are pertinent to the committee™s 
indicators will be dropped in moving to the ADR, although new data elements of interest 
will be added. The committee refers to ﬁthe ADAP reportsﬂ jointly when it is unnecessary to 
distinguish between them.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 141
services, the ADR in particular can provide data to estimate a few of the 
core clinical HIV care indicators, such as the proportion of ADAP clients 
who have received CD4 and/or viral load testing in the past year (Appendix 
Table 3-3a). The ADR also may be able to provide the data to estimate the 
indicators pertaining to the proportion of clients with a CD4+ cell count 
that is less than 500 cells/mm
3 who are on ART; the proportion of clients 
on ART for 12 or more months who have an undetectable viral load; and 
the proportion of female ADAP clients who are pregnant and on ART. 
However the data for these indicators are limited to ART drugs that are 
fully ADAP funded. If a client is not receiving at least one such drug, that 
person will not be identi˜ed as being on ART.
The ADAP reports capture no data pertaining to mental health or 
substance use screening or services or to the need for or use of supportive 
services for housing, food, and transportation. Demographic data captured 
in the ADAP reports are more limited than those captured by the RSR, lim-ited to race and ethnicity, gender (as in RSR), and for the 
ADAP Quarterly 
Report, percentage of clients with an annual household income less than 
200 percent of the FPL. The ADR includes year of birth and insurance 
status or type, as well as income as a percentage of the FPL.
As a stand-alone data system, the ADAP reports are of limited useful-ness in providing the data needed to estimate the indicators identi˜ed by 
the committee for tracking the provision of HIV care and mental health, 
substance use, and supportive services in the United States. However, ADAP 
data may prove useful for assessing waiting time for access to ART drugs 
and the proportion of people who need, but do not have access to, ART. 
The committee supports HRSA™s intention to merge the client-level data 
from the RSR and the ADR into a single system.
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program data are an important source of infor
-mation for monitoring access to quality HIV care and supportive services 
because of the population represented and the importance of the program 
in providing care and services to many disadvantaged populations. By 
increasing health insurance options and extending Medicaid coverage to 
nondisabled individuals who meet the expanded income criteria, imple-mentation of the ACA is expected to reduce the dependency of a portion 
of current Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program clients on the program to meet 
their health care service needs, although the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Pro
-gram likely will continue to serve an important role in providing HIV care 
to individuals who remain uninsured. Reduction in the use of Ryan White 
funds for medical care would permit the redirection of funds to other vital 
Ryan WhiteŒfunded services. The Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program has an 
established role in providing a comprehensive array of services beyond 
medical care, including medical case management and treatment adherence 
counseling, mental health and substance abuse treatment services, oral care, Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
food assistance, medical transportation, and psychosocial support (IOM, 
2011, p. 20). Increased emphasis on such services through continued fund-ing of the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program and decreased demand for medi
-cal care among clients would continue to advance the goals of the NHAS in 
important ways, for example, by supporting PLWHA ﬁwho have challenges 
meeting their basic needs, such as housingﬂ (ONAP, 2010, p. 21). As one 
of the few data systems examined by the committee that capture data on 
housing, food, and medical transportation need, an increase in Ryan White 
funding available for such supportive services would make it an even more 
valuable source of data on those services.
Although the population of PLWHA receiving services through the 
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program is a large and important one, it is not na
-tionally representative of PLWHA, and use of Ryan White data to estimate 
the indicators will only permit tracking of the indicators for that group. 
Another dif˜culty with Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program data is that data 
pertaining to medical and supportive services received are reported only 
when the services were funded with Ryan White dollars. Such services in
-clude mental health and substance abuse treatment visits and housing, food, 
and transportation services. An organization might receive funding from a 
number of different sources, and if a client were to receive some services 
funded, at least in part, through the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program and 
other services funded exclusively by another source, only the former would 
be reported to HRSA. Ryan WhiteŒfunded services vary widely among and 
within states, depending on how state and local jurisdictions tailor services 
to meet the needs of local communities (Rawlings and Hopson, 2009). 
There are persistent dollar-per-case federal allocations to states (Martin 
and Keenan, 2011), which are associated with the size and scope of ADAP 
drug formularies (Martin and Barry, 2011). If other sources of state and 
local funding are used to provide these additional services, they will not 
appear on the client™s record. To obtain a comprehensive picture of access 
to needed services within the Ryan White HIV/AIDS client population, it 
would be helpful to have information on all pertinent services received by 
clients regardless of funding source, as is the case for clinical data. The clini
-cal information reported by providers who receive Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program funding includes all of the data requested for each Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program client, regardless of how the service was paid for and 
who delivered it. Thus, all of a given client™s outpatient or ambulatory care 
visit dates, CD4 and viral load counts, and the like within the reporting 
period are included.Along with MMP, the RSR is one of two data systems to provide infor
-mation on the need for and utilization of supportive services for housing, 
food, and transportation, as well as HIV medical care and mental health 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 143
and substance use services.
15 The data™s usefulness is limited by the report
-ing only of those supportive services that are funded through the Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS Program. Just as all pertinent clinical data are reported 
by Ryan WhiteŒfunded providers for clients regardless of payment source, 
reporting of complete data for supportive service utilization would provide 
more robust information for tracking the impact of the NHAS and health 
care reform on the provision of these services. Absent reporting of all sup-portive service utilization, an indication of whether clients had received any 
non-Ryan White-funded services would allow analyses of Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program data to be strati˜ed accordingly.
Medicaid Statistical Information System
Medicaid is the largest safety-net health insurance program in the 
United States, providing health and long-term care coverage to more than 
59 million low-income and disabled bene˜ciaries (KFF, 2011a). Although 
PLWHA represent less than 1 percent of the total Medicaid population, in 
FY 2007 Medicaid provided coverage for 47 percent of PLWHA estimated 
to be receiving regular medical care: 212,892 Medicaid bene˜ciaries were 
HIV infected (Kates, 2011, p. 1). Medicaid is ˜nanced jointly by the federal 
and state governments and represents the largest expenditure on health care coverage for PLWHA when federal and state funds are combined. Together, 
federal and state Medicaid expenditures totaled $9.3 billion in FY 2011, 
accounting for 51 percent of federal spending for HIV care (Kates, 2011, 
p. 1). Medicare accounts for another $5.4 billion (29 percent) of fed-eral funding for HIV care (Kates, 2011, p. 1). Approximately 29 percent 
of Medicaid bene˜ciaries with HIV were dually eligible for Medicare in 
FY 2007 (Kates, 2011, p. 1).The Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS) is the claims pro
-cessing system for Medicaid, which captures utilization data and man-agement information pertaining to medical care and services provided to 
Medicaid recipients. MSIS includes the full population of people with HIV/AIDS enrolled in Medicaid in the United States,16 and, given Medicaid™s 
prominent role in HIV care (covering 47 percent of PLWHA estimated to 
be in care), it not only captures a signi˜cant share of PLWHA but also is 
a critical source of care and coverage that should be assessed. Currently,  
15 Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA) is a federal program under the 
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) that provides short- and long-term housing assistance to PLWHA and their families (HUD, 2011b). HOPWA data, discussed 
later in the chapter, provide important information on housing needs and services for PLWHA, 
but are focused primarily on housing.
16 It does not include information on individuals who are eligible for, but not enrolled in, 
Medicaid.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
to qualify for Medicaid individuals must be low income and be ﬁcat
-egorically eligible.ﬂ Most Medicaid bene˜ciaries with HIV (74 percent) 
qualify through the disability pathway, meaning their disease is suf˜ciently 
advanced to preclude them from working (Kates, 2011, p. 4). The antici-pated expansion of Medicaid under the ACA will remove the categorical 
eligibility requirement and extend eligibility to most people under the age 
of 65 who have incomes less than 133 percent of the FPL (Kates, 2011, p. 
4). The resulting increase in Medicaid™s role in covering care for PLWHA 
makes MSIS a particularly important source of data for tracking the impact 
of the ACA on HIV care.States are required to report Medicaid bene˜ciary and claims data quar-terly to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) through the 
Medical Management Information System (MMIS).17 These data, which 
include demographic and monthly enrollment data for each person covered 
by Medicaid in the quarter (eligible ˜les) and adjudicated claims data (paid 
claims ˜les), are captured in MSIS. Claims ˜les are categorized by inpatient, 
long-term care, prescription drug, and noninstitutional services and include 
data on types and dates of services, providers, costs and types of reimburse
-ment, and epidemiological variables (CMS, 2011c).
MSIS data are available in two forms: MSIS ˜les and Medicaid Analytic 
eXtract (MAX) ˜les. MSIS ˜les are organized quarterly for the federal ˜scal 
year (OctoberŒSeptember) and by transaction or claims adjudication date. 
They cover all enrollment transactions, including retroactive enrollment 
and corrections, as well as all interim claims records, including originals, 
voids, credits, debits, and the like. MAX ˜les contain data extracted from 
the MSIS ˜les and formatted to facilitate research and public policy needs. 
They are organized chronologically by calendar year, based on date of ser
-vice, and MSIS claims records (initial, interim, voids, and adjustments) are 
combined or consolidated to generate ˜nal records for speci˜c services cov
-ered by Medicaid as accurately as possible (CCW, 2011c; CMS, 2011a,d). 
MAX ˜les include a person summary ˜le, as well as inpatient hospital, 
long-term care, prescription drug, and other services ˜les.
18MAX ˜les are available to approved academic researchers and certain 
government agencies through the CMS Chronic Condition Data Warehouse 
(CCW). MAX ˜les currently are available for 1999 through 2008, although 2008 data are not yet available for all states (ResDAC, 2011a).
19 MSIS ˜les 
17 CMS plans to move to monthly collection of data within 2 years (CMS response to IOM 
request for information, April 8, 2011).
18 More detailed descriptions of MSIS and MAX ˜les, and the differences between them, are 
available from CMS (2011d). See also RESDAC (2011b), CCW (2011b), and CMS (2010).
19 Data are currently missing for Hawaii, Missouri, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, Utah, 
Wisconsin, and the District of Columbia, although these data were expected to be available 
on or about October 31, 2011 (CMS, 2011a).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 145
are available through FY 2009 (48 states) and for 22 states for FY 2010 
(CMS, 2011b). Although most states complete their reporting within a year, 
not all do, resulting in about a 2-year lag time for MSIS data ˜les. The lag 
time is somewhat longer (2.5-3 years) for MAX data ˜les because the raw 
MSIS data must be extracted and consolidated (CCW, 2011c). A built-in 
lag of at least 13 to 14 months is needed to ensure that claims for most 
services delivered in a given calendar year are captured, and another 9 to 
10 months are needed to validate and process the data (ResDAC, 2011b).20 Advantages of MSIS as a source of data for HIV care include the large 
number of HIV-infected individuals represented (although enrollees with 
HIV are identi˜able only if they have a diagnosis for HIV entered in the 
system); strong representation of ﬁvulnerable populations,ﬂ including racial and ethnic minorities; regular collection of data over time (currently quar-terly, moving to monthly within 2 years [CMS response to IOM request for 
information, April 8, 2011]), linkage of data to unique personal identi˜ers, 
and an existing data processing and data retrieval structure. In addition, 
diagnostic and treatment information is reported by providers, which may 
reduce inaccuracies inherent in patient self-report, although nonclinical 
factors can affect provider reporting also. For example, changes in disease 
recognition, treatment, and prescription patterns, as well as billing or re-imbursement considerations, may have an impact on provider reporting 
(Crystal et al., 2007). Inaccurate reporting (errors, coding variation, desig
-nation) is another nonclinical factor that can affect the accuracy of the data 
available from MSIS or MAX. MSIS and MAX data include eligibility and 
claims data and limited demographic data. As is the case with all claims 
databases, information is available to chart ﬁquality of careﬂ based solely 
on medical service and medication utilization. Dates of service, diagnosis 
and procedure codes, and provider codes are available, but core outcome 
measures such as CD4 and viral load test results are not. Some negative 
outcome indicators would be available, such as treatment for an opportu-nistic infection or mortality, based on date of death. Assessment for mental 
health treatment needs or medical comorbidities would be indicated only 
if a diagnosis code appears in the case ˜le to justify treatment or medica-tion. Appendix Tables 3-2a through 3-2e summarize which data elements 
of interest to the committee are captured in MSIS.
One challenge of using MSIS or MAX data is identi˜cation of the 
population of PLWHA who are Medicaid bene˜ciaries. Variations in diag
-nostic and other service coding may adversely affect the usefulness of any 
particular group of codes for accurately identifying the Medicaid popula-tion with a given condition. Therefore, use of a combination of diagnosis 
20 Although 22 to 24 months has been reported as the minimum lag time for MAX data 
(RESDAC, 2011b), it appears that 30 to 36 months may be more realistic.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
codes (for HIV/AIDS), common procedure codes (CD4 counts; HIV RNA 
tests), and prescription drug codes (ARVs) is likely the best way to identify 
the maximum number of PLWHA among Medicaid recipients with the 
greatest positive predictive value (see Crystal et al., 2007; Koroukian et al., 
2003). Dif˜culties other than those related to coding also limit the ability 
to identify the full population of PLWHA within Medicaid. The ˚uctuat
-ing eligibility of some bene˜ciaries causes those individuals to move in and 
out of coverage during the course of a year, meaning any medical care they 
receive in the period during which they are not covered is not captured by 
Medicaid claims data. Dual eligibility with Medicare also causes claims 
covered by Medicare not to be captured in Medicaid data. Each of these 
situations makes it probable that MSIS or MAX data on encounters will 
not provide a complete accounting of medical services received by individu-als in the group (Koroukian et al., 2003). Not only may some Medicaid 
recipients with HIV not be identi˜ed at all, but a number of others within 
these groups will have incomplete encounter data in MSIS, resulting in an 
underestimation of the indicators for the population of Medicaid recipients 
(Crystal et al., 2007).Similar to the cases in which Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program data 
include only Ryan WhiteŒfunded services, even if the MSIS data were com
-plete and accurate, state variation in covered services beyond a set of ﬁman-datoryﬂ services required to receive matching federal funds and service 
payment structure (fee-for-service versus prepaid plans) would mean those 
data still would not provide a complete accounting of service utilization 
by individual recipients. For example, MSIS may include data pertaining 
to a given type of service for some bene˜ciaries (those residing in a state in 
which the service is covered) but not capture data on the provision of the 
same type of service for Medicaid bene˜ciaries residing in a state where the 
service is not covered. In addition, states may place limits on the number 
of occurrences (prescriptions, inpatient days, provider visits) that Medicaid 
will cover. In both types of case, Medicaid claims data will not provide a 
complete picture of service utilization by individual bene˜ciaries.
In other cases, MSIS data may not be complete or accurate. Fee-for-ser
-vice plans generate fairly complete utilization data because reimbursement 
depends on ˜ling a claim for each covered service. However, in FY 2007, 
71 percent of Medicaid bene˜ciaries with HIV received some covered 
services through managed care plans (Kates, 2011). Although states are 
required to report utilization for bene˜ciaries in prepaid plans (HMOs, 
preferred health plans), the accuracy and completeness of these data are 
suspect (CCW, 2011c; Crystal et al., 2007). Both situations (variations in 
Medicaid coverage, incomplete or inaccurate Medicaid data) may result 
in incomplete service utilization data being available from MSIS on spe
-ci˜c individuals. Identi˜cation of the most common service providers for 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 147
individuals with variable Medicaid eligibility or of services not covered by 
Medicaid (e.g., Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program) would permit use of data 
from these additional sources to gain a more complete measure of the full 
set of services received by these individuals. Likewise, combined Medicare 
and Medicaid data for individuals dually eligible for both programs also 
would provide a more complete picture of service usage. As discussed in 
Chapter 6, although combining data from multiple data systems to generate 
a more complete measure of service utilization for the purpose of estimating 
the recommended indicators is a theoretical ideal, doing so in practice poses numerous statistical challenges.
Demographic data of interest are limited to date of birth, date of death, 
gender (male, female), race and ethnicity, and zip code. MSIS also collects 
limited information on private payer status. Income (as a percentage of the 
FPL) is an optional ˜eld, although information about income level could 
be inferred based on eligibility criteria. Also, data are collected on whether 
the bene˜ciary received Temporary Assistance for Needy Families bene˜ts 
during the month. MSIS links data to unique individual identi˜ers (either 
MSIS generated or Social Security number, depending on the state), so that 
information may be tracked across time for individuals, permitting evalua-tion of their longitudinal care experiences to the extent permitted by claims 
data. The demographic data collected would permit assessment of indica-tors for racial and ethnic subgroups of interest, as well as subgroups based 
on location of residence and payer status. Since data on sexual orientation 
are not collected, MSIS data do not permit estimation of the indicators for 
the NHAS-targeted subgroup of gay and bisexual men, although separate 
assessments could be made for men and women with data based on sex. 
With respect to the core indicators of HIV care, MSIS could be expected 
to provide the data needed to assess the indicators pertaining to continuity 
of care and regular CD4 and viral load testing, based on claims submitted 
for of˜ce visits with HIV listed as one of the diagnosis codes and claims 
submitted for CD4 and viral load tests, all of which capture dates of service 
(see Appendix Table 3-3a). However, any services received by an individual 
that were not reported to CMS would not be included in MSIS, resulting 
in gaps in the information available. MSIS captures date of death and so 
could provide data to calculate the mortality rate within its population of 
PLWHA.
MSIS captures neither the date of HIV diagnosis nor the date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV care; thus it cannot be used to assess the linkage-to-care in-dicator. Also, since MSIS does not capture clinical data, such as the results 
of CD4 counts and viral load tests, it cannot independently provide the 
information needed to assess the remaining core indicators of clinical HIV 
care, even though it collects data on the prescription and (re)˜ll dates for 
ART drugs, when claims are submitted.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
MSIS captures data pertaining to screening and visits for mental health 
and substance use services covered by Medicaid, but it does not speci˜cally 
capture the dates of (hence, the time between) diagnosis or referral and ˜rst 
visit for services. With regard to supportive services, MSIS collects data 
on the provision of social work or case management services, but speci˜c 
information pertaining to housing, food, and transportation needs is not 
captured (see Appendix Tables 3-2b, 3-3b).
For the additional indicators (see Appendix Tables 3-2c, 3-3c), MSIS 
could provide data to assess the clinical HIV care indicators relating to TB, 
sexually transmitted infections (STIs), and hepatitis B and C screenings, 
along with in˚uenza, pneumococcal pneumonia, and hepatitis B immu
-nizations, although clinical information about whether the TB test results 
were interpreted or hepatitis B immunity was documented would not be 
available. Data would also be available to assess the indicators pertaining 
to drug resistance testing and the proportion of HIV-infected pregnant 
women on ART, although pregnancy status would have to be extrapolated 
from related diagnostic or service codes. Data to assess indicators relating 
to timely diagnosis of HIV infection and those involving clinical markers 
for ART initiation would not be readily available.
Despite the importance of data from the Medicaid population for 
tracking the impact of the NHAS and the ACA on HIV care, MSIS and 
MAX data have some limitations. As previously noted, the lag time from 
service utilization to reporting completion (especially for MAX data) may 
be problematic for time-sensitive policy evaluation. In addition, Medicaid 
data alone may not provide a complete accounting of service utilization by 
bene˜ciaries who receive services from multiple funding sources, and strate-gies must be employed to help correct for that additional encounter data. 
Stephen Crystal and colleagues (2007) list some ﬁbest practicesﬂ for work-ing with Medicaid data. Development of methods for combining data from 
or analyzing data across additional relevant data systems (e.g., Medicare, 
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program) might provide more complete informa
-tion on service utilization for individuals receiving services through two or 
more of the programs. One such effort is the database of linked Medicaid 
and Medicare data developed by CMS in 2009, which contains service 
utilization and expenditures data for 9 million dually eligible bene˜ciaries 
(CHCS, 2010). CCW assigns a unique bene˜ciary identi˜cation number for 
the MAX and Medicare records of dually eligible bene˜ciaries to permit 
tracking and analysis of data across programs (CCW, 2011c, p. 4).
Chronic Condition Data Warehouse
Although not representing as large a patient population as Medicaid, 
Medicare accounted for 29 percent of federal spending on HIV in FY 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 149
2011 (Kates, 2011), the largest source of federal spending on HIV care.21 Medicare is a federal program providing health care coverage to disabled 
individuals and those age 65 and older. Approximately 100,000 Medicare 
bene˜ciaries are HIV-infected, representing about 20 percent of HIV-in
-fected individuals estimated to be receiving care in the United States (KFF, 
2009a). The majority of PLWHA currently receiving Medicare quali˜ed 
through the disability pathway. With the evolution of HIV into a chronic 
condition, many PLWHA are living longer and increasingly are expected 
to qualify for Medicare on the basis of age, resulting in an increase in the 
number Medicare bene˜ciaries with HIV. Given Medicare™s Part D prescrip
-tion drug coverage and the increasing number of Medicare-eligible PLWHA, 
Medicare plays an important role in HIV care coverage.
The CCW contains fee-for-service
22 claims data for 100 percent of 
Medicare bene˜ciaries from 2005 to 200923 and Part D drug event data 
from 2006 to 2009 (CCW, 2011a, About). As such, it includes fee-for-
service utilization data for all PLWHA who are enrolled in the Medicare 
program. To expedite delivery and maximize cost ef˜ciency, data sets are 
available for predetermined cohorts representing 21 chronic conditions. 
Although HIV/AIDS is not presently one of the prede˜ned cohorts, it cur-rently is under consideration for addition to the list of ˚agged conditions 
(CCW, 2011a, Chronic Conditions).
Medicare uses a unique bene˜ciary identi˜cation number and collects 
the basic demographic data of interest: date of birth, date of death, OMB-de˜ned race and ethnicity, gender (male, female), and zip code. The Medi
-care Current Bene˜ciary Survey (MCBS) of a representative national sample 
of Medicare bene˜ciaries is used to generate two ˜les (Access to Care; Cost 
and Use) each year. The Access to Care ˜le ﬁcontains summaries of use and 
expenditures for the year from Medicare ˜les along with survey data on in-surance coverage, health status and functioning, access to care, information 
needs, satisfaction with care, and incomeﬂ (CCW, 2011b, p. 10). Although 
MCBS data are not automatically linked to Medicare bene˜ciary identi˜ca-tion numbers, information is available upon request to permit MCBS data 
to be merged with other CCW data at the bene˜ciary level. Medicare also 
requires assessments for bene˜ciaries receiving care in nursing facilities, 
inpatient rehabilitation facilities, and home care. These assessments provide data on certain aspects of bene˜ciaries™ health status, as well as other rel-evant information (e.g., the safety and sanitary condition of the individual™s 
21 Federal spending on Medicare is greater than that on Medicaid (if the state share is not 
included) and the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program (KFF, 2011b). 
22 Most services for Medicare recipients in managed care are not captured in the CCW.
23 The CCW also contains data on a random 5 percent sample of Medicare bene˜ciaries for 
1999 forward.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
home for those receiving home care) and likely will increase in importance 
as the population of PLWHA ages and individuals with HIV enter home 
and institutional nursing care in greater numbers.As a source of claims data, Medicare is similar to Medicaid in terms 
of the data available to assess the core indicators of HIV care. It should 
be able to inform indicators related to continuity of care, regular CD4 and 
viral load testing, and mortality rate, but it does not contain the informa-tion necessary to evaluate the linkage-to-care indicator or the clinical data 
needed to assess the other core HIV care indicators. ART drug prescription 
and (re)˜ll data are available for Medicare Part D bene˜ciaries. The avail-ability of Medicare data to assess the additional indicators for HIV care is 
similar to that of MSIS data as well.
Although Medicare does not have data on screening for mental health 
disorders or substance use, it does capture service utilization data on the 
diagnosis of and covered treatment for these conditions, but as with Med-icaid, the data do not speci˜cally permit calculation of the time between 
treatment referral and receipt of services. Medicare does not collect data 
on housing, food, or transportation needs, although questions pertaining 
to housing adequacy are included in the assessment for home health ben-e˜ciaries (OASIS).As previously noted, efforts to link Medicare and Medicaid data for 
dually eligible bene˜ciaries will provide a more complete picture of service 
utilization for that group of individuals. In addition, inclusion of HIV/AIDS in the list of predetermined chronic condition cohorts for which CCW data 
sets are available should expedite delivery of these data for research and 
policy use.North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design
The North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and 
Design (NA-ACCORD) captures data from 22 single and multisite clini-cal and classical epidemiologic HIV cohorts, which represent most of the 
HIV/AIDS cohort studies in North America, including the CFAR Network 
of Integrated Clinical Systems (CNICS) and the HIV Research Network 
(HIVRN) discussed in the following sections. Although NA-ACCORD in-cludes data from CNICS and HIVRN, not all of the data elements captured 
by those systems are represented in NA-ACCORD.
NA-ACCORD collects data on more than 100,000 HIV-infected adults 
from more than 60 academic research and hospital- and community-based 
clinical sites throughout the United States (44 states and the District of 
Columbia) (Kitahata, 2011; NA-ACCORD, 2011; NA-ACCORD response 
to IOM request for information, March 30, 2011). NA-ACCORD is de-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 151
signed to be widely representative of HIV care in the United States,24 and 
the population of PLWHA represented is similar to that reported by the 
CDC in terms of age and sex, but it includes somewhat fewer minorities
25 
(Kitahata, 2011; NA-ACCORD response to IOM request for information, 
March 30, 2011). 
NA-ACCORD data pertaining to the core clinical HIV care indicators 
include date of diagnosis (although these data are not complete); date of 
˜rst visit at the clinical site and whether the individual was previously seen 
at another site (but not always the date of ˜rst-ever visit for HIV care); 
dates of routine HIV care visits; CD4 and viral load test dates and results; 
dates that individual ARVs were started or stopped; year of birth; and 
mortality information (date and cause of death) (Appendix Tables 3-2a, 
3-3a). For the additional indicators of clinical HIV care, NA-ACCORD also 
includes dates of ART drug resistance testing; diagnoses of AIDS-de˜ning 
conditions; diagnoses of and/or laboratory results relevant to renal disease 
(nephropathy), hepatitis C, and hepatitis B; dates of hepatitis C and hepati-tis B screening; and dates of TB testing (Quantiferon-TB tests). As of 2012, 
NA-ACCORD collects information on pregnancy status. NA-ACCORD 
does not currently collect dates of screening for chlamydia, gonorrhea, and 
syphilis or dates of vaccination or immunization for hepatitis B, in˚uenza, 
or pneumococcal pneumonia (see Appendix Tables 3-2c, 3-3c).
Information on diagnosis or referral for mental health disorders and 
substance abuse is included in NA-ACCORD, but not data on screening for 
those disorders or on ˜rst visit for mental health or substance abuse treat-ment, although it will capture visits for psychiatry, psychology, and counsel
-ing, beginning in 2012. NA-ACCORD does not include data pertaining to 
housing stability, food security, or access to transportation but could add 
such data to the extent they are collected by social workers in the clinical 
practice setting (Appendix Tables 3-2b, 3-3b).
Demographic information available in NA-ACCORD includes age, sex, 
race and ethnicity, and the ˜rst three digits of zip code, as well as metro
-politan statistical area (MSA), and, as of 2012, country of birth. Data on 
24 Since urban areas are heavily represented among the cohorts, NA-ACCORD may not be 
representative of the care experience of PLWHA in rural areas.
25 A comparison of 2007 data for NA-ACCORD and the population of PLWHA indicates 
that NA-ACCORD had a lower proportion of non-Hispanic blacks (40 percent versus 46 
percent) and Latinos (14 percent versus 20 percent), as well as a higher proportion of non-Hispanic whites (41 percent versus 32 percent) (Kitahata, 2011). Older (2005) data reported 
for the NHSS (33 states and U.S. dependent areas with con˜dential name-based reporting) 
and NA-ACCORD for HIV transmission risk factors suggest that, at the time, NA-ACCORD 
had a lower proportion of men who have sex with men (33 percent versus 44 percent) and 
a higher proportion of injection drug users (27 percent versus 20 percent) and individuals 
infected through heterosexual contact or other means (40 percent versus 30 percent). (See 
CDC, 2007, Table 8; Gange et al., 2007, Table 3.)
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
sexual orientation, gender identity, income, and insurance status are not 
collected. (See Appendix Table 3-2d.)
Data collected by NA-ACCORD can be used to estimate all of the core 
indicators of clinical HIV care. The data system is less useful for estimat-ing the additional clinical care indicators and much less so for indicators 
pertaining to mental health, substance abuse, and supportive services. A 
strength of NA-ACCORD is that new data elements can be added relatively 
easily if they are collected by the participating cohorts.
CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems
The CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems comprises a net
-work of eight Centers for AIDS Research (CFAR) sites
26 that have imple-mented point-of-care electronic data collection systems. CNICS data are 
collected prospectively through these systems on PLWHA in care at the 
site and, therefore, characterize the rapidly changing course of HIV disease 
management. The CNICS cohort includes more than 23,000 individuals 
and represents a diverse population of patients with regard to sex, race, 
ethnicity, age, risk factor for HIV transmission, and geographic distribu
-tion, although the CFAR sites are located in urban areas and the data may 
not be representative of PLWHA in rural areas (CNICS, 2011, CNICS sites; 
Kitahata, 2011).CNICS currently maintains data on 10 unique domains: (1) disease 
diagnoses; (2) laboratory data (viral load, CD4 count, viral hepatitis, he-matologic, kidney, and chemistries or metabolic markers); (3) medication 
data; (4) demographics (sex, race and ethnicity, age, and risk factor for HIV 
transmission); (5) health care utilization (initial patient enrollment, primary 
care visits, and hospitalizations); (6) vital status (death date, source, and 
cause of death); (7) patient-reported outcomes27; (8) antiretroviral drug 
resistance; (9) biological specimens; and (10) census block data (CNICS, 
2011, Data elements).
According to the project website, an important distinction between 
26 These are Case Western Reserve University; University of Alabama at Birmingham; 
University of California, San Francisco; University of Washington; University of California, 
San Diego; Fenway Community Health Center of Harvard University; University of North 
Carolina; and Johns Hopkins University. Although the Johns Hopkins University site is no 
longer CFAR-funded, it has continued to collaborate with other CNICS sites.
27 Most sites collect patient-reported outcomes data from consenting patients using touch-screen tablets or PCs that are connected to a wireless network. Data are captured on depres-sion and anxiety; adherence; smoking, alcohol, drug use; HIV transmission risk behaviors; 
symptom burden; physical activity level; body morphology; and quality of life. As of August 
2010, there were approximately 8,000 completed assessments in the central database (CNICS, 
2011, Data elements). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 153
CNICS and other cohorts is the ability to provide peer-reviewed open access 
to data for research from a system that prospectively collects comprehensive 
patient data including validated outcomes, longitudinal resistance data, and PROs (CNICS, 2011).
CNICS includes much of the data needed to calculate the core clinical 
HIV care indicators (Appendix Tables 3-2a, 3-3a), including dates of ˜rst 
and ongoing visits for HIV care, CD4 and viral load test dates and results, 
and dates of starting and stopping speci˜c ARVs. Information on date 
of diagnosis is collected by CNICS, but these data are not available for 
some individuals. For the additional clinical HIV care indicators (Appen-dix Tables 3-2c, 3-3c), CNICS collects data on diagnosis of AIDS-de˜ning 
conditions; hepatitis B and C; chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screening; 
ART drug resistance testing; and diagnosis of renal disease. Data also are 
collected on TB testing using QuantiFERON-TB tests. As of 2012, data on 
pregnancy status is collected, and collection of immunization information 
for hepatitis B, in˚uenza, and pneumococcal pneumonia is proposed. If all 
these data are collected, CNICS will capture the data needed to estimate all 
of the core and additional indicators for clinical HIV care.CNICS also collects certain data on mental health and substance abuse 
disorders, including dates of screening and diagnosis or referral. Although 
CNICS does not speci˜cally capture the date of ˜rst visits for mental health 
treatment services, it does capture visits for psychiatry, psychology, and 
counseling. Since it also captures date of screening, a proximate visit for 
services would suggest date of ˜rst visit, but it would not be ˚agged as such. 
CNICS captures whether an individual received substance abuse treatment 
in the past year, but not speci˜c dates of service. CNICS does not currently 
include data on housing, food, and transportation needs assessment or sta-tus, but data on housing stability (stable or permanent, temporary, unstable, 
and homelessness) are collected in the clinical practice setting and could be 
added to CNICS (CNICS response to IOM request for information, April 
11, 2011).Demographic data captured in CNICS include age, sex, race, and 
ethnicity. Data on sexual orientation and gender identity are not currently 
collected. CNICS collects MSA of residence and is adding the three initial 
numbers of individuals™ zip codes, which provide state and at least county 
of residence, as permitted by the Health Insurance Portability and Account-ability Act. Country of birth is collected beginning in 2012. Insurance status 
is collected, and income data are collected and could be added to CNICS. 
PROs provide an opportunity to collect qualitative data on satisfaction with 
provider care and on stigma or discrimination, as well as other information 
of interest, including food security and transportation needs.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HIV Research NetworkThe HIV Research Network compiles data electronically from health 
records and through manual medical record review in order to obtain, 
analyze, and disseminate current information on the delivery of services 
to PLWHA. HIVRN captures these data longitudinally to assess trends 
in areas such as accessibility, quality, utilization, safety, and costs of HIV-
related health care services. HIVRN is primarily supported by the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality with additional support from other 
agencies of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
HIVRN represents a consortium of 16 academic and community-based 
sites that provide primary and subspecialty HIV care in 13 cities throughout 
the United States, with 8 in the eastern United States, 1 in the Midwest, 3 in 
the South, and 4 in the West (HIVRN, 2011). Data are collected annually 
on the clinical and demographic characteristics of approximately 21,000 
adults, adolescents, and children receiving HIV care at the participating 
sites (HIVRN response to IOM request for information, March 30, 2011). 
(Five of the sixteen sites are devoted to pediatric care.) The data from each 
site are sent to the data coordination center at the Johns Hopkins School 
of Medicine, where they are consolidated into a single uniform database.
HIVRN data can be used to estimate all of the core clinical HIV care 
indicators identi˜ed by the committee. In addition, data for estimating the 
core indicators for mental health and substance abuse are available for a 
subset of the participating sites. HIVRN does not collect data on the dates 
of screening for mental health or substance abuse disorders, nor does it 
collect any data pertinent to the committee™s core or additional indicators 
for housing, food security, or unmet need for transportation. As with NA-
ACCORD and CNICS, HIVRN data are collected from urban areas and 
may not be representative of PLWHA in rural areas.
Clinical Case Registry: HIV
The Veterans Health Administration within the Department of Veter
-ans Affairs is the largest provider of HIV care in the United States, serving 
more than 24,000 veterans with HIV in 2010 (VA, 2011). The Clinical 
Case Registry (CCR): HIV is an administrative and clinical database con-taining population-based data on HIV-infected individuals who receive 
care through the VHA.28 Local reporting allows clinicians with access to 
the database to monitor clinical outcomes and resource utilization. The 
national database permits quality of care, as well as outcomes and utiliza-28 A second CCR collects data on veterans with hepatitis C who receive care in the VHA 
system.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 155
tion, monitoring. Data on all veterans with a con˜rmed diagnosis of HIV/AIDS in VHA care during the calendar year are included in the database. 
The sample is limited to those veterans who receive care within the VHA 
system and is older and predominantly male, compared with the overall 
population of PLWHA in the United States (VHA response to IOM request 
for information, April 11, 2011).
The VHA has a sophisticated EHR system that captures utilization 
and outcomes data. Data needed to calculate all of the core clinical HIV 
care indicators and most of the additional clinical care indicators are avail-able from the EHR if the services are performed within the VHA system 
(Appendix Tables 3-2a, 3-2c, 3-3a, 3-3c). Date of diagnosis, CD4 count at 
diagnosis, and date of ˜rst visit for HIV care are all available for individuals 
diagnosed and treated within the VHA, but for those who transfer into the 
system following diagnosis, data on linkage to care and stage of disease at 
diagnosis are not available. Information on prescriptions and re˜lls writ-ten by VHA providers is available as are dispensing data for prescriptions 
(re)˜lled through the VHA pharmacy system.
Although prenatal care is covered by the VHA, prenatal care services 
are provided outside the system by community providers. Although the 
VHA EHR does not capture data from external providers, the information 
pertaining to ART prescription for pregnant women would be available for 
prescriptions ˜lled through the VHA pharmacy system.
Data pertaining to screening for mental health disorders and substance 
use are not captured in the VHA data system (VHA response to IOM re
-quest for information, April 11, 2011), but it does include data on diagno-sis of or referral for mental health and substance abuse disorders, as well 
as date of ˜rst visit for treatment services if they occur in the VHA. Data 
pertinent to the supportive services indicators are not collected, although 
some data pertaining to social work or case management are captured. 
(Appendix Tables 3-2b, 3-3b). Demographic data collected include age, 
sex, race, ethnicity, and address. Data on gender identity, sexual orienta
-tion, income, insurance status, and country of birth are not collected. (See 
Appendix Tables 3-2d, 3-2e.)
As an EHR, the VHA data system contains comprehensive clinical data 
on test and treatment services provided within the system, including pre-scription and pharmacy dispensing data, although information on services 
provided outside the system is not reliably captured.29 As an integrated 
health care system, the VHA is well poised to respond to challenges raised 
by the NHAS, as demonstrated by its recent efforts to implement routine 
29 A uniform notation in the EHR indicating whether a patient reports having received 
health care services outside of the VHA system could facilitate research on health care services 
provided by the VHA. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HIV testing. Although the population of PLWHA served by the VHA is 
disproportionately male and older compared to the national population 
of PLWHA, recent collaborative efforts between the VHA and Kaiser Per
-manente (KP) (discussed in the following section) may be the ˜rst step in 
addressing concerns about representativeness.Kaiser PermanenteKaiser Permanente is one of the largest not-for-pro˜t health plans in the 
United States, providing coverage to more than 8.7 million members in nine states and the District of Columbia (KP, 2011). Health outcome and utiliza
-tion data are collected on all members through EHRs and databases. The 
second-largest private provider of HIV care in the United States in 2006, 
with more than 16,000 HIV-infected individuals in care, KP data represent 
a diverse population of individuals with private insurance in California, 
Hawaii, and selected metropolitan areas, including Baltimore, Maryland; 
Washington, DC; and Atlanta, Georgia. Analyses have shown that KP is 
representative of the HIV-infected population in California (KP response to 
IOM request for information, March 30, 2011), a state with more than 6.5 
million KP members (KP, 2011), and as the largest provider of HIV care in 
Hawaii, KP is representative of the population there as well (KP response 
to IOM request for information, March 30, 2011).
KP has a sophisticated EHR system that facilitates the capture and 
retrieval of detailed clinical data. A major bene˜t to a robust EHR system 
is the availability of data on both service utilization and clinical outcomes. 
KP captures all of the data elements necessary to assess the core indicators 
of clinical HIV care, although the date of HIV diagnosis is only captured 
for individuals diagnosed within the KP system (Appendix Tables 3-2a, 
3-3a). Thus, the linkage-to-care indicator can be calculated reliably only 
for those in the system at the time of diagnosis. KP also captures the data 
needed to assess the additional indicators for clinical HIV care (Appendix 
Tables 3-2c, 3-3c). Data on the prescription of ART drugs are available, as 
are most pharmacy (re)˜ll data. No data are available on prescriptions (re)˜lled at pharmacies outside of the KP system.
KP also records data on screening for mental health disorders and 
substance abuse, although the screenings are performed as indicated and 
not according to a predetermined schedule. Data on referral for services 
for mental health disorders and substance abuse are included in individu-als™ EHRs, as are data on receipt of treatment services that are provided 
within the KP system. Data relevant to supportive services indicators are 
not routinely collected within the KP system.As an integrated health care system with a comprehensive EHR sys-tem, KP, like the VHA, captures comprehensive clinical test and treatment 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 157
data for services provided within the system. Although the population of 
PLWHA served by KP is not nationally representative, it is representative of 
the privately insured HIV-infected population in areas of the United States 
with access to Kaiser (Hawaii; California; Oregon; Mid-Atlantic region, 
including the District of Columbia; Atlanta, Georgia).
In December 2009, KP and the VHA launched a pilot project in San 
Diego, California, for electronically sharing EHR ˜les of individuals who 
receive care from both systems with patient permission (KP, 2009). Now 
part of the Nationwide Health Information Network Exchange project 
(NwHIN Exchange, 2011), this type of data sharing not only should im-prove patient care but also could permit the capture of similar types of data 
from a larger and more diverse population than those represented by the 
individual participating systems.National Vital Statistics System
Most of the data systems reviewed by the committee collect date of 
death. In particular, the NHSS would serve as the most nationally represen
-tative source of data for estimating the committee™s recommended mortality 
indicator: all-cause mortality rate among PLWHA. As indicated in Chapter 
2, the committee selected all-cause mortality for the indicator because of the 
inherent dif˜culties in determining and recording in every instance whether 
deaths among PLWHA were related to the disease or another cause. Mortal
-ity rate due to HIV nevertheless may be a useful measure for some purposes. 
In such cases, the National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) is the best source 
of data for estimating mortality related to HIV infection. Although some 
of the data systems examined by the committee, such as NA-ACCORD, 
record information on cause of death, the NVSS regularly calculates HIV 
mortality. NVSS operates under the auspices of CDC™s National Center 
for Health Statistics, which collects vital statistics data through contracts 
with the registration systems in jurisdictions that are legally responsible 
for recording vital events, such as births and deaths (NVSS, 2011a). Mor-tality data from the NVSS provide uniform, nationwide demographic, 
geographic, and cause-of-death information for individuals who die in the 
United States (NVSS, 2011b). Standard forms (e.g., death certi˜cate) and 
model procedures are developed and recommended for nationwide use 
to promote the collection of uniform national data. The death certi˜cate 
requires a single immediate (˜nal) cause of death and allows for as many 
as three underlying causes of death to be listed sequentially (CDC, 2011c). 
Although reporting errors of various types may occur for cause of death, 
CDC provides extensive information on writing cause-of-death statements 
for death certi˜cates (NVSS, 2011c). Preliminary HIV mortality data cur-rently are available for 2009 (Kochanek et al., 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
ADDITIONAL DATA SYSTEMS FOR MONITORING HIV CARE
The committee identi˜ed three additional systems that provide data to 
help evaluate the impact of the NHAS and the ACA on HIV care and access to supportive services for PLWHA in the United States. The Indian Health 
Service (IHS) and the Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) have data systems 
that capture health care data for two small but important subpopulations 
of HIV-infected individuals: American Indians and Alaska Natives (AI/ANs) 
and federal prisoners. The Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS 
(HOPWA) program collects data pertinent to the program™s funding of as
-sistance for housing and other supportive services for its bene˜ciaries.
Resource and Patient Management System
Nationally, AI/ANs represent less than 1 percent of PLWHA (between 
3,039 and 3,083 individuals in 2009) (CDC, 2012, Commentary, Table 
15a). Yet, AI/ANs are disproportionately burdened by the epidemic in sev
-eral ways. The rate of HIV diagnoses among AI/ANs was 9.7 (per 100,000) 
in 2010, compared with 6.5 for Asians and 7.3 for whites (CDC, 2012, Ta
-ble 1a).
30 Compared with other racial and ethnic groups, AI/ANs also have 
one of the shortest timelines from AIDS diagnosis to death (CDC, 2012, 
Commentary, Table 14a; Hall et al., 2005). Impoverishment and conditions 
such as alcoholism and diabetes that occur at higher rates among AI/ANs 
(Chartier and Caetano, 2010; IHS, 2008) may complicate care and adher-ence to treatment.31 The IHS is the federal agency responsible for providing 
comprehensive health care services to approximately 2.0 million AI/ANs 
representing 566 federally recognized tribes (IHS, 2012). Most IHS facilities 
are primary care clinics. Two IHS-funded hospitals together treat the major
-ity of HIV patients in the lower 48 states (Personal communication, Lisa 
Neel, Indian Health Service, October 13, 2011). Combined with an addi
-tional two sites, these facilities account for 61 percent of the IHS HIV/AIDS 
case load (Personal communication, Lisa Neel, Indian Health Service, Octo-ber 13, 2011). Although some IHS clinics provide limited HIV care services, 
most refer their HIV clients to outside providers for HIV care (GAO, 2007; 
IHS response to IOM request for information, March 28, 2011). As of June 
2011, there were 289 HIV/AIDS patients on record at federal IHS health 
care service sites, of which 224 were ﬁactive,ﬂ having received CD4 and 
viral load testing within the preceding 12 months. Patients receiving care in 
tribally operated and urban Indian health care programs are not included in 30 Black or African Americans and Native Hawaiian and other Paci˜c Islanders had higher 
rates of diagnosis (CDC, 2012, Table1a).
31 In addition, an estimated 25 percent of AI/ANs with HIV infection are undiagnosed (CDC, 
2011a).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 159
these numbers due to administrative constraints (Personal communication, 
Lisa Neel, Indian Health Service, February 29, 2012).The IHS uses an electronic record system called the Resource and Pa
-tient Management System (RPMS) to manage clinical, administrative, and 
˜nancial information on patients and resources and improve the quality 
of care provided at federal, tribal, and urban IHS facilities throughout the 
United States (Cullen, 2006). Data are entered into RPMS by providers 
during patient visits.32 An optional automated module within RPMS called 
the HIV Management System (HMS) may be used by HIV care providers 
and case managers in the IHS system to capture data related to HIV/AIDS 
and to assist nonspecialist providers with decision making through the use 
of clinical reminders, provider guidelines, and quality-of-care audit reports. 
HMS captures HIV-speci˜c information such as date of HIV diagnosis, 
CDC classi˜cations, and ART status. Lab, radiology, and pharmacy data 
are available through linkage with RPMS. HMS also may be used to report 
HIV/AIDS cases to public health authorities through a state surveillance 
form and report (Cullen, 2006). HMS was ˜rst implemented in 2006, and 
personnel at 12 IHS facilities had been trained in how to use the system by 
October 2007 (GAO, 2007). In 2009, it was integrated into RPMS (IHS, 
2011a, Home, Tech Support), but HMS usage is not mandatory (IHS, 
2011d). Although 283 IHS facilities have downloaded HMS as part of the 
RPMS update, only the two large hospitals that treat the majority of HIV-
infected patients are known to use the system and contribute to its ongoing 
development (Personal communication, Lisa Neel, Indian Health Service, 
October 13, 2011).
Another component of the RPMS, called the Clinical Reporting System 
(CRS), is used for national, local, and area monitoring of clinical perfor
-mance measures. The CRS draws from local RPMS databases to create 
printed or electronic reports of clinical performance measures, including 
HIV screening and HIV quality of care, as well as a number of other con-ditions (e.g., STI, depression, and alcohol screening) that may be relevant 
for monitoring HIV care (see IHS, 2011c). According to 2011 guidance on 
the CRS, HIV screening information is reported nationally (IHS, 2011b,c). 
Reported information includes data on HIV screening among pregnant 
women and among patients age 13 to 64 with no recorded HIV diagnosis 
prior to the report period, broken down by gender and age groups, as 
well as the percentage of patients with documented HIV screening refusals 
(IHS, 2011b,c). In addition, information is reported on the percentages of 
patients with positive, negative, or indeterminate test results and on the 
32 Although the IHS is a federal agency, tribal data require special permission to access, since 
the data belong to the tribe and not to the federal government (IHS response to IOM request 
for information, March 28, 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
number of HIV tests given to patients during the report period where the 
patient was not diagnosed with HIV anytime prior to the screening (IHS, 
2011b). HIV screening is also incorporated into a syphilis, gonorrhea, chla
-mydia, and HIV screening measure where diagnosis of one of these STIs 
prompts screening for the other three (IHS, 2011b).
CRS also captures HIV quality-of-care data for the user population 
of patients age 13 and older with at least two direct care visits (i.e., visits 
within the IHS system) during the report period with HIV diagnosis and one HIV visit in the last 6 months (IHS, 2011c). These measures are not 
reported nationally, however. The quality-of-care measures assessed are 
(1) the percentage of patients who received the CD4 test only (without 
HIV viral load) during the report period; (2) the percentage of patients 
who received HIV viral load only (without CD4) during the report period; 
(3) the percentage of patients who received both CD4 and HIV viral load 
tests during the report period; and (4) total numerators 1, 2, and 3 (IHS, 
2011c). The ˜rst collection period for these variables was July 2010ŒJune 
2011 (Personal communication, Lisa Neel, Indian Health Service, October 
13, 2011). IHS recently added ﬁnewly diagnosed HIVﬂ to CRS, but the 
measure has not yet been validated (Personal communication, Lisa Neel, 
Indian Health Service, October 13, 2011). 
As with other clinically based EHR systems (e.g., KP, VHA), the IHS 
collects all of the data needed to calculate the core clinical HIV care indi-cators for services provided within the IHS (Appendix Tables 3-2a, 3-3a), 
and the HMS attempts to include historical data about tests and services 
provided outside of IHS facilities. Similarly, the IHS captures the data 
pertinent to the additional clinical HIV care indicators (Appendix Tables 
3-2c, 3-3c). Even if certain data (e.g., date of in˚uenza vaccination) are not 
currently captured in the HMS, they may apply to quality measures for 
other subpopulations (e.g., individuals ages 50 and older, individuals with 
diabetes) (IHS, 2011c). In addition, data would be captured at the patient 
level and could be applied to HIV-speci˜c indicators in the future.
Data for calculating the mental health and substance abuse indicators 
also are captured by the IHS (Appendix Tables 3-2b, 3-3b, 3-3d). Informa
-tion pertaining to the need for and provision of supportive services may be 
recorded in the provider narrative section of the EHR. Demographic data 
collected include age, sex, race, ethnicity, and locality of residence. Data on 
gender identity and sexual orientation are not routinely collected but might 
be recorded in the provider narrative section of the EHR.
IHS captures the data necessary for estimating most of the indicators 
identi˜ed by the committee, which could be used to track improvements in 
HIV care and access within the population of HIV-infected individuals re
-ceiving care in IHS facilities. The limited number of IHS facilities providing 
comprehensive HIV care can affect the size of the HIV-infected population 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 161
represented in the data system. Facilities that transition from federal to 
tribal management no longer automatically report data to IHS. In addition, 
some tribal facilities have moved from IHS to private-vendor EHRs, making 
data sets incompatible.Bureau of Prisons Electronic Medical RecordWhen both state and federal prisons are considered, 21,987 inmates 
(1.5 percent of total inmates) were HIV infected or had con˜rmed AIDS 
as of the end of 2008. Of those inmates, 1,538 were federal prisoners 
(Maruschak, 2010).  
The BOP, which is responsible for ensuring access to health care ser
-vices for the almost 217,000 individuals incarcerated in federal correctional institutions throughout the United States (BOP, 2011), uses the Bureau of 
Prisons Electronic Medical Record (BEMR), a point-of-care direct entry 
web-based system record, to collect health information on inmates housed 
at 116 federal correctional institutions (BOP response to IOM request for 
information, April 14, 2011). The BEMR includes a fully integrated phar-macy capability (computerized order entry through prescription administra-tion records, BEMRx) as well as a dental module (DOJ, 2011; Price, 2011). 
The BEMR tracks CD4 count and viral load for prisoners with HIV/AIDS. 
Other information contained in the BEMR that may be useful for tracking 
HIV/AIDS care received by prisoners includes demographic, prescription 
drug, substance use, and mental health data. The BOP is in the process 
of enhancing the BEMR by programming key HIV data elements for the 
extraction and analysis of HIV data that currently are available only in 
individuals™ records (BOP response to IOM request for information, April 
14, 2011).Due to the much larger number of HIV-infected inmates in state pris
-ons, it would be necessary to track HIV care data from the state inmate 
population as well in order to gain a more complete picture of HIV care 
within the U.S. corrections system. Gathering and integrating data from 
the individual state systems poses a signi˜cant challenge, however. A 2007 
survey of state electronic health initiatives found that although 22 of 42 
states responding had implemented some sort of health information tech-nology use in their state prison systems, only 3 states reported the use of 
EHRs and/or electronic medical records (Smith et al., 2008). Kentucky had 
implemented an EHR system across all of its state-operated correctional 
facilities. Virginia had planned implementation of an EHR system for its 
correctional facilities, and Washington State was exploring the feasibility 
of a single, integrated EHR for all of its correctional institutions, including 
state prisons, city and county jails, and juvenile corrections facilities (Smith 
et al., 2008).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Integrating EHRs across all types of correctional institutions would 
provide a rich source of data for tracking the provision of HIV care in the 
incarcerated population. For individuals already diagnosed with HIV, link
-age to and maintaining continuity of care and treatment adherence upon 
release is a signi˜cant challenge. Development of methods for capturing 
data on the provision of transitional services and associated outcomes for 
HIV-infected prisoners upon release would be important in this regard 
(Rich et al., 2011). 
Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
The HOPWA program, managed by the U.S. Department of Housing 
and Urban Development™s (HUD™s) Of˜ce of HIV/AIDS Housing, pro
-vides funds for housing assistance and other supportive services. The ad-ditional supportive services most relevant to the indicators identi˜ed by the 
committee include meals and nutritional services, transportation services, 
mental health services, and alcohol and drug abuse services, as well as ap-proved health, medical, and intensive care services (HOPWA, 2011a,b). 
HOPWA programs provide assistance to low-income households with one 
or more PLWHA along with other members of the household. By the end 
of FY 2010, HOPWA had provided resources for housing assistance to 
60,669 unduplicated households (HOPWA response to IOM request for 
information, April 4, 2011). The population served by HOPWA is generally 
representative of low-income PLWHA (HOPWA response to IOM request 
for information, April 4, 2011).
HOPWA grantees report aggregated data on program performance 
outcome measures related to maintenance of housing stability, improved ac
-cess to care and support, and reduced risk of homelessness for low-income 
persons and their families living with HIV/AIDS. HOPWA Competitive 
Program grantees submit an Annual Progress Report (APR) and Formula 
Program grantees submit a Consolidated Annual Performance Evaluation 
Report (CAPER) measuring performance outcomes.APR and CAPER (HOPWA, 2011a,b) report information on the num
-ber of households with an unmet need for housing assistance,
33 as well 
as the type of subsidy assistance needed. They also report on the number 
of households served by HOPWA and other funding sources that provide 
housing assistance and support to PLWHA and their families and the num
-ber of households that received other supportive services through HOPWA 
funds (e.g., meals or nutritional services, transportation, mental health 
33 These data are for ﬁthe number of HOPWA-eligible households that require HOPWA 
housing subsidy assistance, but are not served by any HOPWA-funded housing subsidy as
-sistance in [the] service areaﬂ (HOPWA, 2011b, p. 8).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 163
services, alcohol and drug abuse services). Aggregate data are reported on 
the number of PLWHA who quali˜ed their household to receive HOPWA 
housing assistance, their prior living situation, the number of other PLWHA 
who reside with the HOPWA-eligible individuals, and the number of per
-sons not diagnosed with HIV who reside with the eligible individuals. 
The reports also record the number of HOPWA-eligible individuals and 
other bene˜ciaries by race and ethnicity, as well as by sex (male, female) 
and gender (transgender male to female, female to male) within given age 
ranges. Additional information reported includes number of households 
that demonstrated ﬁa housing plan for maintaining or establishing stable 
on-going [sic] housingﬂ; contact with a case manager or bene˜ts counselor 
as speci˜ed in the client™s individual service plan; contact with a primary 
health care provider as speci˜ed in the client™s individual service plan; ac
-cess to and maintenance of medical insurance or assistance; and sources 
of income. The reports also include the number of households receiving 
assistance by percentage of area median income.
In addition to the aggregate data reported by HOPWA grantees, HUD 
developed the Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) to store 
longitudinal standardized individual-level data on persons receiving hous-ing assistance and homeless prevention services through Continuum of Care 
programs. Program-level data on homeless service usage is reported as well. 
Aggregate HMIS data provides information about the size, characteristics, 
and needs of the homeless population at the local, state, and national levels. Although HMIS is not an HIV-speci˜c data system, one of the client-level 
universal data elements it captures is ﬁdisabling condition,ﬂ which includes 
AIDS and AIDS-related conditions.
HUD requires the collection in HMIS of a minimum set of data ele-ments from all individuals receiving homeless assistance and prevention 
services. These data are required to generate unduplicated estimates of the 
number and basic demographic characteristics of individuals accessing ser-vices and patterns of service use. These ﬁuniversal data elementsﬂ include, 
among others, name, date of birth, race, ethnicity, gender (male, female; 
transgender male to female, female to male), presence of a disabling condi
-tion, residence prior to program entry, zip code of last permanent address, 
and housing status (HUD, 2010, pp. 40-63). Additional ﬁprogram-speci˜cﬂ data elements are variously required from speci˜ed homeless assistance 
programs, including those funded through HOPWA. The program-speci˜c 
data elements include the amounts and sources of income, if any, in the 
preceding 30 days; receipt of noncash bene˜ts (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid, 
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program); and information on physical 
and developmental disability, chronic health conditions, HIV/AIDS, mental 
health, substance abuse, domestic violence, and destination upon program 
exit (HUD, 2010, pp. 64ff.). Optional program-speci˜c data elements, not 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.164
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
required for APR reporting, include employment status, education, general 
health status, and pregnancy status (HUD, 2010, pp. 93ff.).
The data from HOPWA™s APR and CAPER and those captured in 
HMIS provide important information about access to housing and other 
supportive services for PLWHA, including an assessment of unmet hous
-ing needs for HOPWA-eligible households (i.e., those with income below 
80 percent of the area median income and documented HIV/AIDS status) 
(HUD, 2011a). The unmet needs assessment is limited, however, to those 
individuals identi˜ed as being HOPWA-eligible and may not represent the 
full scope of need for housing assistance among PLWHA. In terms of access 
to other supportive services (e.g., nutrition or food, transportation), the 
data are limited to households receiving HOPWA-funded services and do 
not re˚ect need or access to services among other PLWHA.
The collection of longitudinal individual-level data in HMIS permits 
assessment of patterns of housing service usage and outcomes over time. In 
addition, a number of the client-level data elements captured may allow for 
linkage or cross-matching to additional information in other pertinent data 
systems (e.g., MSIS, CCW, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program).
SIMILAR DATA COLLECTION EFFORTS
Several additional data collection efforts are under way that will pro-vide useful information for assessing the impact of the NHAS and ACA 
on HIV care, including CDC™s Enhanced Comprehensive HIV Prevention 
Planning Project, HHS™s 12 Cities Project, and the Nationwide Health In
-formation Network Exchange.
Enhanced Comprehensive HIV Prevention Planning ProjectLaunched in September 2010 in response to the NHAS, the ECHPP 
Project is a 3-year demonstration project funded by the CDC™s Division 
of HIV/AIDS Prevention. The program targets the 12 MSAs that have the 
highest AIDS prevalence, cumulatively accounting for 44 percent of cases 
in the United States (DHAP, 2011).
34 Following the NHAS, the overarching 
goals of the project are to maximize the impact of HIV prevention strategies 
in these geographic areas, reduce the incidence of HIV infections, improve 
the quality of HIV care, and reduce HIV health disparities.
The 12 ECHPP grantees are evenly divided between state or territorial 
health departments and directly funded local health departments. During 
34 The 12 MSAs are Atlanta, Georgia; Baltimore, Maryland; Chicago, Illinois; Dallas, Texas; 
District of Columbia; Houston, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Miami, Florida; New York 
City; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; San Juan, Puerto Rico; San Francisco, California.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 165
the ˜rst year of the project, each grantee was required to conduct a local 
situational analysis, taking account of available resources, epidemiologic 
pro˜les, priority areas, and cost and cost-effectiveness data for speci˜c 
interventions and strategies. Based on these analyses, the grantees created 
a set of goals and strategies that would best aid in the accomplishment of 
NHAS goals. These enhanced prevention plans, which have been approved 
by CDC, include interventions and public health strategies designed to 
prevent new HIV infections and to promote HIV care and treatment. By 
the end of 2011, the jurisdictions had begun implementing their plans and 
had submitted funding applications for the second and third years of the 
project.Although prevention of new infections is the primary emphasis of 
ECHPP, seven of its nine required prevention strategies for PLWHA address 
treatment concerns such as linkage to care, retention or reengagement in 
care, provision of ART consistent with current guidelines, adherence to 
antiretroviral medications, STI screening, prevention of perinatal trans-mission, and linkage to other medical and social services (DHAP, 2011). 
ECHPP has a comprehensive evaluation plan that incorporates process, 
outcome, and impact indicators to assess progress in these prevention and 
treatment areas that will be collected in the 12 MSAs, as well as supplemen-tal data from a subset of the cities (Fisher and Hoyte, 2011).
12 Cities Project
Created by HHS to work in conjunction with CDC™s ECHPP initia
-tive, the 12 Cities Project is a demonstration project designed to promote 
prevention and treatment of HIV in the 12 cities (MSAs) disproportionately affected by the epidemic through cross-agency collaboration and coordina
-tion with state and local health departments and other organizations (HHS, 
2011b). Ultimately the lessons learned through the 12 Cities Project will 
help to improve HIV care in other jurisdictions. The project expands upon 
the foundation laid by ECHPP, engaging additional federal partners and 
increasing focus on HIV care and treatment. Whereas ECHPP™s emphasis 
is on local plans to improve prevention and care in the 12 jurisdictions, the 
12 Cities Project emphasizes better coordination of services and funding of 
federal efforts to improve HIV prevention and care within the jurisdictions 
and the development of a common set of measures (indicators), in conjunc
-tion with streamlining reporting requirements, to evaluate the efforts with 
respect to the goals of the NHAS.
Motivated by the need to develop common metrics for tracking pro
-gram outcomes for the 12 Cities Project, HHS undertook a broader effort 
to develop a streamlined set of cross-agency, core indicators that can be 
used to monitor the prevention, treatment, and care services of all federally 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.166
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
funded programs providing HIV/AIDS services. HHS identi˜ed the need 
for indicators in seven domains: HIV+ diagnosis, early HIV diagnosis, 
initial linkage to care, sustained engagement in care, initiation of ART, 
viral load suppression, and housing (Valdiserri and Forsyth, 2011; Per
-sonal communication, Andrew Forsyth, Department of Health and Human 
Services, January 24, 2012). The committee has recommended indicators 
in each of these areas. Although the jurisdictions included in the 12 Cities 
Project represent a large percentage of the U.S. population of PLWHA, use 
of a common set of core indicators across all federally funded HIV/AIDS 
programs nationwide will generate a more complete picture of HIV care 
in the United States.Nationwide Health Information Network Exchange
Developed under the auspices of the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator 
for Health Information Technology, the Nationwide Health Information 
Network (NwHIN) Exchange is a public-private partnership designed to 
promote the exchange of health information from patient health records 
(ONC, 2011). Federal agencies participating in NwHIN Exchange include 
CDC, Department of Veterans Affairs, and Department of Defense. Non
-federal entities include KP, various hospitals, health information organiza
-tions, and state health information exchanges. 
Health Care Cost InstituteAnother type of data sharing partnership is the Health Care Cost In
-stitute (HCCI), launched in September 2011. The HCCI is an independent, 
nonpro˜t entity whose goal is to create a comprehensive database of health 
care cost and service utilization data to promote and support research on 
the drivers of escalating health care costs and utilization. HCCI will make 
available de-identi˜ed claims records from four of the largest private health 
insurers in the United States (Aetna, Humana, Kaiser Permanente, United
-Healthcare), as well as Medicare Advantage data from each of those plans 
(HCCI, 2011). Currently the HCCI database contains more than 5 billion 
medical claim records from over 5,000 hospitals and 1 million service pro-viders from 2000 through the present (Merrill, 2011). Eventually HHCI 
plans to add data from additional private insurers, as well as public payers 
such as Medicaid (Merrill, 2011). This type of cooperative arrangement 
among private insurers and between the private insurance industry and the 
public serves as another example of the type of data sharing enterprise that 
would help to expand the pool of data available to estimate the indicators 
beyond those available from any individual data system.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 167
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
˜˚
Currently data are being collected by a number of public and pri-vate data systems, some speci˜c to HIV and others not, each of 
which has limitations. These data systems are collecting relevant 
information that can serve as a collective platform for evaluating 
access to continuous and high-quality care in all populations of 
PLWHA. The committee identi˜ed 12 data systems in particular 
that collect data of use for estimating the core indicators to moni-tor progress toward meeting the goals of the NHAS and ACA:
˚˚National HIV Surveillance System
˚˚Medical Monitoring Project˚˚Ryan White Services Report
˚˚Ryan White AIDS Drug Assistance Program Reports
˚˚Medicaid Statistical Information System
˚˚Chronic Condition Data Warehouse
˚˚
˚North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and 
Design˚˚CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems
˚˚HIV Research Network˚˚Clinical Case Registry: HIV
˚˚Kaiser Permanente˚˚National Vital Statistics System
  
Two additional data systems provide information of use in track
-ing the impact of the initiatives on care for two small but impor-tant subpopulations of HIV-infected individuals (AI/ANs; federal 
prisoners), and a third provides information relevant to housing 
assistance and other supportive services for PLWHA:
˚˚Resource and Patient Management System
˚˚Bureau of Prisons Electronic Medical Record˚˚Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
˜˚
The committee™s review of federal data systems relevant to HIV 
care showed they capture a wealth of data that can be used to 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.168
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
estimate the indicators identi˜ed by the committee for monitoring 
the impact of the NHAS and the ACA in improving HIV/AIDS 
care in the United States. Each data system has limitations, how-ever. Few contain all of the data elements needed to estimate the 
indicators, especially those pertaining to mental health, substance 
abuse, and supportive services. In addition, most of the data sys-tems are not fully representative of the population of PLWHA in 
the United States. In many cases (e.g., Ryan White HIV/AIDS Pro
-gram, MSIS, CCW, VHA), the population represented in the data 
system is de˜ned by program eligibility and cannot be expanded. 
Similarly, the purposes for which the data systems were designed 
preclude expansion of the data elements they collect to include all 
of those needed to estimate all of the indicators identi˜ed by the 
committee. Furthermore, such expansion would entail signi˜cant 
increases in cost and reporting burden. The committee concluded, 
however, that more modest changes in individual data systems 
could improve the usefulness of their data for tracking changes in 
HIV care and access to supportive services for people living with 
HIV. For example, a given data system might add one or more data 
elements or modify an existing data element to allow the system to 
provide data for estimating a subgroup of the indicators identi˜ed 
by the committee, such as those pertaining to supportive services 
(housing, food security, transportation), or to simplify identi˜ca
-tion of data representing HIV-infected individuals (e.g., ˚agging 
HIV/AIDS as a chronic condition in the CCW). In cases where the 
population represented in a data system is not constrained by the 
program it serves (e.g., MMP), steps might be taken either to make 
the population more representative of the national population of 
people living with HIV or to include groups (e.g., homeless) who 
are less apt to be represented in other data systems.
  
Recommendation 3-1. The Department of Health and Human 
Services, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, and other relevant federal agen-cies should review and, to the extent practicable, modify the federal 
data systems identi˜ed by the committee to better enable them to 
be used for monitoring progress toward achieving the goals of the 
National HIV/AIDS Strategy.
˜˚
Uniform longitudinal reporting of CD4 and viral load test dates 
and results from all jurisdictions and data on the initiation and 
ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy would 
facilitate the use of data from the NHSS to assess all of the core 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 169
indicators for clinical HIV care identi˜ed by the committee. In ad
-dition, collection of data on sexual orientation, sources of coverage 
for medical treatment, and maintaining current geographic area 
of residence for individuals in the NHSS would facilitate use of 
national surveillance system data for evaluation of indicators for 
speci˜c subpopulations identi˜ed in the NHAS.
  
Recommendation 3-2. The Centers for Disease Control and Pre-vention should take steps to enhance the National HIV Surveillance 
System including˚˚˜˚
˚issuing guidelines or criteria for National HIV Surveillance 
System reporting to include all CD4 and viral load test results˚˚˜˚
˚capturing longitudinal data pertaining to the initiation and 
ongoing prescription or dispensing of antiretroviral therapy 
for individuals diagnosed with HIV (e.g., through pharmacy-based reporting)
˚˚˜˚
˚obtaining information on sexual orientation and sources of 
coverage for medical treatment (including, but not limited 
to, Medicaid, Medicare, Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, 
other public funding, private insurance or health maintenance 
organization, no coverage) and obtaining and employing cur-rent geographic marker of residence (e.g., current address, zip code, partial zip code, census block) for individuals in the 
National HIV Surveillance System
˜˚
The committee™s review of data systems relevant to HIV care 
showed that clinically based EHR systems (e.g., VHA, KP, IHS, 
BOP) capture all, or most, of the data elements needed to estimate 
the clinical HIV care indicators identi˜ed by the committee. They 
also generally capture at least some of the information needed to 
estimate the indicators pertaining to mental health and substance 
abuse, but they do not routinely capture data needed to estimate 
the indicators pertaining to supportive services. Another limitation 
of provider-based systems is that individually they represent only 
one segment of the population of PLWHA in the United States 
(e.g., veterans, KP enrollees, AI/ANs, federal prisoners). Other data 
systems represent larger proportions of PLWHA nationally (e.g., 
NHSS, MSIS) and may contain information on mental health, sub-stance abuse, and supportive services (e.g., Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program, MSIS), but they contain limited or no clinical data. The 
NwHIN Exchange is an example of a partnership between public 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.170
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
and private entities to exchange health information for a variety of 
purposes. It could serve as a model for or a foundation upon which 
to build a broader data sharing partnership among public and pri-vate data systems both to permit better estimation of the indicators 
identi˜ed by the committee and to return information to private 
health care systems and providers for the purpose of improving 
health care for individuals with HIV. Building upon existing data 
sharing partnerships would help to reduce the costs associated with implementation of such partnerships for the exchange of informa-tion relevant to the provision of HIV care.  
Recommendation 3-3. The Department of Health and Human 
Services, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Indian Health 
Service, the Federal Bureau of Prisons, and other relevant federal 
agencies should use existing data from private data systems, includ-ing data from electronic health records, to monitor the impact of 
the National HIV/AIDS Strategy and the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act on improving HIV care. Federal agencies also 
should share data pertaining to HIV care with private health care 
systems and providers to improve the quality of care for individu-als with HIV. Methods might include the development of a data 
sharing partnership between public and private data systems that 
include data pertaining to HIV care.REFERENCESBlair, J. M., A. D. McNaghten, E. L. Frazier, J. Skarbinski, P. Huang, and J. D. Heffel˜nger. 
2011. Clinical and behavioral characteristics of adults receiving medical care for HIV 
infectionŠMedical Monitoring Project, United States, 2007. MMWR Surveillance Sum-maries 60(11):1-20.BOP (Federal Bureau of Prisons). 2011. Weekly Population Report
. http://www.bop.gov/
 locations/weekly_report.jsp (accessed December 22, 2011).
Bozzette, S. A., S. H. Berry, N. Duan, M. R. Frankel, A. A. Leibowitz, D. Lefkowitz, C. A. 
Emmons, J. W. Senter˜tt, M. L. Berk, S. C. Morton, and M. F. Shapiro. 1998. The care 
of HIV-infected adults in the United States. HIV Cost and Services Utilization Study 
Consortium. New England Journal of Medicine
 339(26):1897-1904.Carr, A. C., A. Ghosh, and R. J. Ancill. 1983. Can a computer take a psychiatric history? 
Psychological Medicine 13(1):151-158.CCW (Chronic Condition Data Warehouse). 2011a. 
Chronic Condition Data Warehouse
. http://www.ccwdata.org/index.htm (accessed March 6, 2012).
CCW. 2011b. 
Chronic Condition Data Warehouse User Guide
. Version 1.8. http://www.
ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_userguide.pdf (accessed Decem-ber 21, 2011).CCW. 2011c. 
Medicaid Analytic Extract Files (MAX) User Guide. Version 1.1. http://www.
ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_max_user_guide.pdf (accessed 
February 2, 2012).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 171
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2007. Cases of HIV infection and AIDS 
in the United States and dependent areas, 2005. 
HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report
 17, re
-vised edition, June. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/reports/2005report/#3 
(accessed January 18, 2012).
CDC. 2009. Medical Monitoring Project 2009 Protocol. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Dis-ease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/MMP
 2009Protocol.pdf (accessed October 21, 2011).CDC. 2010. Summary of Changes to the National HIV Surveillance Report. National Cen-ter for HIV/AIDS, Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/
surveillance/resources/factsheets/pdf/summary_changes.pdf (accessed October 20, 2011).CDC. 2011a. HIV surveillanceŠUnited States, 1981-2008. 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report 60(21):689-693.CDC. 2011b. Medical Monitoring Project (MMP). http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/
mmp/index.htm (accessed October 21, 2011).
CDC. 2011c. U.S. Standard Certi˜cate of Death. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/DEATH11-
03˜nal-ACC.pdf (accessed November 27, 2011).CDC. 2011d. Vital signs: HIV prevention through care and treatmentŠUnited States. 
Morbid-ity and Mortality Weekly Report
 60(47):1618-1623.CDC. 2012. Diagnoses of HIV infection and AIDS in the United States and dependent ar
-eas, 2010. HIV Surveillance Report. Volume 22. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/
resources/reports/2010report/index.htm (accessed March 21, 2012).
Chartier, K., and R. Caetano. 2010. Ethnicity and health disparities in alcohol research. 
Al-cohol Research & Health
 33(1-2):152-160.CHCS (Center for Health Care Strategies, Inc.). 2010. Integrating Medicare and Medic-aid Data to Support Improved Care for Dual Eligibles. http://www.chcs.org/usr_doc/
 Integrating_Medicare_and_Medicaid_Data_for_Duals.pdf (accessed January 24, 2012).
CMS (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services). 2010. Medicaid and CHIP Statistical 
Information System (MSIS): File Speci˜cations and Data Dictionary. Release 3.1. https://www.cms.gov/MSIS/Downloads/msisdd2010.pdf (accessed December 21, 2011).
CMS. 2011a. Medicaid Analytic Extract (MAX) General Information. https://www.cms.gov/
MedicaidDataSourcesGenInfo/07_MAXGeneralInformation.asp (accessed October 26, 
2011).CMS. 2011b. Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS) State Summary Datamart. http://msis.cms.hhs.gov/ (accessed December 21, 2011).CMS. 2011c. Overview: Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS). https://www.cms.
gov/msis/ (accessed January 24, 2012).
CMS. 2011d. What Are the Types of Records That Are Contained in Each of the Medicaid 
Analytic Extract (MAX) Files? How Do the Records in These Files Differ from the Re-cords in the Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS) Files? https://questions.cms.hhs.gov/app/answers/detail/a_id/9230/kw/Medicaid%20Analytic%20Extract (accessed 
December 22, 2011).CNICS (CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems). 2011. 
CNICS. http://www.uab.edu/
cnics/ (accessed December 21, 2011).
Crystal, S., A. Akincigil, S. Bilder, and J. T. Walkup. 2007. Studying prescription drug use 
and outcomes with Medicaid claims data: Strengths, limitations, and strategies. Medical 
Care 45(10 Suppl 2):S58-65.Cullen, T. 2006. 
HIV Management System: Software Application. Indian Health Service, Of-˜ce of Information Technology. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/document/95493
1/2006cullen_051111comp_pdf (accessed December 22, 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.172
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DHAP (Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention). 2011. Enhanced Comprehensive HIV Prevention 
Planning (ECHPP) Project. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/nhas/echpp/pdf/echpp_factsheet.pdf 
(accessed December 27, 2011).
DOJ (Department of Justice). 2011. Federal Prison System. FY 2012 Performance Budget.
 http://www.justice.gov/jmd/2012justi˜cation/pdf/fy12-bop-se-justi˜cation.pdf (accessed 
December 22, 2011).Fisher, H. H., and T. Hoyte. 2011. 
Using HIV Surveillance Data to Inform the ECHPP Evalu-ation
. PowerPoint presentation at the 2011 National HIV Prevention Conference, August 
14-17, Atlanta, GA. http://www.slideshare.net/CDCNPIN/using-hiv-surveillance-data-to-
inform-the-echpp-evaluation (accessed December 22, 2011).
Gange, S. J., M. M. Kitahata, M. S. Saag, D. R. Bangsberg, R. J. Bosch, J. T. Brooks, L. 
Calzavara, S. G. Deeks, J. J. Eron, K. A. Gebo, M. J. Gill, D. W. Haas, R. S. Hogg, M. A. 
Horberg, L. P. Jacobson, A. C. Justice, G. D. Kirk, M. B. Klein, J. N. Martin, R. G. 
McKaig, B. Rodriguez, S. B. Rourke, T. R. Sterling, A. M. Freeman, and R. D. Moorey. 
2007. Cohort Pro˜le: The North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and 
Design (NA-ACCORD). International Journal of Epidemiology 36:294-301.GAO (U.S. Government Accountability Of˜ce). 2007. Indian Health Service: HIV/AIDS Pre-vention and Treatment Services for American Indians and Alaskan Natives: Report to 
Congressional Requesters. http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0890.pdf (accessed December 
22, 2011).Greist, J. H., T. P. Laughren, D. H. Gustafson, F. F. Stauss, G. L. Rowse, and J. A. Chiles. 
1973. A computer interview for suicide-risk prediction. American Journal of Psychiatry 130(12):1327-1332.Hall, H. I., K. McDavid, Q. Ling, and A. Sloggett. 2005. Survival after diagnosis of AIDS, 
United States. Annals of Epidemiology 15(8):652.Hall, H. I., R. Song, J. E. Gerstle 3rd, and L. M. Lee, HIV/AIDS Reporting System Evaluation 
Group. 2006. Assessing the completeness of reporting of human immunode˜ciency virus 
diagnoses in 2002-2003: Capture-recapture methods. American Journal of Epidemiology 164(4):391-397.HCCI (Health Care Cost Institute). 2011. About HCCI. http://healthcostinstitute.org/about 
(accessed November 27, 2011).HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). 2011a. 
Statement by Mary K. 
Wake˜eld, Administrator, Health Resources and Services Administration, before the 
Committee on Energy, the Subcommittee on Health, United States House of Representa
-tives: Health Resources and Services Administration on Ryan White AIDS Reauthoriza
-tion Bill. http://www.hhs.gov/asl/testify/2009/09/t20090909a.html (accessed August 9, 
2011).HHS. 2011b. 
12 Cities Project
. http://blog.aids.gov/downloads/NHAS-HHS-12.pdf (accessed 
January 24, 2012).HIVRN (HIV Research Network). 2011. HIVRN: Contacts. https://cds.johnshopkins.edu/hivrn/index.cfm?do=sens.content&page=contacts.html (accessed December 21, 2011).
HOPWA (Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS). 2011a. 
Annual Progress Re-port (APR): Measuring Performance Outcomes. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/
 APR_HOPWA.docx (accessed December 1, 2011).
HOPWA. 2011b. 
Consolidated Annual Performance Evaluation Report (CAPER): Measuring 
Performance Outcomes. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=hopwa_caper_10312014.doc (accessed December 8, 2011).HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2010. Going the Distance: The Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS Program. http://hab.hrsa.gov/data/˜les/2010progressrpt.pdf (accessed 
December 14, 2011).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 173
HRSA. 2011. 2010 Annual Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program Services Report (RSR) Instruc
-tion. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyour
 grant/˜les/rsrinstructionmanual2010.pdf (accessed August 9, 2011).
HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development). 2010. Homeless Management 
Information System (HMIS) Data Standards, Revised Notice. Of˜ce of Community 
Planning and Development, March. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/FinalHMISData
 Standards_March2010.pdf (accessed December 9, 2011).HUD. 2011a. Administering HOPWA Housing Assistance: Determining Bene˜ciary Eli
-gibility. Of˜ce of HIV/AIDS Housing. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=DOC_12082.pdf (accessed December 9, 2011).
HUD. 2011b. HIV/AIDS Housing. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_ of˜ces/comm_planning/aidshousing (accessed October 26, 2011).
IHS (Indian Health Service). 2008. Diabetes in American Indians and Alaska Natives. Fact 
Sheet. Department of Health and Human Services. http://www.ihs.gov/MedicalPrograms/
Diabetes/index.cfm?module=resourcesFactSheets_AIANs08 (accessed August 25, 2011).IHS. 2011a. iCare. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/ca/icare/ (accessed December 22, 2011).
IHS. 2011b. 
IHS Clinical Reporting System (BGP): National GPRA Developmental Re
-port Performance Measure List and De˜nitions. Version 12.0, December. Albuquerque, 
NM: Of˜ce of Information Technology, Division of Information Resource Management. 
https://www.ihs.gov/CIO/CRS/documents/crsv12/GPRA%20Dev%20Measures%20V12.
pdf (accessed January 25, 2012).IHS. 2011c. IHS Clinical Reporting System (BGP): Select Measures (Local) Report Perfor-mance Measure List and De˜nitions. Version 12.0, December. Albuquerque, NM: Of˜ce 
of Information Technology, Division of Information Resource Management. http://www.
ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv12/SelectedMeasuresV12.pdf (accessed January 25, 2012).
IHS. 2011d. The IHS HIV/AIDS Program: Frequently Asked Questions. http://www.ihs.gov/
medicalprograms/hivaids/index.cfm?module=faq (accessed December 22, 2011).
IHS. 2012. IHS Fact Sheets: IHS Year 2012 Pro˜le
. http://www.ihs.gov/PublicAffairs/IHS
 Brochure/Pro˜le.asp (accessed February 29, 2012).IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2004. 
Measuring What Matters: Allocation, Planning and 
Quality Assessment for the Ryan White CARE Act
. Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.IOM. 2011. 
HIV Screening and Access to Care: Health Care System Capacity for Increased 
HIV Testing and Provision of Care
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Kates, J. 2011. Medicaid and HIV: A National Analysis.
 Washington, DC: Henry J. Kaiser 
Family Foundation. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/8218.pdf (accessed January 11, 
2012).KFF (Kaiser Family Foundation). 2009a. Medicare and HIV. 
HIV/AIDS Policy Fact Sheet. February. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/7171_04.pdf (accessed December 19, 2011).
KFF. 2009b. The Ryan White Program. 
HIV/AIDS Policy Fact Sheet. February. http://www.
kff.org/hivaids/upload/7582_05.pdf (accessed December 19, 2011).KFF. 2011a. 
Medicaid and CHIPŠKaiser State Health Facts. http://www.statehealthfacts.org/
comparecat.jsp?cat=4 (accessed December 14, 2011).
KFF. 2011b. U.S. federal funding for HIV/AIDS: The President™s FY 2012 budget request. 
HIV/AIDS Policy Fact Sheet. October. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/7029-07.pdf 
(accessed December 21, 2011).
Kitahata, M. 2011. IOM Review of Data Systems Monitoring HIV Care in the U.S.: CNICS 
and NA-ACCORD. PowerPoint presentation before the committee, Washington, DC, 
April 28.Kobak, K. A., J. H. Greist, J. W. Jefferson, and D. J. Katzelnick. 1996. Computer-administered 
clinical rating scales: A review. 
Psychopharmacology 127(4):291-301.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.174
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Kochanek, K. D., J. Xu, S. L. Murphy, A. M. Miniño, and H. Kung. 2011. Deaths: Preliminary 
data for 2009. 
National Vital Statistics Reports
 59(4):1-51.Koroukian, S. M., G. S. Cooper, and A. A. Rimm. 2003. Ability of Medicaid claims data to 
identify incident cases of breast cancer in the Ohio Medicaid population. Health Services 
Research 38(3):947-960.KP (Kaiser Permanente). 2009. VA and Kaiser Permanente Invite Veterans to Participate in 
Health Record Pilot Program
. Press release, November 25. http://xnet.kp.org/newscenter/
pressreleases/nat/2009/112509vapilot.html (accessed December 21, 2011).KP. 2011. 
Our Plans. https://www.kpchoicesolution.com/HealthPlans.aspx (accessed Decem
-ber 21, 2011).Lawrence, S. T., J. H. Willig, H. M. Crane, J. Ye, I. Aban, W. Lober, C. R. Nevin, D. S. Batey, 
M. J. Mugavero, C. McCullumsmith, C. Wright, M. Kitahata, J. L. Raper, M. S. Saag, 
and J. E. Schumacher. 2010. Routine, self-administered, touch-screen, computer-based 
suicidal ideation assessment linked to automated response team noti˜cation in an HIV 
primary care setting. Clinical Infectious Diseases
 50(8):1165-1173.Lucas, R. W., P. J. Mullin, C. B. Luna, and D. C. McInroy. 1977. Psychiatrists and a computer 
as interrogators of patients with alcohol-related illnesses: A comparison. British Journal 
of Psychiatry 131(2):160-167.Martin, E. G., and C. L. Barry. 2011. The adoption of mental health drugs on state AIDS Drug 
Assistance Program formularies. 
American Journal of Public Health 101(6):1103-1109.Martin, E. G., and P. S. Keenan. 2011. Sticky dollars: Inertia in the evolution of federal alloca
-tions for HIV care through the Ryan White Program. 
Publius: The Journal of Federalism 41(1):101-125.Maruschak, L. M. 2010. HIV in Prisons, 2007-2008. U.S. Department of Justice. http://bjs.ojp.usdoj.gov/content/pub/pdf/hivp08.pdf (accessed December 6, 2011).
Massachusetts Department of Public Health. 2012. Letter to clinical laboratories. (February 
28).McCoy, S. I., B. Jones, P. A. Leone, S. Napravnik, E. B. Quinlivan, J. J. Eron, and W. C. Miller. 
2010. Variability of the date of HIV diagnosis: A comparison of self-report, medical 
record, and HIV/AIDS surveillance data. 
Annals of Epidemiology 20(10):734-742.Merrill, M. 2011. Healthcare Cost Institute to provide data from four private sector insur
-ers. Health IT News. http://healthcareitnews.com/news/healthcare-cost-institute-provide-data-four-private-sector-insurers (accessed November 27, 2011).
Metzger, D. S., B. Koblin, C. Turner, H. Navaline, F. Valenti, S. Holte, M. Gross, A. Sheon, 
H. Miller, P. Cooley, and G. R. Seage III, for the HIVNET Vaccine Preparedness Study 
Protocol Team. 2000. Randomized controlled trial of audio computer-assisted self-
interviewing: Utility and acceptability in longitudinal studies. American Journal of Epi-demiology 152(2): 99-106.NA-ACCORD (North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design). 2011. 
North American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design: Cohorts. http://statepiaps.jhsph.edu/naaccord/Cohorts/index.html (accessed December 21, 2011).
NASTAD (National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors). 2011. 
National ADAP 
Monitoring Project Annual Report. http://www.nastad.org/Docs/020035_2011%20
NASTAD%20National%20ADAP%20Monitoring%20Project%20Annual%20Report.
pdf (accessed December 6, 2011).
NVSS (National Vital Statistics System). 2011a. 
National Vital Statistics System
. http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/nvss.htm (accessed December 21, 2011).
NVSS. 2011b. National Vital Statistics System: Mortality Data
. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
deaths.htm (accessed December 21, 2011).NVSS. 2011c. 
Writing Cause-of-Death Statements
. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/writing_
cod_statements.htm (accessed November 27, 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 175
NwHIN (Nationwide Health Information Network) Exchange. 2011. 
Nationwide Health 
Information Network Exchange. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt?open=
 512&objID=1407&parentname=CommunityPage&parentid=8&mode=2&in_hi_userid=11113&cached=true (accessed December 21, 2011).
OMB (Of˜ce of Management and Budget). 1977. 
Statistical Policy Directive No. 15, Race and 
Ethnic Standards for Federal Statistics and Administrative Reporting. http://wonder.cdc.
gov/wonder/help/populations/bridged-race/Directive15.html (accessed August 11, 2011).OMB. 1997a. Recommendations from the Interagency Committee for the Review of the Racial 
and Ethnic Standards to the Of˜ce of Management and Budget concerning changes to 
the standards for the classi˜cation of federal data on race and ethnicity. 
Federal Register (3110-01):36873-36946.OMB. 1997b. Revisions to the standards for the classi˜cation of federal data on race and 
ethnicity. 
Federal Register 62:58781-58790.ONAP (Of˜ce of National AIDS Policy). 2010. National HIV/AIDS Strategy for the United 
States. http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/˜les/uploads/NHAS.pdf (accessed July 
14, 2011).ONC (Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology). 2011. 
Na-tionwide Health Information Network Exchange. http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.
pt/community/healthit_hhs_gov__nhin_exchange/1407 (accessed November 27, 2011).Overhage, J. M., S. Grannis, and C. J. McDonald. 2008. A comparison of the completeness 
and timeliness of automated electronic laboratory reporting and spontaneous reporting 
of noti˜able conditions. 
American Journal of Public Health 98(2):344-350.Petrie, K., and W. Abell. 1994. Responses of parasuicides to a computerized interview. 
Com-puters in Human Behavior
 10(4):415-418.Price, L. G. 2011. The Federal Bureau of Prisons Electronic Medical Record (BEMR): From 
Sojourn to Odyssey. PowerPoint presentation at the 2011 USPHS Scienti˜c and Training 
Symposium/ New Orleans, Louisiana. http://www.phscofevents.org/agenda/ag_glance
 Detail.cfm?sg_id=58 (accessed December 22, 2011).
Rawlings, M. K., and D. P. Hopson. 2009. The impact of HIV policies and politics on com
-munities of color. In 
HIV/AIDS in U.S. Communities of Color, edited by V. Stone, B. 
Ojikutu, M. K. Rawlings, and K. Y. Smith. Dordrecht: Springer. Pp. 261-282.
ResDAC (Research Data Assistance Center). 2011a. Availability of Research Identi˜able 
Data, Limited Data Sets, and Non Identi˜able Files. http://www.resdac.org/tools/TBs/
TN_015_CMS%20Data%20Availability_508%20.pdf (accessed December 22, 2011).
ResDAC. 2011b. Medicaid FAQs Draft
. http://www.resdac.org/medicaid/FAQs-
draft-08172006.doc (accessed October 31, 2011).
Rich, J. D., D. A. Wohl, C. G. Beckwith, A. C. Spaulding, N. E. Lepp, J. Baillargeon, S. 
Gardner, A. Avery, F. L. Altice, and S. Springer, Centers for AIDS ResearchŠCollabora
-tion on HIV in Corrections (CFAR-CHIC) Working Group. 2011. HIV-related research 
in correctional populations: Now is the time. 
Current HIV/AIDS Reports
 8(4):288-296.
Skinner, H. A., and B. A. Allen. 1983. Does the computer make a difference? Computerized 
versus face-to-face versus self-report assessment of alcohol, drug, and tobacco use. Jour-nal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 51(2):267-275.Smith, V. K., K. Gifford, S. Kramer, J. Dalton, P. MacTaggart, and M. Lim Warner. 2008. 
State 
E-Health Activities in 2007: Findings from a State Survey.
 http://www.commonwealth
 fund.org/usr_doc/1104_Smith_state_e-hlt_activities_2007_˜ndings_st.pdf (accessed Au
-gust 31, 2011).VA (Department of Veterans Affairs). 2011. 
Center for Quality Management in Public Health: 
HIV Infected Veterans in VHA Care by StateŠ2010
. http://www.publichealth.va.gov/
quality/reports/hiv-in-care-by-state-2010.asp (accessed December 21, 2011).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.176
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Valdiserri, R., and A. Forsyth. 2011. 
DHHS/OHAP Consultation on HIV/AIDS Core In-dicators, Data Streamlining, and Federal Reporting Requirements. Washington, DC, 
September 19.Waruru, A. K., R. Nduti, and T. Tylleskär. 2005. Audio computer-assisted self-interviewing 
(ACASI) may avert socially desirable responses about infant feeding in the context of 
HIV. 
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making
 5(August):24 (7 pages).Willig, J. 2011. 
Data at the HIV-Research and Informatics Service Center (RISC)
. PowerPoint 
presentation before the committee, San Francisco, CA, July 8.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 177
APPENDIX TABLE 3-1 follows on next page
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.178
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 Summary of Data Systems for Monitoring 
 HIV Care Identi˜ed by the Committee 
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsNational HIV Surveillance System (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Public 
health 
surveillance, 
state-mediated 
mandatory 
reporting 
by all 
jurisdictionsLongitudinal 
from time of 
diagnosisAll persons 
diagnosed 
with HIV/AIDSClinician 
reports of 
diagnosisLab reports 
of CD4 
counts and 
viral load
State health 
department 
reporting808,090 
(803,771)a Š2009 data 
for 46 states 
and 5 U.S. 
dependent 
areas with 
con˜dential 
name-based 
reportingWide coverage 
of diagnosed 
PLWHA
Includes 
PLWHA out of 
carePopulation-based 
censusIncludes individuals 
not in careNot limited to one 
type of payerDe˜nitions of 
variables and 
reporting methods 
standardizedTrend data routinely 
availableMany highest 
priority indicators 
can be calculatedCan be used to 
monitor disparities 
re: gender, race/
ethnicity, region
Possible to link 
with other data 
systems maintained 
at local level (e.g., 
Ryan White Services 
Report; Homeless 
Management 
Information System)
Clinical data 
elements limited to 
CD4 and viral load 
tests, with optional 
˜elds for ART and 
pregnancy statusNot all jurisdictions 
report lab results 
longitudinallyInability to track 
individuals across 
reporting areasInaccurate/ 
incomplete reporting
Not yet complete for 
jurisdictions without 
mature name-based 
reportingAddition 
of payer 
informationAddition of 
employment 
status, 
income, sexual 
orientationAddition of 
ART status 
(whether 
receiving)Work with 
states to extend 
reporting of 
all CD4 and 
viral load lab 
results to all 
jurisdictionsNumber may 
increase and 
become more 
comprehen-sive as more 
individuals with 
HIV/AIDS are 
identi˜ed with 
increased access 
to health care 
coverage aEstimated number following statistical adjustment for reporting delays and missing risk-
factor information, but not for incomplete reporting (http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/
resources/reports/2010report/pdf/2010_HIV_Surveillance_Report_vol_22.pdf#Page=52, ac-cessed March 21, 2012).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 179
APPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 Summary of Data Systems for Monitoring 
 HIV Care Identi˜ed by the Committee 
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsNational HIV Surveillance System (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)
Public 
health 
surveillance, 
state-mediated 
mandatory 
reporting 
by all 
jurisdictionsLongitudinal 
from time of 
diagnosisAll persons 
diagnosed 
with HIV/AIDSClinician 
reports of 
diagnosisLab reports 
of CD4 
counts and 
viral load
State health 
department 
reporting808,090 
(803,771)a Š2009 data 
for 46 states 
and 5 U.S. 
dependent 
areas with 
con˜dential 
name-based 
reportingWide coverage 
of diagnosed 
PLWHA
Includes 
PLWHA out of 
carePopulation-based 
censusIncludes individuals 
not in careNot limited to one 
type of payerDe˜nitions of 
variables and 
reporting methods 
standardizedTrend data routinely 
availableMany highest 
priority indicators 
can be calculatedCan be used to 
monitor disparities 
re: gender, race/
ethnicity, region
Possible to link 
with other data 
systems maintained 
at local level (e.g., 
Ryan White Services 
Report; Homeless 
Management 
Information System)
Clinical data 
elements limited to 
CD4 and viral load 
tests, with optional 
˜elds for ART and 
pregnancy statusNot all jurisdictions 
report lab results 
longitudinallyInability to track 
individuals across 
reporting areasInaccurate/ 
incomplete reporting
Not yet complete for 
jurisdictions without 
mature name-based 
reportingAddition 
of payer 
informationAddition of 
employment 
status, 
income, sexual 
orientationAddition of 
ART status 
(whether 
receiving)Work with 
states to extend 
reporting of 
all CD4 and 
viral load lab 
results to all 
jurisdictionsNumber may 
increase and 
become more 
comprehen-sive as more 
individuals with 
HIV/AIDS are 
identi˜ed with 
increased access 
to health care 
coveragecontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.180
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsMedical Monitoring Project (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Multistage 
probability 
proportional 
to size 
sampling 
designRepeated 
cross-sectional 
probability 
sampleAdults 
(˛18 years) 
diagnosed 
with HIV/AIDS and 
receiving 
outpatient 
careSelf-reported 
behavioral 
and selected 
clinical data
Medical 
record 
abstraction3,643 HIV-
infected adults 
(2007 cycle)
4,217 HIV-
infected adults 
(2009 cycle)
bRepeated 
cross-sectional 
probability 
samples of 
adult PLWHA 
receiving 
outpatient 
medical care in 
United States 
and Puerto 
RicoMost indicators can 
be calculatedIncludes data on 
supportive services2009 data cycle 
weighted to 
estimate nationally 
representative 
percentages of adult 
PLWHA in care
Not limited to 
patients receiving 
care through a 
speci˜c payer
Low individual 
participation rate in 
2007 cycle2007 data 
unweightedPossibility of social 
desirability response 
bias for in-person 
interviewsSome clinical 
information (e.g., 
date of HIV 
diagnosis and date of 
˜rst entry into care) 
is self-reportedStrati˜cation 
by certain 
characteristics 
produced numbers 
too small for reliable 
interpretationOnly includes 
individuals who are 
in care
Take steps 
to improve 
participation 
rates and make 
sample more 
nationally 
representative 
particularly 
among hard 
to reach 
populations 
such as 
homelessCreate a 
mechanism 
to allow 
supplemental 
questions to 
be added as 
needed to 
capture salient 
data (e.g., with 
speci˜c ACA 
implementation 
issues and how 
they might 
affect patients)Sample may 
be expected to 
re˚ect greater 
number of 
PLWHA not 
previously in 
care, as number 
of persons in 
care increases
APPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 Continued bThe 2009 collection cycle data were weighted to estimate nationally representative percent-ages of HIV-infected adults receiving medical care in the United States.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 181
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsMedical Monitoring Project (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)Multistage 
probability 
proportional 
to size 
sampling 
designRepeated 
cross-sectional 
probability 
sampleAdults 
(˛18 years) 
diagnosed 
with HIV/AIDS and 
receiving 
outpatient 
careSelf-reported 
behavioral 
and selected 
clinical data
Medical 
record 
abstraction3,643 HIV-
infected adults 
(2007 cycle)
4,217 HIV-
infected adults 
(2009 cycle)
bRepeated 
cross-sectional 
probability 
samples of 
adult PLWHA 
receiving 
outpatient 
medical care in 
United States 
and Puerto 
RicoMost indicators can 
be calculatedIncludes data on 
supportive services2009 data cycle 
weighted to 
estimate nationally 
representative 
percentages of adult 
PLWHA in care
Not limited to 
patients receiving 
care through a 
speci˜c payer
Low individual 
participation rate in 
2007 cycle2007 data 
unweightedPossibility of social 
desirability response 
bias for in-person 
interviewsSome clinical 
information (e.g., 
date of HIV 
diagnosis and date of 
˜rst entry into care) 
is self-reportedStrati˜cation 
by certain 
characteristics 
produced numbers 
too small for reliable 
interpretationOnly includes 
individuals who are 
in care
Take steps 
to improve 
participation 
rates and make 
sample more 
nationally 
representative 
particularly 
among hard 
to reach 
populations 
such as 
homelessCreate a 
mechanism 
to allow 
supplemental 
questions to 
be added as 
needed to 
capture salient 
data (e.g., with 
speci˜c ACA 
implementation 
issues and how 
they might 
affect patients)Sample may 
be expected to 
re˚ect greater 
number of 
PLWHA not 
previously in 
care, as number 
of persons in 
care increases
continuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.182
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsRyan White Services Report (Health Resources and Services Administration)
HRSA/HAB 
mandatory 
reporting for 
Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS 
Program 
grantees and 
contracted 
service 
providersHIV-infected 
individuals 
receiving 
at least one 
Ryan White 
serviceRyan White 
grantees and 
contracted 
service 
providersGrantee 
Report: summary 
of RW 
providers 
in the 
jurisdiction 
and services 
they offerService 
Provider 
Report: basic 
information 
about the 
organization; 
lists service 
provider 
contracts for 
reporting 
periodClient 
Report: client-level 
demographic 
information; 
HIV clinical 
information; 
HIV medical, 
health care, 
and support 
services 
received>500,000 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
Representative 
of clients 
receiving Ryan 
White funded 
servicesNot 
representative 
of national 
population of 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesMost indicators 
(or a proxy) can be 
calculatedIncludes data on 
supportive services, 
such as need for 
and use of housing, 
food, transportation 
services for people 
served by Ryan 
White  HIV/AIDS 
ProgramGrantee data can 
be used to monitor 
changes at service 
system levelGrantees/providers 
are not required to 
report client service 
data for services not 
paid for by the Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS 
Program (may result 
in client-level data 
gaps) [Full clinical 
data are reported 
regardless of funding 
source]Dif˜cult to compare 
data across 
jurisdictions due to 
interstate variation 
in programs
Report all client 
service data 
regardless of 
funding sourceAnticipated 
shift in clientele 
and servicesReduced 
dependency 
on program 
to meet health 
service needs
Redirection 
of funds to 
other vital 
services (e.g., 
housing, case 
management)APPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 183
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsRyan White Services Report (Health Resources and Services Administration)
HRSA/HAB 
mandatory 
reporting for 
Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS 
Program 
grantees and 
contracted 
service 
providersHIV-infected 
individuals 
receiving 
at least one 
Ryan White 
serviceRyan White 
grantees and 
contracted 
service 
providersGrantee 
Report: summary 
of RW 
providers 
in the 
jurisdiction 
and services 
they offerService 
Provider 
Report: basic 
information 
about the 
organization; 
lists service 
provider 
contracts for 
reporting 
periodClient 
Report: client-level 
demographic 
information; 
HIV clinical 
information; 
HIV medical, 
health care, 
and support 
services 
received>500,000 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
Representative 
of clients 
receiving Ryan 
White funded 
servicesNot 
representative 
of national 
population of 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesMost indicators 
(or a proxy) can be 
calculatedIncludes data on 
supportive services, 
such as need for 
and use of housing, 
food, transportation 
services for people 
served by Ryan 
White  HIV/AIDS 
ProgramGrantee data can 
be used to monitor 
changes at service 
system levelGrantees/providers 
are not required to 
report client service 
data for services not 
paid for by the Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS 
Program (may result 
in client-level data 
gaps) [Full clinical 
data are reported 
regardless of funding 
source]Dif˜cult to compare 
data across 
jurisdictions due to 
interstate variation 
in programs
Report all client 
service data 
regardless of 
funding sourceAnticipated 
shift in clientele 
and servicesReduced 
dependency 
on program 
to meet health 
service needs
Redirection 
of funds to 
other vital 
services (e.g., 
housing, case 
management)continuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.184
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsRyan White AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP) Reports 
 (Health Resources and Services Administration)ADAP Quarterly Report 
HRSA/HAB 
mandatory 
reporting 
for ADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entitiesAggregate 
data on 
ADAP 
clients 
enrolled/ 
servedADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entities such 
as Pharmacy 
Bene˜ts 
Management 
organizations 
ADAP 
Quarterly 
Data Report 
(aggregate 
data)213,764 
ADAP clients 
enrolled 
(FY2009)190,963 
ADAP 
clients served 
(FY2009)ADAP clients 
are HIV-
positive, low 
income, and 
uninsured or 
underinsuredData are aggregate
Contains only 
limited data, mostly 
demographicScheduled to be 
replaced by ADAP 
Data Report 
beginning with April 1ŒSeptember 
30, 2012, collection 
periodADAP Data Report (NOTE: First data collection period is April 1ŒSeptember 30, 2012)
Proposed 
HRSA/HAB 
mandatory 
reporting 
for ADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entitiesClient-level data 
on ADAP 
clients 
enrolled/ 
served 
(proposed)ADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entities such 
as Pharmacy 
Bene˜ts 
Management 
organizations 
ADAP Data 
Report 
(proposed) 
(client-level 
data)Demographic 
variables 
may be 
self-reportedClinical data 
must be from 
lab report, 
clinical 
documenta-tion, or HIV 
surveillance 
program213,764 
ADAP clients 
enrolled 
(FY2009)190,963 
ADAP 
clients served 
(FY2009)ADAP clients 
are HIV-
infected, low 
income, and 
uninsured or 
underinsuredClient-level dataProvides information 
only on medications 
that are fully funded 
by ADAP
Capture 
dispensing 
information 
for all ADAP 
formulary drugs 
regardless of 
funding sourceAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 185
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsRyan White AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP) Reports 
 (Health Resources and Services Administration)ADAP Quarterly Report 
HRSA/HAB 
mandatory 
reporting 
for ADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entitiesAggregate 
data on 
ADAP 
clients 
enrolled/ 
servedADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entities such 
as Pharmacy 
Bene˜ts 
Management 
organizations 
ADAP 
Quarterly 
Data Report 
(aggregate 
data)213,764 
ADAP clients 
enrolled 
(FY2009)190,963 
ADAP 
clients served 
(FY2009)ADAP clients 
are HIV-
positive, low 
income, and 
uninsured or 
underinsuredData are aggregate
Contains only 
limited data, mostly 
demographicScheduled to be 
replaced by ADAP 
Data Report 
beginning with April 1ŒSeptember 
30, 2012, collection 
periodADAP Data Report (NOTE: First data collection period is April 1ŒSeptember 30, 2012)
Proposed 
HRSA/HAB 
mandatory 
reporting 
for ADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entitiesClient-level data 
on ADAP 
clients 
enrolled/ 
served 
(proposed)ADAP 
grantees and 
contracted 
entities such 
as Pharmacy 
Bene˜ts 
Management 
organizations 
ADAP Data 
Report 
(proposed) 
(client-level 
data)Demographic 
variables 
may be 
self-reportedClinical data 
must be from 
lab report, 
clinical 
documenta-tion, or HIV 
surveillance 
program213,764 
ADAP clients 
enrolled 
(FY2009)190,963 
ADAP 
clients served 
(FY2009)ADAP clients 
are HIV-
infected, low 
income, and 
uninsured or 
underinsuredClient-level dataProvides information 
only on medications 
that are fully funded 
by ADAP
Capture 
dispensing 
information 
for all ADAP 
formulary drugs 
regardless of 
funding sourcecontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.186
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsMedicaid Statistical Information System (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services)
Health care 
claims and 
eligibilityHIV-
diagnosed 
individuals 
enrolled in 
MedicaidClaims and 
eligibility 
data 
reported by 
statesEligible ˜le
Inpatient 
claimsLong-term 
care claims
Other claimsPrescription 
drug claims  Claim types:Fee-for-
 serviceCapitated 
paymentsEncounter 
claimsService-tracking 
claims (some 
states)212,892 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
(FY2007)Representative 
of PLWHA 
enrolled in 
Medicaid 
(estimated 
47 percent of 
PLWHA in 
care)Enrollees most 
likely to be 
black males 
over the age 
of 1974 percent 
qualify for 
Medicaid 
as disabled 
(therefore 
not currently 
representative 
of non-disabled 
population of 
PLWHA)
Represents largest 
single source of 
care coverage for 
PLWHA: Medicaid 
enrollees account 
for 47 percent of 
PLWHA estimated 
to be in regular care
Utilization data only: 
No clinical outcome 
data 
No data on housing, 
food, transportation 
servicesChallenging to 
identify HIV-positive 
Medicaid recipients
Incomplete data 
on services for 
bene˜ciaries in 
managed careDiagnostic and 
service information 
dependent on codes 
entered on claims 
potentially resulting 
in incomplete data
Variations in 
Medicaid eligibility 
resulting in 
enrollment lapsesAnticipated 
increase in 
enrollment 
with increased 
eligibility 
provisions 
in ACA: 
magnitude 
likely to vary 
greatly across 
statesAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 187
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsMedicaid Statistical Information System (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services)
Health care 
claims and 
eligibilityHIV-
diagnosed 
individuals 
enrolled in 
MedicaidClaims and 
eligibility 
data 
reported by 
statesEligible ˜le
Inpatient 
claimsLong-term 
care claims
Other claimsPrescription 
drug claims  Claim types:Fee-for-
 serviceCapitated 
paymentsEncounter 
claimsService-tracking 
claims (some 
states)212,892 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
(FY2007)Representative 
of PLWHA 
enrolled in 
Medicaid 
(estimated 
47 percent of 
PLWHA in 
care)Enrollees most 
likely to be 
black males 
over the age 
of 1974 percent 
qualify for 
Medicaid 
as disabled 
(therefore 
not currently 
representative 
of non-disabled 
population of 
PLWHA)
Represents largest 
single source of 
care coverage for 
PLWHA: Medicaid 
enrollees account 
for 47 percent of 
PLWHA estimated 
to be in regular care
Utilization data only: 
No clinical outcome 
data 
No data on housing, 
food, transportation 
servicesChallenging to 
identify HIV-positive 
Medicaid recipients
Incomplete data 
on services for 
bene˜ciaries in 
managed careDiagnostic and 
service information 
dependent on codes 
entered on claims 
potentially resulting 
in incomplete data
Variations in 
Medicaid eligibility 
resulting in 
enrollment lapsesAnticipated 
increase in 
enrollment 
with increased 
eligibility 
provisions 
in ACA: 
magnitude 
likely to vary 
greatly across 
statescontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.188
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsChronic Condition Data Warehouse (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services)
Health care 
claimsHIV-
diagnosed 
individuals 
enrolled in 
MedicareClaims data 
submitted by 
health care 
providersApproximately 
100,000 
HIV-infected 
individualsApproximately 
20 percent 
of PLWHA 
estimated to be 
receiving care 
in the United 
StatesPLWHA who 
are disabled 
or age 65 or 
older29 percent of 
HIV-infected 
Medicaid 
enrollees are 
dually eligible 
for MedicareRepresents 
approximately 20 
percent of PLWHA 
in care
Number expected 
to increase with 
aging population of 
PLWHA
Primarily fee-for-
service utilization 
dataLimited data 
on services for 
bene˜ciaries in 
managed careLimited/no clinical 
outcome data or 
data on supportive 
servicesMay provide better 
information on drug 
coverage than other 
systems (with Part D 
enrollees) 
Designate HIV/AIDS as one of 
the prede˜ned 
chronic 
condition 
cohortsPotentially 
more claims 
for Medicare 
Part DEventual 
elimination of 
Part D ﬁdonut 
holeﬂAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 189
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsChronic Condition Data Warehouse (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services)
Health care 
claimsHIV-
diagnosed 
individuals 
enrolled in 
MedicareClaims data 
submitted by 
health care 
providersApproximately 
100,000 
HIV-infected 
individualsApproximately 
20 percent 
of PLWHA 
estimated to be 
receiving care 
in the United 
StatesPLWHA who 
are disabled 
or age 65 or 
older29 percent of 
HIV-infected 
Medicaid 
enrollees are 
dually eligible 
for MedicareRepresents 
approximately 20 
percent of PLWHA 
in care
Number expected 
to increase with 
aging population of 
PLWHA
Primarily fee-for-
service utilization 
dataLimited data 
on services for 
bene˜ciaries in 
managed careLimited/no clinical 
outcome data or 
data on supportive 
servicesMay provide better 
information on drug 
coverage than other 
systems (with Part D 
enrollees) 
Designate HIV/AIDS as one of 
the prede˜ned 
chronic 
condition 
cohortsPotentially 
more claims 
for Medicare 
Part DEventual 
elimination of 
Part D ﬁdonut 
holeﬂcontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.190
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsNorth American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design
Clinical 
cohorts 
collect data 
in the course 
of routine 
medical 
practice at 
each of the 
contributing 
clinical sites
Classical 
epidemio-logic HIV 
interval 
cohorts 
collect data 
at visits 
scheduled 
every 6 
monthsHIV-infected 
adults at 60+ 
clinical and 
academic 
research sites 
in the United 
States and 
CanadaElectronic 
data 
provided by 
contributing 
clinical and 
interval 
cohortsClinical 
cohorts 
collect 
data from 
electronic 
health 
records, 
interview 
question-naires, chart 
review, and 
other data 
collection 
systemsInterval 
cohorts 
collect 
data from 
structured 
interview, 
question-naires, and 
other data 
collection 
systemsApproximately 
100,000 
HIV-infected 
individualsDemographics 
(including 
age, sex, and 
transmission 
risk group) 
are similar to 
those reported 
by the CDC 
for the United 
States, but 
with somewhat 
fewer 
minorities;  
includes 
individuals 
from all but 
three U.S. 
states, but 
not all areas 
of each state 
representedRepresents about 20 
percent of PLWHA 
in care
New data elements 
can be added if they 
are collected by 
individual cohortsData are private/ 
proprietary, but 
may be available 
upon submission 
of proposal for 
research/policy useNo common 
protocol for timing 
and standardization 
of data elements 
across sitesLimited data on 
supportive servicesPLWHA receiving 
care primarily in 
academic medical 
centers may show 
little change in 
already high 
standard of care 
in response to 
ACA or NHAS 
implementation 
No change 
anticipatedAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 191
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsNorth American AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design
Clinical 
cohorts 
collect data 
in the course 
of routine 
medical 
practice at 
each of the 
contributing 
clinical sites
Classical 
epidemio-logic HIV 
interval 
cohorts 
collect data 
at visits 
scheduled 
every 6 
monthsHIV-infected 
adults at 60+ 
clinical and 
academic 
research sites 
in the United 
States and 
CanadaElectronic 
data 
provided by 
contributing 
clinical and 
interval 
cohortsClinical 
cohorts 
collect 
data from 
electronic 
health 
records, 
interview 
question-naires, chart 
review, and 
other data 
collection 
systemsInterval 
cohorts 
collect 
data from 
structured 
interview, 
question-naires, and 
other data 
collection 
systemsApproximately 
100,000 
HIV-infected 
individualsDemographics 
(including 
age, sex, and 
transmission 
risk group) 
are similar to 
those reported 
by the CDC 
for the United 
States, but 
with somewhat 
fewer 
minorities;  
includes 
individuals 
from all but 
three U.S. 
states, but 
not all areas 
of each state 
representedRepresents about 20 
percent of PLWHA 
in care
New data elements 
can be added if they 
are collected by 
individual cohortsData are private/ 
proprietary, but 
may be available 
upon submission 
of proposal for 
research/policy useNo common 
protocol for timing 
and standardization 
of data elements 
across sitesLimited data on 
supportive servicesPLWHA receiving 
care primarily in 
academic medical 
centers may show 
little change in 
already high 
standard of care 
in response to 
ACA or NHAS 
implementation 
No change 
anticipatedcontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.192
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsCFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems
Clinical 
cohortsLongitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
a selected 
Center 
for AIDS 
Research 
(CFAR)
Individuals 
receiving 
HIV care at 
8 selected 
CFAR sites 
across the 
United 
StatescElectronic 
health 
recordsElectronic 
patient-reported 
outcomes 
using 
standardized 
questionnaireChart 
review and 
other data 
collection 
systems23,197 HIV-
infected adultsRepresentative 
of PLWHA in 
the geographic 
regions of the 
selected CFAR 
sitesMuch of the data 
needed to calculate 
indicators, except 
for supportive 
servicesNew data elements, 
such as housing 
stability, can be 
added if they are 
collected in the 
clinical practice 
settingPatient reported 
outcome 
questionnaire 
could be used to 
ask about basic 
needs, stigma, 
discriminationData are private/ 
proprietary, but 
may be available 
upon submission 
of proposal for 
research/policy usePopulation 
not nationally 
representative of 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesNo change 
anticipatedHIV Research NetworkClinical 
cohortsLongitudinal 
record while 
in care at a 
participating 
siteAdults, 
children, and 
adolescents 
in care at 
hospital and 
community-based 
outpatient 
clinics 
throughout 
the United 
StatesData 
supplied 
electronically 
and through 
medical 
record 
reviewApproximately 
21,000 
HIV-infected 
patients in 
careDemographics 
(including 
age, sex, race/ethnicity, and 
transmission 
risk group) 
are similar to 
those reported 
by the CDC
Much of the data 
needed to calculate 
indicators, except 
for supportive 
servicesNew data elements, 
such as housing 
stability, can be 
added if they are 
collected in the 
clinical practice 
settingData are private/ 
proprietary, but 
may be available 
upon submission of 
proposal for research 
useAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 Continued cUniversity of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB); University of California at San Fran-cisco (UCSF); University of Washington (UW); Case Western Reserve University (CWRU), 
 
Cleveland, OH; Lifespan/Tufts/Brown University CFAR (Fenway), Boston, MA/Providence RI; 
the University of California, San Diego (UCSD); the University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill (UNC), and Johns Hopkins University (JHU), Baltimore, MD.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 193
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsCFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems
Clinical 
cohortsLongitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
a selected 
Center 
for AIDS 
Research 
(CFAR)
Individuals 
receiving 
HIV care at 
8 selected 
CFAR sites 
across the 
United 
StatescElectronic 
health 
recordsElectronic 
patient-reported 
outcomes 
using 
standardized 
questionnaireChart 
review and 
other data 
collection 
systems23,197 HIV-
infected adultsRepresentative 
of PLWHA in 
the geographic 
regions of the 
selected CFAR 
sitesMuch of the data 
needed to calculate 
indicators, except 
for supportive 
servicesNew data elements, 
such as housing 
stability, can be 
added if they are 
collected in the 
clinical practice 
settingPatient reported 
outcome 
questionnaire 
could be used to 
ask about basic 
needs, stigma, 
discriminationData are private/ 
proprietary, but 
may be available 
upon submission 
of proposal for 
research/policy usePopulation 
not nationally 
representative of 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesNo change 
anticipatedHIV Research NetworkClinical 
cohortsLongitudinal 
record while 
in care at a 
participating 
siteAdults, 
children, and 
adolescents 
in care at 
hospital and 
community-based 
outpatient 
clinics 
throughout 
the United 
StatesData 
supplied 
electronically 
and through 
medical 
record 
reviewApproximately 
21,000 
HIV-infected 
patients in 
careDemographics 
(including 
age, sex, race/ethnicity, and 
transmission 
risk group) 
are similar to 
those reported 
by the CDC
Much of the data 
needed to calculate 
indicators, except 
for supportive 
servicesNew data elements, 
such as housing 
stability, can be 
added if they are 
collected in the 
clinical practice 
settingData are private/ 
proprietary, but 
may be available 
upon submission of 
proposal for research 
usecontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.194
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsClinical Case Registry: HIV (Department of Veterans Affairs)
Longitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemHIV-
diagnosed 
veterans 
receiving 
care in 
Veterans 
Health 
Admini-stration 
(VHA) 
facilitiesElectronic 
health 
records23,463 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
(2008)Population is 
predominantly 
male and older 
compared to 
all PLWHA 
in the United 
StatesOutcome and 
utilization dataLargest provider 
of HIV care in the 
United StatesPopulation 
not nationally 
representative of 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesOnly captures data 
within VHA systemNo data on 
supportive services 
or mental health/ 
substance abuse 
screeningNo change 
anticipatedAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 195
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsClinical Case Registry: HIV (Department of Veterans Affairs)
Longitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemHIV-
diagnosed 
veterans 
receiving 
care in 
Veterans 
Health 
Admini-stration 
(VHA) 
facilitiesElectronic 
health 
records23,463 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
(2008)Population is 
predominantly 
male and older 
compared to 
all PLWHA 
in the United 
StatesOutcome and 
utilization dataLargest provider 
of HIV care in the 
United StatesPopulation 
not nationally 
representative of 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesOnly captures data 
within VHA systemNo data on 
supportive services 
or mental health/ 
substance abuse 
screeningNo change 
anticipatedcontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.196
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsKaiser PermanenteLongitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemHIV-
diagnosed 
individuals 
enrolled in 
KaiserElectronic 
health 
records>19,000 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
(2009); 
regional 
variation +/-
200 to >6,600 
HIV registry 
of 17,000+ 
(2010)Largest private 
provider of 
HIV care 
(2010)Representative 
of the insured 
HIV-positive 
population 
in the U.S. 
areas with 
Kaiser access 
(Hawaii, 
California, 
Oregon, 
Mid-Atlantic 
region, 
Atlanta, GA)Majority 
Caucasian 
MSMGreater 
percentage of 
Latinos on 
West Coast 
and greater 
percentage of 
blacks on East 
Coast12% female, 
but greater 
percentage on 
East CoastOutcome and 
utilization dataRepresents one of 
the largest groups 
of privately insured 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesData are private/ 
proprietaryOnly captures data 
within Kaiser systemNo data on 
supportive servicesYounger and 
marginally employed 
individuals may not 
remain in system due 
to insurance statusPossible 
increase in 
enrollees as 
more people 
with low/ 
moderate 
incomes 
(133Œ400% of 
federal poverty 
level) gain 
access to private 
insurancePossible increase 
in private 
insurance 
enrollees with 
elimination 
of preexisting 
condition 
clausesAPPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 197
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsKaiser PermanenteLongitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemHIV-
diagnosed 
individuals 
enrolled in 
KaiserElectronic 
health 
records>19,000 
HIV-infected 
individuals 
(2009); 
regional 
variation +/-
200 to >6,600 
HIV registry 
of 17,000+ 
(2010)Largest private 
provider of 
HIV care 
(2010)Representative 
of the insured 
HIV-positive 
population 
in the U.S. 
areas with 
Kaiser access 
(Hawaii, 
California, 
Oregon, 
Mid-Atlantic 
region, 
Atlanta, GA)Majority 
Caucasian 
MSMGreater 
percentage of 
Latinos on 
West Coast 
and greater 
percentage of 
blacks on East 
Coast12% female, 
but greater 
percentage on 
East CoastOutcome and 
utilization dataRepresents one of 
the largest groups 
of privately insured 
PLWHA in the 
United StatesData are private/ 
proprietaryOnly captures data 
within Kaiser systemNo data on 
supportive servicesYounger and 
marginally employed 
individuals may not 
remain in system due 
to insurance statusPossible 
increase in 
enrollees as 
more people 
with low/ 
moderate 
incomes 
(133Œ400% of 
federal poverty 
level) gain 
access to private 
insurancePossible increase 
in private 
insurance 
enrollees with 
elimination 
of preexisting 
condition 
clausescontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.198
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedDesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsResource and Patient Management System (Indian Health Service [IHS])
Longitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemAmerican 
Indians/ 
Alaska 
Natives 
receiving 
HIV care 
within IHSElectronic 
health 
recordsA minority of 
the estimated 
2,385 HIV-
positive 
American 
Indian/Alaska Native 
individuals 
(2008) receive 
HIV care in 
IHS facilitiesAmerican 
Indian/Alaska Native 
individuals 
account for 
<1 percent of 
PLWHA
Not 
representative 
of national 
(or native) 
population of 
PLWHA
Utilization and 
outcome data
Optional HIV-
speci˜c module in 
electronic health 
record systemImportant 
subpopulationVery small 
subpopulation of 
PLWHA (even within 
native population)Data from tribal 
facilities require 
special permission to 
accessData on supportive 
services are not 
routinely capturedNo change 
anticipatedBureau of Prisons Electronic Medical RecordLongitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemFederal 
prisoners 
diagnosed 
with HIV/AIDSElectronic 
health 
records1,538 HIV-
infected 
individuals 
(December 31, 
2008)Not 
representative 
of national 
population of 
PLWHA
Developing 
capability to 
extract HIV data 
that currently are 
only available at 
individual levelImportant 
subpopulationVery small 
subpopulation 
of PLWHA (even 
among incarcerated 
population in the 
United States)No change 
anticipatedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 199
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsResource and Patient Management System (Indian Health Service [IHS])
Longitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemAmerican 
Indians/ 
Alaska 
Natives 
receiving 
HIV care 
within IHSElectronic 
health 
recordsA minority of 
the estimated 
2,385 HIV-
positive 
American 
Indian/Alaska Native 
individuals 
(2008) receive 
HIV care in 
IHS facilitiesAmerican 
Indian/Alaska Native 
individuals 
account for 
<1 percent of 
PLWHA
Not 
representative 
of national 
(or native) 
population of 
PLWHA
Utilization and 
outcome data
Optional HIV-
speci˜c module in 
electronic health 
record systemImportant 
subpopulationVery small 
subpopulation of 
PLWHA (even within 
native population)Data from tribal 
facilities require 
special permission to 
accessData on supportive 
services are not 
routinely capturedNo change 
anticipatedBureau of Prisons Electronic Medical RecordLongitudinal 
record while 
in care in 
systemFederal 
prisoners 
diagnosed 
with HIV/AIDSElectronic 
health 
records1,538 HIV-
infected 
individuals 
(December 31, 
2008)Not 
representative 
of national 
population of 
PLWHA
Developing 
capability to 
extract HIV data 
that currently are 
only available at 
individual levelImportant 
subpopulationVery small 
subpopulation 
of PLWHA (even 
among incarcerated 
population in the 
United States)No change 
anticipatedcontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.200
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-1
 ContinuedDesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsHousing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (Department of Housing and Urban Development)
HUD- 
mandated 
reporting 
for Housing 
Oppor-
tunities 
for Person 
with AIDS 
(HOPWA) 
Competitive 
Program 
and Formula 
Program 
granteesAggregate 
data on 
HOPWA 
bene˜-ciaries and 
households 
served and 
unmet need 
for housing 
based on 
HOPWA-
eligible 
households 
not served 
by HOPWA-
funded 
assistance in 
service area
HOPWA 
grantees: 
information 
on program 
accomplish-ments in 
maintaining 
housing 
stability, 
improving 
access to 
care, and 
reducing 
risk of 
homelessnessCompetitive 
Program 
grantees 
˜le Annual 
Progress 
ReportFormula 
Program 
grantees ˜le 
Consolidated 
Annual 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Report 60,669 
unduplicated 
households 
(by end of 
FY2010)Generally 
representative 
of low-income 
PLWHA
Includes data on 
unmet need for 
housing among 
HOPWA-eligible 
households not 
receiving HOPWA 
housing assistanceIncludes data on 
supportive services, 
such as housing, 
food or nutrition, 
and transportation, 
as well as mental 
health and 
substance abuse 
services funded 
through HOPWA
Grantee data can 
be used to monitor 
changes at service 
system levelData are aggregated
Supportive services 
information limited 
to HOPWA-funded 
servicesMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 201
DesignPopulation 
CoveredSource of DataNumberHow 
RepresentativeStrengthsLimitationsPotential 
EnhancementsACA 
ImplicationsHousing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (Department of Housing and Urban Development)
HUD- 
mandated 
reporting 
for Housing 
Oppor-
tunities 
for Person 
with AIDS 
(HOPWA) 
Competitive 
Program 
and Formula 
Program 
granteesAggregate 
data on 
HOPWA 
bene˜-ciaries and 
households 
served and 
unmet need 
for housing 
based on 
HOPWA-
eligible 
households 
not served 
by HOPWA-
funded 
assistance in 
service area
HOPWA 
grantees: 
information 
on program 
accomplish-ments in 
maintaining 
housing 
stability, 
improving 
access to 
care, and 
reducing 
risk of 
homelessnessCompetitive 
Program 
grantees 
˜le Annual 
Progress 
ReportFormula 
Program 
grantees ˜le 
Consolidated 
Annual 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Report 60,669 
unduplicated 
households 
(by end of 
FY2010)Generally 
representative 
of low-income 
PLWHA
Includes data on 
unmet need for 
housing among 
HOPWA-eligible 
households not 
receiving HOPWA 
housing assistanceIncludes data on 
supportive services, 
such as housing, 
food or nutrition, 
and transportation, 
as well as mental 
health and 
substance abuse 
services funded 
through HOPWA
Grantee data can 
be used to monitor 
changes at service 
system levelData are aggregated
Supportive services 
information limited 
to HOPWA-funded 
servicesMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.202
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Date of HIV 
diagnosis [or ˜rst 
evidence of 
HIV infection]Date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV 
care[or date of 
˜rst/second 
CD4/viral 
 load test]CD4 count at 
diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV 
careDates of 
routine HIV-
care visits
Dates of 
CD4 countsCD4 
countsDates of 
viral load 
testsViral load 
resultsART prescription/ 
dispensing datesDate of 
 deathNational HIV 
Surveillance SystemYes
Yes 
(CD4/VL)Yes
Yes
(CD4/VL test 
dates: most 
reporting 
areas)Yes 
(most 
reporting 
areas)Yes
(most 
reporting 
areas)Yes 
(most 
reporting 
areas)Yes 
(most 
reporting 
areas)Whether ever taken 
ARV, ARV taken, 
and dates taken (not 
required in all areas)
Yes
Medical Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Ryan White Services 
ReportNoYes 
(at present 
RW provider 
agency)NoYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Whether prescribed 
within 12-month 
reporting periodYes
Ryan White ADAP 
ReportsNoNoNoNoYes
(most recent 
in past 12 
months)Yes
(most 
recent in 
past 12 
months)Yes
(most recent 
in past 12 
months)Yes
(most 
recent in 
past 12 
months)Yes
(in reporting period: 
only fully ADAP-funded drugs)NoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoNoNoYes
Yes 
NoYes
NoYes
Yes
Medicare Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoNoNoYes
Yes
NoYes
NoYes
Yes
North American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignYes, but 
data are not 
completeYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(dates of starting and 
stopping individual 
drugs)Yes
CFAR Network of 
Integrated Clinical 
SystemsYes, but 
data are not 
completeYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(dates of starting and 
stopping individual 
drugs)Yes
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2a
 Data Elements for Core Clinical HIV Care 
IndicatorsMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 203
Date of HIV 
diagnosis [or ˜rst 
evidence of 
HIV infection]Date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV 
care[or date of 
˜rst/second 
CD4/viral 
 load test]CD4 count at 
diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV 
careDates of 
routine HIV-
care visits
Dates of 
CD4 countsCD4 
countsDates of 
viral load 
testsViral load 
resultsART prescription/ 
dispensing datesDate of 
 deathNational HIV 
Surveillance SystemYes
Yes 
(CD4/VL)Yes
Yes
(CD4/VL test 
dates: most 
reporting 
areas)Yes 
(most 
reporting 
areas)Yes
(most 
reporting 
areas)Yes 
(most 
reporting 
areas)Yes 
(most 
reporting 
areas)Whether ever taken 
ARV, ARV taken, 
and dates taken (not 
required in all areas)
Yes
Medical Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Ryan White Services 
ReportNoYes 
(at present 
RW provider 
agency)NoYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Whether prescribed 
within 12-month 
reporting periodYes
Ryan White ADAP 
ReportsNoNoNoNoYes
(most recent 
in past 12 
months)Yes
(most 
recent in 
past 12 
months)Yes
(most recent 
in past 12 
months)Yes
(most 
recent in 
past 12 
months)Yes
(in reporting period: 
only fully ADAP-funded drugs)NoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoNoNoYes
Yes 
NoYes
NoYes
Yes
Medicare Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoNoNoYes
Yes
NoYes
NoYes
Yes
North American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignYes, but 
data are not 
completeYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(dates of starting and 
stopping individual 
drugs)Yes
CFAR Network of 
Integrated Clinical 
SystemsYes, but 
data are not 
completeYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(dates of starting and 
stopping individual 
drugs)Yes
continuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.204
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Date of HIV 
diagnosis [or ˜rst 
evidence of 
HIV infection]Date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV 
care[or date of 
˜rst/second 
CD4/viral 
 load test]CD4 count at 
diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV 
careDates of 
routine HIV-
care visits
Dates of 
CD4 countsCD4 
countsDates of 
viral load 
testsViral load 
resultsART prescription/ 
dispensing datesDate of 
 deathHIV Research Network
Yes
(> 60% of 
patients)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Clinical Case Registry: 
HIV (VHA)Yes 
(in VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes 
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Kaiser Permanente (KP)Yes 
(at KP)Yes
 (at KP)
Yes 
(at KP)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Indian Health Service 
(IHS)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Federal Bureau of Prisons
Yes
(if during 
incarceration)Yes
(if during 
incarceration)Yes
(not discrete 
data in EHR)Yes
(while 
incarcerated)Yes
(while 
incarcerated)Yes
Yes
 (while 
incarcerated)Yes
Yes
Yes
(if during 
incarceration, 
separate 
database)Housing Opportunities 
for Persons with AIDSNoNoNoHouseholds 
that had 
contact with 
primary 
provider as 
speci˜ed in 
client™s plan
NoNoNoNoNoNoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-2a
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 205
Date of HIV 
diagnosis [or ˜rst 
evidence of 
HIV infection]Date of ˜rst 
visit for HIV 
care[or date of 
˜rst/second 
CD4/viral 
 load test]CD4 count at 
diagnosis/˜rst 
visit for HIV 
careDates of 
routine HIV-
care visits
Dates of 
CD4 countsCD4 
countsDates of 
viral load 
testsViral load 
resultsART prescription/ 
dispensing datesDate of 
 deathHIV Research Network
Yes
(> 60% of 
patients)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Clinical Case Registry: 
HIV (VHA)Yes 
(in VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes 
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Kaiser Permanente (KP)Yes 
(at KP)Yes
 (at KP)
Yes 
(at KP)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Indian Health Service 
(IHS)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Federal Bureau of Prisons
Yes
(if during 
incarceration)Yes
(if during 
incarceration)Yes
(not discrete 
data in EHR)Yes
(while 
incarcerated)Yes
(while 
incarcerated)Yes
Yes
 (while 
incarcerated)Yes
Yes
Yes
(if during 
incarceration, 
separate 
database)Housing Opportunities 
for Persons with AIDSNoNoNoHouseholds 
that had 
contact with 
primary 
provider as 
speci˜ed in 
client™s plan
NoNoNoNoNoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.206
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2b
 Data Elements for Core Mental Health, 
 Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services IndicatorsDate of mental 
health diagnosis or 
referralDate of ˜rst visit 
for mental health 
servicesDate of substance use 
diagnosis or referral
Date of ˜rst visit 
for substance abuse 
servicesHousing statusFood security statusTransportation status
National HIV 
Surveillance SystemNoNoNoNoNoNoNoMedical Monitoring 
ProjectWhether diagnosed/referred in 
12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not date/prior 
diagnosisWhether 
received services 
in 12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not dateWhether diagnosed/ 
referred in 12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not dateWhether 
received services 
in 12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not dateYes
Yes
Yes
Ryan White 
Services ReportNoNumber of visits in 
12-month reporting 
period, but not date
NoNumber of visits in 
12-month reporting 
period, but not date
Yes, also whether 
received RW-funded 
servicesWhether received 
RW-funded services
Whether received RW-
funded servicesRyan White ADAP 
ReportsNoNoNoNoNoNoNoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoVisits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally
NoVisits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally
NoNoNoMedicare Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
Yes
(in past 12 months)
First visit covered 
by Medicare
Yes
(in past 12 months)
First visit covered 
by Medicare
NoNoNoNorth American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research and 
DesignYes
2012, will collect 
visits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally
Yes
NoNoNoNoCFAR Network of 
Integrated Clinical 
SystemsYes
Visits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally 
Yes
Whether received 
services in past yearNoNoNoHIV Research 
NetworkYes
(for a subset of 
sites)Yes
(for a subset of 
sites)Yes
(for a subset of sites)
Yes
(for a subset of 
sites)NoNoNoClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
Yes
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
(in VHA)NoNoNoKaiser Permanente 
(KP)Yes
Yes
(at KP)Yes
Yes
(at KP)NoNoNoIndian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Variable
(provider narrative)Variable
(provider narrative)Variable
(provider narrative)Federal Bureau of 
PrisonsYes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)N/AN/AN/AHousing 
Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS 
(HOPWA)
NoWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesNoYes, also whether 
received HOPWA-
funded servicesWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 207
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2b
 Data Elements for Core Mental Health, 
 Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services IndicatorsDate of mental 
health diagnosis or 
referralDate of ˜rst visit 
for mental health 
servicesDate of substance use 
diagnosis or referral
Date of ˜rst visit 
for substance abuse 
servicesHousing statusFood security statusTransportation status
National HIV 
Surveillance SystemNoNoNoNoNoNoNoMedical Monitoring 
ProjectWhether diagnosed/referred in 
12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not date/prior 
diagnosisWhether 
received services 
in 12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not dateWhether diagnosed/ 
referred in 12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not dateWhether 
received services 
in 12-month 
surveillance period, 
but not dateYes
Yes
Yes
Ryan White 
Services ReportNoNumber of visits in 
12-month reporting 
period, but not date
NoNumber of visits in 
12-month reporting 
period, but not date
Yes, also whether 
received RW-funded 
servicesWhether received 
RW-funded services
Whether received RW-
funded servicesRyan White ADAP 
ReportsNoNoNoNoNoNoNoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoVisits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally
NoVisits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜callyNoNoNoMedicare Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
Yes
(in past 12 months)
First visit covered 
by Medicare
Yes
(in past 12 months)
First visit covered 
by Medicare
NoNoNoNorth American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research and 
DesignYes
2012, will collect 
visits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally
Yes
NoNoNoNoCFAR Network of 
Integrated Clinical 
SystemsYes
Visits, but not ˜rst 
visit speci˜cally 
Yes
Whether received 
services in past yearNoNoNoHIV Research 
NetworkYes
(for a subset of 
sites)Yes
(for a subset of 
sites)Yes
(for a subset of sites)
Yes
(for a subset of 
sites)NoNoNoClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
Yes
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
(in VHA)NoNoNoKaiser Permanente 
(KP)Yes
Yes
(at KP)Yes
Yes
(at KP)NoNoNoIndian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Variable
(provider narrative)Variable
(provider narrative)Variable
(provider narrative)Federal Bureau of 
PrisonsYes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)N/AN/AN/AHousing 
Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS 
(HOPWA)
NoWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesNoYes, also whether 
received HOPWA-
funded servicesWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesWhether received 
HOPWA-funded 
servicesMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.208
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2c
 Data Elements for Additional Clinical HIV 
 Care Indicators
Diagnosis 
of AIDS 
or AIDS-de˜ning 
illnessDates and 
results of 
TB testsDates of 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilis 
screeningDate of 
hepatitis B 
screening 
or date of 
documented 
immunityDates of 
hepatitis C 
testsDate of 
in˚uenza 
immuni-zationDate of 
pneumo-coccal 
immuni-zationDate of 
hepatitis B 
vaccination/ 
date of 
documented 
immunityDates 
of ART 
resist-ance 
testingDate of 
ART 
initiationART 
prescription/ 
dispensing 
datesDiagnosis/ 
test results 
for HIV 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B, 
TBNational HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemYes
(optional)NoNoNoNoNoNoNoYes
(optional)Yes
(self-report, 
not 
required 
in all 
areas)Whether 
ever taken 
ARV, ARV 
taken, 
and dates 
taken (not 
required in 
all areas)NoMedical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(2007Œ 2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
(2007Œ2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
Yes
Yes
(2007Œ 2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
(during 
surveil-lance 
period)Yes
Yes
Yes
Ryan White 
Services ReportYes
Yes 
Yes (syphilis 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)Whether 
screened 
within  
12-month 
reporting 
periodWhether 
screened 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
periodNoNoWhether 
vaccination 
series is 
completedNoNoWhether 
prescribed 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
periodNoRyan White 
ADAP ReportsHIV/AIDS 
status at 
end of 
reporting 
periodNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoProposed(in 
reporting 
period: 
only fully 
ADAP-funded 
drugs)Proposed(in reporting 
period: only 
fully ADAP-
funded 
drugs)NoMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemYes
Test dates
Yes
Yes
(screening)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(vaccination)Yes
NoYes
Diagnosis 
captured 
if claim 
˜led with 
appropriate 
ICD-9 codes 
Medicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoTest dates
Yes
Yes
(screening)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(vaccination)Yes
NoYes
No *Starting with the 2012 data collection cycle, medical record abstraction focuses on the 12 
months preceding the interview. Earlier clinical data is no longer captured.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 209
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2c
 Data Elements for Additional Clinical HIV 
 Care Indicators
Diagnosis 
of AIDS 
or AIDS-de˜ning 
illnessDates and 
results of 
TB testsDates of 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilis 
screeningDate of 
hepatitis B 
screening 
or date of 
documented 
immunityDates of 
hepatitis C 
testsDate of 
in˚uenza 
immuni-zationDate of 
pneumo-coccal 
immuni-zationDate of 
hepatitis B 
vaccination/ 
date of 
documented 
immunityDates 
of ART 
resist-ance 
testingDate of 
ART 
initiationART 
prescription/ 
dispensing 
datesDiagnosis/ 
test results 
for HIV 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B, 
TBNational HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemYes
(optional)NoNoNoNoNoNoNoYes
(optional)Yes
(self-report, 
not 
required 
in all 
areas)Whether 
ever taken 
ARV, ARV 
taken, 
and dates 
taken (not 
required in 
all areas)NoMedical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(2007Œ 2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
(2007Œ2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
Yes
Yes
(2007Œ 2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
(during 
surveil-lance 
period)Yes
Yes
Yes
Ryan White 
Services ReportYes
Yes 
Yes (syphilis 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)Whether 
screened 
within  
12-month 
reporting 
periodWhether 
screened 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
periodNoNoWhether 
vaccination 
series is 
completedNoNoWhether 
prescribed 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
periodNoRyan White 
ADAP ReportsHIV/AIDS 
status at 
end of 
reporting 
periodNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoProposed(in 
reporting 
period: 
only fully 
ADAP-funded 
drugs)Proposed(in reporting 
period: only 
fully ADAP-
funded 
drugs)NoMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemYes
Test dates
Yes
Yes
(screening)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(vaccination)Yes
NoYes
Diagnosis 
captured 
if claim 
˜led with 
appropriate 
ICD-9 codes 
Medicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoTest dates
Yes
Yes
(screening)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(vaccination)Yes
NoYes
NocontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.210
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Diagnosis 
of AIDS 
or AIDS-de˜ning 
illnessDates and 
results of 
TB testsDates of 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilis 
screeningDate of 
hepatitis B 
screening 
or date of 
documented 
immunityDates of 
hepatitis C 
testsDate of 
in˚uenza 
immuni-zationDate of 
pneumo-coccal 
immuni-zationDate of 
hepatitis B 
vaccination/ 
date of 
documented 
immunityDates 
of ART 
resist-ance 
testingDate of 
ART 
initiationART 
prescription/ 
dispensing 
datesDiagnosis/ 
test results 
for HIV 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B, 
TBNorth 
American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignYes
Yes
NoYes
Yes
NoNoNoYes
Yes
Yes, dates of 
starting and 
stopping 
individual 
drugsYes
CFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Proposed 
for 2012Proposed 
for 2012Proposed 
 for 2012Yes
Yes
Yes, dates of 
starting and 
stopping 
individual 
drugsYes
HIV Research 
NetworkYes
For a subset 
of sitesYes
Yes
Yes
For a 
subset of 
sitesFor a 
subset of 
sitesFor a 
 subset of 
sitesFor a 
subset of 
sitesYes
Yes
For a 
 subset of 
sitesClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(in VHA)Yes
Yes 
Kaiser 
Permanente 
(KP)Yes 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(at KP)Yes
Yes 
Indian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Federal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
(if during 
incarcera-tion)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(may not 
be in EHR)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(if during 
incarcera-tion)Yes
(if during 
incarcera-tion)Yes
Yes
Housing 
Opportunities 
for Persons with 
AIDSNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-2c
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 211
Diagnosis 
of AIDS 
or AIDS-de˜ning 
illnessDates and 
results of 
TB testsDates of 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilis 
screeningDate of 
hepatitis B 
screening 
or date of 
documented 
immunityDates of 
hepatitis C 
testsDate of 
in˚uenza 
immuni-zationDate of 
pneumo-coccal 
immuni-zationDate of 
hepatitis B 
vaccination/ 
date of 
documented 
immunityDates 
of ART 
resist-ance 
testingDate of 
ART 
initiationART 
prescription/ 
dispensing 
datesDiagnosis/ 
test results 
for HIV 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B, 
TBNorth 
American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignYes
Yes
NoYes
Yes
NoNoNoYes
Yes
Yes, dates of 
starting and 
stopping 
individual 
drugsYes
CFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Proposed 
for 2012Proposed 
for 2012Proposed 
 for 2012Yes
Yes
Yes, dates of 
starting and 
stopping 
individual 
drugsYes
HIV Research 
NetworkYes
For a subset 
of sitesYes
Yes
Yes
For a 
subset of 
sitesFor a 
subset of 
sitesFor a 
 subset of 
sitesFor a 
subset of 
sitesYes
Yes
For a 
 subset of 
sitesClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(in VHA)Yes
Yes 
Kaiser 
Permanente 
(KP)Yes 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(at KP)Yes
Yes 
Indian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Federal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
(if during 
incarcera-tion)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(may not 
be in EHR)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(if during 
incarcera-tion)Yes
(if during 
incarcera-tion)Yes
Yes
Housing 
Opportunities 
for Persons with 
AIDSNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNocontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.212
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Pregnancy statusNational HIV Surveillance System
Yes
Medical Monitoring ProjectYes 
Ryan White Services Report
Yes
Ryan White ADAP Reports
Yes
Medicaid Statistical Information System
Not speci˜cally, but may be extrapolated 
from related diagnosis/service codes
Medicare Chronic Condition Data Warehouse
NoNorth American AIDS Cohort Collaboration 
on Research and Design
Yes (as of 2012)
CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems
Yes (as of 2012)
HIV Research NetworkNoClinical Case Registry: HIV (VHA)
Yes
Kaiser PermanenteYes
Indian Health ServiceYes
Federal Bureau of Prisons
Yes (via ICD-9 codes)
Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS
NoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-2c
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 213
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2d follows on next page
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.214
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2d
 Data Elements for Additional Mental Health, 
Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services IndicatorsDate of 
mental 
health 
screeningDate of 
screening 
for 
substance 
abuseDates of 
housing 
needs 
assessmentDates 
of food 
security 
assessmentDates of 
transportation 
needs 
assessmentNational HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoNoNoMedical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Whether 
received/ 
needed 
services, 
but not 
dateWhether 
received/ 
needed 
services, 
but not 
dateWhether 
received/ 
needed 
services, 
 but not 
 dateRyan White 
Services ReportWhether 
screened 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
period, 
but not 
dateWhether 
screened 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
period, 
but not 
dateNoNoNoRyan White 
ADAP ReportsNoNoNoNoNoMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemYes
Yes
NoNoNoMedicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoNoNoNoNoNorth American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research and 
DesignNoNoNoNoNoCFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
Yes
Yes
NoNoNoHIV Research 
NetworkNoNoNoNoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 215
Date of 
mental 
health 
screeningDate of 
screening 
for 
substance 
abuseDates of 
housing 
needs 
assessmentDates 
of food 
security 
assessmentDates of 
transportation 
needs 
assessmentClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)NoNoNoNoNoKaiser 
PermanenteYes
Yes
NoNoNoIndian Health 
ServiceYes
Yes
NoNoNoFederal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
Yes
N/AN/AN/AHousing 
Opportunities 
for Persons with 
AIDS (HOPWA)
NoNoNumber of 
HOPWA-
eligible 
households 
with unmet 
need for 
housing 
assistanceNoNoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-2d
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.216
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2e
 Data Elements to Estimate Indicators for 
 SubpopulationsRaceEthnicitySex(M/F)Gender 
identitySexual orientationDate of 
birthZip code/ 
 other geographic 
markerCountry of 
birthNational HIV Surveillance 
SystemYes
Yes
Yes
(sex at birth)
Current 
gender identity 
(optional)No(but captures sexual 
history)Yes
Yes
(at diagnosis of 
HIV and AIDS)Yes
(optional)Medical Monitoring ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(optional ˜eld for 
local use only)
Yes
Ryan White Services Report
Yes
Yes
Yes
(male/female 
under gender)Yes
Yes
Yes
(year)Yes
(˜rst 3 digits)NoRyan White ADAP Reports
Yes
Yes
Yes
(male/female 
under gender)Yes
NoYes
(year)NoNoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoMedicare Chronic 
Condition Data Warehouse
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoNorth American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignYes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
(˜rst 3 digits)Yes
(as of 2012)CFAR Network of 
Integrated Clinical Systems
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoSex of patient and 
current partner 
collected semiannuallyYes
Yes
(˜rst 3 digits)Yes
(as of 2012)HIV Research NetworkYes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(transgender 
persons who 
self-identify) 
Yes
Yes
NoNoClinical Case Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoKaiser PermanenteYes
Yes
Yes
NoYes
(but data are not 
complete)Yes
Yes
NoIndian Health ServiceYes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoFederal Bureau of Prisons
Yes
Yes
(in separate 
database)Yes
NoNoYes
N/AYes
(in separate 
database)Housing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
NoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 217
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2e
 Data Elements to Estimate Indicators for 
 SubpopulationsRaceEthnicitySex(M/F)Gender 
identitySexual orientationDate of 
birthZip code/ 
 other geographic 
markerCountry of 
birthNational HIV Surveillance 
SystemYes
Yes
Yes
(sex at birth)
Current 
gender identity 
(optional)No(but captures sexual 
history)Yes
Yes
(at diagnosis of 
HIV and AIDS)Yes
(optional)Medical Monitoring ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(optional ˜eld for 
local use only)
Yes
Ryan White Services Report
Yes
Yes
Yes
(male/female 
under gender)Yes
Yes
Yes
(year)Yes
(˜rst 3 digits)NoRyan White ADAP Reports
Yes
Yes
Yes
(male/female 
under gender)Yes
NoYes
(year)NoNoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoMedicare Chronic 
Condition Data Warehouse
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoNorth American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignYes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
(˜rst 3 digits)Yes
(as of 2012)CFAR Network of 
Integrated Clinical Systems
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoSex of patient and 
current partner 
collected semiannuallyYes
Yes
(˜rst 3 digits)Yes
(as of 2012)HIV Research NetworkYes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(transgender 
persons who 
self-identify) 
Yes
Yes
NoNoClinical Case Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoKaiser PermanenteYes
Yes
Yes
NoYes
(but data are not 
complete)Yes
Yes
NoIndian Health ServiceYes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
Yes
NoFederal Bureau of Prisons
Yes
Yes
(in separate 
database)Yes
NoNoYes
N/AYes
(in separate 
database)Housing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoNoYes
NoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.218
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2f
 Additional Data Elements for Monitoring 
 HIV CareStigmaDiscriminationEmergency 
department/ 
inpatient useSexual risk 
behaviorsPartner HIV 
statusAccess to dental 
careIncomeEmployment 
statusInsurance 
status/typeNational HIV Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoYes
Yes
(only for persons 
reporting 
heterosexual risk)NoNoNoYes
(optional)Medical Monitoring Project2011 
cycle2011 
 cycleYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoYes
Ryan White Services Report
NoNoNoYes
NoYes
(RW-funded)
Percent of 
federal poverty 
level (FPL)NoYes
Ryan White ADAP Reports
NoNoNoNoNoNoPercent of FPL
Current: percent 
of clients 
<200% FPL
NoYes
Medicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoNoYes
NoNoYes
NoNoYes
Medicare Chronic Condition 
Data Warehouse
NoNoYes
NoNoNoNoNoYes
(only Medicare 
and Medicaid)North American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignNoNoYes
(as of 2012)NoNoNoNoNoYes
(as of 2012)CFAR Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
NoNoYes
Yes
Yes
(current 
partner status 
semiannually)NoNoNoYes
HIV Research NetworkNoNoYes
Yes
NoNoNoNoYes
Clinical Case Registry: HIV 
(VHA)NoNoYes
Variable
NoYes
(in VHA)NoNoNoKaiser Permanente (KP)NoNoYes
Yes
NoAt KP Northwest 
(Oregon) only*NoYes
Yes
Indian Health ServiceNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoFederal Bureau of Prisons
NoNoNoYes (not as a 
discrete data 
element)NoYes
N/AN/AN/AHousing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS
NoNoNoNoNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
 *KP Northwest is the only provider of dental services in the KP system. Only dental services 
provided within the system are captured.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 219
APPENDIX TABLE 3-2f
 Additional Data Elements for Monitoring 
 HIV CareStigmaDiscriminationEmergency 
department/ 
inpatient useSexual risk 
behaviorsPartner HIV 
statusAccess to dental 
careIncomeEmployment 
statusInsurance 
status/typeNational HIV Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoYes
Yes
(only for persons 
reporting 
heterosexual risk)NoNoNoYes
(optional)Medical Monitoring Project2011 
cycle2011 
 cycleYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
NoYes
Ryan White Services Report
NoNoNoYes
NoYes
(RW-funded)
Percent of 
federal poverty 
level (FPL)NoYes
Ryan White ADAP Reports
NoNoNoNoNoNoPercent of FPL
Current: percent 
of clients 
<200% FPL
NoYes
Medicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoNoYes
NoNoYes
NoNoYes
Medicare Chronic Condition 
Data Warehouse
NoNoYes
NoNoNoNoNoYes
(only Medicare 
and Medicaid)North American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignNoNoYes
(as of 2012)NoNoNoNoNoYes
(as of 2012)CFAR Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
NoNoYes
Yes
Yes
(current 
partner status 
semiannually)NoNoNoYes
HIV Research NetworkNoNoYes
Yes
NoNoNoNoYes
Clinical Case Registry: HIV 
(VHA)NoNoYes
Variable
NoYes
(in VHA)NoNoNoKaiser Permanente (KP)NoNoYes
Yes
NoAt KP Northwest 
(Oregon) only*NoYes
Yes
Indian Health ServiceNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoFederal Bureau of Prisons
NoNoNoYes (not as a 
discrete data 
element)NoYes
N/AN/AN/AHousing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS
NoNoNoNoNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
 *KP Northwest is the only provider of dental services in the KP system. Only dental services 
provided within the system are captured.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.220
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3a
 Data Systems Mapped to Core Clinical HIV 
 Care Indicators
Proportion 
with CD4+ cell 
count >200 
and without 
a clinical 
diagnosis of 
AIDSProportion 
linked to care 
for HIV within 
3 months of 
diagnosisProportion in 
continuous 
care (2 or 
more visits 
in preceding 
12 months at 
least 3 months 
apart)Proportion who 
received 2 or 
more CD4 tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion 
who received 2 
or more viral 
load tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion in 
continuous 
care for 12 or 
more months 
and with CD4+ 
cell count 
˛350Proportion 
with a CD4+ 
cell count <500 
who are not on 
ART
Proportion on 
ART for 12 or 
more months 
who have an 
undetectable 
viral load (VL)
All-cause 
mortality rateNational HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemYes
(most reporting 
areas)Yes
Most reporting 
areas: proxy 
using CD4/VL 
test dates
Yes
(most reporting 
areas)Yes
(most reporting 
areas)Possible using 
CD4 test dates 
as proxy, 
but not all 
jurisdictions 
report all 
resultsNo/Variable 
(minimal 
data on ART 
status; variable 
jurisdictional 
reporting of 
CD4 counts)No(no 
longitudinal 
data on ART 
status; variable 
jurisdictional 
reporting of 
VL results)Yes
Medical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Ryan White 
Services ReportNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)Possible: 
depends on 
availability of 
longitudinal 
data on ART 
statusYes
Ryan White 
ADAP ReportsNoNoNoYes
 (most recent date)Yes
 (most recent 
date)NoPossible for 
future, but 
only for fully 
ADAP-funded 
ARVs
Possible for 
future, but 
only for fully 
ADAP-funded 
ARVs
NoMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
No(no CD4 
results)No(no CD4 
results)No(no VL results)Yes
Medicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoNoYes
Yes
Yes
No(no CD4 
results)No(no CD4 
results)No(no VL results)Yes
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 221
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3a
 Data Systems Mapped to Core Clinical HIV 
 Care Indicators
Proportion 
with CD4+ cell 
count >200 
and without 
a clinical 
diagnosis of 
AIDSProportion 
linked to care 
for HIV within 
3 months of 
diagnosisProportion in 
continuous 
care (2 or 
more visits 
in preceding 
12 months at 
least 3 months 
apart)Proportion who 
received 2 or 
more CD4 tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion 
who received 2 
or more viral 
load tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion in 
continuous 
care for 12 or 
more months 
and with CD4+ 
cell count 
˛350Proportion 
with a CD4+ 
cell count <500 
who are not on 
ART
Proportion on 
ART for 12 or 
more months 
who have an 
undetectable 
viral load (VL)
All-cause 
mortality rateNational HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemYes
(most reporting 
areas)Yes
Most reporting 
areas: proxy 
using CD4/VL 
test dates
Yes
(most reporting 
areas)Yes
(most reporting 
areas)Possible using 
CD4 test dates 
as proxy, 
but not all 
jurisdictions 
report all 
resultsNo/Variable 
(minimal 
data on ART 
status; variable 
jurisdictional 
reporting of 
CD4 counts)No(no 
longitudinal 
data on ART 
status; variable 
jurisdictional 
reporting of 
VL results)Yes
Medical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Ryan White 
Services ReportNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)Possible: 
depends on 
availability of 
longitudinal 
data on ART 
statusYes
Ryan White 
ADAP ReportsNoNoNoYes
 (most recent date)Yes
 (most recent 
date)NoPossible for 
future, but 
only for fully 
ADAP-funded 
ARVs
Possible for 
future, but 
only for fully 
ADAP-funded 
ARVs
NoMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
No(no CD4 
results)No(no CD4 
results)No(no VL results)Yes
Medicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoNoYes
Yes
Yes
No(no CD4 
results)No(no CD4 
results)No(no VL results)Yes
continuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.222
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Proportion 
with CD4+ cell 
count >200 
and without 
a clinical 
diagnosis of 
AIDSProportion 
linked to care 
for HIV within 
3 months of 
diagnosisProportion in 
continuous 
care (2 or 
more visits 
in preceding 
12 months at 
least 3 months 
apart)Proportion who 
received 2 or 
more CD4 tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion 
who received 2 
or more viral 
load tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion in 
continuous 
care for 12 or 
more months 
and with CD4+ 
cell count 
˛350Proportion 
with a CD4+ 
cell count <500 
who are not on 
ART
Proportion on 
ART for 12 or 
more months 
who have an 
undetectable 
viral load (VL)
All-cause 
mortality rateNorth 
American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignYes
Yes (but date- 
of-diagnosis 
data are not 
complete)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
CFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical 
SystemsYes
Yes (but date- 
of-diagnosis 
data are not 
complete)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
HIV Research 
NetworkYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Clinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
(diagnosed in 
VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Kaiser 
Permanente 
(KP)Yes
(diagnosed at 
KP)Yes
(at KP)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Indian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Federal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
(if diagnosed 
while 
incarceratedYes
(if diagnosed 
during 
incarceration)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(if incarcerated 
during that 
period)Yes
Yes
Yes
(in separate 
database for those 
who die while 
incarcerated)Housing 
Opportunities 
for Persons 
with AIDSNoNoProportion 
following 
client-speci˜c 
schedule for 
contact with 
provider 
NoNoNoNoNoNoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-3a
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 223
Proportion 
with CD4+ cell 
count >200 
and without 
a clinical 
diagnosis of 
AIDSProportion 
linked to care 
for HIV within 
3 months of 
diagnosisProportion in 
continuous 
care (2 or 
more visits 
in preceding 
12 months at 
least 3 months 
apart)Proportion who 
received 2 or 
more CD4 tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion 
who received 2 
or more viral 
load tests in 
past 12 monthsProportion in 
continuous 
care for 12 or 
more months 
and with CD4+ 
cell count 
˛350Proportion 
with a CD4+ 
cell count <500 
who are not on 
ART
Proportion on 
ART for 12 or 
more months 
who have an 
undetectable 
viral load (VL)
All-cause 
mortality rateNorth 
American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignYes
Yes (but date- 
of-diagnosis 
data are not 
complete)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
CFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical 
SystemsYes
Yes (but date- 
of-diagnosis 
data are not 
complete)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
HIV Research 
NetworkYes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Clinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
(diagnosed in 
VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Kaiser 
Permanente 
(KP)Yes
(diagnosed at 
KP)Yes
(at KP)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Indian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Federal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
(if diagnosed 
while 
incarceratedYes
(if diagnosed 
during 
incarceration)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(if incarcerated 
during that 
period)Yes
Yes
Yes
(in separate 
database for those 
who die while 
incarcerated)Housing 
Opportunities 
for Persons 
with AIDSNoNoProportion 
following 
client-speci˜c 
schedule for 
contact with 
provider 
NoNoNoNoNoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.224
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3b
 Data Systems Mapped to Core Mental Health, 
 Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services IndicatorsProportion with mental 
health disorder referred for 
mental health services who 
receive these services within 
60 days
Proportion with substance 
use disorder referred for 
substance abuse services 
who receive these services 
within 60 days
Proportion who were 
homeless or temporarily or 
unstably housed 
 at least once in the 
preceding 12 monthsProportion who 
experienced food or 
nutrition insecurity 
 at least once in the 
preceding 12 monthsProportion who had 
an unmet need for 
transportation services 
 at least once in the 
preceding 12 monthsNational HIV Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoNoNoMedical Monitoring ProjectNo(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)No(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)Yes
Yes
Yes
Ryan White Services Report
NoNoYes, also whether received 
RW-funded services
Whether received RW-
funded servicesWhether received RW-
funded servicesRyan White ADAP Reports
NoNoNoNoNoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoNoNoNoNoMedicare Chronic Condition 
Data Warehouse
Yes, if ˜rst visit covered by 
MedicareYes, if ˜rst visit covered by 
MedicareNoNoNoNorth American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignPossible, if a service date is 
proximate to referral dateNoNoNoNoCFAR Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
Possible, if a service date is 
proximate to referral dateNoNoNoNoHIV Research NetworkYes
(for a subset of sites)
Yes
(for a subset of sites)
NoNoNoClinical Case Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes
(in VHA)NoNoNoKaiser Permanente (KP)Yes
(at KP)Yes
(at KP)NoNoNoIndian Health Service (IHS)
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Variable
(incomplete data)Variable
(incomplete data)Variable
(incomplete data)Federal Bureau of Prisons
Yes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)N/AN/AN/AHousing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS
NoNoYes
NoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 225
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3b
 Data Systems Mapped to Core Mental Health, 
 Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services IndicatorsProportion with mental 
health disorder referred for 
mental health services who 
receive these services within 
60 days
Proportion with substance 
use disorder referred for 
substance abuse services 
who receive these services 
within 60 days
Proportion who were 
homeless or temporarily or 
unstably housed 
 at least once in the 
preceding 12 monthsProportion who 
experienced food or 
nutrition insecurity 
 at least once in the 
preceding 12 monthsProportion who had 
an unmet need for 
transportation services 
 at least once in the 
preceding 12 monthsNational HIV Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoNoNoMedical Monitoring ProjectNo(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)No(no dates for diagnosis/referral or services)Yes
Yes
Yes
Ryan White Services Report
NoNoYes, also whether received 
RW-funded services
Whether received RW-
funded servicesWhether received RW-
funded servicesRyan White ADAP Reports
NoNoNoNoNoMedicaid Statistical 
Information System
NoNoNoNoNoMedicare Chronic Condition 
Data Warehouse
Yes, if ˜rst visit covered by 
MedicareYes, if ˜rst visit covered by 
MedicareNoNoNoNorth American AIDS 
Cohort Collaboration on 
Research and DesignPossible, if a service date is 
proximate to referral dateNoNoNoNoCFAR Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
Possible, if a service date is 
proximate to referral dateNoNoNoNoHIV Research NetworkYes
(for a subset of sites)
Yes
(for a subset of sites)
NoNoNoClinical Case Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes
(in VHA)NoNoNoKaiser Permanente (KP)Yes
(at KP)Yes
(at KP)NoNoNoIndian Health Service (IHS)
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
(in IHS)Variable
(incomplete data)Variable
(incomplete data)Variable
(incomplete data)Federal Bureau of Prisons
Yes
(while incarcerated)Yes
(while incarcerated)N/AN/AN/AHousing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS
NoNoYes
NoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.226
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3c
 Data Systems Mapped to Additional Clinical 
 HIV Care IndicatorsProportion 
screened for 
TB since 
diagnosis 
and results 
interpretedProportion 
screened for 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis 
B since 
diagnosisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis CProportion 
immunized 
for in˚uenzaProportion 
immunized 
for 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia 
since 
diagnosisProportion 
immunized for 
hepatitis B (if 
needed)Proportion 
who receive 
drug 
resistance 
testing prior 
to ART 
initiationProportion with 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B 
 (when treatment 
is indicated) or 
active TB who 
are not on ART
Proportion 
HIV-infected 
pregnant women 
who are not on 
ART
National HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYes (when 
pregnancy and 
ART status 
captured)Medical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
(2007Œ2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
(2007Œ2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Yes
(2007Œ2011 
cycles only)*Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Yes
Yes
Ryan White 
Services ReportYes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Syphilis 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
periodYes
(within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)Yes
(within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)NoNoWhether 
vaccination series 
is completedNoNoYes
(ART prescribed 
in last 12 
months)Ryan White 
ADAP ReportsNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoData only for 
fully ADAP-
funded drugsMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemYes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date; TB 
test results)
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
(if covered 
and 
identi˜able 
by code; 
lacks ART 
initiation 
date)Yes
(if claims ˜led 
with proper 
diagnosis code/s)Yes
(if pregnancy 
captured 
by relevant 
diagnostic 
code/s)Medicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date; TB 
test results)
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
ART 
initiation 
date)NoNo *Starting with the 2012 data collection cycle, medical record abstraction will focus on the 
12 months preceding the interview. Earlier clinical data will no longer be captured.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 227
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3c
 Data Systems Mapped to Additional Clinical 
 HIV Care IndicatorsProportion 
screened for 
TB since 
diagnosis 
and results 
interpretedProportion 
screened for 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis 
B since 
diagnosisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis CProportion 
immunized 
for in˚uenzaProportion 
immunized 
for 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia 
since 
diagnosisProportion 
immunized for 
hepatitis B (if 
needed)Proportion 
who receive 
drug 
resistance 
testing prior 
to ART 
initiationProportion with 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B 
 (when treatment 
is indicated) or 
active TB who 
are not on ART
Proportion 
HIV-infected 
pregnant women 
who are not on 
ART
National HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoYes (when 
pregnancy and 
ART status 
captured)Medical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
Yes
(2007Œ2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
(2007Œ2011 cycles 
only)*Yes
Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Yes
(2007Œ2011 
cycles only)*Yes
(during 
surveillance 
period)Yes
Yes
Ryan White 
Services ReportYes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Syphilis 
within 
12-month 
reporting 
periodYes
(within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)Yes
(within 
12-month 
reporting 
period)NoNoWhether 
vaccination series 
is completedNoNoYes
(ART prescribed 
in last 12 
months)Ryan White 
ADAP ReportsNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoData only for 
fully ADAP-
funded drugsMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemYes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date; TB 
test results)
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
(if covered 
and 
identi˜able 
by code; 
lacks ART 
initiation 
date)Yes
(if claims ˜led 
with proper 
diagnosis code/s)Yes
(if pregnancy 
captured 
by relevant 
diagnostic 
code/s)Medicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date; TB 
test results)
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
diagnosis 
date)Yes
Yes
(but lacks 
ART 
initiation 
date)NoNocontinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.228
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Proportion 
screened for 
TB since 
diagnosis 
and results 
interpretedProportion 
screened for 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis 
B since 
diagnosisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis CProportion 
immunized 
for in˚uenzaProportion 
immunized 
for 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia 
since 
diagnosisProportion 
immunized for 
hepatitis B (if 
needed)Proportion 
who receive 
drug 
resistance 
testing prior 
to ART 
initiationProportion with 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B 
 (when treatment 
is indicated) or 
active TB who 
are not on ART
Proportion 
HIV-infected 
pregnant women 
who are not on 
ART
North 
American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignYes
NoYes
(date-of- 
diagnosis 
data 
incomplete)Yes
NoNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
(as of 2012)CFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical 
SystemsYes
Yes
Yes
(date-of- 
diagnosis 
data 
incomplete)Yes
Proposed 
for 2012Proposed for 
2012(date-of- 
diagnosis data 
incomplete)Proposed for 
2012Yes
Yes
Yes
(as of 2012)HIV Research 
NetworkYes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
 of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
 of sites)NoClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Kaiser 
Permanente 
(KP)Yes
(at KP)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Indian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Federal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(although 
data may 
not be 
available in 
EHR)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(may not be 
available)Yes
(would 
require record 
abstraction and 
veri˜cation)Yes
Housing 
Opportunities 
for Persons with 
AIDSNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-3c
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 229
Proportion 
screened for 
TB since 
diagnosis 
and results 
interpretedProportion 
screened for 
chlamydia, 
gonorrhea, 
and syphilisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis 
B since 
diagnosisProportion 
screened 
for 
hepatitis CProportion 
immunized 
for in˚uenzaProportion 
immunized 
for 
pneumococcal 
pneumonia 
since 
diagnosisProportion 
immunized for 
hepatitis B (if 
needed)Proportion 
who receive 
drug 
resistance 
testing prior 
to ART 
initiationProportion with 
HIV-associated 
nephropathy, 
hepatitis B 
 (when treatment 
is indicated) or 
active TB who 
are not on ART
Proportion 
HIV-infected 
pregnant women 
who are not on 
ART
North 
American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignYes
NoYes
(date-of- 
diagnosis 
data 
incomplete)Yes
NoNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
(as of 2012)CFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical 
SystemsYes
Yes
Yes
(date-of- 
diagnosis 
data 
incomplete)Yes
Proposed 
for 2012Proposed for 
2012(date-of- 
diagnosis data 
incomplete)Proposed for 
2012Yes
Yes
Yes
(as of 2012)HIV Research 
NetworkYes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
 of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
of sites)Yes
(for a subset 
 of sites)NoClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)Yes
(in VHA)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Kaiser 
Permanente 
(KP)Yes
(at KP)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Indian Health 
Service (IHS)
Yes
(in IHS)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Federal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
Yes
Yes
Yes 
(although 
data may 
not be 
available in 
EHR)Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
(may not be 
available)Yes
(would 
require record 
abstraction and 
veri˜cation)Yes
Housing 
Opportunities 
for Persons with 
AIDSNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.230
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-3d
 Data Systems Mapped to Additional Mental 
Health, Substance Abuse, and Supportive Services Indicators
Proportion 
screened 
for mental 
health  
disorders at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
screened 
for 
substance 
use  
disorders at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
assessed for 
need for 
housing at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
assessed 
for need 
for food or 
nutrition at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
assessed for 
need for 
transportation 
at least once 
in the past 12 
monthsNational HIV 
Surveillance 
SystemNoNoNoNoNoMedical 
Monitoring 
ProjectYes
Yes
No(whether 
received/ 
needed 
services, 
but not 
date)No(whether 
received/ 
needed 
services, 
but not 
date)No(whether 
received/ 
needed 
services, 
 but not 
 date)Ryan White 
Services ReportYes
Yes
NoNoNoRyan White 
ADAP ReportsNoNoNoNoNoMedicaid 
Statistical 
Information 
SystemYes
Yes
NoNoNoMedicare 
Chronic 
Condition Data 
Warehouse
NoNoNoNoNoNorth American 
AIDS Cohort 
Collaboration 
on Research 
and DesignNoNoNoNoNoCFAR Network 
of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
Yes
Yes
NoNoNoHIV Research 
NetworkNoNoNoNoNoClinical Case 
Registry: HIV 
(VHA)NoNoNoNoNoMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 231
Proportion 
screened 
for mental 
health  
disorders at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
screened 
for 
substance 
use  
disorders at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
assessed for 
need for 
housing at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
assessed 
for need 
for food or 
nutrition at 
least once 
in the past 
12 months
Proportion 
assessed for 
need for 
transportation 
at least once 
in the past 12 
monthsKaiser 
PermanenteYes
Yes
NoNoNoIndian Health 
ServiceYes
Yes
NoNoNoFederal Bureau 
of PrisonsYes
Yes
N/AN/AN/AHousing 
Opportunities 
for Persons with 
AIDSNoNoYes
NoNoAPPENDIX TABLE 3-3d
 ContinuedMonitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.232
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-4
 Publicly Available Data Collection 
 Instruments and InformationData SystemCollection Instrument/sLink/sNational HIV Surveillance 
System1. Adult HIV/AIDS Con˜dential Case Report
1. http://health.utah.gov/epi/forms/Adult%20HIV.AIDS%20Report%20Form.pdf
Medical Monitoring Project1. 2010 Medical History Form*
 2. 2010 Surveillance Period Inpatient Form* 3. 2010 Surveillance Period Summary Form*
 4. 2010 Surveillance Period Visit Form*
 5. 2010 Standard Questionnaire*6. 2011 Medical Monitoring Project Response Cards
1. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_MHF_v400_
OMB_Race_Jan5_2009.pdf2. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_SPIF_v400_
Jan5_2009.pdf3. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_SPSF_v400_
Jan5_2009.pdf4. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_SPVF_v400_
Jan5_2009.pdf5. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/2009MMPStandardEnglish.pdf
6. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/2011_english_response_cards.pdf
Ryan White AIDS Drug 
Assistance Program (ADAP) 
Reports1. AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP) Data 
ReportŠFinal Client-Level Data Variables (Effective 
October 1, 2012)
2. ADAP Data Report: Grantee Report: Summary of 
Changes to the Grantee-Level Variables
3. ADAPŠQuarterly Data Report (Phasing out this 
year)1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/habadrclientlevelvariables.pdf  2. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/adrgranteeleveldatavariables˜nal.pdf 3. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/adap/adapformfeb08.pdfRyan White Services Report
1. Data Elements for Client-Level Data Export 
(Effective for the 2010 Annual RSR)
1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/clientleveldata˜elds.pdfMedicaid Statistical Information 
System1. Medicaid Analytic eXtract Files (MAX) User Guide
2. Medicaid and CHIP Statistical Information System 
(MSIS): File Speci˜cations and Data Dictionary
1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_max_user_guide.pdf
2. https://www.cms.gov/msis/downloads/msisdd2010.pdf
Medicare Chronic Condition 
Data Warehouse
1. Chronic Condition Data Warehouse User Guide
2. Summary Statistics3. Data Dictionaries4. Chronic Conditions5. Analytic Guidance
1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_userguide.pdf
2. http://www.ccwdata.org/summary-statistics/index.htm
3. http://www.ccwdata.org/data-dictionaries/index.htm
4. http://www.ccwdata.org/chronic-conditions/index.htm
5. http://www.ccwdata.org/analytic-guidance/index.htm
CFAR Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
1. CNICS Data Elements1. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/data-core/cnics-data-elements
Indian Health Service1. HIS Clinical Reporting System (BGP): Selected 
Measures (Local) Report Performance Measure List 
and De˜nitions1. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv11/SelectedMeasuresV11_1.pdf
Federal Bureau of Prisons
1. Management of HIV: Federal Bureau of Prisons 
Clinical Practice GuidelinesŠMay 2011
1. http://www.bop.gov/news/PDFs/mgmt_hiv.pdf
Housing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS1. Annual Progress Report (APR): Measuring 
Performance Outcomes2. Consolidated Annual Performance Evaluation 
Report (CAPER): Measuring Performance Outcomes3. Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) 
Data Standards, Revised NoticeŠMarch 20101. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/APR_HOPWA.docx
 2. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=hopwa_caper_10312014.doc 3. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/FinalHMISDataStandards_March2010.pdf
 *Link to 2009 version of MMP data collection materials.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 233
APPENDIX TABLE 3-4
 Publicly Available Data Collection 
 Instruments and InformationData SystemCollection Instrument/sLink/sNational HIV Surveillance 
System1. Adult HIV/AIDS Con˜dential Case Report
1. http://health.utah.gov/epi/forms/Adult%20HIV.AIDS%20Report%20Form.pdf
Medical Monitoring Project1. 2010 Medical History Form*
 2. 2010 Surveillance Period Inpatient Form* 3. 2010 Surveillance Period Summary Form*
 4. 2010 Surveillance Period Visit Form*
 5. 2010 Standard Questionnaire*6. 2011 Medical Monitoring Project Response Cards
1. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_MHF_v400_
OMB_Race_Jan5_2009.pdf2. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_SPIF_v400_
Jan5_2009.pdf3. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_SPSF_v400_
Jan5_2009.pdf4. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/MMP_2009_MRA_SPVF_v400_
Jan5_2009.pdf5. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/MMP/pdf/2009MMPStandardEnglish.pdf
6. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/treatment/mmp/pdf/2011_english_response_cards.pdf
Ryan White AIDS Drug 
Assistance Program (ADAP) 
Reports1. AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP) Data 
ReportŠFinal Client-Level Data Variables (Effective 
October 1, 2012)
2. ADAP Data Report: Grantee Report: Summary of 
Changes to the Grantee-Level Variables
3. ADAPŠQuarterly Data Report (Phasing out this 
year)1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/habadrclientlevelvariables.pdf  2. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/adrgranteeleveldatavariables˜nal.pdf 3. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/adap/adapformfeb08.pdfRyan White Services Report
1. Data Elements for Client-Level Data Export 
(Effective for the 2010 Annual RSR)
1. http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/clientleveldata˜elds.pdfMedicaid Statistical Information 
System1. Medicaid Analytic eXtract Files (MAX) User Guide
2. Medicaid and CHIP Statistical Information System 
(MSIS): File Speci˜cations and Data Dictionary
1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_max_user_guide.pdf
2. https://www.cms.gov/msis/downloads/msisdd2010.pdf
Medicare Chronic Condition 
Data Warehouse
1. Chronic Condition Data Warehouse User Guide
2. Summary Statistics3. Data Dictionaries4. Chronic Conditions5. Analytic Guidance
1. http://www.ccwdata.org/cs/groups/public/documents/document/ccw_userguide.pdf
2. http://www.ccwdata.org/summary-statistics/index.htm
3. http://www.ccwdata.org/data-dictionaries/index.htm
4. http://www.ccwdata.org/chronic-conditions/index.htm
5. http://www.ccwdata.org/analytic-guidance/index.htm
CFAR Network of Integrated 
Clinical Systems
1. CNICS Data Elements1. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/data-core/cnics-data-elements
Indian Health Service1. HIS Clinical Reporting System (BGP): Selected 
Measures (Local) Report Performance Measure List 
and De˜nitions1. http://www.ihs.gov/cio/crs/documents/crsv11/SelectedMeasuresV11_1.pdf
Federal Bureau of Prisons
1. Management of HIV: Federal Bureau of Prisons 
Clinical Practice GuidelinesŠMay 2011
1. http://www.bop.gov/news/PDFs/mgmt_hiv.pdf
Housing Opportunities for 
Persons with AIDS1. Annual Progress Report (APR): Measuring 
Performance Outcomes2. Consolidated Annual Performance Evaluation 
Report (CAPER): Measuring Performance Outcomes3. Homeless Management Information System (HMIS) 
Data Standards, Revised NoticeŠMarch 20101. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/APR_HOPWA.docx
 2. http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/documents/huddoc?id=hopwa_caper_10312014.doc 3. http://www.hudhre.info/documents/FinalHMISDataStandards_March2010.pdf
 *Link to 2009 version of MMP data collection materials.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.234
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
APPENDIX TABLE 3-5
 CD4 and Viral Load Reporting by HIV 
 Surveillance Reporting Area (as of June 15, 2010)
CD4 count (cells/µL)Reportable LevelAll Values
Reportable Level 
 <200Reportable Level 
 <500No ReportingAlaska, Arkansas, California, Delaware, Florida, 
Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,* Michigan, 
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New 
Hampshire, New York, North Dakota, Oregon, 
South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virginia, 
Washington, West Virginia, Wyoming
Alabama, Arizona, 
Connecticut, Idaho, New 
Jersey, New Mexico, 
North Carolina, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, Rhode 
Island, Tennessee, 
Vermont, Wisconsin
Colorado, Kansas, Nevada, Oklahoma
MontanaDistrict of Columbia
Guam, Puerto RicoU.S. Virgin Islands
American Samoa; Marshall Islands; 
Micronesia, FS; N. Mariana Islands; Palau
Viral Load
Reportable LevelAny ResultReportable LevelDetectableNo ReportingAlaska, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, 
Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts*, 
Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, 
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, 
North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, 
South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, 
Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming
Arizona, Idaho, Kansas, 
Kentucky, Montana, 
Nevada, North Carolina, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode 
Island, Tennessee
AlabamaDistrict of Columbia
Guam, Puerto RicoU.S. Virgin Islands
American Samoa; Marshall Islands; 
Micronesia, FS; N. Mariana Islands; Palau
 *As of January 2012.SOURCES: Personal Communication, Amy Lansky, Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, October 6, 2011; Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2012.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCES OF DATA
 235
APPENDIX TABLE 3-5
 CD4 and Viral Load Reporting by HIV 
 Surveillance Reporting Area (as of June 15, 2010)
CD4 count (cells/µL)Reportable LevelAll Values
Reportable Level 
 <200Reportable Level 
 <500No ReportingAlaska, Arkansas, California, Delaware, Florida, 
Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,* Michigan, 
Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New 
Hampshire, New York, North Dakota, Oregon, 
South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Virginia, 
Washington, West Virginia, Wyoming
Alabama, Arizona, 
Connecticut, Idaho, New 
Jersey, New Mexico, 
North Carolina, Ohio, 
Pennsylvania, Rhode 
Island, Tennessee, 
Vermont, Wisconsin
Colorado, Kansas, Nevada, Oklahoma
MontanaDistrict of Columbia
Guam, Puerto Rico
U.S. Virgin Islands
American Samoa; Marshall Islands; 
Micronesia, FS; N. Mariana Islands; Palau
Viral Load
Reportable LevelAny ResultReportable LevelDetectableNo ReportingAlaska, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, 
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, 
Iowa, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts*, 
Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, 
New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, 
North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, 
South Dakota, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, 
Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming
Arizona, Idaho, Kansas, 
Kentucky, Montana, 
Nevada, North Carolina, 
Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode 
Island, Tennessee
AlabamaDistrict of Columbia
Guam, Puerto Rico
U.S. Virgin Islands
American Samoa; Marshall Islands; 
Micronesia, FS; N. Mariana Islands; Palau
 *As of January 2012.SOURCES: Personal Communication, Amy Lansky, Centers for Disease Control and 
 Prevention, October 6, 2011; Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2012.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2374Barriers to the Collection 
of HIV Care DataThis chapter addresses question 4 from the committee™s statement of 
task on barriers to the collection of data to measure core indicators for 
clinical HIV care and for mental health, substance use, and supportive 
services. The committee was speci˜cally asked to describe policy, reimburse
-ment, and reporting issues that need to be addressed to collect necessary 
data (statement of task question 4a). Because the reimbursement and re
-porting barriers to the collection of data are sometimes linked to policies, 
the chapter begins with a discussion of those barriers and then describes 
other policy barriers to the collection of data. The chapter addresses how 
data can be collected in a way that will not signi˜cantly increase burden 
(statement of task question 4b) within the section on reporting barriers. 
The chapter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendation 
pertaining to this portion of its charge. 
POTENTIAL REIMBURSEMENT-RELATED BARRIERS 
TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA 
Reimbursement-related barriers to the collection of data on care and 
supportive services received by people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) 
are to a large extent speci˜c to claims data, as providers enter services 
rendered into claims systems in order to receive reimbursement for those 
services. As described in Chapter 2, there are several advantages to the use 
of claims data for health care research. For example, claims data represent 
a large quantity of data, can be made anonymous and used without patient 
authorization, and are available in an electronic format for easier transmis
-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.238
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
sion. Claims data are an especially important source of information on care 
received by PLWHA given the large number who are Medicaid bene˜cia
-ries: an estimated 47 percent of PLWHA who were receiving regular medi
-cal care were Medicaid bene˜ciaries in FY 2007 (Kates, 2011). As more 
PLWHA become eligible for Medicaid and commercial health insurance as 
a result of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA, P.L. 111-
148), claims data are likely to become an even more useful source of data 
for monitoring HIV care. Despite the many advantages of claims data, the 
in˚uence of reimbursement policies needs to be taken into consideration 
when using claims data for health services research (Crystal et al., 2007). 
Health plan reimbursement policies may ﬁcarve outﬂ certain services 
such as behavioral health, transportation, dental, and pharmacy bene˜ts 
so that a separate organization is responsible for payment. As a result, 
the primary insurer may not have a record of the carved-out service in its 
claims data (Hicks, 2003; Joins et al., 2007). Carve-out arrangements are 
often used in the Medicaid program when Medicaid managed care organi-zations (MCOs) contract with other entities to provide services to which 
bene˜ciaries are entitled, as per the state Medicaid agencies™ contract with 
the MCO.1 An MCO may decide to carve out a bene˜t because it lacks 
in-house expertise to meet a particular patient need or because it does not 
have the infrastructure necessary to administer a bene˜t (e.g., transporta-tion services) (Joins et al., 2007). Carve-out arrangements parse bene˜ts out 
to multiple entities, and it is often challenging for these entities to commu-nicate and exchange data with one another in order to coordinate patient 
care effectively (Joins et al., 2007).2 Carve-outs may also make it dif˜cult 
to combine data at the patient level for research or monitoring purposes. 
Carve-out arrangements may pose a challenge to the estimation of indica-tors that require prescription drug dispensing data, or data on receipt of 
mental health or transportation services, since these services are among 
those that are most likely to be carved out of a health plan. 
A health plan™s claims data also will not contain data on care for which 
1 In FY 2007, 71 percent of Medicaid enrollees with HIV had some of their care paid for 
through Medicaid managed care (Kates, 2011). 
2 The Lewin Group performed an assessment of carve-out and carve-in arrangements for 
pharmacy bene˜ts within Medicaid MCOs (Joines et al., 2007). Among the advantages to 
MCOs with carve-in arrangements were that providers were more likely to have real-time 
access to pharmaceutical data to help prevent potential drug interactions and polypharmacy 
(unwanted duplication of drugs), identify inappropriate use of drugs, monitor controlled 
substance usage, and other interventions. Some representatives of carve-out MCOs reported 
that they do not always have access to real-time claims data to determine what medications 
patients are taking. The report noted the importance of data system integration to ensure real-time transfer of pharmaceutical information, both for MCOs that carve their pharmaceutical 
services out to other entities and for carve-in MCOs who may contract with a pharmacy 
bene˜ts management group to manage pharmacy bene˜ts (Joines et al., 2007).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 239
a patient pays out of pocket or for which a claim is submitted before a 
deductible is exceeded (Hicks, 2003). In other cases, services may not be 
documented because they are provided by nonphysicians or by contract 
practitioners and providers who cannot be reimbursed for the service. Some state Medicaid agencies limit the types of providers and practitioners that 
can bill and receive reimbursement, for example (Bachman et al., 2006). 
Furthermore, some states limit the number of services that can be billed to 
Medicaid on the same day (e.g., state Medicaid restrictions on same-day 
billing for a physical health and a mental health service or visit), which 
may result in inaccurate or incomplete documentation (Kautz et al., 2008). 
Another general source of inaccuracy in claims data that is tied to re-imbursement is inappropriate or incomplete coding. Providers may not use 
all applicable codes as a way to reduce administrative burden,3 exaggerate 
condition severity by entering alternate coding as a way to ensure payment, 
or enter alternate diagnoses for sensitive conditions such as mental illness 
or HIV in order to protect patients™ con˜dentiality and insurability (Hicks, 
2003). 
As will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 5, effective use of 
health information technology (health IT) can make for easier collection 
and exchange of care delivery data. To reap its full bene˜ts, health IT will 
have to be adopted across insurers and a growing number of providers. 
However, a number of surveys show that adoption of electronic health re
-cords (EHRs) and other health IT products is occurring slowly in settings 
where PLWHA receive care.
4 The cost to implement and maintain health IT 
systems is a frequently cited barrier to adoption (Lardiere, 2009; Rao et al., 
2011; Reardon and Davidson, 2007). A 2011 study estimated the cost of 
implementation of an EHR into a physician practice to be $162,000 during 
the ˜rst year (Fleming et al., 2011). 
The Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health 
(HITECH) Act, a component of the American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009 (ARRA, P.L. 111-5), helps to reimburse providers for some 
of the costs for implementation of EHRs by authorizing incentive pay-ments through Medicare and Medicaid to health care professionals and 
3 Surveys of physicians show that there is substantial administrative burden associated 
with reimbursement processes under Medicaid and Medicare (AMA, 2010; Cunningham 
and O™Malley, 2009). This administrative burden includes payment delays, rejection of 
claims because a billing form was completed incorrectly or the physician was not able to 
verify a patient™s eligiblity, and complex rules and regulations on how claims are to be ˜led 
(Cunningham and O™Malley, 2009). 
4 An electronic health record (EHR) is an electronic record of health-related information on 
an individual that conforms to nationally recognized interoperability standards and that can 
be created, managed, and consulted by authorized clinicians and staff across more than one 
health care organization (HHS, 2008).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.240
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
hospitals that implement certi˜ed EHRs and demonstrate certain usage 
requirements.5 This support is likely to increase EHR usage by HIV care 
providers owing to the large number of PLWHA who have Medicare and/
or Medicaid coverage. A continuing obstacle to EHR adoption may be the 
inability of some providers to cover the upfront costs of implementation, 
however, since providers are reimbursed after demonstrating usage require
-ments. Some have argued that under current provider reimbursement mod-els, the larger share of the monetary bene˜t from health IT goes to health 
care payers (e.g., insurers) and that often the users of health IT (e.g., HIV 
care providers) do not experience much in the way of ˜nancial bene˜t (e.g., 
Johnston et al., 2003; PCAST, 2010; Sittig and Singh, 2011). This could be 
a barrier to implementation or continued use of EHRs. In addition, ques-tions remain about the role of commercial health insurers, who are major 
payers in many care settings, in funding health IT implementation (Sittig 
and Singh, 2011). Although most HIV care is ˜nanced through public 
programs, the number of PLWHA who are eligible for commercial health 
insurance is likely to grow under the ACA. 
POTENTIAL REPORTING-RELATED BARRIERS TO 
THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
The ability to monitor trends in HIV care depends on accurate and 
timely reporting of data by HIV care providers, laboratories, health de-partments, and other entities. For example, estimation of several of the 
committee™s recommended indicators for clinical HIV care require accurate 
estimates of the number of people living with diagnosed HIV infection 
in the United States, as well as CD4 and viral load testing information, 
reported for state and local as well as national HIV/AIDS surveillance 
purposes. 
As of April 2008, all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and 6 depen-dent areas had implemented con˜dential name-based HIV case reporting 
(in addition to AIDS case reporting), where the names of individuals who 
test positive for HIV are reported to state or local public health authorities 
(CDC, 2010) (Table 4-1). Some research has shown underreporting of HIV/
AIDS cases by health care providers and laboratories to public health au-thorities (Hall et al., 2006). Past studies conducted in different geographic 
5 Under a Medicare EHR incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive as much 
as $44,000 over a 5-year period. Incentive payments for hospitals and critical access hospitals 
(CAHs) are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2-million base payment. Under 
a Medicaid EHR incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive up to $63,750 
over 6 years. As under the Medicare program, incentive payments for hospitals and CAHs 
under the Medicaid program are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2-million 
base payment (CMS, 2012).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 241
areas and years show a range of AIDS case reporting completeness of 60 
to 98 percent (Buehler et al., 1992; Doyle et al., 2002; Greenberg et al., 
1993, Jara et al., 2000; Rosenblum et al., 1992; Schwarcz et al., 1999). 
These studies were limited in that they assessed completeness of reporting 
for a speci˜c geographic area or for an isolated time period (Hall et al., 
2006). Attempting to address the weaknesses of previous studies, Hall and 
colleagues (2006) used capture-recapture methods to assess the complete-ness of HIV and AIDS case data reported to surveillance programs during 
October 1, 2002 to September 30, 2003. Over the 1-year period, 11,266 
HIV diagnoses were reported to surveillance programs in four states and 
two cities. The estimated completeness of reporting of HIV diagnoses was 
76 percent when allowing 6 months of reporting delay and increased to 81 
percent with 12 months of follow up. The estimated completeness of AIDS 
diagnoses reported to seven states and two cities (11,079 AIDS diagnoses 
were reported) was 77 percent when allowing 6 months of a reporting de-lay (Hall et al., 2006). Based on this research, in part, the CDC estimates 
the completeness of reporting of HIV infection to be more than 80 percent 
(CDC, 2010). 
Barriers to the reporting of noti˜able diseases, including HIV/AIDS, 
may include lack of awareness of reporting requirements and procedures 
on the part of providers, human error, lack of motivation, and poor system 
processes (Lazarus et al., 2009; Overhage et al., 2008; Turnberg et al., 
2010). Evidence suggests that automated electronic reporting facilitates 
more accurate and complete reporting of noti˜able diseases to public health authorities. For example, Overhage and colleagues (2008) found that use of an automated electronic laboratory reporting (ELR) system to report noti˜
-able conditions to health departments serving Indianapolis, Indiana, identi-˜ed 4.4 times as many cases of such conditions as traditional, spontaneous, 
paper-based methods, likely by helping to overcome some of the barriers 
noted above. The ELR system also identi˜ed cases about 8 days earlier than 
spontaneous reporting (Overhage et al., 2008). Despite substantial progress 
in the implementation of electronic reporting, some reporting mechanisms 
still depend on practitioner-initiated manual data entry and submission, 
which are more likely to result in delayed and inaccurate data (Lazarus et 
al., 2009). 
State and local HIV/AIDS surveillance systems collect additional labo-ratory information on established, reported cases of HIV/AIDS, such as 
CD4 and viral load counts. These data are used for surveillance purposes, 
such as to verify existing cases of HIV/AIDS, to identify potential new cases, 
and to evaluate unmet medical need (CSTE, 2009). HIV diagnostic CD4 
count and HIV viral load test results are reportable from clinical, hospital, 
laboratory, or other authorities in all but a few U.S. states and territories 
(CSTE, 2011). However, as is discussed in Chapter 3, states currently vary 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.242
 TABLE 4-1
 HIV Testing and Reporting Policies
State or 
Territory
C/AHIV 
 ReportingName Reporting 
ImplementationState or 
 Territory
C/AHIV 
 ReportingName Reporting 
ImplementationAlabamaCName1988 JanNew HampshireC, AName2005 JanAlaskaC, AName1999 FebNew JerseyC, AName1992 JanArizonaC, AName1987 JanNew MexicoC, AName1998 JanArkansasC, AName1989 JulNew York
C, AName2000 JunCaliforniaC, A,Name2006 AprNorth Carolina
CName1990 FebColoradoC, AName1985 NovNorth Dakota
CName1988 JanConnecticutC, AName2005 JanOhioC, AName1990 JunDelawareC, A,Name2006 FebOklahomaC, AName1988 JunDistrict of 
ColumbiaC, AName2006 NovOregonC, AName2006 AprFloridaC, AName1997 JulPennsylvaniaC, AName2002 OctGeorgiaC, AName2003 DecRhode IslandC, AName2006 JulHawaiiC, AName2008 MarSouth Carolina
CName1986 FebIdahoCName1986 JunSouth Dakota
CName1988 JanIllinoisC, AName2006 JanTennessee
CName1992 JanIndianaC, AName1988 JulTexas
C, AName1999 JanIowaCName1998 JulUtahC, AName1989 AprKansasC, AName1999 JulVermont
C, AName2008 AprKentuckyC, AName2004 OctVirginia
C, AName1989 JulLouisianaC, AName1993 FebWashington
C, AName2006 MarMaineC, AName2006 JanWest Virginia
C, AName1989 JanMarylandC, AName2007 AprWisconsin
C, AName1985 NovMassachusettsC, AName2007 JanWyoming
C, AName1989 JunMichiganC, AName1992 AprAmerican SamoaC, AName2001 AugMinnesotaC, AName1985 OctGuamC, AName2000 MarMississippiCName1988 AugNorth Mariana Islands
C, AName2001 OctMissouriC, AName1987 OctPalauCName2005 OctMontanaC, AName2006 SeptPuerto RicoC, AName2003 JanNebraskaC, AName1995 SeptU.S. Virgin Islands
CName1998 DecNevadaCName1992 FebNOTE: A = anonymous; C = con˜dential.SOURCE: Adapted from KFF, 2011.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 243
TABLE 4-1
 HIV Testing and Reporting Policies
State or 
Territory
C/AHIV 
 ReportingName Reporting 
ImplementationState or 
 Territory
C/AHIV 
 ReportingName Reporting 
ImplementationAlabamaCName1988 JanNew HampshireC, AName2005 JanAlaskaC, AName1999 FebNew JerseyC, AName1992 JanArizonaC, AName1987 JanNew MexicoC, AName1998 JanArkansasC, AName1989 JulNew York
C, AName2000 JunCaliforniaC, A,Name2006 AprNorth Carolina
CName1990 FebColoradoC, AName1985 NovNorth Dakota
CName1988 JanConnecticutC, AName2005 JanOhioC, AName1990 JunDelawareC, A,Name2006 FebOklahomaC, AName1988 JunDistrict of 
ColumbiaC, AName2006 NovOregonC, AName2006 AprFloridaC, AName1997 JulPennsylvaniaC, AName2002 OctGeorgiaC, AName2003 DecRhode IslandC, AName2006 JulHawaiiC, AName2008 MarSouth Carolina
CName1986 FebIdahoCName1986 JunSouth Dakota
CName1988 JanIllinoisC, AName2006 JanTennessee
CName1992 JanIndianaC, AName1988 JulTexas
C, AName1999 JanIowaCName1998 JulUtahC, AName1989 AprKansasC, AName1999 JulVermont
C, AName2008 AprKentuckyC, AName2004 OctVirginia
C, AName1989 JulLouisianaC, AName1993 FebWashington
C, AName2006 MarMaineC, AName2006 JanWest Virginia
C, AName1989 JanMarylandC, AName2007 AprWisconsin
C, AName1985 NovMassachusettsC, AName2007 JanWyoming
C, AName1989 JunMichiganC, AName1992 AprAmerican SamoaC, AName2001 AugMinnesotaC, AName1985 OctGuamC, AName2000 MarMississippiCName1988 AugNorth Mariana Islands
C, AName2001 OctMissouriC, AName1987 OctPalauCName2005 OctMontanaC, AName2006 SeptPuerto RicoC, AName2003 JanNebraskaC, AName1995 SeptU.S. Virgin Islands
CName1998 DecNevadaCName1992 FebNOTE: A = anonymous; C = con˜dential.SOURCE: Adapted from KFF, 2011.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.244
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
with respect to the level at which viral load and CD4 test results are report-able. In several states, CD4 cell counts of less than 500 or 200 cells/mm3 are 
reportable, whereas in other states all CD4 values are reportable. In addi-tion, some states do not report undetectable viral load results (see Chapter 
3, Appendix Table 3-5) (Personal communication, Amy Lansky, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, October 6, 2011). The variability in 
the legislation and regulations for reporting may result in differences in the 
completeness of data and make it dif˜cult to compare these measures across 
states and territories. The committee recommends (see Recommendation 
3-2 in Chapter 3) that CDC take steps to enhance HIV/AIDS surveillance by 
issuing guidelines or criteria for National HIV Surveillance System report-ing to include all CD4 and viral load test results.
Non-reporting of HIV/AIDS cases identi˜ed at anonymous testing sites 
may be another barrier to the completeness of surveillance data. Health 
departments introduced anonymous HIV testing early in the HIV epidemic 
because of the unique stigma attached to HIV and concern that fear of 
potential breaches in con˜dentiality might deter individuals from testing 
(Markovitz et al., 2011). Unlike con˜dential HIV testing where an indi-vidual™s name is recorded with her or his test result, in anonymous HIV 
testing a number or code is linked to the test, and only the individual being 
tested knows the code. Individuals who test positive for HIV at anonymous 
testing sites are not reported to state or local health departments unless they 
choose to have their test results converted from anonymous to con˜den-tial (CDC, 2011b). Anonymous testing is an important service. Research 
has shown that it contributes to earlier testing as well as medical care (as 
de˜ned by the average number of days in HIV-related medical care before 
an AIDS diagnosis) (Bindman et al., 1998). A recent study of public testing 
sites in Colorado and Washington state showed that anonymous testers 
were signi˜cantly more likely to have CD4+ cell counts >500 cells/mm3, suggesting an earlier stage of HIV infection. Yet because anonymous tests 
are not reported to con˜dential HIV/AIDS surveillance systems, surveillance 
data may not be representative of individuals who are tested at anonymous 
testing sites (CDC, 1999, 2011b).6 Research on the demographic character-istics of anonymous testers shows that they are often MSM and younger, 
more often white, and more likely to report more years of education than 
individuals who receive con˜dential testing (Markovitz et al., 2011). Most 
U.S. states and territories currently offer both anonymous and con˜dential 
HIV testing, although some have only con˜dential testing (Table 4-1). 
6 In addition, in a 2007 survey of HIV/AIDS surveillance capacity in health departments, 
only 20 percent of health departments responded that it is permissible in their jurisdiction for 
a provider or laboratory to report a new HIV or AIDS case without a name or other personal 
identi˜er (CSTE, 2009). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 245
Many cases of HIV/AIDS identi˜ed at anonymous testing sites, along with 
CD4 count and viral load information, are added to surveillance after in-dividuals enter care. 
One of the core functions of health departments in response to the HIV 
epidemic is the collection and analysis of data on the number of PLWHA 
and demographic data on individuals who receive services through feder-ally funded HIV/AIDS programs within a jurisdiction (NASTAD, 2007). 
The data are compiled and analyzed at the local and national levels and 
serve as the basis for decision making about funding to state and local 
health departments to support HIV/AIDS programs. Sharing of identi˜able 
health information across health departments is often necessary to link 
data for individuals who receive HIV care and supportive services across 
multiple jurisdictions. However, local laws designed to protect identi˜able 
information may inhibit data sharing among state public health authorities, 
compromising the accuracy of the analysis of and conclusions drawn from 
the data (Hodge et al., 2011; Personal communication, Carmine Grasso, 
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, August 9, 2011).
7 Funding mechanisms can result in inadequate resources within health 
departments to support activities related speci˜cally to data collection and 
analysis. When data collection and analysis activities are funded, they may 
be lumped into the category of administrative costs, which may result in 
inadequate allocation of ˜nancial and staff resources to these activities. For 
example, due to budget constraints that impede the employment of staff 
with expertise in data collection and analysis, health departments may del-egate data collection and analysis activities to support staff who may not 
be suf˜ciently trained to perform these activities (Personal communication, 
Carmine Grasso, New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, 
August 9, 2011). 
Reducing Provider Reporting Burden
Grantees of federally funded HIV/AIDS programs are an important 
source of HIV care and supportive services data. To comply with funding 
requirements, grantees must generate and submit to federal agencies nu-merous programmatic reports. These reports contain program information 
that can inform how well the clinical care and supportive services needs of 
PLWHA are being met locally and nationally. The range of data contained 
in such reports includes, but is not limited to, the number and demograph-ics of PLWHA within a speci˜c jurisdiction or provider setting who receive 
7 The CDC issued guidance on standards for data security, con˜dentiality, and use across 
surveillance and program areas for HIV, viral hepatitis, STD, and TB prevention in state and 
local health jurisdictions in December 2011 (CDC, 2011a).  
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.246
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
medical services, pharmaceutical assistance, and supportive services such as 
housing assistance, as well as information on the provision of care and sup-portive services to communities that are disproportionately affected by HIV. 
As the recipients of numerous core and supplemental HIV/AIDS grant 
awards, health departments are central to the collection and reporting of 
data to monitor progress in achieving NHAS goals. However, health depart
-ments are currently overburdened with myriad grant-related administrative 
activities. The scope of reporting requirements for state health departments 
in 2010 included 96 reports for core and supplemental (e.g., STD and viral 
hepatitis) HIV/AIDS grant awards (Figure 4-1). Reporting includes several 
hundred speci˜c variables (NASTAD, 2011; PACHA, 2011). Furthermore, 
the National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors (NASTAD) 
reports that the current requirements for reporting on program planning, 
progress, and performance measures are project speci˜c and inconsistent 
across related programming (e.g., HIV prevention and STD prevention and 
control; HIV prevention and HIV/AIDS care). Thus, health departments 
must modify their reporting practices to meet the speci˜cations of each 
grant. Projects also operate on different grant cycles, which further compli
-cates reporting. There is also substantial duplication in reporting practices 
owing to differences in the schedules for reporting on program progress 
and for local disease reporting and service data collection and validation. 
Health departments often must submit incomplete or inaccurate data on 
program progress, and then resubmit the data after local data are updated 
(to ensure the accuracy and completeness of program progress reports) 
(NASTAD, 2012).
8 According to the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS (PACHA), 
the current reporting requirements for grantees of federally funded pro-grams have not resulted in a set of metrics by which to thoroughly moni-tor the HIV epidemic. Nor have they yielded data of suf˜cient quality to 
effectively evaluate and manage federal HIV/AIDS programs (PACHA, 
2011). A smaller number of key metrics that are relevant to NHAS goals 
could be used across federal agencies to monitor progress in managing 
the epidemic. Use of metrics that are comparable across funding agencies 
would also help to streamline reporting requirements for grantees (PACHA, 
2011). While the committee was preparing this report, there was an effort 
under way by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) 
to identify a uniform set of HIV-related metrics to be used across funding 
agencies and reduce reporting burden (HHS, 2011; Valdiserri and Forsyth, 
8 In addition, many health departments currently face staff challenges that affect reporting 
capacity. Budget cuts in many states™ HIV/AIDS and other infectious disease programs in 
health departments have resulted in hiring freezes and the elimination of staff positions, result-ing in less capacity for the completion of the required reports (NASTAD, 2010).  
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 247
2011). The committee supports this current effort and recommends that it 
be maintained and institutionalized (see recommendation 4-1 at the end of 
this chapter) so that data needs can be periodically reprioritized based on 
changes in the HIV epidemic and to facilitate continued minimization of 
grantee reporting burden. 
Legislative action may also be necessary to reduce reporting burden in 
certain instances because some of the overlapping and duplicative reporting 
activities are delineated in federal legislative or appropriations language. 
For example, per its authorizing legislation, the Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program contains multiple parts. Each part includes several different fund
-ing components and requirements that are often in con˚ict, duplicative, and 
may be burdensome for grantees. 
In addition to health departments, sites that provide direct clinical care 
and supportive services to PLWHA could stand to bene˜t from the use of 
a streamlined set of metrics for HIV monitoring. Such entities, such as 
community health centers (CHCs), may themselves be the direct grantees 
of federally funded HIV/AIDS core or supplemental programs and report 
program data to funding agencies, or they may provide data to health 
departments that are then incorporated into reports for federal agencies. 
Providers of HIV clinical care and supportive services have many com-peting responsibilities and restrictions (e.g., budget or expertise related) 
on the amount of staff time that can be devoted to reporting activities. As 
potential users of the collected data, the various providers of HIV care and 
supportive services can be involved in decision making about what data are 


FIGURE 4-1
 Federal reporting requirements for core and supplemental HIV/AIDS 
grant awards administered by state health department HIV/AIDS directors.
SOURCE: Adapted from NASTAD, 2011. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.248
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
important to collect as well as processes for collecting them. Early and con-tinuous dialogue with providers about the data collection process can help 
to identify and address any concerns in a timely fashion, and perhaps help 
to reduce reporting burden later on. Some federal HIV/AIDS data collection 
efforts are already informed by such input. As one example, proposed data 
variables for the Health Resources and Services Administration™s (HRSA™s) 
AIDS Drug Assistance Program Data Report were vetted with Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program grantees (CareActTarget.org, 2011). 
OTHER POLICY BARRIERS TO THE 
COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
Several other laws and policies may present obstacles to the collection 
of data elements needed to estimate the committee™s recommended core in
-dicators. These include federal and state policies that result in a fragmented 
health care system, as well as federal and state policies pertaining to the 
disclosure of health information. 
Federal and State Policies That Result in a 
Fragmented Health Care System
There are multiple sources of care and care coverage for PLWHA in 
the United States. PLWHA who are insured and in the health care system 
rely heavily on public insurance programs (i.e., Medicaid, Medicare, both) 
to ˜nance their care. PLWHA who are uninsured or underinsured rely on 
safety net programs such as the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, CHCs, 
and public hospitals. Other PLWHA are privately insured. Care for many 
PLWHA is ˜nanced through multiple sources (KFF, 2004). 
The multiple sources of care and care coverage are uncoordinated, 
making it dif˜cult for patients to navigate care. Furthermore, eligibility for 
these programs depends on factors such as health or disability status, family 
status, employment status and income, and assets that will vary over time 
for any given individual (Table 4-2). Eligibility for programs also varies 
widely by state, particularly for Medicaid and the Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program. Thus, a person may be eligible for a program in one state but not 
in another, and not all states have the same coverage and care programs 
(KFF, 2004).
9 As PLWHA lose access to care or move from one source of 
9 Many PLWHA migrate to different jurisdictions following an HIV diagnosis. One study of 
migration patterns after HIV diagnosis among 760 HIV-infected adults residing in the south
-ern United States found that 226 (30 percent) moved after testing HIV positive (Agee et al., 
2006). In another study involving a national probability sample of 3,014 PLWHA, 17 percent 
of respondents made a move to a different state or noncontiguous county following an HIV 
diagnosis. These ˜ndings suggested that PLWHA are more likely to move than non-infected 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 249
care or care coverage to another, there may be gaps or losses in care data, 
or duplicate records, which can complicate collection of data needed to 
estimate the indicators recommended by the committee. 
Some provisions of the ACA will not be implemented by states uni-formly, resulting in state variation in eligibility of PLWHA for health insur
-ance and, by consequence, access to health care. One of several examples 
relates to the establishment of health insurance exchanges that will serve 
as points of access to commercial health insurance for individuals and em-ployers. The ACA sets broad parameters for the exchanges, but states are 
given ˚exibility on several features, such as whether to establish their own 
exchange or rely on the federal government to do so and how the exchange 
will interact with the state™s Medicaid program (Carey, 2010). In many 
states, legislation has been proposed to alter or oppose provisions of the 
ACA. Resulting differences in access to health care by state will have to be 
taken into consideration for the collection and use of program data for pur
-poses of monitoring the impact of the ACA on improvements in HIV care. 
In the current fragmented health care system, the various sources of 
care and care coverage often have their own policies relating to the sharing 
of data. Data from private sources, such as commercial health insurers, may 
be proprietary, for example. As noted earlier in this chapter, local privacy 
laws and lack of data sharing mechanisms among state and local public 
health authorities can impede the collection and analysis of surveillance 
data (Personal communication, Carmine Grasso, New Jersey Department 
of Health and Senior Services, August 9, 2011). 
Federal and State Laws Pertaining to the Disclosure of Health InformationPrivacy of personal health information is a concern for many PLWHA. 
Fears of breaches in con˜dentiality and resulting HIV stigma can result 
in individuals not accessing or adhering to care and treatment (Kempf et 
al., 2010; Whetten-Goldstein et al., 2001). When personally identifying 
information is disclosed, it can result in stigma, embarrassment, and dis-crimination. Without some assurance of privacy, people may be disinclined 
to provide honest and complete disclosures of sensitive information, even 
to their physicians (IOM, 2009). This section discusses federal and state 
privacy laws designed to protect patient health information and how these 
laws may in˚uence the collection of HIV care data for purposes of estimat-ing the core indicators recommended by the committee. 
persons in the general population and are almost twice as likely to move out of state (Berk 
et al., 2003). Reasons for moving, especially for PLWHA in small or rural communities, may 
be to gain access to better HIV medical care, to obtain ˜nancial assistance, or due to fear of 
stigma and con˜dentiality issues (Agee et al., 2006; Berk et al., 2003).  
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.250
 TABLE 4-2
 Potential Eligibility Criteria for Care Coverage for PLWHA, by Major Payer/Source
MedicaidMedicarePrivate (employer)Private (individual)Ryan White
Both low income and 
categorically eligibleSeniors or under-65 
disabledJob-basedIndividual 
market-basedLow income and 
uninsured or 
underinsuredIncome/asset testYes
NoN/A, but costs 
involvedN/A, but costs 
involvedYes
U.S. citizenYes
Yes
Not necessarilyNot necessarilyNoPreexisting 
 condition limitNoNoSome limits
Yes, in most states
NoState variationYes
NoYes
Yes
Yes
Capped fundingNoNoYes
Yes
Yes
HIV-speci˜c 
 programNoNoNoNoYes
NOTE: N/A = Not applicable.
SOURCE: KFF, 2010.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 251
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Privacy Rule 
At the federal level, the sharing and use of people™s health information 
is governed primarily by the Health Insurance Portability and Account
-ability Act (HIPAA, P.L. 104-191), which was enacted by Congress in 1996 
with the goals of making health care delivery more ef˜cient and increasing 
the number of Americans with health insurance. The HIPAA Privacy Rule 
was developed under administrative simpli˜cation provisions of the HIPAA, 
instructing the HHS Secretary to issue regulations concerning electronic 
transmission of health information, which was increasing in the early 1990s 
(IOM, 2009). The Privacy Rule standardizes requirements for disclosure of 
individually identi˜able protected health information (PHI) related to ﬁan 
individual™s past, present, or future physical or mental health condition; the 
provision of health care to the individual; or, the past, present, or future 
payment for the provision of health care to the individualﬂ (HHS, 2003). 
PHI includes names, all geographic subdivisions smaller than a state, 
all elements of dates (except year) directly related to an individual, Social 
Security numbers, and other information.10 Data elements to estimate indi-cators of HIV care that are recommended by the committee (see Chapter 2) 
that may be considered PHI include zip code, several date-based elements 
(e.g., date of HIV diagnosis, dates of viral load and CD4 counts), and age. 
The Privacy Rule applies to health plans, health care providers, and 
health care clearinghouses that electronically transmit health information 
in connection with certain health care transactions11 (HHS, 2003). These 
entities are collectively designated as ﬁcovered entitiesﬂ (Box 4-1). Covered 
entities, which include providers of care and care coverage to PLWHA, are 
required to obtain patient authorization before using or disclosing PHI to 
third parties, except under the following circumstances:
˜˚
To the individual (unless required for access or accounting of 
disclosures);˜˚
For treatment, payment, and health care operations; 
10 The full list of PHI includes the following: names; postal address information, other than 
town or city, state and zip code; telephone numbers; fax numbers; electronic mail addresses; 
Social Security numbers; medical record numbers; health plan bene˜ciary numbers; account 
numbers; certi˜cate or license numbers; vehicle identi˜ers and serial numbers, including license 
plate numbers; device identi˜ers and serial numbers; web Universal Resource Locators (URLs); 
Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers; biometric identi˜ers, including ˜nger- and voiceprints; 
and full face photographic images and any comparable images. 45 CFR § 164.514(e)(2) (HHS, 
2003). 
11 These transactions include claims, bene˜t eligibility inquiries, referral authorization re-quests, or other transactions for which HHS has established standards under the HIPAA 
Transactions Rule (HHS, 2003).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.252
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
˜˚
To provide an individual the opportunity to agree or object to uses 
and disclosures of PHI (informal permission); 
˜˚
For purposes of an incident to an otherwise permitted use and dis-closure (i.e., a secondary use or disclosure that cannot reasonably 
be prevented, is limited in nature, and occurs as a result of another 
permitted use or disclosure); 
˜˚
For public interest and bene˜t activities; and 
˜˚
For a Limited Data Set for the purposes of research, public health 
or health care operations (HHS, 2003).
The permitted use and disclosure of PHI without patient authorization 
for ﬁpublic interest and bene˜t activitiesﬂ is particularly relevant to the 
public health goal of monitoring improvement in HIV care. Under this ex-ception, covered entities may disclose PHI for public health activitiesŠfor 
example, to public health authorities as required by law to prevent and 
BOX 4-1
 HIPAA Privacy RuleŒCovered Entities
Health Care Provider
 Health Plans˜˚
Doctors ˜˚
Health insurance companies
˜˚
Clinics ˜˚
Health maintenance organizations (HMOs)
˜˚
Psychologists ˜˚
Company health plans
˜˚
Dentists ˜˚
Government programs that pay for health
˜˚
Chiropractors
  care, such as Medicare, Medicaid, and the
˜˚
Nursing Homes
  military and veterans health care programs, 
˜˚
Pharmacies
  and the Indian Health Service
Health Care Clearinghouses
This includes entities that process nonstandard health information they receive 
from another entity into a standard (i.e., standard electronic format or data con
-tent), or vice versa.
Other˜˚
Researchers employed by a covered entity
˜˚
Some universities (or parts of universities, such as health centers)
˜˚
A public health clinic that is part of a public health agency 

Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 253
control disease (such as HIV/AIDS), injury, and disability. Public health 
activities include, but are not limited to, ﬁreporting of disease, injury, and 
vital events, and conducting public health surveillance, investigations, and 
interventionsﬂ (CDC, 2003). Examples of public health authorities include 
the CDC and state and local health departments, which is why providers 
are permitted to report new HIV and AIDS cases with patient identifying 
information to area public health authorities.
12 PHI also may be disclosed 
to health oversight agencies for activities such as audits and investigations 
necessary for administration of the health care system and government 
bene˜t programs (HHS, 2003). Disclosure of PHI by covered entities to 
HRSA™s HIV/AIDS Bureau (HAB) for purposes of monitoring and assessing 
its grants is permitted under the health oversight exception, for example 
(HRSA, 2010). PHI may also be released for research, de˜ned as ﬁa system-atic investigation, including research development, testing, and evaluation, 
designed to develop or contribute to generalizable knowledgeﬂ [45 CFR. 
§164.501] (HHS, 2003). 
The collection of data for purposes of monitoring HIV care may also 
occur under the Limited Data Set permitted use and disclosure, which may 
be used for public health, health care operations, or research activities 
(HHS, 2003). A Limited Data Set is PHI that excludes direct identi˜ers of 
an individual, her or his relatives, employers, or household members, but 
may include the following:
˜˚
Geographic data other than street address (town, city, state, zip 
code);˜˚
Dates relating to an individual (dates of birth, admission, and dis
-charge); and˜˚
Other unique identifying characteristics or codes not listed as direct 
identi˜ers (HHS, 2003).Covered entities are required to condition their disclosure of a limited 
data set to third parties on establishment of a data use agreement.
13 
12 ﬁPublic health authoritiesﬂ are ﬁlegally authorized to collect or receive the information for 
purposes of preventing or controlling disease, injury, or disability.ﬂ They include any ﬁentity 
working under a grant of authority from a public health authority, or when directed by a 
public health authority, to a foreign government agency that is acting in collaboration with a 
public health authorityﬂ (CDC, 2003). 
13 A data use agreement establishes the permitted uses and disclosures of such information by 
the recipient, consistent with the purposes of research, public health, or health care operations; limits who can use or receive the data; and requires the recipient to agree not to reidentify the 
data or contact the individuals. The agreement must contain assurances that the recipient will 
use appropriate safeguards to prevent use or disclosure of the data other than as permitted by 
HIPAA and the data use agreement, or as required by law (OCR, 2003). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.254
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HIPAA-covered entities may not disclose data on ﬁsmall cellsﬂ or for 
data elements for which there is a very small number of observations. For 
example, there may be a small number of HIV cases among a subpopula-tion in a geographic area, and release of the data could reveal an individ-ual™s identity. This could be an impediment to analysis of subpopulations 
of PLWHA. 
The Privacy Rule does not apply to health information that has been 
de-identi˜ed in accordance with the Privacy Rule (HHS, 2003).14 Limited 
data sets differ from de-identi˜ed information in that they may contain 
dates and some geographic information associated with an individual that 
are absent from de-identi˜ed information. 
Several of the data systems identi˜ed in Chapter 3 as important for 
monitoring indicators of HIV care are maintained within HIPAA-covered 
entities (i.e., Medicaid Statistical Information System [MSIS], CMS Chronic Condition Data Warehouse [CCW], Kaiser Permanente, North American 
AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design [NA-ACCORD], 
CFAR Network of Integrated Clinical Systems [CNICS]). In cases where 
PHI-linked data are requested from these data systems for purposes of 
estimating core indicators, the reasons for use of the data may be required 
to fall within the permitted uses and disclosures of the Privacy Rule (listed 
above), which may include the public health and limited data set exceptions. 
Even with the permitted uses and disclosures of PHI and the allowable 
use of de-identi˜ed data from HIPAA-covered entities, the Privacy Rule and 
its varying interpretations may impede data collection (Gostin and Nass, 
2009). In an evaluation of the collection of race, ethnicity, and language 
data in medical practices with ˜ve or fewer physicians, Hasnian-Wynia 
and colleagues found practices worried that asking questions about race or 
ethnicity could be a violation of patient privacy rights under the HIPAA, 
even though the collection of race and ethnicity data from patients in health care settings does not violate the HIPAA Privacy Rule and is legal under 
both federal and state law (Hasnian-Wynia et al., 2010). In another study, 
health information managers reported increases in the public™s misunder
-standing about release of patient information under HIPAA to be a major 
barrier to the release of such information. Lack of an umbrella policy or 
regulation de˜ning infractions and enforcement and challenges in control-14 The Privacy Rule designates two ways in which a covered entity can determine that health 
information is de-identi˜ed. Under the ﬁSafe Harborﬂ approach, a covered entity may consider 
data to be de-identi˜ed if that entity removes identi˜ers and has no reason to believe that 
the remaining information could be used to identify a person. Alternatively, a covered entity 
may consider data to be de-identi˜ed if ﬁa quali˜ed statistical or scienti˜c expert concludes, 
through the use of accepted analytic techniques, that the risk the information could be used 
alone or in combination with other reasonably available information, to identify the subject 
is very smallﬂ (HHS, 2010). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 255
ling safeguards related to the release of information with increased use 
of health IT, such as electronic health records, were other major barriers 
(Houser et al., 2007). 
The implementation of the Privacy Rule has changed the way in which 
covered entities manage health information. Concerned about compliance 
with the Privacy Rule, many providers have reevaluated the manner in 
which patient data are stored and disseminated (Wilson, 2009). As noted 
previously, the Privacy Rule permits the release of PHI without patient 
permission for public health purposes. Yet the terms of release are unclear 
and leave room for interpretation as to whether disclosure is permitted. 
Covered entities and their attorneys (whose job is to minimize clients™ risk 
rather than improve public health) may decide not to release requested in-formation, given that the release of PHI under the public health exception 
is permitted but not mandatory (Wilson, 2009). Public health of˜cials have 
found success in gaining access to personal health data to be mixed and 
note that covered entities cite the Privacy Rule as a reason not to provide 
data to researchers and health departments (Stoto, 2008). Concern that 
reported data may reveal aspects of a person™s lifestyle such as health status 
(e.g., HIV) or behaviors (e.g., unsafe sex or needle sharing) may result in re
-luctance to disclose PHI among both patients and providers (Gostin, 2002). 
A potential disincentive to reporting is that covered entities that do 
release PHI for certain public health activities are required to record such 
disclosures and make an accounting of the disclosures available to patients 
who request them (Wilson, 2009).
15 Reporting of patient information to 
authorities can create tensions between physicians, whose primary role is 
to protect their patients™ interests, and public health, whose primary role is 
to protect the population™s interests (Gostin, 2002; Wilson, 2009). 
As noted in Chapter 3, epidemiologic studies are a useful source of data on HIV care. Researchers who conduct epidemiologic studies on PLWHA 
often have to obtain patient information from hospitals and clinics that are 
HIPAA-covered entities (Houser et al., 2007). A few studies conducted after 
the Privacy Rule became effective in 2003 suggested that the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule had a negative impact on the conduct of health research, including 
research related to public health surveillance (e.g., Armstrong et al., 2005; 
Linet, 2003; Ness, 2007). A 2007 study showed that the Privacy Rule had 
little impact on a researcher™s ability to obtain patient medical records. 
A likely by-product of HIPAA, however, was the refusal of 10 percent of 
facilities to accept a HIPAA-compliant release form other than their own, 
15 Where data are released for public health activities, HIPAA-covered entities are required 
to make a listing of all disclosures of an individual™s protected health information made by the 
covered entity or its business associates for up to 6 years preceding the request (HHS, 2003). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.256
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
adding delay time, increasing participant burden, and creating a possible 
loss of study outcomes (Houser et al., 2007). 
Con˜dentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient Records Regulation
HIV-infected drug users have increased prevalence and frequency of 
medical, substance use, and psychiatric disorders that result in increased 
morbidity and mortality (Altice et al., 2010). Left untreated, these comorbid 
disorders can complicate treatment by impeding adherence to antiretroviral 
therapy, which is critical to maintaining suppression of viral replication 
(Altice et al., 2010; Fiellin, 2004). Therefore, screening and referral for 
substance abuse treatment are important components of HIV care. 
Con˜dentiality has been fundamental to the practice of substance 
abuse treatment in the United States for more than four decades. In 1975, 
Congress enacted the Con˜dentiality of Alcohol and Drug Abuse Patient 
Records Regulation16 (see 42 CFR § Part 2 or ﬁPart 2ﬂ) after it recog-nized that the stigma associated with substance abuse, as well as fear 
of prosecution, might deter individuals from entering treatment (Fenner, 
2009; SAMHSA, 2004). The regulation, hereafter referred to as ﬁPart 2,ﬂ 
establishes con˜dentiality requirements for patient records maintained in 
connection with application for or receipt of services provided by federally 
assisted programs that provide alcohol and drug treatment, diagnosis, and 
referral services programs.17 
Part 2 has been described as ﬁpowerfully preemptiveﬂ of both lesser 
state laws and HIPAA (Rosenbaum et al., 2009). Part 2 generally requires 
patient consent for disclosure of identifying information that reveals that a 
patient is in, has been in, or has applied for substance abuse treatment.18 It also prohibits health care providers and plans that receive information 
from disclosing it to another entity without patient consent. Most substance 
abuse treatment programs are subject to both Part 2 and the Privacy Rule 
and must comply with both. According to guidance for alcohol and sub-stance abuse programs developed by SAMHSA, this generally means that 
16 ﬁRecordsﬂ refer to ﬁany information, whether recorded or not, relating to a patient re-ceived or acquired by a federally assisted alcohol or drug programﬂ (SAMHSA, 2004).
17 Broadly de˜ned, ﬁfederally assistedﬂ programs are those that receive direct federal fund-ing, but also have a tax-exempt status from the Internal Revenue Service (White and Daniel, 
2009). For-pro˜t drug and alcohol treatment programs and private practitioners who do not 
receive federal assistance are not subject to the requirements of Part 2, unless state law requires 
them to comply with Part 2 (SAMHSA, 2004, 2010). 
18 This may include name, address information, Social Security number, ˜ngerprint, 
photograph, or similar information by which the identity of a patient can be determined with 
reasonable accuracy and speed either directly or by reference or through veri˜cation with 
another party (42 CFR 2.11).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 257
programs will follow Part 2 and not disclose information unless they receive 
patient consent or can point to an exception that permits the disclosure. 
Then programs con˜rm that the disclosure is also allowed under the Privacy 
Rule (SAMHSA, 2004). 
There are instances in which patient identifying information can be 
disclosed without patient consent under Part 2, such as (42 CFR Part 2, 
Subpart DŠDisclosures without patient consent):
˜˚
to medical personnel in case of a medical emergency;
˜˚
to quali˜ed personnel to conduct research, management audits, 
˜nancial audits, or program evaluation (e.g., through a quali˜ed 
service organization agreement [QSOA]);
19˜˚
for communications within a program; and
˜˚
for communications between a program and an entity having direct 
administrative control over the program.
Unlike the Privacy Rule, which usually permits the disclosure of PHI 
without patient consent for treatment, payment, or health care operations 
purposes, Part 2 typically requires patient consent for such disclosures (see 
42 CFR §§ 2.3, 2.12, 2.13). As with the Privacy Rule, Part 2 does not apply 
to data that have been de-identi˜ed (SAMHSA, 2004). 
Part 2 does not prohibit drug and alcohol treatment programs from 
meeting state-mandated communicable disease reporting and follow-up 
responsibilities. Therefore, programs can report cases of HIV/AIDS and 
other communicable diseases without patient consent to local public health 
authorities, such as through a QSOA with the local public health depart-ment or by some other mechanism. Reported cases of HIV/AIDS would 
probably not be linked to substance abuse treatment information; however, 
most states require reporters to identify themselves (which may disclose 
that the information is coming from a drug and alcohol abuse treatment 
program) (SAMHSA, 2004). 
Part 2 may impede the collection of data on date of diagnosis for sub-stance use disorder, date of referral for substance abuse services, and date 
of ˜rst visit for substance abuse services.  These data elements are needed 
to estimate the proportion of people with diagnosed HIV infection and 
substance use disorder who are referred for substance abuse services and 
receive these services within 60 days, one of the core indicators recom
-19 A quali˜ed service organization provides services to a Part 2 program, such as data pro-cessing, bill collecting, dosage preparation, laboratory analyses, or legal, medical, accounting 
or other professional services, and has entered into a written agreement with a program under 
which that person acknowledges that in receiving, storing, processing or otherwise dealing 
with any patient records from the programs, it is fully bound by these regulations (SAMHSA, 
2010). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.258
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
mended by the committee. Most drug and alcohol treatment programs 
receive federal assistance (SAMHSA, 2010) and therefore are required to be in compliance with Part 2. PLWHA in need of substance abuse treatment, 
especially those who are low income and under- or uninsured, are apt to 
receive such treatment from federally assisted programs. 
Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments 
Several of the committee™s recommended indicators require data from 
laboratory testing results. Clinical laboratory testing performed on hu-mans in the United States is regulated by the federal Clinical Laboratory 
Improvement Amendments (CLIA). CLIA may apply to HIV and other 
tests (e.g., CD4 count, viral load, drug resistance testing, tuberculosis 
testing, and STD and hepatitis screenings) received by PLWHA that are 
processed by clinical laboratories. CLIA regulations allow clinical labo-ratories to disclose test results to individuals who are authorized under 
state law to order or receive test results and, if applicable, to the person 
responsible for using the test results and the referring laboratory, in the 
case of reference labs (Pritts et al., 2009a; 42 CFR § 493.2). In the absence 
of state guidance, CLIA allows clinical laboratories to release laboratory 
results to ﬁthe individual responsible for using the test results and the 
laboratory that initially requested the testﬂ (42 CFR § 493.1291[f]). Who 
is responsible for using the test results is not de˜ned under CLIA, however 
(Purington et al., 2010). Laboratory reporting of HIV, CD4, and viral 
load information to public health authorities is required in virtually all 
U.S. states (although, as discussed earlier, the level at which CD4 count 
and viral load reporting is required varies by state) (Personal communica-tion, Amy Lansky, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, October 
6, 2011). While the CLIA provisions suggest that test results may be 
furnished to providers who order tests, whether clinical laboratories may 
directly provide results to health care providers who did not order the test 
or to patients varies by state (Pritts et al., 2009b; Purington et al., 2010). 
The role of state laws on clinical laboratory reporting is discussed in the 
following section. 
State Health Privacy Laws 
In addition to federal laws, state statutes and regulations govern the 
disclosure of health information. In general, a state health privacy law 
that is more stringent about the privacy of individually identi˜able health 
information takes precedence over federal law (Pritts et al., 2009b). State 
health privacy laws also are the primary laws governing entities that hold 
health information but are not covered under federal privacy laws (e.g., 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 259
health care providers who do not electronically transmit health information 
in connection with health care transactions). The landscape of state health 
privacy laws is uneven because states are diverse in the rights and protec-tions that they provide. 
Because it was peripheral to the study charge, the committee did not 
conduct an independent review of current laws for all U.S. states and ter-ritories pertaining to the privacy of health information needed to estimate 
the core indicators of HIV care, behavioral health, and supportive services 
recommended in this report (although, such a review might be helpful to 
gain a better sense of the full extent to which state laws are barriers to the 
collection of necessary data). Instead, the committee consulted existing 
reviews of state health privacy laws and independently reviewed code per-taining to the privacy of health information for a few select states.
State Laws Pertaining to HIV and Other Communicable Disease Report-ing Consistent with federal noti˜able disease reporting, many states™ laws 
articulate that HIV test results, as well as results from tests for other com-municable diseases, may be reported without patient permission to public 
health authorities. Under current New York State law, for example, a 
person who obtains con˜dential HIV-related information may not disclose 
such information except to ﬁa federal, state, county or local health of˜cer 
when such disclosure is mandated by federal or state lawﬂ (New York State 
Article 27-F, HIV and AIDS Related Information). 
Similarly, under Illinois law, no person is permitted to disclose the 
identity of a person who receives HIV testing or the results of the test in a 
manner that permits the identi˜cation of the person, except to ﬁthe Depart-ment or the local health authority, in accordance with rules for reporting 
and controlling the spread of disease, or as otherwise provided by State 
lawﬂ (Illinois Title 77: Public Health, Subchapter K: Communicable Disease 
Control and Immunizations). 
Disclosure of Health Information to Other Health Care Providers for 
Treatment Purposes
 The exchange of health information among providers 
for treatment purposes is essential both for the provision of coordinated 
care for PLWHA and for accurate and complete data collection. 
A review of state law requirements for the disclosure of health informa-tion that is often considered ﬁsensitiveﬂ and provided heightened legal pro-tections showed that almost all U.S. states and territories have statutes or 
regulations that speci˜cally address disclosure of HIV-related information 
or communicable diseases including HIV (Pritts et al., 2009b). The scope 
of state laws governing disclosure of HIV-related information between care 
providers includes information related to HIV test taking and results, other 
(i.e., non-HIV testing) HIV-related information, and/or the redisclosure of 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.260
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HIV-related information (i.e., from a recipient to someone else) (Table 4-3). 
As of 2008, when the review of state health information laws was con-ducted, laws in 41 U.S. states and territories addressed information related 
to HIV testing and results. At least 19 of these states had HIV-speci˜c laws 
that apply to a wide range of HIV-related information and limit disclosure 
of all information that identi˜es, or could identify, a person as having HIV/
AIDS. Laws in 15 states and territories expressly prohibited recipients of 
HIV-related information from redisclosing the information (Pritts et al., 
2009a).20 Pritts and colleagues (2009b) note that the scope of the laws in states 
that address the disclosure of HIV-related information beyond HIV testing 
appear broad enough to possibly include valuable care information, such 
as information on antiretroviral medications. For example, the code for 
one of these states, New York, de˜nes ﬁcon˜dential HIV-related informa
-tionﬂ as: 
any information, in the possession of a person who provides one or more 
health or social services or who obtains the information pursuant to a 
release of con˜dential HIV related information, concerning whether an in-dividual has been the subject of an HIV related test, or has HIV infection, 
HIV related illness or AIDS, or information which identi˜es or reasonably 
could identify an individual as having one or more of such conditions, in-cluding information pertaining to such individual™s contacts (Part 63 HIV/
AIDS Testing, Reporting and Con˜dentiality of HIV-Related Information). 
Some states permit the disclosure of HIV-related information for treat
-ment purposes without patient permission absent any qualifying conditions. 
In many states, the disclosure of information without patient permission is 
20
 States expressly prohibiting redisclosure of HIV-related information were Arizona, 
California, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Maine, New Mexico, New York, Ohio, 
Oregon, Pennsylvania, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin. 
TABLE 4-3
 Scope of State and Territorial Statutes and Regulations 
Governing HIV-Related Information
Number of States and 
Territories
Information related to HIV test taking and results
41Other information related to HIV
19Recipient expressly prohibited from redisclosing information
a15SOURCE: Adapted from Pritts et al., 2009a.
aDoes not include statutes and regulations that, as a general rule, apply to holders of HIV-
related information. Includes only provisions that expressly restrict recipient™s redisclosure of 
information. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 261
allowed under speci˜ed circumstances, such as for continuing or emergency 
care purposes or when necessary for treatment, and is subject to various 
interpretations. As of 2008, ˜ve states, the District of Columbia, and four 
U.S. territories did not allow the disclosure of HIV-related information for 
treatment purposes without patient permission (Pritts et al., 2009b). States 
that require patient permission to disclose HIV-related information often 
require that the permission be in writing, although in some of these states, 
separate permission is not required for each release of information. A cur-rent provision of Massachusetts public health law on the disclosure of HIV 
testing results, for instance, states that no health care facility, physician, or 
health care provider shall ﬁdisclose the results of such test to any person 
other than the subject thereof without ˜rst obtaining the subject™s written 
informed consent; or identify the subject of such tests to any person with-out ˜rst obtaining the subject™s written informed consentﬂ (Massachusetts 
Laws Ch.111 70F). 
Almost every state has a statute or regulation that governs the disclo-sure of information related to substance abuse treatment. State laws gener
-ally impose con˜dentiality requirements on both substance abuse treatment 
records as well as the patient™s identity. The laws also focus primarily on 
patient information and records generated by substance abuse treatment 
programs and facilities, rather than those generated in the context of clini
-cal care. The entities covered by statutes and regulations vary across states 
(e.g., in some states the law applies to programs that operate under or 
who have a contract with the state while other states™ laws have broader 
application) (Pritts et al., 2009b). As of 2008, laws in more than 30 states 
incorporate the federal standards (Part 2) for protection of con˜dentiality 
in federally funded programs and/or state-funded programs. Pritts and col-leagues noted that in at least one state (Pennsylvania) restrictions on the 
disclosure of substance abuse treatment-related information for treatment 
reasons appear to be more restrictive than Part 2. A number of states™ laws 
specify the circumstances under which providers may disclose substance 
abuse treatment-related information without patient permission, such as 
for continuity-of-care purposes (Pritts et al., 2009b).
While there is no federal equivalent, nearly every state also has a stat-ute or regulation that governs the disclosure of information maintained by 
mental health treatment facilities that provide inpatient treatment.21 The 
scope of entities covered varies; in some states the law applies to services 
provided by state, local, or county government, while in others the law 
applies to any establishment that provides mental health treatment. Most 
states™ mental health laws allow inpatient mental health treatment facilities 
21 At the federal level, mental health treatment information is protected under the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule, which addresses all types of health care information.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.262
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
to disclose health information for treatment reasons but for very limited cir-cumstances. Some states have limitations on disclosures that may be made 
for treatment, such as restricting the type of information that can be shared 
and with whom. In several states, recipients are prohibited from further 
disclosure of the information except as authorized under the terms of the 
law. A few states™ mental health laws treat mental health information the 
same as other types of health information and generally permit disclosure 
without patient permission for treatment purposes. (The review did not 
include outpatient mental health treatment facilities.)
With respect to general clinical information, Pritts and colleagues 
(2009b) found that the HIPAA Privacy Rule sets the standard for disclo
-sure of information by hospitals and medical doctors in many states (either 
expressly or implicitly). In other states, statutory or regulatory provisions 
independently allow for disclosure of health information without patient 
permission for treatment purposes. A handful of states have laws that ei-ther limit disclosures to providers who previously provided treatment to 
the patient, or allow patients to opt out of such disclosures (Pritts et al., 
2009b). Under the Texas Health and Safety Code, for example, disclosure 
of a patient™s health care information by hospitals without the patient™s 
authorization is permitted only: 
to a health care provider who is rendering health care to the patient when 
the request for the disclosure is made . . . [or] . . . to a prospective health 
care provider for the purpose of securing the services of that health care 
provider as part of the patient™s continuum of care, as determined by the 
patient™s attending physician (Texas Health and Safety Code §
 241.153). 
Most states™ laws appear to permit pharmacists to disclose general 
clinical information for treatment reasons without patient permission. 
However, a few states indicate that the decision as to whether to provide 
such information is based on the pharmacists™ own professional judg-ment. In other states, pharmacists may disclose clinical health information 
without patient consent only to speci˜c types of care providers (Pritts et 
al., 2009b).Disclosure of Information Maintained by Clinical Laboratories State law 
controls who is authorized to receive the results of tests performed by clini-cal laboratories, as described in the discussion of CLIA above. A survey of 
state laws on the release of clinical laboratory test results by independent 
(rather than public health) laboratories showed that clinical laboratory 
licensing laws often restrict the release of test results to the person who 
ordered the test or the person authorized to use the test (Pritts et al., 
2009a). Most states do not expressly allow results to be released to other 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 263
providers.22,23 In addition, a few states have laws that limit the release of 
test results to health care providers who are licensed to practice within the 
state, presenting obstacles to the provision of care across state lines. 
Pritts and colleagues (2009a) observe that states that provide height-ened con˜dentiality for speci˜c medical conditions such as HIV/AIDS im
-pose an additional layer of complexity on the manner in which clinical 
laboratories may release test results. It is not always apparent whether 
clinical laboratories are subject to these statutes and regulations, which 
are written to cover a broad range of entities. As of 2008, laws in a hand-ful of states with HIV/AIDS con˜dentiality laws that are broad enough to 
possibly include independent clinical laboratories expressly indicate that 
HIV test results must or may be provided to the person who ordered the 
test. In about half of the states, HIV/AIDS con˜dentiality laws appear to 
permit the disclosure of HIV test results to health care providers and health 
care facilities for treatment reasons without the patient™s permission. Some 
states have a ﬁneed-to-knowﬂ standard on the release of HIV test results, 
perhaps leaving disclosure open to various interpretations (Pritts et al., 
2009a). For example, Ohio™s code on the disclosure of HIV test results to 
providers states: 
The results of an HIV test or a diagnosis of AIDS or an AIDS-related 
condition may be disclosed to a health care provider, or an authorized 
agent or employee of a health care facility or a health care provider, if the 
provider, agent, or employee has a medical need to know the information 
and is participating in the diagnosis, care, or treatment of the individual 
on whom the test was performed or who has been diagnosed as having 
AIDS or an AIDS-related condition (OhioRev.Code.Ann.3701.243 [B]). 
Privacy Issues in State Public Health Agencies
 The Public Health Data 
Standards Consortium conducted a survey of past, present, and future 
privacy-related issues faced by public health agencies in 2008. Among cur
-rent issues, public health agencies identi˜ed the need for a standardized 
way to ensure data de-identi˜cation, because statutes (federal and state) 
have different de˜nitions of de-identi˜cation. Agencies also identi˜ed the 
need for secure and reliable methods for linkages across databases. How 
to handle data breaches and identity theft in an environment where more 
22 As of 2008, about half of the states had laws that expressly allowed or required clinical 
laboratories to release test results to authorized providers who requested the test. In some 
of these states, test results may be released only to the person who ordered the test; in other 
states, the law enumerates the health care providers who are authorized to order tests and 
receive results (Pritts et al., 2009a). 
23 Where state law does not specify who is authorized to receive test results, clinical 
laboratories may send results only to persons who ordered the test or who are responsible for 
using the test (Pritts et al., 2009a).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.264
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
information is being collected electronically was another concern. Privacy 
of˜cers in public health agencies noted challenges to ensuring privacy and 
security-related training and education of the workforce as well as a need 
for clari˜cation on oversight responsibilities and enforcement. One HIV-
speci˜c issue noted by privacy of˜cers was the new federal requirement to 
report HIV/AIDS data to states with identi˜able information (name), which 
required amendments to regulations as well as assurances to PLWHA that 
their data will be protected (PHDSC, 2008). 
Participating health agencies also noted several new and emerging 
health information privacy issues. Privacy of˜cers in health agencies identi-˜ed the need to develop state public health privacy frameworks to simplify 
understanding and documentation of privacy regulations pertaining to 
the reporting of health information. The growing demand for identi˜able 
information for research purposes that is occurring as a result of increased 
availability of data in electronic form creates greater opportunity for link-ing data across systems and tracking individual-level data longitudinally. 
However, privacy of˜cers reported that these changes present more complex 
privacy issues for state agency institutional review boards and raise ethical 
challenges in balancing increased access to data for research and ensuring 
the privacy and security of health information (PHDSC, 2008). 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Reimbursement-Related Barriers to the Collection of HIV Care Data
˜˚
Reimbursement policies and practices can result in the dispersal of 
care information across multiple entities. For example, care services 
that are carved out of a health plan (e.g., behavioral health, trans-portation, dental, and pharmacy bene˜ts) may not be recorded 
in the primary insurer™s claims records. Therefore, the primary 
insurer™s records will not provide a complete medical history of 
the patient. Means to link data across reimbursement systems will 
be required to gain access to a complete medical history for many 
PLWHA.
Reporting-Related Barriers to the Collection of HIV Care Data
˜˚
Several of the core indicators recommended by the committee re-quire estimates of the total number of people diagnosed with HIV 
in the United States, as well as dates and values of CD4 count and 
viral load tests. Incomplete HIV/AIDS case reporting by provid-ers to public health authorities; variability in the levels at which 
CD4 counts and viral loads are reportable across states; and a 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 265
lack of mechanisms for health departments to share data across 
jurisdictions may in˚uence the comprehensiveness and accuracy of 
reported data. Staf˜ng, administrative, and budgetary constraints 
are other potential barriers to reporting for health departments and other providers of HIV care and supportive services. 
˜˚
Current national estimates of the number of people who are tested 
for HIV at anonymous sites were not available at the time of this 
report. Most states do offer anonymous HIV testing, however. 
Although anonymous testing should be acknowledged as a minor 
barrier to the completeness of HIV surveillance data, its bene˜ts 
may outweigh this drawback since the availability of anonymous 
testing may promote testing among individuals who are concerned 
about potential breaches in the con˜dentiality of their testing 
information. 
Reducing Data Reporting Burden˜˚
Grantees of federally funded HIV/AIDS programs are a vital source of HIV care and supportive services data, but are currently over-burdened by the many reporting obligations they are required to 
ful˜ll as a condition of program funding. The reporting require-ments for core and supplemental HIV/AIDS programs administered 
by health departments are often project speci˜c, even across related programming (e.g., HIV prevention and HIV/AIDS care), requiring 
staff to modify their reporting practices for each grant. Reporting is 
further complicated by the fact that programs operate on different 
grant cycles so that reports for related programs are due a different 
times during the year. According to the Presidential Advisory Coun
-cil on HIV/AIDS, the current reporting requirements for grantees 
of federally funded HIV/AIDS programs have not resulted in a 
set of metrics by which to thoroughly monitor the HIV epidemic 
or to evaluate federal HIV/AIDS programs. A smaller number of 
metrics that are aligned with NHAS goals could be used across 
federal agencies to monitor progress in managing the epidemic. As 
it was preparing this report, the committee learned that there is an 
effort under way by HHS to identify a set of HIV-related metrics 
to be used across funding agencies and reduce reporting burden for 
program grantees. The committee supports this current effort and 
recommends that it be maintained so that data needs can be peri
-odically reprioritized based on changes in the HIV epidemic and to 
facilitate continued minimization of grantee reporting burden. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.266
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
  
Recommendation 4-1. The Department of Health and Human 
Services should maintain and institutionalize the existing effort to 
streamline data collection and reduce reporting requirements for 
federally funded HIV/AIDS programs. This will allow for periodic 
reprioritization of data needs based on changes in the HIV epi-demic that occur over time, and ensure the continuous availability 
of data to effectively monitor HIV care while minimizing reporting 
requirements for grantees. The data reprioritization should involve 
health departments, HIV provider organizations, and federal agen-cies that are major funders of HIV/AIDS programs, including HHS, 
the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Department of Hous
-ing and Urban Development. 
˜˚
Engagement of health departments, HIV care clinicians, and other 
stakeholders in the planning of an HIV/AIDS data collection effort 
can help to identify what data are most important to collect (since 
these groups are often users of the collected data) as well as pro-cesses for collecting those data. Involvement of stakeholders may 
foster greater investment in data collection and reduce reporting 
burden since the data collected will be more closely aligned with 
stakeholders™ own data needs. 
Other Policy Barriers to the Collection of HIV Care Data
˜˚
The various sources of care and care coverage in the United States 
each have their own eligibility requirements. As a result, many 
PLWHA shift in and out of care and change providers over the 
course of their illness, which creates opportunities for gaps or 
losses of patient data and impedes longitudinal tracking of care. 
Improved exchange of data across systems maintained by insurers 
and providers would help to address this problem, as discussed in 
Chapter 5. 
˜˚
Several provisions of the ACA are being implemented differently by 
states. Resulting differences across states in access to health insur-ance and health care will have to be taken into consideration for 
purposes of monitoring the improvements HIV care resulting from 
the ACA and more generally. 
˜˚
Providers of HIV care and supportive services contend with numer-ous federal laws and state statutes and regulations on the proper 
use and disclosure of patient information. The inconsistent nature 
of these protections, which often leave the decision of whether or 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 267
not to disclose requested patient information open to various inter
-pretations, may result in discrepancies in data sharing and report-ing across states and providers. Such discrepancies may in˚uence 
the availability and quality of data needed to estimate indicators 
of HIV care and supportive services. 
  
Recommendation 4-2. The Department of Health and Human Ser-vices should issue guidance to the HIV care community to clarify 
what is permissible patient information to share given federal and 
state privacy laws. 
REFERENCESAgee, B. S., E. Funkhouser, J. M. Roseman, H. Fawal, S. D. Holmberg, and S. H. Vermund. 
2006. Migration patterns following HIV diagnosis among adults residing in the non-urban deep south. 
AIDS Care
 18(Suppl 1):S51-S58. 
Altice, F. L., A. Kamarulzaman, V. V. Soriano, M. Schechter, and G. H. Friedland. 2010. 
Treatment of medical, psychiatric, and substance-use comorbidities in people infected 
with HIV who use drugs. 
The Lancet 376:367-387. 
AMA (American Medical Association). 2010. The Impact of Medicare Physician Payment on 
Seniors™ Access to Care
 http://media.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/outlook/documents/
medicare_survey_results_061810.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012).
Armstrong, D., E. Kline-Rogers, S. M. Jani, E. B. Goldman, J. Fang, D. Mukherjee, B. K. 
Nalla-Mothu, and K. A. Eagle. 2005. Potential impact of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on 
data collection in a registry of patients with acute coronary syndrome. Archives of In-ternal Medicine 23:1125-1129. 
Bachman, J., H. A. Pincus, J. K. Houtsinger, and J. Unutzer. 2006. Funding mechanisms for 
depression care management: Opportunities and challenges. General Hospital Psychiatry 28: 278-288.Berk, M. L., C. L. Schur, J. L. Dunbar, S. Bozzette, and M. Shapiro. 2003. Short report: Migra
-tion patterns among persons living with HIV. 
Social Science & Medicine
 57:1091-1097. 
Bindman, A. B., D. Osmond, F. M. Hecht, J. S. Lehman, K. Vranizan, D. Keane, and A. 
Reingold. 1998. Multistate evaluation of anonymous HIV testing and access to medical 
care. Journal of the American Medical Association
 280(16):1416-1420.Buehler, J. W., R. L. Berkelman, and J. K. Stehr-Green. 1992. The completeness of AIDS sur
-veillance. Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syndromes
 5:257-264.CareActTarget. 2011. 
ADAP Data Report Proposed Client-Level and Grantee-Level Data 
Variables
. Grantee Worksheets. http://www.careacttarget.org/library/media/ADAP/
ADAPDataReportProposedCLDVarWorksheet.pdf and http://www.careacttarget.org/
 library/media/ADAP/ADAPDataReportProposedGLDVarWorksheet.pdf (accessed March 
7, 2012). 
Carey, R. 2010. 
Health Insurance Exchanges: Key Issues for State Implementation. http://www.rwjf.org/˜les/research/70388.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 1999. Guidelines for national human 
immunode˜ciency virus case surveillance, including monitoring for human immunode˜-ciency virus infection and acquired immunode˜ciency syndrome. Morbidity and Mortal
-ity Weekly Report
 48(RR13):1-28.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.268
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
CDC. 2003. HIPAA Privacy Rule and public health. Guidance from the CDC and the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 52:1-12. 
CDC. 2010. HIV Infection Reporting. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/topics/surveillance/reporting.
htm (accessed March 7, 2012).
CDC. 2011a. Data Security and Con˜dentiality Guidelines for HIV, Viral Hepatitis, Sexually 
Transmitted Disease, and Tuberculosis Programs: Standards to Facilitate Sharing and 
Use of Surveillance Data for Public Health Action. http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/resources/
guidelines/security_con˜dentiality_hiv.htm?source=govdelivery (accessed March 7, 2012).
CDC. 2011b. HIV Surveillance Report. Diagnoses of HIV Infection and AIDS in the United 
States and Dependent Areas, 2009. 
http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/surveillance/resources/
reports/2009report/pdf/2009SurveillanceReport.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services). 2012. Overview: EHR Incentive Program. https://www.cms.gov/EHRIncentivePrograms/ (accessed March 7, 2012).
Crystal, S., A. Akincigil, S. Bilder, and J. T. Walkup. 2007. Studying prescription drug use 
and outcomes with Medicaid claims data: Strengths, limitations, and strategies. Medical 
Care 45(10 Suppl):S58-S65.CSTE (Council of State and Territorial Epidemiologists). 2009. 
National Assessment of 
HIV/AIDS Surveillance Capacity. June. http://www.cste.org/dnn/Portals/0/HIV%20
 Capacity%20Assessment%20Report.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
CSTE. 2011. State Reportable Conditions Assessment. http://www.cste.org/dnn/Programs
 andActivities/PublicHealthInformatics/StateReportableConditionsQueryResults/tabid/261/Default.aspx (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Cunningham, P. J., and A. S. O™Malley. 2009. Do reimbursement delays discourage Medicaid 
participation by physicians? Health Affairs 28(1):w17-w28.Doyle, T. J., M. K. Glynn, and S. L. Groseclose. 2002. Completeness of noti˜able infectious 
disease reporting in the United States: An analytical literature review. 
American Journal 
of Epidemiology 155:866-874.Fenner, J. J. 2009. 
Mum™s the Word: Mental Health and Substance Abuse Treatment Informa
-tion and Other Specialized Medical Records Issues. http://lldlaw.com/LinkClick.aspx?
 ˜leticket=NWJe5Zv78bE%3d&tabid=81 (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Fiellin, D. A. 2004. Substance use disorders in HIV-infected patients: Impact and new treat
-ment strategies. 
Topics in HIV Medicine
 12(3):77-82.Fleming, N. S., S. D. Culler, R. McCorkle, E. R. Becker, and D. J. Ballard. 2011. The ˜nancial 
and non˜nancial costs of implementing electronic health records in primary care prac-tices. Health Affairs 30(3):481-489.Gostin, L. O. 2002. Surveillance and Public Health Research: Privacy and the ﬁRight to 
Know.ﬂ In: 
Public Health Law and Ethics: A Reader. Edited by L.O. Gostin. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press. Pp. 295.
Gostin, L. O., and S. Nass. 2009. Reforming the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Safeguarding privacy and 
promoting research. Journal of the American Medical Association
 301(13):1373-1375.Greenberg, A. E., R. Hindin, A. G. Nicholas, E. L. Bryan, and P. A. Thomas. 1993. The com
-pleteness of AIDS case reporting in New York City. 
Journal of the American Medical 
Association 269:2995-3001.Hall, H. I., R. Song, J. E. Gerstle, and L. M. Lee. 2006. Assessing the completeness of reporting 
of human immunode˜ciency virus diagnoses in 2002-2003: Capture-recapture methods. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 164:391-397. 
Hasnian-Wynia, R., K. VanDyke, M. Youdelman, C. Krautkramer, S. L. Ivey, R. Gilchick, E. 
Kaleba, and M. K. Wynia. 2010. Barriers to collecting patient race, ethnicity, and primary 
language data in physician practices: An exploratory study. 
Journal of the National Medi-cal Association 102(9):769-775.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 269
HHS (Department of Health and Human Services). 2003. 
Summary of the HIPAA Privacy 
Rule. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/privacysummary.
pdf (accessed March 7, 2012).HHS. 2008. The National Alliance for Health Information Technology Report to the Of
-˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology on De˜ning Key 
Health Information Technology Terms
. http://cdm266901.cdmhost.com/cdm/singleitem/ collection/p266901coll4/id/2086/rec/8 (accessed March 7, 2012). 
HHS. 2010. Workshop on the HIPAA Privacy Rule™s De-Identi˜cation Standard
 http://www.hhs.
gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/coveredentities/De-identi˜cation/deidenti˜cation workshop2010.html (accessed May 29, 2012)
HHS. 2011. Review Reporting and Recordkeeping Requirements to Reduce Burdens (May 
31). http://www.hhs.gov/open/recordsandreports/execorders/13563/draft/candidates/5a2-
review.html (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Hicks, J. 2003. The potential of claims data to support the measurement of health care quality. 
http://www.rand.org/pubs/rgs_dissertations/RGSD171.html (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Hodge, J. G., T. Kaufman, and C. Jaques. 2011. 
Legal Issues Concerning Identi˜able Health 
Data Sharing Between State and Local Public Heath Authorities and Tribal Epidemiology 
Centers in Selected U.S. Jurisdictions. http://www.cste.org/webpdfs/LegalIssuesConcerning
 IdentifiableHealthDataSharingBetweenStateLocalPublicHealthAuthoritiesandTribal
 EpidemiologyCentersinSelectedUSJurisdictionsFINAL.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Houser, S. H., H. W. Houser, and R. M. Shewchuk. 2007. Assessing the effects of the HIPAA 
Privacy Rule on release of patient information by healthcare facilities. 
Perspectives in 
Health Information Management
 4(1):1-11.HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2010. Using Data to Measure Public 
Health Performance: A Guide for Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program Grantees.
 http://hab.hrsa.gov/manageyourgrant/˜les/datatomeasure2010.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012).
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2009. Beyond the HIPAA Privacy Rule: Enhancing Privacy, 
Improving Health Through Research. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Jara, M. M., K. M. Gallagher, and S. Schieman. 2000. Estimation of completeness of AIDS 
case reporting in Massachusetts. 
Epidemiology 11:209-213.Johnston, D., E. Pan, J. Walker, D.W. Bates, and B. Middleton. 2003. 
The Value of Comput
-erized Provider Order Entry in Ambulatory Settings. Center for Information Technol
-ogy Leadership
. www.partners.org/cird/pdfs/CITL_ACPOE_Full.pdf (accessed March 
7, 2012). 
Joines, W., J. Menges, and J. Tracey. 2007. Programmatic Assessment of Carve-In and Carve 
Out Arrangements for Medicaid Prescription Drugs. The Lewin Group. http://www.
lewin.com/~/media/lewin/site_sections/publications/assessmentcarveincarveout.pdf (ac-cessed March 7, 2012). 
Kates, J. 2011. 
Medicaid and HIV: A National Analysis.
 October. Kaiser Family Foundation 
publication 8218. http://www.kff.org/hivaids/upload/8218.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012).
Kautz, C., D. Mauch, and S. A. Smith. 2008. Reimbursement of Mental Health Services in 
Primary Care Settings (HHS Pub. No. SMA-08-4324). Rockville, MD: Center for Mental Health Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.Kempf, M. C., J. McLeod, A. K. Boehme, M. W. Walcott, L. Wright, P. Seal, W. E. Norton, 
J. E. Schumacher, M. Mugavero, and L. Moneyham. 2010. A qualitative study of the 
barriers and facilitators to retention-in-care among HIV-positive women in the rural 
southeastern United States: Implications for targeted interventions. AIDS Patient Care 
and STDS 24(8):515-520.KFF (Kaiser Family Foundation). 2004. Financing HIV/AIDS care: A quilt with many holes. 
HIV/AIDS Policy Issue Brief. Publication 1607-02.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.270
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
KFF. 2010
. Overview: Assessing the Patchwork of Care and Service for People Living with 
HIV/AIDS in the U.S. PowerPoint presentation by Jennifer Kates at Committee on HIV 
Screening and Access to Care Workshop 2: Facilitators and Barriers to HIV/AIDS Care, 
IOM, June 21, Washington, DC. 
KFF. 2011. HIV testing in the United States. 
HIV/AIDS Policy Fact Sheet. Publication 6094-11.Lardiere, M. R. 2009. A National Survey of Health Information Technology Adoption in 
Federally Quali˜ed Health Centers. National Association of Community Health Cen-ters. http://www.nachc.org/client/NACHC%202008%20HIT%20Survey%20Analysis_
 FINAL_6_9_091.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Lazarus, R., M. Klompas, F. X. Campion, S. J.N. McNabb, X. Hou, J. Daniel, G. Haney, A. 
Demaria, L. Lenert, and R. Platt. 2009. Electronic support for public health: Validated 
case ˜nding and reporting for noti˜able diseases using electronic medical data. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association
 16:18-24. 
Linet, M. 2003. American College of Epidemiology (ACE) Testimony on Impact of HIPAA on 
Research. http://www.ncvhs.hhs.gov/031120p3.htm (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Markovitz, A. R., C. S. Thibault, P. W. Brandauer, and S. E. Buskin. 2011. Primary antiretrovi
-ral drug resistance in newly human immunode˜ciency virus-diagnosed individuals tested 
anonymously and con˜dentially. 
Microbial Drug Resistance 17(2):283-289. 
NASTAD (National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors). 2007. 
The Role of State 
Health Departments in Administering Federal HIV/AIDS Programs. http://www.nastad.
org/Docs/highlight/200759_Role%20of%20States.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
NASTAD. 2010. 
2010 State General Revenue Cuts in HIV/AIDS, STD and Viral Hepatitis 
Programs. http://www.nastad.org/Docs/Public/InFocus/2011223_State%20Budget%20
Cuts%202010%20FINAL.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
NASTAD. 2011. 
U.S. State Health Department HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, and STD Federal 
Program Reporting Requirements. http://www.nastad.org/Docs/034156_Federal%20
 Reporting%20Requirements%20-%20June%202011%20update.pdf (accessed March 
7, 2012).
NASTAD. 2012. Draft recommendations for streamlining reporting requirements. Submission 
to committee. February 16.
Ness, R. B. 2007. In˚uence of the HIPAA Privacy Rule on research. 
Journal of the American 
Medical Association
 298(18):2164-2170.OCR (Of˜ce of Civil Rights). 2003. Health Information Privacy. http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/
privacy/hipaa/understanding/special/research/index.html (accessed March 7, 2012).
Overhage, J. M., S. Grannis, and C. J. McDonald. 2008. A comparison of the completeness 
and timeliness of automated electronic reporting and spontaneous reporting of noti˜able 
conditions. American Journal of Public Health 98(2):344-350. 
PACHA (Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS). 2011. Letter to President and HHS 
Secretary Kathleen Sebelius. August 8. http://aids.gov/federal-resources/policies/pacha/
meetings/august-2011/august-2011-pacha-letter.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012).
PCAST (President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology). 2010. 
Report to the 
President: Realizing the Full Potential of Health Information Technology to Improve 
Healthcare: The Path Forward
. Washington, DC. December. 
PHDSC (Public Health Data Standards Consortium). 2008. Health Information Privacy 
in State Public Health Agencies. A Review of Past, Present, and Future Privacy-
Related Issues and Priorities Affecting Public Health Practice.
 http://www.phdsc.org/
privacy_security/pdfs/PHDSC%20Best%20Priv%20Pract%20Proj%20-%20FULL%20 REPORT%20-%20FINAL%20-%201-15-09.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012).
Pritts, J., S. Lewis, R. Jacobson, K. Lucia, and K. Kayne. 2009a. Privacy and Security Solu-tions for Interoperable Health Exchange: Releasing Clinical Laboratory Test Results: 
Report on Survey of State Laws. http://library.ahima.org/xpedio/groups/public/docu
-ments/government/bok1_046379.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BARRIERS TO THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
 271
Pritts, J., S. Lewis, R. Jacobson, K. Lucia, and K. Kayne. 2009b. Privacy and Security Solu-tions for Interoperable Health Exchange: Report on State Law Requirements for Patient 
Permission to Disclose Health Information. 
Purington, K., S. T. Alfreds, J. Pritts, and J. Buxbaum. 2010. 
Electronic Release of Clinical 
Laboratory Results: A Review of State and Federal Policy.
 http://www.nashp.org/sites/
default/˜les/ElectronicLabResultsExchangePolicy.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Rao, S. R., C. M. DesRoches, K. Donelan, E. G. Campbell, P. D. Miralles, and A. K. Jha. 2011. 
Electronic health records in small physician practices: Availability, use, and perceived 
bene˜ts. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
 18:271-275.Reardon, J., and E. Davidson. 2007. An organizational learning perspective on the assimila
-tion of electronic health records among small physician practices. European Journal of 
Information Systems 16:681-694. 
Rosenbaum, S., S. Abramson, and P. MacTaggart. 2009. Health information law in the context 
of minors. Pediatrics 123 (Suppl 2):S116-S121. 
Rosenblum, L., J. W. Buehler, M. W. Morgan, S. Costa, J. Hidalgo, R. Holmes, L. Lieb, A. 
Shields, and B. M. Whyte. 1992. The completeness of AIDS case reporting, 1988: A multi-site collaborative surveillance project. American Journal of Public Health 
82:1495-1499.SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration). 2004. 
Con˜denti-ality of Patient Records for Alcohol and Other Drug Treatment. 
Technical Assistance 
Publication (TAP) Series 13. http://kap.samhsa.gov/products/manuals/taps/13b.htm (ac
-cessed March 7, 2012).SAMHSA. 2010. Frequently Asked Questions: Applying the Substance Abuse Con˜dentiality 
Regulations to Health Information Exchange. http://www.samhsa.gov/healthPrivacy/
docs/EHR-FAQs.pdf (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Schwarcz, S. K., L. C. Hsu, M. K. Parisi, and M. H. Katz. 1999. The impact of the 1999 
AIDS case de˜nition on the completeness and timeliness of AIDS surveillance. AIDS 13(9):1109-1114.Sittig, D. F., and H. Singh. 2011. Legal, ethical, and ˜nancial dilemmas in electronic health 
record adoption and use. 
Pediatrics 127(4): e1042-e1047.Stoto, M. A. 2008. Public health surveillance in the twenty-˜rst century: Achieving population 
health goals while protecting individuals™ privacy and con˜dentiality. 
The Georgetown 
Law Journal 96:703-719.Turnberg, W., W. Daniell, and J. Duchin. 2010. Noti˜able infectious disease reporting aware
-ness among physicians and registered nurses in primary care and emergency department 
practices. American Journal of Infection Control 38(5):410-412.Valdiserri, R., and A. Forsyth. 2011. 
DHHS/OHAP Consultation on HIV/AIDS Core In-dicators, Data Streamlining, and Federal Reporting Requirements. Washington, DC, 
September 19.Whetten-Goldstein, K., T. Q. Nguyen, and J. Sugarman. 2001. So much for keeping secrets: 
The importance of considering patients™ perspectives on maintaining con˜dentiality. 
AIDS Care
 13(4):457-465. 
Wilson, A. 2009. Missing the mark: The public health exception to the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
and its impact on surveillance activity. 
Houston Journal of Health Law and Policy 131-156.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2735The Role of Health Information 
Technology and Data System Integration 
in the Collection of HIV Care Data
This chapter describes potential improvements in the collection of 
HIV care and supportive services data from health information technology 
(health IT) and data system integration. Speci˜cally, the chapter addresses 
how health IT can be utilized and con˜gured to improve the collection of 
comprehensive data describing the care experiences of people living with 
HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) (statement of task question 7), and discusses models 
and best practices in data system integration to make existing data systems 
and core indicators interoperable (statement of task question 6). The chap-ter ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations on these 
aspects of its charge. 
UTILIZATION AND CONFIGURATION OF HEALTH 
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE 
THE COLLECTION OF HIV CARE DATA
Health IT generally refers to the various computer technologies that are used by providers, consumers, payers, insurers, and other groups to manage 
and transmit health information (PCAST, 2010). Some of the more com
-mon health IT applications are computerized physician order entry (CPOE), 
clinical decision support (CDS), and electronic prescribing (Table 5-1). 
These applications are often housed in an electronic medical record (EMR), 
an electronic record of a patient™s health information created, managed, and 
consulted by providers, or an electronic health record (EHR) that generally 
has the same features as an EMR but conforms to nationally recognized 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
interoperability1 standards and can be used by providers across more than 
one health care organization (HHS, 2008). Personal health records (PHRs) 
are electronic records of a patient™s health-related information that are con
-trolled by the patient and can be shared with others, such as providers and 
family members. PHRs are usually web based so that patients may access 
1 In health care, interoperability refers to the ability of different IT systems and software 
applications to communicate; to exchange data accurately, effectively, and consistently; and 
to use the information that has been exchanged (HHS, 2008). 
TABLE 5-1
 Descriptions of Health IT Products and Functionalities
Product or 
FunctionalityDescriptionElectronic health record 
(EHR)An electronic record of health-related information on 
an individual that conforms to nationally recognized 
interoperability standards and that can be created, managed, and 
consulted by authorized clinicians and staff across more than 
one health care organizationElectronic medical 
record (EMR)An electronic record of health-related information on an 
individual that can be created, gathered, managed, and consulted 
by authorized clinicians and staff within one health care 
organizationPersonal health record 
(PHR)An electronic record of an individual™s health-related information 
that is managed, shared, and controlled by the individual. May 
conform to nationally recognized interoperability standards. 
Health-related information may be drawn from multiple sources 
(e.g., providers, insurance claims, pharmacy data). 
e-prescribing (eRx)Enables a physician to transmit a prescription electronically to 
the patient™s pharmacy. Also enables physicians and pharmacies 
to obtain information about the patient™s eligibility and 
medication history from drug plans. May come with alerts for 
drug-drug, drug-allergy, and drug-disease interactions
Computerized physician 
order entry (CPOE)A computer-based system of ordering medications and other 
tests. Physicians enter orders into a computer system that can 
have varying levels of sophistication. Basic CPOE ensures 
standardized, legible, complete orders and thus primarily reduces 
errors due to poor handwriting and ambiguous abbreviationsClinical decision 
support (CDS)Any system designed to improve clinical decision making 
related to diagnostic or therapeutic processes of care. Addresses 
activities ranging from the selection of drugs or diagnostic tests 
to detailed support for optimal drug dosing and support for 
resolving diagnostic dilemmas. Often incorporated as part of 
CPOE or EMR-EHR systems
SOURCE: Adapted from Detmer et al., 2008; HHS, 2008; Moiduddin and Moore, 2008.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 275
their information remotely. Some PHRs can be populated with information 
from a variety of sources (e.g., provider EHRs, insurance claims, pharmacy 
data) to provide a more complete picture of the patient™s health-related 
information (Table 5-1) (CMS, 2012a; Detmer et al., 2008; HHS, 2008). 
The full bene˜ts of health IT cannot be realized without an infrastruc-ture that supports the secure exchange of health information beyond an 
individual provider or health care delivery system. Health information 
exchange (HIE) enables the electronic sharing of patient-level health infor-mation across organizations and health IT products (principally EHRs and 
PHRs) using nationally recognized interoperability standards (HHS, 2008). 
HIE is a solution to barriers to the exchange of health information across 
organizations posed by the fragmented health care system (HHS, 2008; Vest 
et al., 2011). HIE gives providers access to more accurate and complete 
information on their patients and, thus, may help to improve the safety 
and quality of care (CBO, 2008; Vest et al., 2011; Wright et al., 2010). A 
number of regional health information organizations (RHIOs) across the 
country have developed networks to enable secure HIE among local clini-cians, provider organizations, pharmacies, laboratories, health departments 
and other entities (Shapiro et al., 2011). 
When used appropriately, health IT has the potential to generate sav
-ings. For example, health IT could result in savings by lowering the costs 
of providing health care, eliminating unnecessary services (e.g., duplicate 
tests), and improving care quality in a way that may reduce costs. Savings 
may be internal in the form of reductions in the costs of providing care for 
health care providers directly. Savings also can be external, meaning the 
savings accrue beyond individual providers to other providers, patients, 
health insurance plans, or othersŠfor example, from increased ability of 
participants to engage in HIE (CBO, 2008). As discussed below, compared 
with large integrated health organizations, small provider groups may be 
less likely to internalize the ˜nancial bene˜ts from health IT because there 
is less incentive for improvements in administrative ef˜ciency and because 
costs are distributed across a smaller number of providers and patients 
(PCAST, 2010). 
Uses of Health Information Technology for the Collection 
of HIV Care Data and Management of HIV Care 
Clinical data needed to monitor indicators of HIV care are often con-tained in EHRs or EMRs. As discussed in Chapter 2, clinical data include 
information on individuals™ health status, ˜ndings from examinations, and 
medical history information. EHRs and EMRs also document patient de-mographic information such as sex, date of birth, insurance status, and race and ethnicity. Stand-alone and EHR- or EMR-embedded CPOE applica
-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.276
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
tions contain data on pharmacy, laboratory, and other types of provider 
orders. E-prescribing features also provide prescription drug information. 
Because the clinical data are maintained in an electronic format, they can 
be more easily retrieved and transmitted. Some IT systems can be used to 
compile and summarize information from patients™ medical records to iden-tify trends in a speci˜c population or to track compliance with clinical stan-dards or other quality measures. They also may be used to generate reports 
such as to identify no-show rates for HIV patients or to monitor trends in 
laboratory test results. Such features can help HIV care providers comply 
with mandated reporting requirements (HRSA, 2011). Integrated EHRs can 
organize patient information across providers (within or across organiza
-tions) and facilitate faster distribution of data so that providers can obtain 
up-to-date views of a patient™s health information (PCAST, 2010). This 
is important for PLWHA who often receive care and supportive services 
across several providers and organizations over the course of their illness. 
Another bene˜t of EHRs and EMRs in HIV/AIDS care is supporting 
research. EHRs and EMRs have become a rich source of data for both ret-rospective and prospective cohort studies, which can improve understand-ing of PLWHA and their health care. As discussed in Chapter 3, the CFAR 
Network of Integrated Clinical Systems (CNICS) is an EMR-based research 
network containing data collected at point of care on more than 23,000 
PLWHA. Research using CNICS data has helped to inform several impor
-tant questions in HIV care, including, but not limited to, factors associated 
with linkage to and retention in care and the comparative effectiveness of 
different HIV treatment strategies (Kitahata, presentation to IOM, April 
28, 2011; UAB, 2012). 
Preliminary research from the Louisiana Public Health Information 
Exchange (LaPHIE)Ša partnership between the Louisiana Of˜ce of Public 
Health and the Louisiana State University Health Care Services Division 
(LSU HCSD)Šshows that the electronic exchange of EMR and surveillance 
data can be used to identify PLWHA who have not been linked to care or 
who have fallen out of care (Herwehe et al., 2012). Using a secure bidirec-tional HIE linking state public health surveillance data with medical record 
data, LaPHIE sends alerts to LSU HCSD care providers when individuals 
who have not received CD4 or viral load monitoring for more than a year 
present to care for non-HIV-related conditions (Herwehe et al., 2012). 
Over a 2-year period, LaPHIE issued alerts for 488 patient encounters and 
identi˜ed, matched, and exchanged messages on 345 unduplicated PLWHA 
who were in need of treatment. The majority of the individuals identi˜ed 
followed up with care within the study period; 82 percent received one or 
more CD4 counts within the 18-month follow-up period, and 62 percent 
had at least one HIV specialty visit. Both providers and patients were ac-cepting of the exchange. A patient acceptability evaluation showed that 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 277
patients preferred the sharing of their information to be limited to public 
health authorities and health care providers when there is bene˜t to the 
patient and/or the community. The evaluation also showed that the health 
care delivery setting is the preferred environment for communication about 
the need for follow-up, as opposed to community-based outreach methods 
traditionally used by public health (Herwehe et al., 2012). 
One limitation of EHRs and EMRs is that, like hard copy medical 
charts, the completeness and quality of data they contain, and therefore 
their usefulness for research and patient monitoring, depend on the input
-ting of data by users. Some research has shown data to be frequently miss-ing from EMRs (Lau et al., 2011). Incomplete and inaccurate information 
can also diminish the potential for improvements in patient safety and qual-ity resulting from health IT. For example, drug alerts and CDS functions 
will be of little use if the relevant data in the EMR or EHR to activate such 
functions are not complete and accurate. 
A data-related bene˜t of PHRs is that providers may use them to docu-ment and verify a patient™s health-related information (e.g., in the EHR), 
thus improving data quality (Detmer et al., 2008). PHRs may include clini-cal data populated from a provider EHR, and some PHRs allow patients 
to input information such as demographic and emergency contact infor-mation, diagnoses, drug allergies, immunizations, and other information. 
Some PHRs also include features that allow patients to schedule and receive reminders about their appointments, re˜ll prescriptions, research medical 
conditions, and communicate with their providers. Like EHRs, many PHRs 
conform to nationally recognized interoperability standards and therefore 
can be used in HIE (HHS, 2008). 
Because PHRs allow patients to view and manage their own health 
information, they are thought to facilitate better patient engagement in care 
(CHF, 2010; HHS, 2008; Kahn et al., 2010; McInnes et al., 2011).
2 PHRs 
may be especially useful to individuals with chronic conditions such as HIV 
as well as for those with comorbidities because they help patients manage 
information across multiple care providers, appointments, and medications 
(HHS, 2009; Kahn et al., 2009, 2010). A recent study evaluated PHR us-age patterns of 211 patients attending San Francisco General Hospital™s 
HIV/AIDS clinic (Kahn et al., 2010). Data retrieved from the PHR website 
log showed that participants commonly accessed their PHRs to view CD4 
count and viral load information (891 visits by 110 persons, and 542 visits 
by 104 persons, respectively) as well as of˜ce visits, medical conditions, 
2 Adherence research has shown that patients, including HIV/AIDS patients, who perceive 
themselves to be more highly engaged with their health care providers have better adher
-ence to medication, provider advice, and appointments (Bakken et al., 2000; Osterberg and 
Blaschke, 2005).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.278
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
and medications. Of 51 patients who completed a usage survey, 80 percent 
agreed that the PHR helped them to manage their medical conditions (Kahn 
et al., 2010). Results from a national consumer survey on health IT showed 
that PHR users who had less education and lower incomes, and those with 
chronic illnesses, derive the most value from PHRs (CHF, 2010). Web-based 
PHRs may aid in continuity of care for PLWHA as they change providers 
or relocate. 
Electronic laboratory reporting (ELR), the electronic reporting of com-municable diseases and laboratory test results to public health authorities 
for surveillance, is another health IT tool that is relevant to the collection 
of HIV-related data. As discussed in Chapter 2 of this report, several of 
the data elements (e.g., HIV/AIDS cases, CD4 counts and viral load in-formation) needed to estimate the committee™s core indicators come from 
surveillance data. Evidence suggests that methods for electronic reporting 
of communicable disease information facilitates more accurate and com
-plete reporting of data to public health authorities (CDC, 2011; Nguyen et 
al., 2007; Overhage et al., 2008), while provider-initiated, manual systems 
often provide delayed and inaccurate data with many omissions and errors 
(Birkhead et al., 1991; Jajosky and Groseclose, 2004; Ward et al., 2005).
3 A Special Projects of National Signi˜cance (SPNS)-sponsored project 
identi˜ed key considerations in the adoption of health IT for HIV care 
providers based on the experiences of 6 HIV care sites conducting com
-prehensive evaluations of health IT interventions between 2002 and 2005 
(Magnus et al., 2007). The project encompassed care delivered to 24,232 
clients by 700 providers. Each site was implementing a different type of 
health IT ranging from a web-based information tool for HIV care provid-ers to an application to allow HIV patients to complete a questionnaire on 
medication adherence, depression, and substance abuse via touch screen 
computers prior to meeting with their health care provider. The investiga
-tors identi˜ed 6 key considerations for IT adoption across the SPNS sites. 
These were: programmatic capacity (e.g., assessment of computer resources 
and existing IT infrastructure); elucidating stakeholder expectations of the 
value added by IT; participation (the involvement of all key stakeholders in 
the development of the IT plan); organization models (whether the IT effort 
was pioneered by leadership, support staff, or was self-contained within a 
speci˜c HIV clinic); end-user types (assessment of the various ways that end 
users will interact with the IT system); and consideration of the challenges 
to adoption under different care models (see Box 5-1). The project also 
showed that it is essential to have an evaluation process in place to monitor 
3 Although there has been substantial progress in the use of electronic reporting, many 
surveillance mechanisms still depend on manual data entry and submission (CDC, 2005; 
Lazarus et al., 2009; Lober et al., 2003). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 279
BOX 5-1
 Key Considerations for the Adoption of 
Health IT by HIV Care Providers
Programmatic Capacity
Prior to implementation of new health IT strategies, it is important to assess 
computer resources and explore existing IT infrastructure to see whether new 
capabilities can be added in to it, rather than implementing a completely new sys
-tem. The IT intervention should be developed with future growth and sustainability 
in mind. Selection of well supported software that protects the con˜dentiality of 
patient data, is capable of addressing current and future compatibility standards, 
and has ongoing technical assistance is also important. 
ExpectationsIt is important to determine whether stakeholder expectations of the value 
added by IT are realistic and address system needs, or barriers to IT utilization 
may result. Understanding the reasons for suboptimal care, and the ability of IT to 
improve them prior to implementation of the IT intervention, helps to ensure that 
the IT will address system needs. 
Participation
All key stakeholders, including providers, end users, ancillary staff, clients, 
patients, and other community members, should be consulted and involved in the 
IT creation and implementation processes.
Organizational Models 
Grantees noted that IT interventions were implemented in one of three 








the intervention was self-suf˜cient in a preexisting context of care, not requiring 
extensive organizational support. 
End-User Types




-fore, during the preadoption phase, it is important that each potential user be 
consulted and their usage assessed to understand the relative value of the system 
for them and how they expect to use it. This information can help to identify the 
scope of the IT or, if the assessment determines that the proposed IT is not an 
ideal solution, determine that other changes may be necessary.
continued
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.280
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
IT use and its impact on patient outcomes. Feedback from the evaluation 
can improve IT implementation and provide data that may assist with sus-tainability (Magnus et al., 2007). 
Challenges to the Adoption of Health Information Technology
Despite its potential bene˜ts, evidence suggests that adoption of health 
IT is occurring at a slow pace in settings where PLWHA receive care, such 
as physician of˜ces, hospitals, and community health centers (CHCs). Data 
from a nationally representative survey of of˜ce-based physicians show that 25 percent of physician of˜ces were using a basic EHR or EMR system in 
2010, up from 22 percent in 2009. Ten percent of physicians were using a 
fully functional system in 2010, compared with 7 percent in 2009 (Hsiao 
et al., 2010).4 A report on progress in EHR adoption by acute care, non-federal hospitals in the ˜rst year following passage of the 2009 American 
Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA; P.L. 111-5), which authorized 
incentive payments through Medicaid and Medicare to providers who 
implement certi˜ed EHRs, found only small gains in EHR adoption. The 
proportion of hospitals (N=3,101) meeting criteria for a basic EHR rose 
from 7.2 to 9.2 percent between 2008 and late 2009 while the proportion 
4 A ﬁbasicﬂ EHR or EMR system as de˜ned in the study has functionalities for patient 
history and demographics, patient problem lists, physician clinical notes, medications taken 
by patients, computerized orders for prescriptions, and viewing laboratory and imaging 
results. A ﬁfully functionalﬂ EHR or EMR system has each of the basic functionalities as 
well as functionalities for prescription and test orders, warnings of drug interactions or 
contraindications, highlighting of out-of-range test levels, and reminders for guideline-based 
interventions or screening tests (Hsiao et al., 2010). 
Challenges
It is important to be aware of challenges to the implementation of IT under a 





and providers may resent a particular system being imposed upon them and resist 
using the system, while in a ground-up model IT may not have administration sup
-




can be used to address barriers to success of the IT intervention. 

BOX 5-1  Continued
 Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 281
of hospitals meeting criteria for a comprehensive EHR increased from 1.5 
to 2.7 percent. Hospitals likely to serve more disadvantaged populations 
(e.g., critical access, public, nonteaching, and rural hospitals) were among 
the least likely to have adopted even a basic EHR in the 12 months preced-ing the survey. Eighty-nine percent and 74 percent of hospitals, respectively, 
did not have key meaningful use functions for engagement in HIE and the 
ability to report quality measures to the state or to the Centers for Medi
-care and Medicaid Services (CMS) (Jha et al., 2010). In a 2008 survey of 
362 federally quali˜ed health centers (which include CHCs), 23 percent 
responded that they use an ﬁall-electronicﬂ EHR. None of the health centers 
met the criteria for a fully functional EHR (Lardiere, 2009).
5 The practice 
of HIE, or the exchange of health care information across organizations, 
also remains the exception rather than the rule (PCAST, 2010; Vest, 2009; 
Vest et al., 2011; Wilcox et al., 2006). The national health IT consumer us
-age survey mentioned above found that just 7 percent of respondents were 
using a PHR (CHF, 2010). 
Part of the explanation for the lack of broad adoption and use of health 
IT is linked to the organizational and economic structure of the U.S. health 
care system (PCAST, 2010). Many physicians, including those who provide 
care to PLWHA, practice in small groups and are reimbursed for care on 
a fee-for-service basis. Physicians who practice in this type of environment 
may not garner the bene˜ts of health IT, such as increased sharing of pa
-tient information, enhanced coordination of care, or the ability to aggregate 
care data. Therefore, there is little incentive for these providers to invest 
in health IT. Adoption of health IT has occurred at a faster pace in large 
health care organizations, such as in the Veterans Health Administration 
(VHA) and Kaiser Permanente, that directly gain from health IT and have 
a greater incentive to provide care ef˜ciently and reduce duplication of 
services. Large organizations are also better situated to shoulder the costs 
of implementing health IT, since costs are spread across a larger number of 
patients and providers (PCAST, 2010). 
Besides the costs of installing and maintaining health IT systems, a 
number of other barriers and challenges to the adoption of health IT have 
been described in the research literature. These include the inability to 
integrate new and existing systems (Lardiere, 2009; PCAST, 2010); con
-cerns about the security and privacy of data (PCAST, 2010); productivity 
loss (e.g., during transition to a new EHR) (Lardiere, 2009; PCAST, 2010; 
Poon et al., 2006; Reardon and Davidson, 2007; Shields et al., 2007); lack 
of support from providers (Bhattacherjee and Hikmet, 2007; Lardiere, 
5 ﬁFully functionalﬂ was de˜ned as having functionalities for collection of patient 
demographic information, electronic prescribing, computerized physician order entry, clinical 
notes, clinical decision support, and public health reporting (Lardiere, 2009). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.282
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
2009; Liu et al., 2011); and perceived incompatibility with work processes 
(Bhattacherjee and Hikmet, 2007; PCAST, 2010). Some providers may be 
concerned about the potential liabilities associated with use of health IT 
and participation in HIE. For example, it has been suggested that since 
integrated EHRs can store large amounts of instantly accessible informa-tion on several aspects of care, providers may be more likely to be found 
responsible for missing critical details in a given patient™s EHR that affect 
treatment decisions (Sittig and Singh, 2011). 
Providers who care for the underserved may face additional barriers 
to the implementation of health IT. In CHCs, which disproportionately 
serve patients who are low income, for example, the integrated service 
approach to care may make health IT implementation more complicated 
(Moiduddin and Moore, 2008). Health IT can improve care quality when 
used effectively. Therefore, these unique challenges must to be addressed 
to ensure that health disparities are not exacerbated by uneven adoption 
and use of health IT. 
The bene˜ts of health IT, both within a practice and for purposes of 
monitoring care on a broader scale, may not be evident to many providers. 
Education on possible functions and bene˜ts of health IT is important for 
implementation and use (Gibbons, 2011; Samentaray et al., 2011; Torda et 
al., 2010). Surveys of physicians have reported that ˜nancial incentives for 
the purchase and use of health IT systems, receipt of technical assistance, 
and protections from personal liabilities would facilitate adoption and use 
(DesRoches et al., 2008; Patel et al., 2011). There may be a particular need 
for improved incentives to smaller providers who are less likely to internal-ize the ˜nancial bene˜t from health IT.
Although adoption of health IT has occurred at a slow pace thus far, 
the ˜nancial incentives and technical assistance being provided as a result 
of the ARRA could help to promote broader use of EHRs among HIV pro-viders in coming years. The Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, a component of the ARRA, supports 
adoption and use of EHRs by authorizing incentive payments through 
Medicare and Medicaid, major payers of care for PLWHA, to physicians 
and hospitals that use EHRs and demonstrate their ﬁmeaningful useﬂ (Jha 
et al., 2010).6 The three main components of meaningful use for the ˜rst 
phase of the HITECH Act, which began in 2011, are the use of certi˜ed 
6 Under the Medicare EHR incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive as 
much as $44,000 over a 5-year period. Incentive payments for hospitals and critical access 
hospitals (CAHs) are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2-million base payment. 
Under the Medicaid EHR incentive program, eligible health professionals can receive up to 
$63,750 over 6 years. As under the Medicare program, incentive payments for hospitals and 
CAHs under the Medicaid program are based on a number of factors and begin with a $2- 
million base payment (CMS, 2012a). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 283
EHRs (1) in a meaningful manner (e.g., for electronic prescribing); (2) for 
secure electronic exchange of health information to improve the quality of 
health care; and (3) to submit clinical quality and other measures (CMS, 
2011). Because providers must use an EHR that has been certi˜ed to sup-port objectives of meaningful use to qualify for the incentive, a possible 
outcome of meaningful use is the increased development of functions in 
EHRs to document various clinical quality measures and other health 
data.7,8 HITECH Act programs also offer technical support to providers 
that are in particular need of assistance (e.g., solo and small group prac
-tices, CHCs, critical access hospitals) to attain adoption and meaningful 
use of EHRs, including assistance with implementation, workforce training, 
and HIE (ONC, 2011a). 
The array of data contained in health IT systems is largely limited to 
clinical care data. Resources to support effective use of health IT are par-ticularly lacking among mental health and supportive services providers 
who were not eligible for EHR meaningful use incentives under ARRA 
(SAMHSA, 2011). Efforts to expand the use of health IT by behavioral 
health providers and to address barriers to the inclusion of behavioral 
health information in HIE would improve the availability of data to moni-tor indicators for referral for and receipt of mental health and substance 
abuse services among people with diagnosed HIV infection, as well as for 
other populations (SAMHSA, 2011).Data Privacy and Security Considerations
As noted previously, some of the existing ambivalence about integrating 
health IT into the health care system is related to concerns about privacy 
7 The criteria by which meaningful use of EHRs will be determined is being rolled out in 
three phases. Phase 1 (2011 and 2012) ﬁsets the baseline for electronic data capture and 
information sharingﬂ (CMS, 2011). It is anticipated that future stages of meaningful use 
will be increasingly rigorous. For example, by 2015, in order to qualify for meaningful use 
of EHRs, providers will have to demonstrate greater use of decision support tools, higher 
levels of information exchange, and improvement in care coordination and patient outcomes 
(PCAST, 2010).
8 Since the HITECH Act was passed, the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology (ONC) has moved forward on several additional activities that will 
help to improve the health IT infrastructure. One of these activities, the Nationwide Health 
Information Network (NwHIN), is composed of standards, services, and policies to enable 
secure health information exchange over the Internet. The NwHIN is meant to help achieve 
the goals of the HITECH Act by enabling ﬁhealth information to follow the consumer, be 
available for clinical decision making, and support appropriate use of health care information 
beyond direct patient care so as to improve population healthﬂ (ONC, 2011b). This project 
has convened stakeholders and created an appropriate forum for the discussion of options to 
improve the health IT infrastructure (PCAST, 2010). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.284
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
and security of information (PCAST, 2010). The privacy and security of 
health information is particularly important to PLWHA and their provid
-ers. HIV continues to be a stigmatized disease (Sengupta et al., 2011). Be-sides HIV status, other information about PLWHA contained in health IT 
systems (e.g., information on drug use, sexually transmitted diseases, etc.) 
may be considered sensitive information and, if released, could potentially 
be used to discriminate against PLWHA. Increased use of health IT and 
HIE heightens privacy and security concerns because the accessibility of 
information may increase the potential for access and misuse by authorized 
and unauthorized users. A lack of protections to keep health information 
private and secure would undermine trust in health IT as a means for data 
collection and storage and its ability to improve care (NRC, 1997; ONC, 
2011a). 
The federal government has initiated several efforts to improve privacy 
and security protections that are relevant to increased use of health IT. For 
example, the HHS Of˜ce of Civil Rights (OCR) is ful˜lling HITECH Act 
obligations to modify privacy and security rules under the Health Infor
-mation Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), which establishes a 
federal ˚oor of protection for health information, to strengthen the privacy 
and security of health information and the enforcement of penalties for 
violating HIPAA rules.
9 OCR and ONC are working with providers and 
consumers of health IT to educate and inform them of the importance of 
health IT security and ways to ensure that personal health information is 
kept secure (ONC, 2011a). 
Lessons from the Veterans Health Administration and Kaiser 
Permanente on the Use of Integrated Electronic Health Records
Although not representative of other health care organizations, the 
experiences of large integrated care organizations, such as VHA and Kaiser 
Permanente (KP), provide important lessons on the uses and limitations of 
integrated EHRs. The Veterans Health Information Systems and Technol
-ogy Architecture (VistA)
 integrated EMR system has enabled VHA to pro-vide a highly regarded level of information technology that supports better 
9 See Chapter 4 for a fuller discussion of HIPAA. The HIPAA Privacy Rule regulates the use 
and disclosure of identi˜able health information held by health plans, health clearinghouses, 
and health care providers who engage in administrative electronic transactions. In general, the 
Privacy Rule permits the disclosure of identi˜able health information for treatment, payment, 
and health care operations without written patient permission. The Privacy Rule also permits 
the disclosure of identi˜able information for research and public health purposes without 
patient permission as long as certain conditions are met. However, the Privacy Rule does not 
supersede state laws that are more stringent, such as those that require patient permission to 
exchange health information. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 285
care (Asch et al., 2004; PCAST, 2010). For instance, VistA enabled VHA 
to reduce medication errors to a rate of 7 per million prescriptions, com
-pared to a national average of 1 error in 20 prescriptions. Use of electronic 
reminders and performance measurement to improve pneumonia vaccina-tion rates for veterans with emphysema is estimated to have saved the lives 
of thousands of VHA patients (PCAST, 2010). KP™s HealthConnect system 
connects all KP members over nine states and the District of Columbia to 
throusands of physicians in hundreds of medical of˜ces and hospitals. Phy-sicians can retrieve data on patient care received from anywhere within the 
network. In addition to providing alerts to providers on overdue preventive 
screenings, KP™s system also produces quality measures and feedback for 
providers. Data from the system can be aggregated to track adverse events 
and trends (PCAST, 2010). Improved quality and ef˜ciency of care have 
been attributed to patient access to KP™s system via the Internet. One study 
showed that patients™ use of secure messaging and scheduled phone visits 
enabled by HealthConnect resulted in a 26.2 percent decrease in total of˜ce 
visits over 4 years (Chen et al., 2009). 
The VistA and HealthConnect systems were expensive to implement,  
and they require substantial resources to maintain and to extract and utilize 
the information (PCAST, 2010). As noted previously, there is often little 
incentive for providers outside of integrated networks, which may include 
care sites such as CHCs where many PLWHA receive care, to invest in in
-tegrated EHRs. Both VistA and HealthConnect are currently limited with 
regard to interoperability or the ability to share patient information with 
other providers. The lack of interoperability means that a complete record 
of patient care often will not be available, even for many PLWHA in large 
integrated health networks. 
In a presentation before the committee, Jamie Ferguson, vice president 
of Health IT Strategy and Policy at Kaiser Permanente, described a partner-ship between KP and the VHA to share data on patients who receive care 
in both systems. The exchange was the ˜rst Nationwide Health Informa-tion Network exchange conducted for treatment purposes. Information 
exchanged included patient demographics, medications, lab results, immu-nizations, allergies, and vital sign information. Participating patients opted 
into the exchange and were permitted to opt out at any time. An important 
lesson learned from the exchange was that the Healthcare Information 
Technology Standards Panel (HITSP) speci˜cations to enable interoper
-ability were much easier to implement than expected. Patient ID matching 
was the biggest unresolved issue. Mr. Ferguson also noted that operational 
processes for patient opt-in need to be streamlined and automated. Key 
success factors for the exchange were the alignment of incentives (quality of 
care and patient safety as drivers for participation in the exchange); a data 
use agreement (describing the permitted purposes for data exchange; breach 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.286
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
noti˜cation, privacy and security requirements; and dispute resolution, li-ability, and governance terms); and data content (use of HITSP speci˜cation 
enabled interoperability) (Ferguson, 2011).
MODELS AND BEST PRACTICES IN DATA SYSTEM INTEGRATION 
The committee was asked to identify models and best practices in data 
system integration to improve interoperability of data systems and core 
indicators. In health care, ﬁinteroperabilityﬂ is generally de˜ned as ﬁthe 
ability of different IT systems and software applications to communicate, 
exchange data accurately, effectively, and consistently, and to use the infor
-mationﬂ (HHS, 2008). Interoperability is not fully possible in the United 
States at this time (ONC, 2011a). For the most part, the various sources 
of care and care coverage have their own health IT systems with their own 
digital language. Systems also vary in their complexity, length, and technical 
vocabulary and are run using different information architectures, protocols, 
and software programs (Edwards et al., 2010). As PLWHA move through 
the health care system, each provider™s health IT system captures a portion 
of the patient information, and care data cannot easily be tracked across 
these systems. Methods of data system integration can help to address chal-lenges of interoperability. 
Some examples of data system integration involve direct information 
exchange across settings, which simply makes information available be
-tween systems. The Indiana Network for Patient Care has been an op-erational statewide health information exchange for more than 10 years, 
linking hospitals, public health departments, and state Medicaid data to 
deliver clinical data to care settings throughout Indiana and has served 
as a model of HIE across the nation. New York State in 2006 began a 
signi˜cant investment in health data integration with the Healthcare Ef-˜ciency and Affordability Law for New Yorkers (HEAL-NY) capital grant 
program (Kern et al., 2009). Initially this program distributed $53 million 
to 26 RHIOs across the state, each of which pursued a speci˜c implemen-tation of health IT and exchange. Although most of the recipients focused 
more heavily on health IT adoption, among the RHIOs were prominent 
examples that facilitated direct information exchange, such as the Bronx 
RHIO, Brooklyn Health Information eXchange (BHIX), Long Island Pa-tient Information eXchange (LIPIX), and the New York Clinical Informa
-tion eXchange (NYCLIX). Other information exchange initiatives have also 
been developed in other states.
Other examples go beyond just data integration to actually monitor 
patient populations. The Academic Model Providing Access to Healthcare 
(AMPATH) medical record system is used speci˜cally to monitor HIV 
patients and was implemented to support HIV care in sub-Saharan Africa 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 287
(Tierney et al., 2007). AMPATH includes standard EHR components, as 
well as data entry capabilities for clinical observations relevant to HIV 
care. From the system, data can be extracted and reported to national AIDS 
programs or funding agencies. The data in structured form can also support research queries. The New York City Department of Health and Mental 
Hygiene™s (NYC DOHMH™s) Primary Care Information Project (PCIP) pro
-moted EHR adoption in clinics and doctors™ private of˜ces, with technology 
supporting both CDS and electronic reporting of required health measures 
to public health organizations. Data exchange focused more on reporting 
than on access across providers, which created an information-supported 
centralized data model at the DOHMH (Mostashari et al., 2009). This 
allowed the use of the PCIP infrastructure for the NYC DOHMH in 
population monitoring. Integrated delivery networks with extensive infor-mation systems, such as Kaiser Permanente, Geisinger, and Intermountain 
Healthcare, have created patient monitoring systems by gathering data 
from multiple sites of care. Common examples are the various diabetes or 
chronic disease registries, which can be used to both monitor patient status 
with accepted guidelines and prompt care providers to bring patients back 
into care. 
National research registries have also exchanged health informationŠbut to support research rather than to direct patient care. The National 
Registry for Myocardial Infarction collects health information for patients 
in multiple institutions to monitor the effectiveness of various treatments 
and patient outcomes. Other examples include the Surveillance, Epidemiol-ogy and End Results (SEER) program, a source for cancer statistics in the 
United States, and the National Program of Cancer Registries.
Various lessons learned throughout these examples might be applied 
to a strategy of data monitoring for HIV care. Most of these examples are 
focused on HIE, and integration is done through the clinicians only on indi-vidual cases. Data integration does exist for patient monitoring, but usually 
this is done within delivery networks where systems are already integrated 
and/or incentives can better justify data integration. These examples are 
relevant to PLWHA in these systems, but most PLWHA receive care outside 
of integrated delivery networks. AMPATH was applied directly to HIV/
AIDS care, but that was in an environment where the disease prevalence 
was suf˜ciently high to promote monitoring systems. Lessons learned from 
AMPATH are thus best applied to settings where the prevalence of HIV/
AIDS in the patient population is high enough to standardize the integration 
of data, such as specialty HIV/AIDS clinics. The PCIP project was interest-ing in that it centered data exchange with the public health organization. 
Data reporting was facilitated, and data integration could occur within a 
centralized system. Since public health reporting is ubiquitous among sites 
where PLWHA receive care, this is the most relevant example for patients 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.288
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
outside of integrated delivery networks and specialty clinics. A ˜nal lesson 
is learned from research registries. Many registries require manual abstrac-tion of data from patient records at the institutions providing data. Where 
this information is available electronically, registry reporting can be more 
ef˜cient, but only when the data are collected consistently. Indicators of 
care are more ef˜cient when they can be based on data that are collected 
consistently and are available electronically.
As noted in the ONC™s Federal Information Technology Strategic Plan 
for 2011Œ2015, future stages of meaningful use for EHRs may become more 
rigorousŠfor example, by requiring that providers not only adopt health IT 
but use it to exchange health information (ONC, 2011a). If implemented as 
planned, these changes could help to lay the groundwork for increased data 
system interoperability and to simplify the assessment of the state of HIV 
care at the national level. The federal government is currently developing a 
standards and interoperability framework (S & I Framework) to broaden 
interoperability across different organizations and federal agencies.
10 To 
support health IT adoption and information exchange for public health 
and populations with unique needs, ONC is working with CDC, CMS, the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR), and 
the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) to ensure that 
meaningful use of certi˜ed EHRs supports the needs of public health agen-cies. In particular, these agencies are working to ensure that EHRs include 
capabilities to submit electronic syndromic surveillance data, immunization 
registries, and electronic lab reporting (as based on current stage 1 mean
-ingful use criteria). This may help set the stage for two-way communication 
between providers and public health agencies (ONC, 2011a). 
Data System Linkage
One means of data system integration is data linkage. Data linkage 
refers to the bringing together of information from one or more disparate 
data sources for the same individual, family, event, or place, removing 
the need to extract data from several sources. Data linkage has been used 
frequently for medical and population health research (Brook et al., 2008; 
Herzog et al., 2007; Jutte et al., 2011; Karmel and Rosman, 2008). Rather 
than initiating new data collection efforts, linkage allows researchers to 
10 The framework will focus on identifying transport standards (that enable one provider to 
exchange data with another provider, or one system with another system, securely); content 
standards (that allow data to be packaged or ﬁreadﬂ in a way that is useful for the provider); 
and vocabulary and terminology standards and value sets (to achieve semantic interoperability 
at the level of individual data elements) (ONC, 2011a).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 289
make better use of data that are already collected for other purposes (e.g., 
claims or registry data) (Jutte et al., 2011). Data linkage can improve the 
cost-effectiveness of data collection, can reduce the amount of time needed 
for data collection in research, and has the potential to improve the quality 
of the data collectedŠfor example, through the detection of duplications 
that otherwise may not have been identi˜ed (Herzog et al., 2007; Holman 
et al., 2008). 
Methods for record linkage are described elsewhere in the research lit-erature (see Fellegi and Sunter, 1969; Herzog et al., 2007). In general, link
-age is achieved using individual identi˜ers to reliably identify an individual 
across two or more data systems (Jutte et al., 2011; Tromp et al., 2011).
11 Identi˜ers may include Social Security numbers, names, dates of birth, zip 
codes, and other information. The use of a unique individual identi˜er (e.g., Social Security number, patient medical record number) across data sources 
can help to overcome problems of inaccuracies in identi˜cation of matches 
across systems based on other types of identi˜ers. However, in the United 
States, unique identi˜ers are not applied ubiquitously across the various 
sources of care and care coverage for PLWHA. 
Some of the best examples of successful data linkage while maintain
-ing patient privacy and con˜dentiality come from the international realm 
(Jutte et al., 2011). For the most part, countries that have demonstrated 
successful data linkages for most of their residents have single-payer health 
care systems that do not face the same administrative and legal barriers 
to sharing of health information encountered within the U.S. health care 
system (see Chapter 4). In Sweden, the MigMed2 database was developed 
by linking data from several national registers, including those containing 
population, death, hospital discharge, multigenerational (i.e., identities of 
the biological and adopted parents), and immigration data. The national 
10-digit civic registration identi˜cation number that each person uses for 
her or his lifetime are used to link individual-level data across registers. 
Prior to inclusion in the database, the identi˜cation numbers are replaced 
with serial numbers to ensure anonymity. MigMed2 has been used for re
-search in a number of areas including, but not limited to, prostate cancer 
mortality and patterns of breast cancer survival within families (Hemminki 
et al., 2008; Ji et al., 2010; Li et al., 2011). Population Data BC (British 
Columbia), formerly the British Columbia Linked Health Database, con-tains data on nearly every person in British Columbia and links individual-level health care utilization, population demographics and vital statistics, 
11 The two primary methods for data linkage are deterministic linkage and probabilistic 
linkage. In deterministic linkage, a prede˜ned subset of linking variables have to agree to be 
considered a match and linked. In probabilistic linkage, record pairs are linked based on the 
probabilities of agreement of a set of identi˜ers (Tromp et al., 2011). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.290
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
cancer registry, and occupational and early childhood information for use 
in research. Population Data BC uses identi˜ers (e.g., names, birth dates) 
to link data, but it does not store data in a linked format, and data are 
reported only at an aggregate level to protect con˜dentiality. This resource 
has been used by researchers to identify determinants of health for the en-tire population of BC as well as for health disparities research (Population 
Data BC, 2012). Other international examples of successful record linkage 
for population-based research include the Scottish Record Linkage System, 
the Oxford Record linkage Study, and the Western Australia Data Linkage 
System (Holman et al., 2008; Jutte et al., 2011). 
In keeping with the fragmented nature of the U.S. health care system, 
a number of successful examples of data linkage in the United States have 
occurred more locally. One example involving PLWHA is the HIV/AIDS 
Cancer Match Study, which uses anonymized data collected by state and 
regional HIV/AIDS and cancer registries to study cancer in PLWHA. The 
study data are pulled from computerized linkages between databases that 
are maintained by study sites in 13 states and the District of Columbia 
(NCI, 2012). Data from the linked registries have helped to identify cancers 
that occur more often among PLWHA; describe changes in cancer burden 
among PLWHA over time; and identify predictors of cancer outcomes for 
PLWHA (Shiels et al., 2010, 2011a,b; Simard et al., 2011). The results 
from the study provide important information on the impact of HIV on 
cancer risk and trends in morbidity and mortality to the National Cancer 
Institute and other policy makers (NCI, 2012). Data linkage has been used 
in several HIV-related research studies carried out in the United States to 
improve the completeness of data for surveillance and for monitoring HIV 
care. A study of linkage of HIV/AIDS surveillance data in the District of Co
-lumbia Department of Health with death registries showed that the linkage 
improved the accuracy of estimation of the prevalence of individuals living 
with HIV/AIDS (CDC, 2008). In the LaPHIE study described earlier in this 
chapter, state public health surveillance data was linked to real-time EMR 
data to successfully identify PLWHA who had fallen out of care (Herwehe 
et al., 2011). 
Efforts are under way to improve data linkage among sources of care 
and care coverage for PLWHA. As discussed in Chapter 3, the 
AIDS Drug 
Assistance Program (ADAP) Data Report will begin to capture client-level 
data during the April 1 through September 30, 2012, data collection period 
and will employ a unique client identi˜er using the same algorithm and 
encryption process as is currently used for the Ryan White Services Report
. Eventually the systems will be merged to link data for Ryan White clients 
who are receiving ADAP services (Personal communication, Faye Malitz, 
Health Resources and Services Administration, October 25, 2011). In 2009, 
the CMS developed a database of linked Medicaid and Medicare data to 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 291
improve tracking and coordination of care for individuals who are enrolled 
in both programs (CHCS, 2010). 
Further enhancements in linkages among data systems could enhance 
the completeness of data for monitoring HIV care. Examples include, but 
are not limited to, linkage of surveillance systems that collect CD4 and viral load information to other public health data systems. For example, linking 
surveillance data with the Medical Monitoring Project (described in Chap-ter 3) could enhance understanding of the transition from newly diagnosed 
HIV infection to chronic clinical outcomes. Other linkages to more com-prehensive data collection systems such as CNICS and the North American 
AIDS Cohort Collaboration on Research and Design ([NA-ACCORD] de-scribed in Chapter 3) could provide rich data but may require new data-use 
agreements given that the data for these studies were obtained via informed 
consent. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS


health care data and directly improve patient care. Although little 
research has been conducted on the use and con˜guration of health 
IT for the collection of HIV care data in particular, general im
-provements in the collection and exchange of data resulting from 
health IT would increase the availability of data to monitor HIV 
care. Education for HIV care providers on the potential uses and 
bene˜ts of health IT for their own practices, technical assistance, 
and ˜nancial incentives (including, but not limited to, that being 
offered to providers who demonstrate meaningful use of EHRs 
under the HITECH Act) could help to promote more widespread 
use of health IT. 

of HIV care and supportive services has the potential to improve 
care coordination and longitudinal tracking of care. Some inte-grated health care systems, such as the Veterans Health Administra
-tion and Kaiser Permanente, effectively manage patient information 
across providers within their networks, but most PLWHA receive 
care and supportive services outside of these networks and many 
receive care across multiple organizations. The committee identi-˜ed local efforts in health information exchange that have resulted 
in improved monitoring of patient care and outcomes. However, 
these efforts have not been scaled broadly among entities serving 
PLWHA. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.292
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
  
Recommendation 5-1. The Department of Health and Human 
Services should review existing mechanisms for the con˜dential 
and secure exchange of health information to provide a platform to 
increase the exchange of such information among entities serving 
individuals with HIV. These entities may include, but are not lim
-ited to, state and local health departments and government agen-cies or community-based organizations funded to provide medical 
care, substance abuse and mental health services, and housing and 
other supportive services. 

applications to communicate, exchange, and use informationŠis 
not fully possible in the United States at this time due to a lack of 
infrastructure to support it. For the most part, the various sources 
of care and care coverage for PLWHA have their own health IT 
systems with disparate architectures and vocabularies, posing a 
challenge to the exchange of data across systems. 
  
Recommendation 5-2. The Department of Health and Human Ser-vices and the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Infor
-mation Technology should provide technical assistance and policy 
guidance to state and local health departments, clinical providers, 
and other agencies serving individuals with HIV to improve the 
interoperability of data systems relevant to monitoring HIV care 
and supportive services.REFERENCESAsch, S. M., E. A. McGlynn, M. M. Hogan, R. A. Hayward, P. Shekelle, L. Rubenstein, J. 
Keesey, J. Adams, and E. A. Kerr. 2004. Comparison of quality of care for patients in 
the Veterans Health Administration and patients in a national sample. 
Annals of Internal 
Medicine 141:938-945. 
Bakken, S., W. L. Holzemer, M. Brown, G. Powell-Cope, J. G. Turner, J. Inouye, K. M. Nokes, 
and I. B. Corless. 2000. Relationships between perception of engagement with health care 
provider and demographic characteristics, health status, and adherence to therapeutic 
regimen in persons with HIV/AIDS. 
AIDS Patient Care and STDs
 14(4):189-197.Bhattacherjee, A., and N. Hikmet. 2007. Physicians™ resistance toward healthcare information 
technology: A theoretical model and empirical test. European Journal of Information 
Systems (16):725-737. 
Birkhead, G., T. L. Chorba, S. Root, D. N. Klaucke, and N. J. Gibbs. 1991. Timeliness of 
national reporting of communicable diseases: The experience of the National Telecommu
-nications System for Surveillance. 
American Journal of Public Health
 81(10):1313-1315.
Brook, E. L., D. L. Rosman, and C. D. J. Holman. 2008. Public good through data linkage: 
Measuring research outputs from the Western Australian Data Linkage System. 
Austra-lian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health
 32(1):19-23. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 293
CBO (Congressional Budget Of˜ce). 2008. 
Evidence on the Costs and Bene˜ts of Health Infor
-mation Technology. 
http://www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=9168 (accessed March 1, 2012). 
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2005. Progress in improving state and 
local disease surveillanceŠUnited States, 2000-2005. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report 54(33):822-825. 
CDC. 2008. Electronic record linkage to identify deaths among persons with AIDSŠDistrict 
of Columbia, 2000-2005. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
 57(23):631-634.CDC. 2011. Electronic Laboratory Reporting (ELR). http://www.cdc.gov/ehrmeaningfuluse/
elr.html (accessed March 1, 2012). 
CHCS (Center for Health Care Strategies, Inc.). 2010. Integrating Medicare and Medic-aid Data to Support Improved Care for Dual Eligibles. http://www.chcs.org/usr_doc/
 Integrating_Medicare_and_Medicaid Data_for_Duals.pdf (accessed February 22, 2012).Chen, C., T. Garrido, D. Chock, G. Okawa, and L. Liang. 2009. The Kaiser Permanente 
Electronic Health Record: Transforming and streamlining modalities of care. 
Health 
Affairs 28:323-333.CHF (California Healthcare Foundation). 2010. Consumers and Health Information Tech
-nology: A National Survey. http://www.chcf.org/publications/2010/04/consumers-and-
health-information-technology-a-national-survey (accessed March 1, 2012). 
CMS (Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services). 2011. The Of˜cial Web Site for the Medi
-care and Medicaid Electronic Health Records (EHR) Incentive Programs. https://www.
cms.gov/ehrincentiveprograms/ (accessed March 1, 2012). 
CMS. 2012a. Overview: EHR Incentive Program. https://www.cms.gov/EHRIncentive
 Programs/ (accessed March 4, 2012).CMS. 2012b. 
Personal Health Records. Overview
. https://www.cms.gov/PerHealthRecords/ 
(accessed March 4, 2012). 
DesRoches, C. M., E. G. Campbell, S. R. Rao, K. Donelan, T. G. Ferris, A. Jha, R. Kaushal, 
D. E. Levy, S. Rosenbaum, A. E. Shields, and D. Blumenthal. 2008. Electronic health 
records in ambulatory careŠA national survey of physicians. New England Journal of 
Medicine 359(1): 50-60.Detmer, D., M. Bloomrosen, B. Raymond, and P. Tang. 2008. Integrated personal health 
records: Transformative tools for consumer-centric care. 
BMC Medical Informatics and 
Decision Making 8:45 doi:10.1186/1472-6947-8-45.Edwards, A., I. Hollin, J. Barry, and S. Kachnowski. 2010. Barriers to cross-institutional 
health information exchange: A literature review. 
Journal of Healthcare Information 
Management 24(3):22-34. 
Fellegi, I. P., and A. B. Sunter. 1969. A theory for record linkage. 
Journal of the American 
Statistical Association
 40:1183-1210.Ferguson, J. 2011. Our Journey in Health IT and Health Information ExchangeŠWorking 
Towards Ubiquitous, Computable Care Data in Kaiser Permanente
. PowerPoint Presen-tation before the committee, San Francisco, CA, July 8. 
Gibbons, M. C. 2011. Use of health information technology among racial and ethnic un-derserved communities. Perspectives in Health Information Management
 8(Winter):1f. 
Hemminki, K., J. Jianguang, A. Forsti, J. Sundquist, and P. Lenner. 2008. Survival in breast 
cancer is familial. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment
 110:177-182.Herwehe, J., W. Wilbright, A. Abrams, S. Bergson, J. Foxhood, M. Kaiser, L. Smith, K. Xiao, 
A. Zapata, and M. Magnus. 2012. Implementation of an innovative, integrated electronic 
medical record (EMR) and public health information exchange for HIV/AIDS. 
Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association
 19(3):448-452.Herzog, T. N., F. Scheuren, and W. E. Winkler. 2007. 
Data Quality and Record Linkage 
Techniques.
 New York: Springer.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.294
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
HHS (Department of Health and Human Services). 2008. The National Alliance for Health 
Information Technology Report to the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology on De˜ning Key Health Information Technology Terms
. http://
cdm266901.cdmhost.com/cdm/singleitem/collection/p266901coll4/id/2086/rec/8 (ac
-cessed March 1, 2012). 
HHS. 2009. Personal Health Records and People Living with HIV.
 http://blog.aids.gov/2009/05/personal-health-records-and-people-living-with-hiv.html (accessed March 
1, 2012).
Holman, C. J., A. J. Bass, D. L. Rosman, M. B. Smith, J. B. Semmens, E. J. Glasson, E. L. 
Brook, B. Trutwein, I. L. Rouse, C. R. Watson, N. H. de Klerk, and F. J. Stanley. 2008. 
A decade of data linkage in Western Australia: Strategic design, applications and bene˜ts 
of the WA Data Linkage System. 
Australian Health Review 32(4):766-777.HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2011a. Health IT for HIV/AIDS 
Care Toolbox.
 http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/HIVAIDSCaretoolbox/index.html 
(accessed March 1, 2012).Hsiao, C., E. Hing, T. C. Socey, and B. Cai. 2010. 
Electronic Medical Record/Electronic Health 
Record Systems and Of˜ce-Based Physicians: United States, 2009 and Preliminary 2010 
State Estimates
. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/emr_ehr_09/emr_ehr_09.pdf (ac
-cessed March 1, 2012). 
Jajosky, R. A., and S. L. Groseclose. 2004. Evaluation of reporting timeliness of public health 
surveillance systems for infectious diseases. 
BMC Public Health 4:29. 
Jha, A. K., C. M. DesRoches, P. D. Kralovec, and M. S. Joshi. 2010. A progress report on 
electronic health records in U.S. hospitals. 
Health Affairs 29(10):1951-1957.Ji, J., K. Hemminki, J. Sundquist, and K. Sundquist. 2010. Ethnic differences in incidence of 
Type 1 diabetes among second-generation immigrants and adoptees from abroad. 
Journal 
of Endocrinology Metabolism 95(2):847-850.Jutte, D. P., L. R. Roos, and M. D. Brownell. 2011. Administrative record linkage as a tool 
for public health research. Annual Review of Public Health 32:91-108. 
Kahn, J. S., V. Aulakh, and A. Bosworth. 2009. What it takes: Characteristics of the ideal 
personal health record. 
Health Affairs 28(2):369-376.Kahn, J. S., J. F. Hilton, T. V. Nunnery, S. Leasure, K. M. Bryant, C. B. Hare, and D. H. 
Thom. 2010. Personal health records in a public hospital: Experience at the HIV/AIDS 
clinic at San Francisco General Hospital. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association 17:224-228. 
Karmel, R., and D. Rosman. 2008. Linkage of health and aged care service events: Com-paring linkage and event selection methods. 
BMC Health Services Research
 8:149 
doi:10.1186/1472-6963-8-149.Kern, L. M., Y. Barron, E. L. Abramson, V. Patel, and R. Kaushal. 2009. HEAL NY: Pro
-moting interoperable health information technology in New York State. 
Health Affairs 
(Millwood) 28(2):493-504. 
Lardiere, M. R. 2009. A National Survey of Health Information Technology Adoption in 
Federally Quali˜ed Health Centers. National Association of Community Health Cen-ters. http://www.nachc.org/client/NACHC%202008%20HIT%20Survey%20Analysis_
 FINAL_6_9_091.pdf (accessed March 1, 2012). 
Lau, E. C., F. S. Mowat, M. A. Kelsh, J. C. Legg, N. M. Engel-Nitz, H. N. Watson, H. L. 
Collins, R. J. Nordyke, and J. L. Whyte. 2011. Use of electronic medical records (EMRs) 
for oncology outcomes research: Assessing the comparability of EMR information to 
patient registry and health claims data. 
Clinical Epidemiology
 3:259-272.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 295
Lazarus, R., M. Klompas, F. X. Campion, S. J. N. McNabb, X. Hou, J. Daniel, G. Haney, A. 
Demaria, L. Lenert, and R. Platt. 2009. Electronic support for public health: Validated 
case ˜nding and reporting for noti˜able diseases using electronic medical data. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association
 16:18-24. 
Li, X., K. Sundquist, and J. Sundquist. 2011. Neighborhood deprivation and prostate cancer 
mortality: A multilevel analysis from Sweden. Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Diseases doi:10.1038/pcan.2011.46.Liu, L. S., P. C. Shih, and G. R. Hayes. 2011. 
Barriers to the Adoption and Use of Personal 
Health Record Systems
. http://www.star-uci.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/iConf_
PHR_CAMERAREADY.pdf (accessed March 1, 2012).
Lober, W. B., D. Bliss, M. R. Dockrey, A. J. Davidson, and B. T. Karras. 2003. Communicable 
disease case entry using PDAs and public wireless networks. American Medical Informat-ics Association Annual Symposium Proceedings
 2003:916.Magnus, M., J. Herwehe, R. J. Proescholdbell, F. Lombard, A. Canjina, Z. Dastur, M. Millery, 
and B. P. Sabundayo. 2007. Guidelines for effective integration of information technology 
in the care of HIV-infected populations. 
Journal of Public Health Management Practice
 13(1), 39-48.McInnes, D. K., J. L. Solomon, B. G. Bokhour, S. M. Asch, D. Ross, K. M. Nazi, and A. L. 
Gifford. 2011. Use of electronic personal health record systems to encourage HIV screen-ing: An exploratory study of patient and provider perspectives. BMC Research Notes 4:295.Moiduddin, A., and J. Moore. 2008. The Underserved and Health Information Technol
-ogy: Issues and Opportunities. http://aspe.hhs.gov/sp/reports/2009/underserved/report.html#_Toc214201537 (accessed March 1, 2012). 
Mostashari, F., M. Tripathi, and M. Kendall. 2009. A tale of two large community electronic 
health record extension projects. Health Affairs 28(2):345-356.NCI (National Cancer Institute). 2012. HIV/AIDS Cancer Match Study: Background. http://www.hivmatch.cancer.gov/background.html
 (accessed March 1, 2012). 
Nguyen, T. Q., L. Thorpe, H. A. Makki, and F. Mostashari. 2007. Bene˜ts and barriers to 
electronic laboratory results reporting for noti˜able diseases: The New York City De
-partment of Health and Mental Hygiene experience. 
American Journal of Public Health
 97(Suppl 1):S142-S145. 
NRC (National Research Council). 1997. For the Record: Protecting Electronic Health Infor-mation. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
ONC (Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology). 2011a. 
Federal 
Health Information Technology Strategic Plan, 2011-2015.
 http://web.mediacdt.com/onc-emerg/FINAL-Federal-Health-IT-Strategic-Plan-0911.pdf (accessed March 1, 2012). 
ONC. 2011b. 
Nationwide Health Information Network:Overview.
 http://healthit.hhs.gov/
portal/server.pt?open=512&objID=1142&parentname=CommunityPage&parentid=4&
mode=2 (accessed March 1, 2012). 
Osterberg, L., and T. Blaschke. 2005. Adherence to medication. 
New England Journal of 
Medicine 353:487-497.Overhage, J. M., S. Grannis, and C. J. McDonald. 2008. A comparison of the completeness 
and timeliness of automated electronic reporting and spontaneous reporting of noti˜able 
conditions. American Journal of Public Health 98(2):344-350. 
Patel, V., E. L. Abramson, A. Edwards, S. Malhotra, and R. Kaushal. 2011. Physicians™ po
-tential use and preferences related to health information exchange. International Journal 
of Medical Informatics 80(3):171-180. 
PCAST (President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Technology). 2010. 
Report to the 
President: Realizing the Full Potential of Health Information Technology to Improve 
Healthcare: The Path Forward.
 Washington, DC. December. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.296
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Poon, E. G., A. K. Jha, M. Christino, M. M. Honour, R. Fernandopulle, B. Middleton, J. 
Newhouse, L. Leape, D. W. Bates, D. Blumenthal, and R. Kaushal. 2006. Assessing the 
level of healthcare information technology adoption in the United States: A snapshot. 
BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making
 6:1; doi:10.1186/1472-6947-6-1.
Population Data BC. 2012. http://www.popdata.bc.ca/ (accessed February 18, 2012). 
Reardon, J., and E. Davidson. 2007. An organizational learning perspective on the assimila
-tion of electronic health records among small physician practices. European Journal of 
Information Systems 16:681-694. 
Samantaray, R., V. O. Nioku, J. W. M. Brunner, V. Raghavan, M. L. Kendall, and S. C. Shih, 
2011. Promoting electronic health record adoption among small independent primary 
care practices. 
American Journal of Managed Care
 17:353-358.SAMHSA (Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration). 2011. Strategic 
Initiative #6: Health Information Technology. 
http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/content//SMA11-4629/08-HealthInformationTechnology.pdf (accessed February 24, 2012). 
Sengupta, S., B. Banks, D. Jonas, M. S. Miles, and G. C. Smith. 2011. HIV interventions to 
reduce HIV/AIDS stigma: A systematic review. 
AIDS and Behavior
 15(6):1075-1087.Shapiro, J. S., F. Mostashari, G. Hripcsak, N. Soulakis, and G. Kuperman. 2011. Using health 
information exchange to improve public health. American Journal of Public Health 
101(4):616-623.Shields, A. E., P. Shin, M. G. Le, D. E. Levy, R. M. Betancourt, D. Hawkins, and M. Proser. 
2007. Adoption of health information technology in community health centers: Results 
of a national survey. 
Health Affairs 26(5):1373-1383. 
Shiels, M. S., J. J. Goedert, and E. A. Engels. 2010. Recent trends and future directions in 
human immunode˜ciency virus-associated cancer. 
Cancer 116(23):5344-5347.Shiels, M. S., R. M., Pfeiffer, H. I. Hall, J. Li, J. J. Goedert, L. M. Morton, P. Hartge, and E. A. 
Engels. 2011a. Proportions of Kaposi sarcoma, selected non-Hodgkin lymphomas, and 
cervical cancer in the United States occurring in persons with AIDS, 1980-2007. Journal 
of the American Medical Association
 305(14):1450-1459. 
Shiels, M. S., R. M. Pfeiffer, M. H. Gail, H. I. Hall, J. Li, A. K. Chaturvedi, K. Bhatia, T. S. 
Uldrick, R. Yarchoan, J. J. Goedert, and E. A. Engels. 2011b. Cancer burden in the 
HIV-infected population in the United States. 
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 
103(9):753-762.Simard, E. P., R. M. Pfeiffer, and E. A. Engels. 2011. Cumulative incidence of cancer among 
individuals with acquired immunode˜ciency syndrome in the United States. Cancer 117(5):1089-1096.Sittig, D. F., and H. Singh. 2011. Legal, ethical, and ˜nancial dilemmas in electronic health 
record adoption and use. 
Pediatrics 127(4):e1042-e1047.Tierney, W. M., J. K. Rotich, T. J. Hannan, A. M. Siika, P. G. Biondich, B. W. Mamlin, W. M. 
Nyandiko, S. Kimaiyo, K. Wools-Koloustian, J. E. Sidle, C. Simiyu, E. Kigotho, B. 
Musick, J. J. Mamlin, and R. M. Einterz. 2007. The AMPATH medical record system: 
Creating, implementing, and sustaining an electronic medical record system to support 
HIV/AIDS care in western Kenya. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics
 129 (Pt 1):372-376. 
Torda, P., E. S. Han, and S. H. Scholle. 2010. Easing the adoption and use of electronic health 
records in small practices. 
Health Affairs 29(4):668-675.Tromp, M., A. C. Ravelli, G. J. Bonsel, A. Hasman, and J. B. Reitsma. 2011. Results from 
simulated data sets: Probabilistic record linkage outperforms deterministic record link-age. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 64(5):565-572.UAB (University of Alabama at Birmingham). 2012. The CNICS Research Network. http://www.uab.edu/cnics/ (accessed February 21, 2012). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE ROLE OF HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 297
Vest, J. R. 2009. Health information exchange and healthcare utilization. 
Journal of Medical 
Systems 33:223-231.Vest, J. R., H. Zhao, J. Jasperson, L. D. Gamm, and R. L. Ohsfeldt. 2011. Factors motivat
-ing and affecting health information exchange usage. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association 18:143-149. 
Ward, M., P. Brandsema, E. van Straten, and A. Bosman. 2005. Electronic reporting improves 
the timeliness and completeness of infectious disease noti˜cation, The Netherlands, 2003. 
Eurosurveillance 10(1):27-30. 
Wilcox, A., G. Kuperman, D. A. Dorr, G. Hripcsak, S. P. Narus, S. N. Thorton, and R. S. 
Evans. 2006. Architectural strategies and issues with health information exchange. 
AMIA 
Annual Symposium Proceedings 2006:814-818. 
Wright, A., C. Soran, C. A. Jenter, L. A. Volk, D. W. Bates, and S. R. Simon. 2010. Physician 
attitudes toward health information exchange: Results of a statewide survey
. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association
 17:66-70. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2996Ef˜cient Analysis of HIV Care 
Indicators and Dissemination of 
Data by Federal Agencies
In this chapter the committee describes how federal agencies can ef-˜ciently analyze indicators and disseminate data to improve the quality 
of HIV care (statement of task question 5). The chapter begins with an 
overview of the challenges to the analysis of indicators, including those re-lated to combining data drawn from multiple sources, and how to address 
those challenges. The committee then describes how federal agencies can 
ef˜ciently disseminate HIV care data to improve care quality. The chapter 
ends with the committee™s conclusions and recommendations. 
EFFICIENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE 
INDICATORS BY FEDERAL AGENCIES
As discussed in Chapter 3, no single data system can be used to gauge 
the impact of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS) and the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA) on improvements in HIV care. 
Rather, estimates of the indicators of clinical HIV care and mental health, 
substance use, and supportive services recommended by the committee 
often will require the use of data elements from two or more data systems. 
Combining data from multiple systems may also be necessary to compen
-sate for the weaknesses of any individual data system, such as a lack of rep
-resentativeness of the population of people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) 
or incompleteness of data (e.g., due to a low response rate). 
The committee was asked to describe how federal agencies can ef-˜ciently analyze indicators. The data systems described in Chapter 3 that 
are maintained by federal entities represent a mix of surveillance (e.g., the 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.300
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
National HIV Surveillance System [NHSS]), claims (e.g., Medicaid Statisti-cal Information System), and programmatic (e.g., Ryan White HIV/AIDS 
Program) data sources, as well as epidemiologic studies of PLWHA (e.g, the 
Medical Monitoring Project). Ef˜cient analysis of the indicators will require 
overcoming challenges to combining data across these disparate systems. 
One analytic challenge to the ef˜cient analysis of indicators relates to 
differences in the way that data systems operationalize data elements or 
de˜ne concepts to allow them to be measured. An area in which this may 
be relevant is in the calculation of indicators for subgroups of PLWHA, 
because data systems may vary in how they de˜ne certain demographic 
data such as income, geographic marker of residence, race or ethnicity, and 
sex or gender. Another challenge is differences across data systems in the 
periodicity for particular data elements. Although claims systems will have 
continuous data on dispensing of antiretroviral drugs, the Ryan White HIV/
AIDS Program collects information on whether antiretroviral drugs were 
prescribed within a 12-month reporting period. This presents an obstacle 
to combining data from these systems for purposes of estimating the pro
-portion of PLWHA who were or were not on antiretroviral therapy (ART) 
during a given period. Although technically dif˜cult, there are approaches 
to deal with the analytic challenges of combining data, as discussed below.
Additional impediments to the ef˜cient analysis of the indicators by 
federal agencies that relate to combining data from multiple systems in-clude the current lack of an infrastructure to support the secure exchange 
of health information across health information technology systems (e.g., 
electronic health records) and organizations, and other barriers to data 
sharing. These issues are discussed in Chapters 4 and 5 of this report.
An Example of Challenges to the Ef˜cient Analysis 
of an Indicator for Clinical HIV Care
One of the core indicators for clinical HIV care recommended by the 
committee (see Recommendation 2-1 in Chapter 2) is the 
proportion of 
people with diagnosed HIV infection and a CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 who are not on ART
 among all patients who receive such counts. To 
de˜ne this indicator more precisely, one must take timing into account. 
For example, one might ask: What proportion of individuals who received 
a CD4+ cell count measurement of <500 cells/mm
3 in 2011 also received 
ART at any point in 2011. Although this de˜nition is clear, it suffers from 
the problem that those who received such a count late in 2011 had less op
-portunity to receive ART in that year. Therefore, it may make more sense 
to rephrase the question: How many individuals who received a CD4+ cell 
count <500 cells/mm3 in 2011 received ART treatment within a ˜xed win
-dow of time (e.g., 6 months) of receipt of that measurement. In addition 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 301
to estimating a population average, there is also interest in estimating the 
effects of demographic factors or insurance status on this indicator. 
To estimate such an indicator requires information on date of measure
-ment and level of CD4 count as well as date of ART prescriptions given 
or ˜lled. Some data sources, such as health maintenance organizations 
(HMOs; e.g., Kaiser Permanente), the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), 
and federal prisons provide all of the relevant information needed, permit-ting a relatively straightforward estimation for subsets of the population. 
However, analytic issues arise from the fact that patients may leave these 
systems at any pointŠpossibly after a CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 is 
measured but before the prescription is provided or 6 months have elapsed. 
Furthermore, delays in reporting (e.g., of HIV/AIDS cases, CD4 counts) 
must be taken into account, particularly if the goal is to investigate trends 
over time. In addition, patients may die within 6 months of receiving a 
CD4 countŠa situation that makes it impossible to obtain the indicator. 
For patients who leave a system before their contribution to the indica-tor can be assessed, it is important to make use of the available partial 
follow-up information in an attempt to avoid, or at least reduce, bias. This 
is fairly straightforward using methods for failure-time data if the loss to 
follow-up is not informative (i.e., unassociated with greater or lower risk 
of starting treatment). If it is informative, appropriate methods must be 
used to minimize bias; however, unbiased estimation is possible only if all 
potentially confounding variables are available (a very unlikely situation). 
To investigate the effect of demographic and other factors on the risk of 
not receiving appropriate ART, regression methods can be used. Limitations 
arise from losses to follow-up, as described above, as well as from the fact 
that with the exception of the NHSS, which captures data on the vast ma-jority of people identi˜ed with HIV/AIDS in the United States, none of the 
data sources is representative of either the American population as a whole 
or any particular demographic group.The limitation of representativeness can be addressed by making use 
of other sources of data that have broader coverage. To do so, however, 
one must make use of data systems that provide only part of the necessary 
information by combining them in some way. For example, the NHSS pro
-vides dates of measurements and CD4 counts but not (reliably) the time 
of receiving ART. By contrast, Medicare and Medicaid databases provide 
information about dates of ART prescriptions ˜lled but not CD4 counts. 
In the absence of unique identi˜ers, no direct linkage between databases 
can be made. However, combining across sources is still feasible through 
linkage by demographic factors. For example, suppose one knew that for 
one demographic group in a given state, 400 people had CD4+ cell counts 
<500 cells/mm3 at some point in 2011 among 600 people who had CD4+ 
cell counts drawn. Suppose one also knew for this group that 300 people 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.302
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
received or ˜lled prescriptions for ART. One then would know that at a 
minimum, there had to be 100 patients who should have been on ART but 
were not. In fact, however, the number might be considerably greater be
-cause some of the ART use may have been among patients who had CD4+ 
cell counts of 500 cells/mm3 or greater. However, if one could estimate this 
number from other sources (for example, from people within HMO-type 
systems who are similar in demographic category to those under study), the 
estimate could be re˜ned further. Suppose that of the 200 people who never 
had a CD4+ cell count <500 cells/mm3 during the year, one estimates, from 
some other data source, that about 100 of them were on ART. Then one 
could estimate that about 200 of the 400 patients who should have been 
receiving ART were not.
The above discussion illustrates the underlying logic for making infer-ence but does not address the question of uncertainty in estimation. Of 
course there would be errors associated with all of these estimates. How 
to calculate the variability in estimates obtained by combining data from 
different sources is an area of active research. Bayesian methods have 
been used in a variety of settings to characterize the uncertainty associated 
with such estimates, re˚ecting the limitations of the data and the need to 
combine across sources. Similarly, Bayesian methods can also be used to 
conduct regression analyses that would allow for estimation of the effect of 
demographic factors on risk of receiving inadequate treatment.
Issues in Combining Information 
Many problems can bedevil analyses of data sets that are derived from 
clinical program or public health systems and from which treatment or 
intervention effects are being estimated; these include missing data, un-known population sizes and denominators, and sampling bias. Analysis of 
randomized studies generally also suffers from these challenges, since they 
are subject to some level of participant attrition, unplanned crossovers, 
and inadvertent unblinding. Combining sources of information can help 
to overcome shortcomings in each source but creates new challenges for 
the analyst, as described in the illustration above. These challenges arise 
from the fact that linkage between sources at the individual subject level 
may be uncertain or impossible, and even when linkages with high levels of 
certainty are possible, all of the relevant information may not be available 
on all subjects. Furthermore the level of precision of information may not 
be equal across studies and optimal estimation may have to take this factor 
into account as well. A large and growing body of work regarding strategies 
and methods for combining information is now available. 
In 1992, the National Research Council issued an important report 
titled Combining Information: Statistical Issues and Opportunities for 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 303
Research which described many of the principles and methods associated 
with combining information (NRC, 2002). Since that time, a number of 
developments in methods for combining data from different sources have 
occurred that could be applied to HIV research. For example, Bayesian 
two-stage hierarchical models have been employed in environmental health 
studies that relate air pollution to mortality. The ˜rst stage of such studies 
estimates the impact on mortality of air pollution for different cities of in-terest, after controlling for confounding factors. The second stage combines 
the estimates across cities using a Bayesian hierarchical model (Lindley and 
Smith, 1972; Morris and Normand, 1992) to obtain an overall estimate 
and to explore whether some of the geographic variation can be explained 
by site-speci˜c explanatory variables (Dominici et al., 2000). Such tech-niques would also be useful if, for example, there was interest in relating 
community-level factorsŠsuch as prevalence or incidence of disease, access 
to health care, poverty or homelessness ratesŠto such health outcomes as 
HIV morbidity or mortality.
Many of the problems that arise in combining information can be 
viewed as related to the issue of missing data. For example, the indicator for 
a link between individuals may be seen as missing. Missing data are handled 
in a wide variety of ways from the ad hoc (analyze only complete cases) to 
sophisticated methods for accommodating incomplete observations. 
One approach to dealing with missing data is imputationŠreplacement of the missing observation with the best estimate of what it would have 
been had it not been missing. Such methods, however, tend to underesti
-mate the uncertainty that arises from the missing data. Multiple imputation 
addresses this concern using Bayesian methods (Little and Rubin, 1987). 
Likelihood-based methods are also useful; these involve the development 
of a likelihood for just the observed data. In either case, one must have 
a statistical model for the generation process of the data, including the 
probability of its being observed. Given the importance of such models, 
considerable effort has been made to expand their ˚exibility, by allowing 
not only fully parametric but also semiparametric models (Tsiatis, 2006).
In some cases it may be possible to make inferences about the sizes of 
populations of interest using capture-recapture methods; these are useful 
in settings when collection of complete data (i.e., a full enumeration of 
the populations) is not feasible or affordable. For example, as described 
below, these have been used to estimate the size of an injection drug-using 
population. 
In addition to the problem of missing data, analyses of observational 
data intended to produce causal estimates of the impact of factors, such 
as demographics or insurance status, on outcomes must take into account 
confounding factors. There is an enormous literature on adjustment for 
confounding factors, as well as increased interest in causal modeling for 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.304
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
this purpose. One approachŠuse of marginal structural modelsŠhas re-ceived increasing attention because of its ability to handle confounding 
factors that vary over time (Suarez et al., 2008). All of these techniques 
are relevant to the charge to the committee to explore the opportunities 
and limits of data sources for HIV program and outcome evaluation in the 
United States, but they by no means capture the breadth of methodology 
available to cope with data limitations that may bias or confound results 
and distort conclusions.Multiple Imputation for Missing Data
Missing data can arise from settings in which people are asked about 
sensitive personal data, when resource constraints limit the completeness 
of data collection, or when certain items of information are not routinely 
collected. When a given variable is essential for a particular evaluation, 
analyses only of complete cases introduces many threats to inference: (1) 
bias can be introduced because persons with missing data may be system
-atically different from those with complete data; (2) statistical power can 
be reduced when many cases are deleted from analyses due to missing 
data; (3) resources can be wastedŠfor example, when 95 percent of data 
are collected on someone, but due to the 5 percent missing data, the entire 
data block is left unused; and (4) ethical obligations to research subjects 
can be compromised when they have inconvenienced themselves under the 
assumption that they were doing this for biomedical or behavioral research, but the investigator discards their data due to missing variables. 
Data on sensitive topics such as sexual risk behaviors or drug use may 
be limited by nonresponse bias or biases stemming from socially sensitive 
responding. These biases present a special challenge to the collection of 
data for surveillance and for epidemiologic research studies where sexual 
behaviors or drug use may be relevant (Fenton et al., 2001). Multiple im-putation helps to circumvent the need to eliminate subjects with partially 
observed data imputing (predicting) values for missing variables. Such 
imputation requires a statistical model for the complete data (including 
the unobserved portions) and for the process that led to the observed 
pattern of missing observations. This model is used to predict the missing 
observation based on the individuals for whom the data were observed. 
The posterior distributions of the unobserved values given the observed 
data can then be calculated. Since such calculations may be dif˜cult, Little 
and Rubin (1987) propose a resampling-based approach for their calcula
-tion. Like any approach for handling missing data, its validity depends 
on the correct speci˜cation of a model for the process that generated the 
missing data. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 305
Capture-Recapture MethodsWhen the population of interest has not been enumerated and a survey 
of the prevalence of a condition or size of a subgroup in a community is 
impractical or otherwise unfeasible, the capture-recapture method may be 
used. This technique derived from the ˜eld of population ecology (Stephen, 
1996). For example, one can capture mosquitoes, dust them with harm-less ˚orescent material, and release them. The proportion of recaptured 
mosquitoes in a day or two (allowing suf˜cient time for remixing but not 
allowing time for signi˜cant mortality) can be used to estimate the total 
number of mosquitoes in the local population, assuming random mix-ing and equal probability of selecting labeled and unlabeled mosquitoes. 
Similarly, small mammals may be trapped, tagged, and released, and then 
a second trapping recaptures new and old (tagged) mammals, enabling a 
population estimate. 
In human biology and epidemiology, the completeness of population 
ascertainment can be indirectly estimated using capture-recapture, as with 
estimations of persons who need HIV therapy, drug addiction services, or 
other social or medical services. Thus, persons must be ﬁcapturedﬂ and 
ﬁmarked,ﬂ to borrow the ecology model, such that they are available for 
recapture after release. Sometimes in epidemiology, this is literal, as with 
prisoners who are injection drug users (IDUs), who are arrested but released 
after a short time in jail. The proportion who return to jail may be used to 
estimate the proportion of drug users at risk of being arrested (presumably 
a large proportion of IDUs); combined with population HIV estimates, the 
absolute number of HIV-infected drug users can be estimated (Drucker and 
Vermund, 1989; Dunn and Ferri, 1999).
One may estimate the size of a population from just two samples or 
through multiple samples. Capture histories may be analyzed to estimate 
migration, life span, or size in the population of interest. A simple formula 
re˚ects the core principle of the basic capture-recapture approach. This sim-ple model requires strong assumptions such as full mixing of persons who 
have been ﬁcapturedﬂ and ﬁreleasedﬂ (as with hospitalized patients who 
go home) with the general population. The time-to-recapture estimation 
must be long enough to permit remixing and short enough for estimation 
to be relatively unaffected by deaths, out- and in-migrations, and failure to 
identify ﬁmarks.ﬂ The latter may occur, for example, when rehospitalized 
patients use different names when entering an institution. If the assump
-tions are met, the formula is expressed as: N = MC/R (where N = total 
population size estimated; M = total number of persons ﬁcapturedﬂ and 
ﬁmarkedﬂ [i.e., identi˜ed] on the ˜rst occasion; C = total number of per-sons ﬁcapturedﬂ on the second visit; and R = number of identi˜ed persons 
ﬁmarkedﬂ from the ˜rst occasion that were then reidenti˜ed on the second 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.306
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
occasion) (Chao et al., 2001; Hook and Regal, 1995; International Working 
Group for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting, 1995a,b; Stephen, 1996). 
Marginal Structural Methods and Models
Marginal structural models estimate treatment or intervention effects 
in observational studies by statistical strategies of controlling for selection 
bias and confounding variables (Robins, 1999). The fundamental concept 
behind marginal structural modeling can be explained as follows: Suppose 
one wishes to compare exposures A and B, which may vary over time, in 
some population and suppose that, at each time, one could create an iden-tical copy of each study subject. If the actual subject had exposure A at a 
given time, we would give the copy exposure B and vice versa. One could 
then compare each subject to his or her copy. We refer to the outcomes for 
each of the imaginary copies as ﬁcounterfactualsﬂ and treat them as miss-ing data. Inverse-probability weighting (IPW) is an approach to handling 
missing data that reweights observations by the inverse of the probability 
that they are made. Marginal structural models use IPW to deal with the 
unobserved (ﬁmissingﬂ) counterfactuals. Using IPW and marginal structural 
model procedures reweight data sets so that treatment and covariates are 
not confounded.In ﬁconfounding by indication,ﬂ an ﬁexposureﬂ is linked to a true 
causal exposure (e.g., condom use and commercial sex work) but does not 
itself contribute to the outcome. For example, condom use may be statisti-cally and positively linked to HIV risk, which is counterintuitive (Holmes 
et al., 2004), but this association may arise because of confounding by 
indication (e.g., disproportionate use of condoms by sex workers in the 
population studied). When this occurs in an observational study, the as
-sociation of the putative risk factor cannot be accurately attributed to the 
outcome of interest unless one has measured all of the exposures and the 
relevant confounding factors. 
Estimation of causality must take into account time-dependent con
-founding, and marginal structural models can address selection bias and/or confounding in such analyses. However, inclusion of such factors as 
time-varying covariates in longitudinal models does not correct for this 
bias. Such bias occurs most often when ﬁ(1) conditional on past treatment 
history, a time-dependent variable is a predictor of the subsequent outcome 
and [is] also a predictor of subsequent treatment; and (2) [when] past treat-ment history is an independent predictor of the time-dependent variableﬂ 
(Suarez et al., 2008). 
Marginal structural models can be used for causal inference even from 
nonexperimental designs, comparing treatments or interventions, as long as 
information is reasonably accurate, all confounders are measured, and cen-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 307
soring either is noninformative or can be modeled accurately as a function 
of known covariates. Better control of confounding than available from 
simple parametric regression models alone may bring some observational 
data closer to values that would be measured in a randomized controlled 
clinical trial. One recent example comes from a study showing that hor-monal contraception is a risk factor for HIV acquisition in African women 
(Heffron et al., 2011). Marginal structural model analyses were used to as-sess the validity of the Cox proportional hazards regression from this large 
observational couples study. 
Here the committee describes only a few of the challenges that arise in 
the use of observational data to make inferences about outcomes or service 
coverage (Teresi, 1994) and the approaches to dealing with them. Nonethe
-less, the committee seeks to illustrate a few modern statistical methods to 
make surveillance and programmatic data more useful for evaluation pur-poses and to illustrate the inherent challenges, both to data collection and 
to analyses. Correct application of these and other relevant techniques can 
improve the chances that inferences drawn from imperfect data are valid. 
Analysis of Indicators Involving Small Subgroups of People Living with 
HIV/AIDSTracking reductions in HIV-related health disparities will require analy
-sis of indicators by race and ethnicity, sexual orientation, and other de
-mographic variables. The NHAS is aimed at improving access to care and 
health outcomes for PLWHA and reducing HIV-related health disparities 
at the national level. Yet, analysis of indicators may occur at a local level, 
such as to disseminate information to local health departments and HIV 
care providers on the status of the HIV epidemic in their jurisdictions. In 
some communities of the United States, the number of individuals who 
comprise a speci˜c demographic group (e.g., racial and ethnic minority men 
who have sex with men) may be small. Because the statistical power of an 
indicator estimate is linked to the number of observations in a sample, small 
subgroups limit the precision of estimates of care indicators and the ability 
to compare them with other subpopulations of PLWHA. In epidemiologic 
studies, investigators may have little choice but to pool very small subpopu
-lations with the larger study population because there is insuf˜cient power 
to extract the effects of de˜ning subgroup characteristics. With respect to 
the NHAS, however, this would defeat the purpose of using indicators to 
track improvements in HIV-related disparities. 
Statistical methods for inference may be used for the analysis of indica-tors involving small subgroups of PLWHA. In general, Bayesian methods 
are useful for combining information about prevalence, incidence, or treat-ment effects across different population subgroups (Han and Chaloner, 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.308
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
2005). Group-speci˜c Bayesian estimates are ﬁshrunkﬂ toward (moved 
closer to) the mean of the quantity of interest over the population included 
in the combined data set. Because the amount of shrinkage depends on 
the amount of available information, the smaller the size of the subgroup, 
the greater will be the reliance on the estimate of the mean. In addition, 
group-speci˜c Bayesian estimates are sensitive to assumptions regarding 
the distributions of the random effects; the most common approach of as-suming normal distributions leads to the greatest shrinkage. Using other 
types of random effects distributions, such as Student t or mixtures, can 
reduce the amount of shrinkage, since they have longer tails and, therefore, 
allow for a greater probability of outlying values. As an alternative, one 
can base inference on nonparametric approaches, which can achieve the 
same goal. Posterior distributions may also tend to be ˚atterŠimplying 
lower precision in estimatesŠbecause the strong normal assumption can 
convey a sense that there is more information on which to base inference 
than is truly the case if the distributions are nonnormal. While Bayesian 
methods provide posterior distributions for any subgroup, no matter its 
size, the inference for that group will rest most heavily on the mean and on 
underlying assumptions if the subgroup is small. More advanced statistical 
methods, such as those that do not require parametric assumptions for the 
distributions of the random effects, can provide more reliable and robust 
results in this setting. 
Growing numbers of studies indicate that social status modi˜ers such 
as race and ethnicity, nativity (place of birth), sexual orientation, geo
-graphic location, and drug use status often have an impact on important 
measures of HIV care (e.g., Kempf et al., 2010; Lillie-Blanton et al., 2009; 
McGowan et al., 2011). For these subpopulations, among whom social 
status contributes to their risk environment (Farley, 2006; Rhodes, 2009) 
and treatment access, assumptions of normality of the distribution of ran-dom effects may be especially problematic, and approaches that allow for 
the existence of outliers are particularly needed. One potential consequence 
of overshrinkage is underestimation of the impact of indicators of social 
status, such as geographic location, economic status, or drug status, on care experiences. And so although parametric approaches can provide some care data on individuals in these subpopulation groups, they lie within a more 
restrictive set of assumptions that could temper the use of the results for 
policy changes.Epidemiologic studies are an important source of data on care and 
supportive services received by PLWHA. Health research in general has 
historically been plagued by an inability to recruit and retain large numbers 
of racial and ethnic and socioeconomically diverse populations, particularly of sexual minorities or the homeless (Levkoff and Sanchez, 2003; Moreno-John et al., 2004; Sengupta et al., 2000), although studies of PLWHA may 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 309
do better than studies of other populations in terms of representativeness. 
Although helpful, statistical methods cannot make up for a lack of suf˜cient 
data to estimate indicators for small populations of PLWHA. The develop
-ment of precise indicator estimates would be facilitated to a greater degree 
by inclusion of those groups in greater numbers in HIV-related studies.
In a given community, there may be subpopulations of PLWHA that are 
small in number and have complex health care and supportive service needs 
for whom the ability to maintain health care regimens depends on access 
to supportive services. Improvements in linkages between data systems that 
collect information on clinical care and those that collect information on 
supportive services (e.g., housing and transportation services) would help 
to ensure the availability of the full range of data needed to estimate indica-tors for these subpopulations. Although data system linkages will not ad
-dress the problem of low statistical power in analyses designed speci˜cally 
to provide estimates for small subpopulations of PLWHA, nonparametric 
methods can be used to provide some insights into care needs.
Increased support for training of HIV/AIDS researchers in statistics and methodologies may facilitate the development of expertise in the analysis 
of data for subpopulations of PLWHA. Such investment could speed the 
provision of effective treatment to all communities and thereby improve 
control of HIV transmission. 
DISSEMINATION OF DATA TO IMPROVE HIV CARE QUALITY
Analysis of the HIV care and related indicators identi˜ed by the com-mittee will generate data of interest to a number of stakeholders, including 
federal and state agencies and policy makers, state and local health depart-ments, health care systems (e.g., HMOs, VA, prisons), individual provid
-ers, consumers (patients), and academic researchers. Properly presented, 
the information provided to each audience has the potential to improve 
the quality of HIV care in the United States. Policy makers, agencies, and 
health departments may use the information to direct resources and poli
-cies toward areas that are most problematic (e.g., access to health care or 
mental health, substance use, or supportive services to improve linkage to 
or retention in care). Health care systems and individual providers may use 
the information to inform their provision of quality HIV care and to target 
patient education efforts. Individual patients, patient groups, and patient 
advocates could use the information to direct personal and group advocacy 
efforts for access to needed services. Academic researchers could use the 
information to support research proposals and projects that might generate 
additional information to further improve the quality of HIV care.
The committee™s review of the existing systems that capture data rel
-evant to HIV care shows that many data on various aspects of HIV care 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.310
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
currently exist. However, existing data often are not used to the fullest 
extent possible. Although government agencies and some state and local 
health departments make some de-identi˜ed data available publicly, in 
other cases the data reside with the agencies that require the reporting 
and are not made accessible to the public (HHS, 2010), including to the 
programs and providers who reported the data in the ˜rst place. Not only 
is broad dissemination of data on HIV care important for improving care 
by engaging as many stakeholders as possible; the return of information to 
reporting programs and providers increases the collaborative nature of the 
relationship, provides them with useful feedback, and may motivate them 
to further increase reporting compliance (CDC, 2011, p. 5-32).
Data Dissemination by Federal Agencies
Federal agencies, including the Centers for Disease Control and Preven-tion (CDC), the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), and 
the National Institutes of Health (NIH), have been disseminating health-
related information for decades. Until the advent of the Internet, which 
enabled agencies to disseminate large amounts of information, dissemina-tion had primarily involved making paper copies of documents available to 
the public (OMB, 2011). In the context of increasing federal information 
dissemination, Congress passed the Information Quality Act (IQA), also 
referred to as the Data Quality Act, in December 2000. The IQA required 
the Of˜ce of Management and Budget (OMB) to issue guidance to federal 
agencies to ensure the ﬁquality, objectivity, utility, and integrityﬂ of infor
-mation disseminated to the public. In response, the OMB issued Guidelines 
for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity 
of Information Disseminated by Federal Agencies, effective October 2001. 
These guidelines require that information quality be treated as an integral 
step in the information development process. Federal agencies must adopt 
a basic standard of quality as a performance goal and take steps to incor-porate information quality criteria into agency information dissemination. 
In addition, agencies are to develop a process for reviewing the quality of 
information before it is disseminated. OMB designed the guidelines to apply 
to a variety of government dissemination activities and to be generic enough 
to ˜t all media (HHS, 2006a).
The IQA also required that government agencies issue their own infor-mation quality guidelines and establish mechanisms to allow individuals 
to seek correction of information maintained and disseminated by federal 
agencies that does not comply with OMB guidance (OMB, 2011). There-fore, Guidelines for Ensuring the Quality of Information Disseminated to 
the Public have been issued for several agencies of the U.S. Department of 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 311
Health and Human Services (HSS). These guidelines describe the types of 
information disseminated by the agency to the public; types of dissemina-tion methods; agency standards for ensuring the quality of information 
disseminated; agency administrative complaint procedures; in˚uential sci-enti˜c, ˜nancial, and statistical information; and any special considerations 
for agency dissemination. As one HIV-speci˜c example, the types of infor
-mation disseminated by HRSA listed in its guidelines include HRSA HIV/AIDS Bureau State Pro˜les that describe spending and service information 
for Ryan White HIV/AIDS Programs, including provider characteristics 
(e.g., the number and types of organizations in the state that receive Ryan 
White HIV/AIDS Program funding), client demographic information, ser-vice utilization information (e.g., number of patient visits for core medical 
services), and characteristics of AIDS Drug Assistance Program clients 
(HHS, 2006b; HRSA, 2012). Under ﬁdissemination methodsﬂ the guide
-lines say that the state pro˜les are available through the HRSA HIV/AIDS 
Bureau website and that further requests or feedback can be made by phone 
or email (HHS, 2006c). Within CDC, dissemination guidance applies to 
HIV/AIDS Surveillance Reports and reports for other infectious and non
-infectious conditions (HHS, 2006b).
Considerations in Data Dissemination
Effective and ef˜cient dissemination of data requires careful attention 
to several considerations, including audience, de˜nition and presentation of 
the message, data quality and interpretation, and method of dissemination 
(CDC, 2009; Marriott et al., 2000; Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a,b).
In HRSA guidelines for ensuring the quality of information dissemi-nated to the public, CAREWare, a software package used by Ryan White 
HIV/AIDS Program providers to track clients and services, is listed as a 
means to ensure the quality of information disseminated to the public 
(HHS, 2006c). According to the guidelines, CAREWare helps to ensure the 
quality of data because it contains consistency and edit checks on input 
data. HIV/AIDS Bureau State Pro˜les, which present state-level data derived 
from these data, provideŠfor each data elementŠinformation on data 
limitations, rounding, and restrictions where appropriate (HHS, 2006c). 
CDC guidance notes that surveillance information is often obtained from 
third parties, such as states and grantees, which places limits on quality 
assurance. However, the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the in
-formation are subject to sample audits, site visits, and an ﬁevaluation for 
completeness and consistency with trends and external controlsﬂ (HHS, 
2006b).Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.312
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
AudienceDe˜ning and understanding the target audience is one of the ˜rst steps 
in developing a plan for data dissemination (Marriott et al., 2000; Sofaer 
and Hibbard, 2010b). Potential audiences for data derived from the full 
set of HIV care indicators identi˜ed by the committee already have been 
identi˜ed (federal and state agencies and policy makers, state and local 
health departments, health care systems, individual providers, consumers 
[patients], and academic researchers). Selection of the appropriate audience 
involves consideration of what the data show, the purpose for which the 
data are being disseminated, and the message that is to be conveyed.
Federal, state, or local policy makers and agencies would be the pri-mary target audience/s if the purpose is to increase or redirect the allocation of resources or to affect policy changes, including the development of new 
programs to address speci˜c areas of need. Such programs could focus on 
points in the HIV care continuum that the data might indicate are particu-larly problematic (e.g., continuity of care) or mediators known to affect 
those areas (e.g., access to stable housing). Information about improve-ments on indicators would be useful as well, by showing which current 
policies and programs are working.
Public and private health care systems, as well as individual providers, 
might be interested in the data for the purpose of evaluation of, and pos
-sible changes in, the HIV care they provide. Such information could permit 
systems and providers to identify their areas of strength, as well as areas 
for improvement, in the provision of quality HIV care. Research indicates 
that dissemination of clinical practice guidelines alone has a minimal effect 
on provider knowledge and performance, while combination strategies, 
including those with an education component, are more effective (Marriott 
et al., 2000). Results of performance indicators also may be more effective 
in changing provider behavior (Marriott et al., 2000).
PLWHA, and advocacy groups for PLWHA, are other potential audi
-ences for the information on indicators. The information could be used 
to educate individuals regarding areas in which increased attention and 
advocacy could improve HIV care.
Depending on what the data show, the dissemination process might 
target any of these general audiences or a more speci˜c audience within a 
group, such as policy makers representing a particular region of the United 
States, HIV care providers who serve patients in a speci˜c demographic 
group, or patients of a particular race or ethnicity. Ultimately, audience 
selection should depend on the applicability of the data for that audience 
and the purpose the data serve (Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010b). Once the 
audience is de˜ned, the message and the remainder of the dissemination 
process should be geared to that audience (CDC, 2009).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 313
De˜nition and Presentation of the MessageAnother critical consideration in effective data dissemination is the 
message to be conveyed. Many audiences are not equipped to understand 
and process vast quantities of data (Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a). Data 
provided without the expertise to interpret them can cause more harm 
than good. Even the language used to present the information may result 
in unanticipated misinterpretation (Hibbard and Sofaer, 2010). It is impor
-tant therefore for an agency to have a clear understanding of the message it 
wants to transmit and then relay that message to the target audience clearly 
and concisely, along with the data to support it (Hibbard and Sofaer, 2010; 
Marriott et al., 2000; Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a). The details of the mes-sage may vary depending on the target audience, as will the way in which 
the message is presented.
Presentation of the message in the most appropriate way for the target 
audience is critical to ensure that the message the agency wants to convey 
is the one that is received by the audience (CDC, 2009; Marriott et al., 
2000). Considerations of health literacy and numeracy are important when 
preparing information for dissemination (Hibbard and Sofaer, 2010; IOM, 
2004). Presentations of data from the HIV care and supportive services 
indicators and trends in the quality of HIV care over time will use differ-ent language depending on the audience (e.g., clinical care professionals, 
policy makers, program administrators, members of the public). Clinical 
indicators of HIV care that are fully comprehensible to HIV care providers 
may be incomprehensible to patients or to policy makers. It is important to 
make the information relevant to what the audience understands and the 
purpose for which it will use the data. Three papers on ﬁbest practices in 
public reportingﬂ on health care performance data, prepared for the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality, discuss a number of the pitfalls in 
and solutions to presenting performance data to health care consumers 
(Hibbard and Sofaer, 2010; Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a,b). Although the 
papers focus on a speci˜c type of data and target audience, the concepts 
presented may be generalized to other audiences and types of information.Data Quality and Interpretation
As discussed, the IQA mandates that federal agencies develop quality 
assurance guidelines for information releases to the public, and a number of HHS agencies have issued Guidelines for Ensuring the Quality of Informa-tion Disseminated to the Public. Although it is important for agencies to 
present the message clearly, concisely, and in language that is understood by 
and resonates with the target audience, it is also important that they include 
information about the quality of the data that support the message and the 
methods used to interpret them (Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a).
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.314
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Factors affecting data quality include the source of the data, quality 
within the system, coverage of the data, con˜dence range, use of proxies, 
and analytic methodology applied. The challenge lies in providing suf˜-cient information to permit independent assessment of the data, while not 
overwhelming the target audience with information that it cannot or will 
not use (Marriott et al., 2000; Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a). One approach 
is to include with the disseminated information a summary, presented in 
language accessible to the target audience, of the data and the data analy-sis, including discussion of limitations or gaps in the data and any other 
relevant information that would enhance the audience™s understanding and 
evaluation of the data (HHS, 2006b; Marriott et al., 2000; Sofaer and 
Hibbard, 2010a). At the same time, the agency could make available to 
interested parties full information on the data set and the methodologies 
used to assess it (Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a). CDC, for example, clearly 
documents and makes publicly available the statistical processes and meth-odologies used to derive published information, which allows independent 
statisticians to replicate the results (HHS, 2006b).
Evidence suggests that an audience™s acceptance of data is affected by 
its perception of the credibility of the data source and the source reporting 
the information (e.g., professional medical journal versus popular press), as 
well as proximity of the source to the target audience (Marriott et al., 2000; Sofaer and Hibbard, 2010a). Information intermediaries can help in this 
regard. Engagement with organizations knowledgeable about and trusted 
by the target audience may assist in the dissemination of information and 
help to support the credibility of the information and its source (Sofaer and 
Hibbard, 2010b).Methods of Dissemination
A ˜nal consideration for effective and ef˜cient data dissemination is se-lection of the most appropriate and cost-effective method of dissemination. 
As previously mentioned, federal agencies have a variety of dissemination 
methods at their disposal, including traditional print media (e.g., reports, 
peer-reviewed articles, fact sheets, newsletters), electronic media (e.g., web
-sites, podcasts), and public forums (e.g., conferences, planned meetings) 
(CDC, 2009), and frequently more than one method may be employed.
The target audience and the message and data to be conveyed are fac-tors in the choice of dissemination method. An agency might choose to 
prepare a report or paper for a peer-reviewed professional journal if the 
goal is transmit the information to health care systems or providers. Re-ports, newsletters, and fact sheets might be more effective in reaching policy 
makers or other agencies. Websites will reach a larger and broader audi
-ence, including members of the public. The type of information and style of 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 315
presentation used for a professional journal will differ markedly from that 
prepared for dissemination on the agency website. The speed or urgency 
with which a message needs to be conveyed is another consideration in the 
selection of dissemination method.CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS


care and supportive services will often require combining data from 
multiple data systems. Making valid inferences about the indicators 
across different populations and over time using data from multiple 
data systems presents a range of analytic and logistical challenges. 
Such challenges will change over time and will have to be reevalu-ated periodically. 
  
Recommendation 6-1. At least once every 2 years, the Department 
of Health and Human Services should reevaluate mechanisms for 
combining data elements to estimate key indicators of HIV care 
and access to supportive services, analyze the combined data, and 
identify and address barriers to the ef˜cient analysis of such data, 
including relevant statistical methodologies. To facilitate this pro
-cess, HHS should engage a center of excellence representing broad 
areas of expertise that include information technology, statistical 
methodologies for combining data, and data system content.
  
The center of excellence might also include experts in epidemiology and surveillance; laws and policies that affect access to HIV-related 
data; health services research, including insurance; medical infor-matics, including integration of public and private data sources 
to estimate population-level parameters; clinical HIV care and 
relevant social services; and community and patient perspectives. 
  
The center of excellence could address questions such as the extent 
to which proxy data elements can be used to estimate indicators; 
whether knowledge of an indicator for a subpopulation rather 
than the whole cohort of PLWHA might be acceptable for some 
indicators; and the level of accuracy to be demanded for any given 
indicator (e.g., whether estimates are needed within 1, 5, or 10 
percentage points) given the potential costs of data collection and 
of obtaining very accurate indicator estimates. 

be of interest to a variety of stakeholders, including policy makers, 
health departments, HIV care providers, patients, and researchers. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.316
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
The disseminated information can be used in numerous waysŠfrom informing policy decisions to supporting the development of 
research projectsŠthat have the potential to improve the quality 
of HIV care. 
  
Recommendation 6-2. The Department of Health and Human 
Services should report to the public at least once every 2 years on 
indicators of HIV care and access to supportive services to foster 
improvements in the quality of HIV care and in monitoring prog-ress toward meeting the goals of the National HIV/AIDS Strategy.
  
The reporting interval of at least once every 2 years allows for 
regular reporting of the indicator data to monitor the NHAS while 
minimizing reporting burden and associated costs. To facilitate 
understanding and use of the indicator information by stakehold-ers, dissemination products and strategies may vary depending 
on the target audience and message to be conveyed. Information 
about the quality of the indicator data (e.g., con˜dence ranges for 
indicators estimates, use of proxy data elements) might be included 
in the dissemination product so that stakeholders are aware of the 
limitations of the data. 
REFERENCESCDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2009. Basic Concepts for Disseminating 
and Communicating Surveillance Data. http://www.cdc.gov/pednss/how_to/disseminate_
data/basic_concepts.htm (accessed January 19, 2012).CDC. 2011. Principles of Epidemiology in Public Health Practice. Third Edition. Self-Study 
Course SS-1000. Atlanta, GA: CDC. http://www.cdc.gov/training/products/ss1000/
ss1000-ol.pdf (accessed January 19, 2012).
Chao, A., P. K. Tsay, S. Lin, W. Shau, and D. Chao. 2001. The applications of capture-
 recapture models to epidemiologic data. 
Statistics in Medicine 20:3123-3157.Dominici, F., J. M. Samet, and S. L. Zeger. 2000. Combining evidence on air pollution and 
daily mortality from the 20 largest U.S. cities: A hierarchical modelling strategy. 
Journal 
of the Royal Statistical Society 163(3):263-302. 
Drucker, E., and S. Vermund. 1989. Estimating population prevalence of human immunode
-˜ciency virus infection in urban areas with high rates of intravenous drug use: A model 
of the Bronx in 1988. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 130(1):133-142.Dunn, J., and C. P. Ferri. 1999. Epidemiologic methods for research with drug misusers: 
Review of methods for studying prevalence and morbidity. 
Revista de Saúde Pública 33(2):206-215.Farley, T. A. 2006. Sexually transmitted diseases in the southeastern United States: Location, 
race, and social context. Sexually Transmitted Diseases
 33(7):S58-S64.Fenton, K. A., A. M. Johnson, S. McManus, and B. Erens. 2001. Measuring sexual behavior: 
Methodological challenges in survey research. Sexually Transmitted Infections
 77:84-92.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EFFICENT ANALYSIS OF HIV CARE INDCATORS
 317
Han, C., and K. Chaloner. 2005. Design of population studies of HIV dynamics. In 
Deter-ministic and Stochastic Models of HIV Epidemics and HIV Infections with Intervention,
 edited by W. Tan and H. Wu. Hackensack, NJ: World Scienti˜c Publishing Co. 
Heffron, R., D. Donnell, H. Rees, C. Celum, N. Mugo, E. Were, G. de Bruyn, E. Nakku-
Joloba, K. Ngure, J. Kiarie, R.W. Coombs, and J. M. Baeten. 2011. Use of hormonal 
contraceptives and risk of HIV-1 transmission: A prospective cohort study. 
Lancet Infec-tious Diseases
 doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(11)70247-X. 
HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). 2006a. 
HHS Guidelines for Ensur
-ing and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of Information Dis
-seminated to the Public. Part 1: HHS overview.
 http://aspe.hhs.gov/infoquality/guidelines/part1.shtml (accessed January 19, 2012).
HHS. 2006b. Guidelines for Ensuring the Quality of Information Disseminated to the Public. 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Agency for Toxic Substances and Dis
-ease Registry.
 http://aspe.hhs.gov/infoquality/guidelines/cdcinfo2.shtml (accessed January 
19, 2012).HHS. 2006c. 
Guidelines for Ensuring the Quality of Information Disseminated to the Public. 
Health Resources and Services Administration. 
http://aspe.hhs.gov/infoquality/guidelines/HRSAinfo2.shtml (accessed January 19, 2012). 
HHS. 2010. Putting data and innovation to work to help communities and consumers improve 
health. News Release. http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2010pres/06/20100602a.html (ac
-cessed January 19, 2012). 
Hibbard, J., and S. Sofaer. 2010. 
Best Practices in Public Reporting No. 1: How to Effec-tively Present Health Care Performance Data io Consumers. AHRQ Publication No.10-0082-EF. Bethesda, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
Holmes, K. K., R. Levine, and M. Weaver. 2004. Effectiveness of condoms in preventing sexu
-ally transmitted infections. Bulletin of the World Health Organization
 82(6):454-461.Hook, E. B., and R. R. Regal. 1995. Capture-recapture methods in epidemiology: Methods 
and limitations. American Journal of Epidemiology 17(2):243-264.HRSA (Health Resources and Services Administration). 2012. 
Ryan White HIV/AIDS Pro
-gram. 2009 State Pro˜les. http://hab.hrsa.gov/statepro˜les/index.htm (accessed March 
6, 2012). 
International Working Group for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting. 1995a. Capture-
recapture and multiple-record systems estimation I: History and theoretical development. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 142(10):1047-1058.International Working Group for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting. 1995b. Capture-
recapture and multiple-record systems estimation II: Applications in human diseases. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 142(10):1059-1068.IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2004. Health Literacy: A Prescription to End Confusion. Wash
-ington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Kempf, M., J. McLeod, A. K. Boehme, M. W. Walcott, L. Wright, P. Seal, W. E. Norton, J. E. 
Schumacher, M. Mugavero, and L. Moneyham. 2010. A qualitative study of the barriers 
and facilitators to retention-in-care among HIV-positive women in the rural southeast
-ern United States: Implications for targeted interventions. AIDS Patient Care and STDs 24(8):515-520.Levkoff, S., and H. Sanchez. 2003. Lessons learned about minority recruitment and retention 
from the Centers on Minority Aging and Health Promotion. 
Gerontologist 43:18-26.Lillie-Blanton, M., V. E. Stone, A. S. Jones, J. Levi, E. T. Golub, M. H. Cohen, N. A. Hessol, 
and T. E. Wilson. 2009. Association of race, substance abuse, and health insurance cover
-age with use of highly active antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected women, 2005. 
American Journal of Public Health 100:1493-1499.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.318
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Lindley, D. V., and A. F. M. Smith. 1972. Bayes estimates for the linear model. 
Journal of the 
Royal Statistical Society 
34(1):1-41.Little, R. J. A., and D. B. Rubin. 1987. 
Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. 
First Edition. 
Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley and Sons, Inc.
Marriott, C., C. Palmer, and P. Lelliott. 2000. Disseminating healthcare information: Getting 
the message across. Quality in Health Care 9:58-62.McGowan, C. C., D. D. Weinstein, C. P. Samenow, S. E. Stinnette, G. Barkinic, P. F. Rubiero, 
T. R. Sterling, R. D. Moore, and T. Hulgan. 2011. Drug use and receipt of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy among HIV-infected persons in two U.S. clinic cohorts. 
PLoS One 6(4):e18462. 
Moreno-John, G., A. Gachie, C. M. Fleming, A. Napoles-Springer, and E. Mutran. 2004. 
Ethnic minority older adults participating in clinical research: Developing trust. Journal 
of Aging and Health 
16:93S-123S.Morris, C. N., and S. L. Normand. 1992. Hierarchical models for combining information 
and for meta-analysis. In Bayesian Statistics 4, edited by J. M. Bernardo, J. O. Berger, 
A. P. Dawid, and A. F. M. Smith. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Pp. 321-344 
(with discussion).
NRC (National Research Council). 2002. Combining Information: Statistical Issues and Op-portunities for Research.
 Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 
OMB (Of˜ce of Management and Budget). 2011. Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing 
the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal 
Agencies. http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg_˜nal_information_quality_guidelines 
(accessed January 19, 2012). 
Rhodes, T. 2009. Risk environments and drug harms: A social science for harm reduction 
approach. International Journal of Drug Policy
 20(3):193-201. 
Robins, J. M. 1999. Association, causation, and marginal structural models. Synthese 121: 
151e79.Sengupta, S., R. P. Strauss, R. DeVellis, S. C. Quinn, B. DeVellis, and W. B. Ware. 2000. 
Factors affecting African-American participation in AIDS research. Journal of Acquired 
Immunode˜ciency Syndromes 24(3):275-284.Sofaer, S., and J. Hibbard. 2010a. 
Best Practices in Public Reporting No. 2: Maximizing 
Consumer Understanding of Public Comparative Quality Reports: Effective Use of Ex-planatory Information. AHRQ Publication No. 10-0082-1-EF. Bethesda, MD: Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
Sofaer, S., and J. Hibbard. 2010b. 
Best Practices in Public Reporting No. 3: How to Maximize 
Public Awareness and Use of Comparative Quality Reports Through Effective Promo
-tion and Dissemination Strategies. AHRQ Publication No. 10-0082-2-EF. Bethesda, MD: 
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. 
Stephen, C. 1996. Capture-recapture methods in epidemiological studies. Infection Control 
and Hospital Epidemiology 
17(4):262-266.Suarez, D., J. M. Haro, D. Novick, and S. Ochoa. 2008. Marginal structural models might 
overcome confounding when analyzing multiple treatment effects in observational stud-ies. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 61:525-530.Teresi, J. 1994. Overview of methodological issues in the study of chronic care populations. 
Alzheimer™s Disease and Associated Disorders
 8(Suppl 1):S247-S273.Tsiatis, A. A. 2006. 
Semiparametric Theory and Missing Data. New York: Springer Science 
and Business Media, LLC.Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.319AppendixBiographical Sketches of 
Committee MembersPaul A. Volberding, M.D. 
(Chair), is a professor in the Department of 
Medicine and codirector of the Center for AIDS Research at the University 
of California, San Francisco (UCSF). He received his medical degree from 
the University of Minnesota and ˜nished training at the University of Utah 
and UCSF, where he studied for 2 years as a research fellow in the virology 
laboratory of Dr. Jay Levy, later a co-discoverer of HIV. Dr. Volberding™s 
professional activities initially centered at San Francisco General Hospital, 
where he established a model program of AIDS patient care, research, and 
professional education. His research career began with investigations of 
HIV-related malignancies, especially Kaposi™s sarcoma. His primary re
-search focus, however, shifted to clinical trials of antiretroviral drugs. He 
was instrumental in testing many compounds but is best known for ground-breaking trials establishing the bene˜t of treatment in early-stage HIV 
infection. Dr. Volberding has written many research and review articles. 
He is coeditor in chief of the Journal of Acquired Immune De˜ciency Syn-dromes and is the founder and chair of the board of the International AIDS 
Society-USA and a past president of the International AIDS Society. He 
was president of the HIV Medicine Association of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America (IDSA). He is a Fellow of the American Association for 
the Advancement of Science, the American College of Physicians, and of 
IDSA, and he is a member of the Institute of Medicine, where he has served 
on several committees addressing the HIV epidemic.
Angela A. Aidala, Ph.D., is an associate research scientist at the Joseph L. 
Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia University in the Depart-Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.320
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
ment of Sociomedical Sciences. Her primary interest is the intersection of 
economic, social, and cultural in˚uences on health and illness among dis
-advantaged populations. Dr. Aidala™s work focuses on research, teaching, 
and service delivery strategies to work effectively with harder-to-reach or 
ﬁhiddenﬂ populations in urban settings, including the homeless, mentally 
ill, substance users, HIV-positive adults, and youth. Dr. Aidala has directed 
over 20 collaborative community health or services research projects. Her 
recent work is studying housing/lack of housing and HIV prevention and 
care, and methodological and statistical approaches to improve ﬁpractice-basedﬂ evidence. Dr. Aidala is coprincipal director and study director of 
the Community Health Advisory & Information Network (CHAIN), an 
ongoing study of persons living with HIV or at high risk of infection in 
New York City, now in its 18th year. CHAIN is conducted in collaboration 
with the HIV Planning Council and the New York Health Department of 
Health and Mental Hygiene and is a main source of data for service plan-ning in the region. Formerly, she directed the Multiple Diagnoses Initiative, 
a Department of Housing and Urban DevelopmentŒDepartment of Health 
and Human Services joint initiative that worked with housing providers to 
better understand the reciprocal relationship between housing and health 
care among persons living with HIV/AIDS who also struggle with mental 
illness and/or chronic substance abuse problems. Dr. Aidala received her 
Ph.D. in sociology from Columbia University.
David D. Celentano, Sc.D., M.H.S.,
 is professor and Charles Armstrong 
Chair of the department of epidemiology in the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg 
School of Public Health, with joint appointments in medicine, international 
health, and health, society, and behavior. His research integrates behavioral 
science theory and research with epidemiologic methods in the study of be-havioral and social epidemiology. Although originally trained in a chronic 
disease paradigm (alcoholism and cancer control), he began his research 
in HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) in the early 1980s. 
He has worked on some of the major cohort studies (AIDS Link to the In-travenous Experience [ALIVE], Multicenter AIDS Cohort Study [MACS]) 
in HIV epidemiology, as well as conducted intervention research in the 
United States for heterosexual men and women, injection drug users, and 
young men who have sex with men. He began international HIV research 
in 1990 through a long-term collaboration with Chiang Mai University in 
northern Thailand. He has worked on and directed numerous HIV/AIDS 
and STD epidemiological investigations and preventive interventions. He 
and his collaborators demonstrated that a behavioral intervention with 
young military conscripts led to a sevenfold reduction in incident STDs and 
halved the HIV incidence rate. In addition, the role of STDs and alcohol 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 321
use in HIV acquisition has been shown. His research group conducted a 
prospective study of hormonal contraception in relation to HIV seroconver-sion and elucidated the epidemiology of human papillomavirus prevalence, 
incidence, and clearanceŠa study with signi˜cant family planning policy 
and health implications. Today, he is the principal investigator of four stud
-ies in Thailand supported by the National Institutes of Health, focusing on 
interventions to in˚uence the association between drug use, sexual risk, and HIV treatment in HIV transmission. Additional research is being conducted 
in Vietnam, India, South Africa, and Tanzania.
Moupali Das, M.D., M.P.H.,
 is director of research in the HIV Prevention 
Section at the San Francisco Department of Public Health and assistant 
clinical professor in the Divisions of Infectious Diseases and HIV/AIDS at 
San Francisco General Hospital, at the University of California, San Fran-cisco. She is a board-certi˜ed infectious disease clinicianŒHIV specialist 
with research expertise in implementation science and evaluation research, 
in particular, using routinely collected HIV surveillance data to evaluate 
the impact of a comprehensive public health approach to HIV, including 
multilevel HIV prevention interventions. Dr. Das coauthored a key model
-ing study using San Francisco™s surveillance data to evaluate the effect of 
expanding access to antiretroviral therapy on the HIV epidemic among 
men who have sex with men. She has developed a novel population-based 
biologic indicator, community viral load, for monitoring the HIV epidemic 
prevention and control. Her manuscript on community viral load (Das, 
PLOS One
 2010) has been cited as the basis for measuring community viral 
load in President Barack Obama™s National HIV/AIDS Strategy (NHAS) 
and provides the framework for the NHAS recommendation that commu-nity viral load be used as an outcome measure to evaluate the effectiveness 
of the strategy. Dr. Das has examined geographic and socio-demographic 
disparities in community viral load as well as the relationship between com-munity viral load and new HIV infections. She is evaluating the relationship between differences in community viral load among different subpopula-tions in San Francisco and corresponding disparities in HIV incidence. 
Dr. Das is currently re˜ning the community viral load methodology and 
exploring using community viral load as a marker for multiple planned 
multilevel HIV-prevention trials. Dr. Das has been honored by invitations 
to participate in the Department of Health and Human Services and Of˜ce 
of Management and Budget consultations on developing a parsimonious set of harmonized indicators to evaluate the impact of the NHAS and health 
care reform. Dr. Das has been privileged to mentor junior investigators to 
support publication of their manuscripts on community viral load (Castel, 
AIDS 2011). 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.322
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Victor G. DeGruttola, Sc.D., M.S.,
 is a professor of biostatistics and chair 
of the department of biostatistics at the Harvard School of Public Health. 
His research activities focus on developments of statistical methods required 

for appropriate public health response to the AIDS epidemic both within 

the United States and internationally. The aspects of the epidemic on which 

he has worked include transmission of, and natural history of infection 

with, HIV, as well as research on antiretroviral treatments, including the de
-velopment and consequences of resistance and other adverse consequences 

of treatments. The broad goals of his research include developing treatment 

strategies that provide tolerable and durable virologic suppression while 

preserving treatment options after failure, and evaluating the community-

level impact of packages of prevention interventions, including antiviral 

treatment itself. He served as the director of the Statistics and Data Analysis 

Center of the Adult Project of the AIDS Clinical Trials Group during the 

period in which highly active antiretroviral treatment was developed, and 

he was instrumental in designing and analyzing studies of the best means of 

providing such therapy. Most recently, he has been engaged in development 

and application of methods for prevention of HIV infection.Carlos del Rio, M.D.,
 is Hubert Chair and Professor of Global Health in 
the Department of Global Health at the Rollins School of Public Health, 
and professor of medicine in the Division of Infectious Diseases at the 

Emory University School of Medicine. He is also codirector of the Emory 

Center for AIDS Research. He has held numerous leadership roles, includ-ing executive director of the National AIDS Council of Mexico, the federal 

agency of the Mexican government responsible for AIDS policy in that 

country; program director and principal investigator of the Emory AIDS 

International Training and Research Program; and member of the boards 

of the International AIDS Society USA, the HIV Medicine Association, and 

the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Dr. del Rio™s research interests 

include the epidemiology of opportunistic infections in HIV and other im-mune de˜ciencies, the epidemiology and transmission dynamics of HIV 

and other sexually transmitted diseases, HIV testing, access to and reten-tion in care, and compliance with antiretroviral drug regimens. He is also 

interested in the impact of HIV in developing countries and the optimal use 

of antiretroviral drugs in limited-resource settings. Dr. del Rio is associate 

editor of AIDS Clinical Care and senior clinical editor for AIDS Research 
and Human Retroviruses and is a member of the editorial boards of 
Jour-nal of AIDS and Global Public Health. He has coauthored more than 150 
scienti˜c papers.Marshall Forstein, M.D., is an associate professor of psychiatry at Harvard 
Medical School and director of Adult Psychiatry Residency Training at the 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 323
Cambridge Health Alliance. He attended the College of Medicine, Univer-sity of Vermont, after a career of teaching high school English, where he 
developed a lifelong interest in teaching and education. He completed an 
internship at Presbyterian Hospital, Paci˜c Medical Center in San Fran-cisco, and a residency in psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital. 
For 12 years he served as medical director of Mental Health and Addiction 
Services of the Fenway Community Health Center in Boston, a dedicated 
center for the care of sexual minorities and people at risk for and living 
with HIV infection. Dr. Forstein teaches medical students and is a core fac
-ulty member in the Division of Palliative Care at Harvard Medical School. 
Dr. Forstein has been treating people with HIV since the beginning of the 
epidemic, and he cofounded an integrated medical/psychiatric HIV clinic 
that has been treating a diverse population of people infected with HIV 
for over 25 years. He served as a member of the board of directors of the 
AIDS Action Committee of Massachusetts. Dr. Forstein has been a principal 
investigator on an HIV Education and Training Grant through the federal 
Center for Mental Health Services, and later served as a member of the 
advisory board of the Center for Mental Health Services of the Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration. He teaches and has pub-lished on the neuropsychiatry and psychosocial aspects of the HIV/AIDS 
epidemic. He currently chairs the Steering Committee on HIV Psychiatry 
for the American Psychiatric Association for Research and Education. He 
is a distinguished fellow of the American Psychiatric Association and is 
currently serving on the Residency Review Committee for Psychiatry of the 
Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education.
Carmine Grasso, M.S.W., M.P.H.,
 is currently a consultant working on HIV 
policy and funding issues. He recently retired from public service from the 
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, where he served 
as director of the Care and Treatment Unit. The Care and Treatment Unit 
oversaw the development of integrated systems designed to address the 
care and treatment needs of persons living with HIV in New Jersey. This 
unit served as the Ryan White Part B grantee in New Jersey and oversaw 
CARE Act activities, which included the AIDS Drug Distribution Program, 
the HIV Home Care Program, the Health Insurance Continuation Program, and regional HIV Care Services. Mr. Grasso has served as a consultant for 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Global AIDS Program and 
the National Alliance of State and Territorial AIDS Directors. From 1979 
to 1981, Mr. Grasso served as a Peace Corps volunteer in the Republic of 
Kiribati, where he worked as an outer-island health education and sanita
-tion worker in a primary health care program sponsored by the World 
Health Organization. Mr. Grasso received his M.P.H. and M.S.W. degrees 
from Columbia University. 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.324
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Shannon Houser, Ph.D., M.P.H., RHIA,
 is an associate professor in the 
Health Information Management Program in the Department of Health 
Services Administration, School of Health Professions of the University of 
Alabama at Birmingham (UAB). Dr. Houser works on many research stud
-ies at UAB, mostly large national studies of epidemiology, health behavior, 
health information technology, data management, and program evaluation. 
She brings her expertise in health information management, the Health In-formation Portability and Accountability Act Privacy Rule, and electronic 
health record implementation and evaluation. She has published widely 
in professional journals. Dr. Houser has been appointed as an adviser 
to Project HOPE and provides technical advice on program monitoring 
and evaluation for most ongoing HOPE-sponsored projects in China. Dr. 
Houser serves as a member of the American Health Information Manage-ment Association™s Education Strategy Committee and Research Committee 
and the Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society™s Schol
-arship Committee and Electronic Health Record Usability Task Force. She 
has served on the editorial review board and is currently a reviewer of the 
journal Perspectives in Health Information Management. Dr. Houser also 
develops courses and teaches in the undergraduate and graduate Health 
Information Management Programs for both traditional classroom courses 
and online or distance learning courses. 
Jennifer Kates, Ph.D., M.A., M.P.A., 
is vice president and director of Global 
Health & HIV Policy at the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation (KFF), 
where she oversees the foundation™s policy analysis and research focused on 
the U.S. government™s role in global health and on the global and domestic 
HIV epidemics. Widely regarded as an expert in the ˜eld, she regularly 
publishes and presents on global health issues and is particularly known 
for her work on analyzing donor government investments in global health; 
assessing and mapping the U.S. government™s global health architecture, 
programs, and funding; and tracking key trends in the HIV epidemic, an 
area in which she has been working for more than 20 years. Prior to join-ing KFF in 1998, Dr. Kates was a senior associate with the Lewin Group, 
a health care consulting ˜rm, where she focused on HIV policy, strategic 
planning and health systems analysis, and health care for vulnerable popu-lations. Before that, she directed the Of˜ce of Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual 
Concerns at Princeton University. Dr. Kates also serves on numerous federal 
and private sector advisory committees on global health and HIV/AIDS 
issues. Currently she is a member of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) Com-mittee on Planning the Evaluation of Global HIV/AIDS Programs Imple-mented Under the U.S. Global Leadership Against HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, 
and Malaria Reauthorization Act of 2008.  She is a former member of the 
IOM Committee on HIV Screening and Access to Care. Dr. Kates received 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 325
her Ph.D. in Health Policy from George Washington University, where she 
is also a lecturer. She holds a Bachelor™s degree from Dartmouth College, 
a Master™s degree in Public Affairs from Princeton University™s Woodrow 
Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, and a Master™s degree in 
Political Science from the University of Massachusetts.
Erika G. Martin, Ph.D., M.P.H.,
 is an assistant professor of public admin
-istration and policy at the Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy 
and an institute fellow at the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Govern-ment, State University of New York at Albany. She teaches undergraduate 
and graduate courses on policy analysis methods and health policy. Dr. 
Martin has examined the fairness and ˚exibility of the federal allocation 
formula for the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program, interstate variation in 
state AIDS Drug Assistance Program formularies, and the budget impact of 
expanded HIV screening on government testing, discretionary, and entitle
-ment programs. Current projects include using system dynamics modeling 
to evaluate the new HIV-testing law in New York State, analyzing the ef
-fects of the recently repealed ban on federal funding for syringe exchange 
programs, and assessing how health reform may affect AIDS Drug Assis-tance Programs. In addition to her research on HIV and substance abuse 
policy, Dr. Martin is actively involved in various projects that examine the 
public health effects of state vaccination laws and the way media in˚u
-ence public policy and public health practice. Dr. Martin received her B.A. 
from Brown University, her M.P.H. in epidemiology from the University 
of Michigan, and her Ph.D. in health policy and administration from Yale 
University.
Kenneth H. Mayer, M.D.,
 is the director of HIV Prevention Research at 
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and a visiting professor in medicine 
at Harvard Medical School. Previously, Dr. Mayer was professor of medi
-cine and community health and director of the AIDS Program at Brown 
University and an attending infectious disease physician at Miriam Hospi-tal. He is medical research director at Fenway Community Health in Boston 
and codirector of the Fenway Institute. Dr. Mayer has conducted studies 
of HIV™s natural history and interventions to interrupt transmission since 
the beginning of the epidemic. He was one of the ˜rst clinical researchers 
in New England to care for patients living with AIDS. Dr. Mayer has lec
-tured at many international conferences and symposia on biological and 
behavioral approaches to HIV prevention research and the development of 
community-based clinical research. He coedited The Emergence of AIDS: 
Impact on Immunology, Microbiology, and Public Health 
(APHA Press); 
HIV Prevention: A Comprehensive Approach
 (Academic Press); and 
The 
Fenway Guide to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Health
 (ACP 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.326
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Press). He has served as a member of the Data and Safety Monitoring Board 
of the National Institutes of Health™s AIDS Clinical Trials Group and sits 
on several editorial boards of scienti˜c publications. Dr. Mayer has co-
authored more than 450 articles, chapters, and other publications on AIDS 
and related infectious disease topics.
Vickie M. Mays, Ph.D., M.S.P.H.,
 is a professor in the department of psy-chology in the College of Letters and Sciences as well as a professor in the 
department of health services at the University of California, Los Angeles 
(UCLA) School of Public Health. She is also the director of the UCLA 
Center on Research, Education, Training and Strategic Communication on 
Minority Health Disparities. She teaches courses on health status and health 
behaviors of racial and ethnic minority groups; research ethics in biomedical 
and behavioral research on racial and ethnic minority populations; research methods in minority research; mental health policy and mental health ser-vices; and the social determinants of mental disorders and psychopathology. 
She holds a Ph.D. in clinical psychology and an M.S.P.H. in health services, 
with postdoctoral training in psychiatric epidemiology, survey research as 
it applies to ethnic minorities (University of Michigan), and health policy 
(RAND). Professor Mays™s research focuses on the mental and physical 
health disparities affecting racial and ethnic minority populations. She has 
a long history of research and policy development in the area of contextual 
factors surrounding HIV/AIDS in racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities. 
This work ranges from looking at barriers to education and services to un-derstanding racially based immunological differences that may contribute 
to disparities in health outcomes. Other areas of research include looking 
at the role of perceived and actual discrimination in mental and physical 
health outcomes, particularly as these factors impact downstream disease 
outcomes. Her mental health research examines the availability, access, and 
quality of mental health services for racial, ethnic, and sexual minorities 
and effective and ef˜cient methods for integrating behavioral health of these 
populations into primary care systems. She is the coŒprincipal investigator 
of the California Quality of Life Survey, a population-based study of more 
than 5,000 Californians on the prevalence of mental health disorders and 
the contextual factors associated with those disorders. Her recent work in 
mental health includes the provision of mental health disaster response, 
recovery, and preparedness as the director of a Kellogg-sponsored project in 
New Orleans, ﬁHelping Hands, Healing Hearts,ﬂ which designed training 
for mental health providers and religious leaders. Dr. Mays has provided 
testimony to a number of congressional committees on her HIV, mental 
health, and health disparities research ˜ndings. She was chair of the Sub
-committee on Populations of the National Committee on Vital and Health 
Statistics. There, she helped develop a report on the role of the collection of 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 327
data on race, ethnicity, and primary language to reduce health disparities. 
She has received a number of awards, including one for her lifetime research 
on women and HIV from the American Foundation for AIDS Research, a 
Women and Leadership Award from the American Psychological Associa
-tion, and several distinguished contributions for research awards.
David P. Pryor, M.D., M.P.H.,
 is West Coast medical director for NBC Uni
-versal, where he oversees medical services provided to company employees, 
promotes the corporate-wellness agenda, and serves as a subject matter 
expert on legal and production-related health and safety issues. Previously, 
Dr. Pryor was medical director for Aetna, one of the largest health bene˜ts 
companies in the United States, where he was responsible for a number of 
medical management activities that resulted in the coordination of quality, 
cost-effective care on behalf of Aetna members. He also proactively used 
data analysis to identify new opportunities to increase the effectiveness and 
ef˜ciency of care. Prior to joining Aetna, Dr. Pryor was an associate medical 
director at WellPoint, where he was fortunate to have been actively involved 
with almost all aspects of medical management, including utilization man-agement, medical policy, disease management, and program development. 
Dr. Pryor maintains a strong commitment to impacting health disparities 
and serves as the president and founder of BlackWomensHealth.com, one of 
the leading Internet sites dedicated to improving the health and wellness of 
African American women. Additionally, he serves on the Institute of Medi
-cine Roundtable on the Promotion of Health Equity and the Elimination of 
Health Disparities and was a featured speaker on the Congressional Black 
Caucus Foundation™s Black Health Empowerment Tour. A native of Cali
-fornia, Dr. Pryor received a B.S. in biology from Stanford University and 
completed his medical degree at the University of California, San Diego. 
He is board-certi˜ed in internal medicine and also has a master™s in public 
health from the University of California, Berkeley. 
Sten H. Vermund, M.D., Ph.D.,
 is Amos Christie Chair in Global Health 
and professor of pediatrics at Vanderbilt University and director of the 
Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health. With interests in adolescence, cervi
-cal cancer prevention, and prevention of mother-to-child transmission of 
HIV, he has focused on issues of special relevance to women and HIV. Dr. 
Vermund served as chief of the Vaccine Trials & Epidemiology Branch in 
the National Institute of Health (NIH) Division of AIDS at the National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases from 1988 to 1994 and was 
awarded the Superior Service Award
 of the U.S. Public Health Service in 
1994 for his work in HIV vaccine clinical trial development. Dr. Vermund 
founded the Centre for Infectious Disease Research in Zambia in 2000, 
now a major research venue and President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.328
 MONITORING HIV CARE IN THE UNITED STATES
Relief implementer. In 2007, he founded Friends in Global Health, LLC, 
to spearhead HIV prevention, care, and treatment in rural Mozambique 
and Nigeria. He serves as principal investigator for the HIV Prevention 
Trials Network, with sites in the United States, Africa, Asia, and South 
America. His collaboration with the Chinese Center for Disease Control 
and Prevention seeks to implement a ﬁtest and linkage to careﬂ initiative 
for HIV-infected men who have sex with men; the dual goal is to reduce 
community transmission and, at the same time, improve the quality of 
life for HIV-infected persons. His training initiatives include the Gorgas 
Course in Clinical Tropical Medicine in Lima, Peru; an AIDS International 
Training and Research Program in Zambia, Mozambique, India, Pakistan, 
Bangladesh, and China; and the Fogarty International Clinical Research 
Scholars and Fellows Support Center, with 472 trainees and alumni over 
5 years in 45 developing-country sites doing 1-year mentored overseas 
research training. Dr. Vermund is co-Principal Investigator of the Medical 
Education Partnership Initiative award to the University of Zambia to build manpower capacity in HIV control. Dr. Vermund sits on advisory commit
-tees for U.S. and European universities, the World Health Organization, 
U.S. Agency for International Development, and NIH.
Adam B. Wilcox, Ph.D.,
 is an associate professor in the department of 
biomedical informatics at Columbia University and the director of clini-cal databases for New York Presbyterian Hospital. His primary interest 
is the application of health information technology in transforming the 
research, discovery, and delivery of health care. He currently leads a proj
-ect to create a research infrastructure that incorporates data from multiple 
institutions and includes patient-reported data, with the goal of support-ing comparative-effectiveness studies of multiple diseases. He has worked 
in supporting the use of data from existing clinical systems for research, 
and manages an electronic health record at Columbia University Medical 
Center. He also directed the development of a community-centered health 
information exchange in Washington Heights, New York City, with the 
goal of improving care in a medically underserved immigrant population. 
Previously at Intermountain Healthcare and as faculty at the University of 
Utah, Dr. Wilcox led the design and implementation of electronic health 
records in the primary care and emergency department settings and was the 
principal investigator of a project studying the comparative effectiveness 
of care management in ambulatory care. He received his Ph.D. in medical 
informatics from Columbia University.
Douglas Wirth, M.S.W.,
 is president and chief executive of˜cer of Amida-Care, a nonpro˜t Medicaid HIV Special Needs Plan speci˜cally designed for 
persons living with HIV/AIDS that works with its members and providers 
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX
 329
to improve access to and retention in care. He is the former executive direc-tor of the People with AIDS Coalition of New York, a past chairperson of 
the New York AIDS Coalition, and former health policy adviser to New 
York City mayors Dinkins and Giuliani where he served as chair of Stra
-tegic Planning and Evaluation for the NYC HIV Planning Council. As a 
senior faculty member of the American Psychological Association Of˜ce of 
AIDS™ HOPE Project, he provided continuing education, health, and mental health training from coast to coast. Mr. Wirth completed his master™s degree 
in social work at Hunter College, City University of New York. He is pres
-ently a board member of the Association for Community-Af˜liated Plans.
Monitoring HIV Care in the United States: Indicators and Data SystemsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.