DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13253Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation forAllocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study ofMolecular Dynamics: Second Round22 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-22019-4 | DOI 10.17226/13253Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for theStudy of Molecular Dynamics; National Research CouncilReport of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics, Second Round  Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the 
Study of Molecular Dynamics, Second Round 
 Board on Life Sciences 
Division on Earth and Life Studies       Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 In Memory of  Joel R. Stiles 
 Whose leadership helped 
established this programReport of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    September 16, 2011 
 Jodi Swidzinski Hezky, Ph.D. 

D. E. Shaw Research 

120 West 45th Street, 39th Floor 
New York, NY 10036  
 
Dear Dr. Hezky: 

 
This letter describes the work and transmits 
the final report of the Committee on Proposal 
Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics, Second 

Round. 
 
The committee evaluated submissions received in 
response to a Request for Proposals (RFP) for 
Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton, a supe
rcomputer specially designed and built by D.E. 
Shaw Research (DESRES) that allows for dram
atically increased molecular dynamics simulations 
compared to other currently available resources. Over the past year (October 1, 2010 Œ September 

30, 2011), DESRES has made available to the 
non-commercial research community 3,000,000 
node-hours on an Anton system housed at the P
ittsburgh Supercomputing Ce
nter (PSC), based on the advice of a previous National Research C
ouncil committee convened in the fall of 2010. 
 The success of the program has led DESRES to ma
ke the Anton machine housed at PSC available 
for an additional 3,000,000 node-hours over the 9-months following October 1, 2011 and 
DESRES has asked the National Research Council to, once again, facilitate the allocation of time 

to the non-commercial research community. 
 The work of the National Research Council 
committee to evaluate proposals fo
r time allocations was supported by a contract between D.E. 
Shaw Research and the National Academy of Sc
iences and was performed under the auspices of the National Research Council™s Board on Life Sciences. 

 
To undertake this task, the National Resear
ch Council convened a committee of experts to evaluate the proposals submitted in response to the aforementioned RFP.  The committee of 17 
was chaired by Dr. Robert L. Jernigan, Director
 of the Baker Center for Bioinformatics and 
Biological Sciences and Professor of Biochemistry
, Biophysics and Molecular Biology at Iowa 
State University.  The committee members were
 selected for their expertise in molecular 
dynamics simulations, as well as their experience 
in the subject areas represented in the 81 
proposals that were considered by the committe
e.  They comprised a cross section of the 
biomolecular dynamics field in academia, industry and government including an array of both 
senior and junior investigators.  The committee was assisted by two external reviewers,
1 who                                                  1 The two external reviewers were Dr. Douglas Tobias, University of California, Irvine and Dr. Gerhard 
Hummer, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health.  
Dr. Tobias submitted a proposal as a Principal Investig
ator for a time allocation on the Anton machine.  Dr. 
Tobias provided the committee with an initial assessmen
t of 8 proposals and provided his feedback to the 
committee only on those proposals.  He took no part in other discussions or deliberations of the committee.  
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 were selected to provide additional expertise in 
the areas of protein-lipid interactions and channel 
functions and who provided the committee with an 
initial assessment of a subset of the proposal 
submissions. 
 The goal of the second RFP for Biomolecular Simula
tion Time on Anton has been to continue to 
facilitate breakthrough research in the study of
 biomolecular systems by providing a massively 
parallel system specially designed for molecular dynamics simulations.  These special capabilities 

allow multi-microsecond to millisecond simulation 
timescales, which previously had been 
unobtainable. The program seeks to continue to support research that addresses important and 
high impact questions demonstrating a clear
 need for Anton™s special capabilities.    The Anton RFP described the thr
ee criteria against which the committee was asked to evaluate 
proposals: 
  Scientific Merit, including the potential to advance understanding on an important 
problem or question in the field; potential for breakthrough science resulting in new 

discoveries and understanding; the impact that successful completion of the proposed 

research would have on knowle
dge, methods, and current barriers in the field; and a 
scientifically and technologically feasible project with clear, well-developed, and 

appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to proposed studies. 
 Justification for Requested Time Allocation
, including a clear and well-justified need for multi-microsecond simulation timescales and a 
clear and convincing justification that 
the length and number of proposed simulation runs and node-hours requested are 

necessary and sufficient to achie
ve the scientific objectives. 
 Investigator Qualifications and Past Accomplishments
, including the appropriate 
experience and training to successfully conduct the proposed studies, evidence of 

knowledge and prior experience in molecular simulations, and past publications. 
 
Proposals from investigators who had previously 
received an allocation of time on Anton were 
required to include brief progress reports. Following guidance provided by DESRES and PSC, 
the committee did not use these progress reports as primary criteria but drew on them only to 
supplement its consideration of proposals. As e
xplained in the RFP, staff at PSC conducted an 
initial assessment of all proposal submissions for co
mpleteness to determine whether they were 
technically feasible for simulation on Anton.  A member of the PSC staff was also present as an 

observer throughout the review committee™s discussions to address technical specification that 

arose. 
 
In the second round of time allocations for Anton,
 DESRES and PSC will make time available at 
two levels.  In the first level, approximately
 15 proposals will receive an allocation of 100,000 

node-hours each.  The second level will include 
approximately 30 proposals to receive an 
allocation of 50,000 node-hours each.  The committe
e was asked to identify proposals that best 
met the selection criteria defined above for alloca
tions at each of the two levels.  The committee was further asked to try to allocate approximately 50% of the time to investigators who did not 

receive an allocation in the first round.  Th
e judgments of the committee are based on which 
proposals adequately met or exceeded the selection 
criteria described above and on the estimates 
of required simulation time provided by the applicants.  The committee was also permitted to 
                                                                                                                                                 Neither reviewer participated in the final committee di
scussion and assessment to achieve consensus on the 
list of proposals that best met the selection criteria.  
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 consider a modified time allocation if it conclude
d that the proposed research required a greater 
or lesser number of node-hours than in
itially requested by an applicant. 
 Initial reviews of the proposals were provided by the 17 committee member
s and the two external 
reviewers.  Each proposal was assigned a minimum of two primary reviewers who were asked to 
evaluate the proposal based on the RFP and gu
idelines described above.  Review assignments 
were made so that no proposal was evaluated by
 a reviewer from the applicant™s same institution 
or who had a collaborative rela
tionship with an applicant. 
 The NRC committee held its 2-day meeting in Wash
ington, D.C. on August 5-6, 2011.  On the 
first day of the meeting, members undertook a detailed discussion of the proposals.  The two 

primary reviewers were asked to summarize thei
r review for the committee, which was followed 
by discussion of the proposed research.  As described in detail above, committee members 

considered the scientific merit, justification of 
the requested time and the qualifications of the 
principal investigator (PI). The discussion aimed 
at reaching consensus on which proposals best 
met the selection criteria.  The committee divided the proposals into three groups.  Group 1 
contained proposals that best met or exceeded the selection criteria, Group 2 contained proposals 

that adequately met the selection criteria, and 
Group 3 contained proposals that met the selection 
criteria less well than those in Groups 1 and 
2.  If consensus could not be reached on an 
individual proposal on day 1, an
 additional committee member
 was assigned to review the proposal in detail for discussion on the second day. 

 
On the second day, committee members first di
scussed the proposals that were not easily 
categorized on day 1 and obtained further deta
ils from the additional reviewer, or a primary 
reviewer who had been unavailable on day 1. 
The committee then considered the slate of proposals as a whole, came to a consensus on the assignment of proposals into the three groups 
and, in some cases, decided to suggest a modified allocation of time on Anton. 

 
The committee concluded that the proposals listed 
below best meet the selection criteria set forth 
in the RFP for Biomolecular Simulation Time on Anton.  Detailed comments for each of the 81 
proposals are included in Appendix B. 
 Group 1: The committee has identified 23 proposals that best
 met or exceeded the selection criteria.  Of these 23 proposals, 5 proposals were selected for a 
modified allocation (identified below with an 
*).  In numerical order by proposal submission number, these are: 

 PSCA10006P Investigating protein folding and dynamics with a highly optimized 
additive force field; PI: Alexander MacKerell, University of Maryland, Baltimore 
[New 
user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10018P What are the atomistic underpinni
ngs of molecular allostery and signaling?; PI: David Beratan, Duke University 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-
hours]* 

PSCA10030P Recognition of kinesin by microtubule during the stepping process; PI: Devarajan Thirumalai, University of Maryland, College Park 
[New user, identified for 
100,000 node-hours] 

PSCA10031P Mapping slow dynamical regulation of a protein kinase by combining 
molecular dynamics with NMR data
; PI: Susan Taylor, University of California, San 
Diego [New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 PSCA10038P Continued Exploration of the Human Adenovirus Protease Activation 
Pathway via Long Timescale Mo
lecular Dynamics Simulations
; PI: Ross Walker, University of California, San Diego 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
 PSCA10039P Determining the pathway of nascent-protein insertion through the 
protein-conducting channel and into the membrane
; PI: Klaus Schulten, University of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
 PSCA10040P Assessment of Multi-Microsecond Simulations of Intrinsically 
Disordered Proteins Using NMR: Applications to PDX1
; PI: Scott Showalter, The 
Pennsylvania State University 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]
 PSCA10042P Determining Effects of HIV-1 gp41 Membrane-Spanning Domain on the 
Local Composition of a Mixed Cholesterol/Lipid Bilayer using Microsecond MD 
Simulation; PI: Cameron Abrams, Drexel University 
[New user, identified for 70,000 
node-hours]*
 PSCA10043P Unraveling anomalous subdiffusion in heterogeneous membranes
; PI: Edward Lyman, University of Delaware 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]
 PSCA10061P The determinants of C-type inactivation and recovery in the KcsA 
channel; PI: Benoit Roux, University of Chicago 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 
node-hours]
 PSCA10062P Using microsecond scale dynamics to characterize different classes of 
allosteric interactions; PI: J. Andrew McCammon, University of California, San Diego 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours]
 PSCA10066P Molecular dynamics simulation of signal transduction in the squid rhodopsin G-protein coupled receptor
; PI: Douglas Tobias, University of California, 
Irvine [Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10067P Dynamic coupling and fluctuations in protein-protein complexes
; PI: Matthias Buck, Case Western Reserve University [Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10074P Chacterization of the structure and dynamics of a model two-domain 
protein using multi-microsecond simulations
; PI: Lillian Chong, University of Pittsburgh 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10076P Long time MD simulations to st
udy large scale conformational 
transitions in RNA enzymes
; PI: Darrin York, Rutgers University 
[New user, identified 
for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10081P Exploring Lipid-Protein Interactions Using Microsecond-scale 
Molecular Dynamics Simulation
; PI: Toby Allen, University of California, Davis 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10085P Propagation of conformational changes across a regulated catch-bond 
protein; PI: Wendy Thomas, University of Washington 
[New user, identified for 75,000 
node-hours] 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 PSCA10086P Understanding the origin of high-fidelity co-translational protein 
targeting: Long-timescale simulations of
 the Signal Receptor Particle complex
; PI: Thomas Miller, California Institute of Technology 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 
node-hours] 
PSCA10088P Entropy and Allostery in Protein-Ligand Binding via Simulations at the 
Microsecond Time Scale
; PI: Michael Gilson, University of California San Diego 
[New 
user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10095P Long Time Scale Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Protein 
Folding; PI: Martin Gruebele, University
 of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10096P Computational Design and Evaluation of Novel Enzyme Catalysts
; PI: Kendell Houk, University of California, Los Angeles 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 
node-hours]*
 PSCA10097P The effects of nonnucleoside inhibitors on the structure and dynamics of 
HIV wild type reverse transcriptase and drug resistant mutants
; PI: Michael Shirts, University of Virginia 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10099P Folding of Ribosomal Signatures and Early tRNAs; PI: Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
[New user, identified 
for 100,000 node-hours] 
 
Group 2: The committee has identified 21 proposals that ade
quately met the selection criteria.  Of these 21 
proposals, 11 proposals were selected for a modifi
ed allocation and are identified below with an 
*.  In numerical order by proposal submission number, these are: 
 PSCA10007P Molecular dynamics simulation study of the diffusion fence for PIP2 (phosphotidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate) in lipid membrane
; PI:Wonpil Im, The 
University of Kansas 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10008P Simulation of the two-step mechanism for kinesin force generation in 
realistic time scale
: PI: Wonmuk Hwang, Texas A&M University 
[Returning user, 
identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10014P Understanding the role of A-tracts
 in eukaryotic genome organization 
and their functions in transcriptional regulation; PI: George Schatz, Northwestern 
University 
[New user, identified for 45,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10017P Investigate Hidden Intermediates in Protein Folding
; PI: Shuanghong Huo, Clark University [New user, identified for 40,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10025P Influence of ATP and ADP on conformation and dynamics of the nucleotide-binding domain of Hsp70 chaperones
; Harold Scheraga, Cornell University 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PSCA10029P Exploring the Membrane Selectivity and Toxicity of Antimicrobial 
Peptides; Judy Kim, University of California, San Diego 
[New user, identified for 60,000 
node-hours] 
PSCA10052P Unraveling the Structure Œ Dynamics Œ Function Relationship of Human 
Histone Deacetylase 8
; Peter Coveney, Yale University 
[Returning user, identified for 
50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10056P Simulation and Analysis of Pressure Perturbation Dynamics of Proteins
; PI: Kim Sharp, University of Pennsylvania 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10059P In-silico assembly of the Urel urea channel from H. pylori from helical 
fragments; PI: Hartmut Luecke, University of California, Irvine 
[New user, identified for 
50,000 node-hours] 

PSCA10060P Sequencing DNA Using MspA
; PI: Aleksei Aksimentiev, University of 
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10063P Continuous Long-Time Dynamics of 
RNA Molecules: Watching without 
Blinking for Microseconds through An
ton™s Microscope: Extension Request
; PI: Ioan Andricioaei, University of California, Irvine 
[Returning user, ident
ified for 50,000 node-hours]* 

PSCA10065P Exploring the Gating Motions of Connexin Channels on a Microsecond Timescale
; PI: Ivaylo Ivanov, Georgia State University 
[New user, identified for 50,000 
node-hours] 

PSCA10068P Timescale of dynamics in unfolded/unstructured proteins: microseconds 
or nanoseconds?; PI: Jeetain Mittal, Lehigh University [New user, identified for 50,000 
node-hours]* 

PSCA10070P Simple, Regulated Ion Channels: New Avenues for Synthetic Biology
; PI: 
Andrew Pohorille, University of California, San Francisco [Returning user, identified for 
50,000 node-hours] 

PSCA10071P Molecular Dynamics Simulations of 
Conformational Dynamics in the 
p38 MAP Kinase: Effects of the Apo State™s Flexibility on Inhibitor Binding Affinity
; PI: Adrian Elcock, University of Iowa [Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10073P Probing allosteric regulation in the Imidazole Glycerol Phosphate 
Synthase by microsecond MD simulations
; PI: Victor Batista, Yale University 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 

PSCA10080P Anton Simulations of EPAC1 to illu
minate the molecular details of cAMP based allosteric control of conformational change
; PI: Thomas Woolf, Johns 
Hopkins University 
[New user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10090P Metabolite permeation and voltage-gating of the mitochondrial channel 
VDAC
; PI: Michael Grabe, University of Pittsburgh 
[Returning user, identified for 50,000 
node-hours]* 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 PSCA10093P Atomistic modeling of the resting and 
activated states of a voltage-gated potassium channel voltage-sensing domain; PI: J. Alfredo Freites, University of 
California, Irvine [Returning user, identified for 50,000 node-hours]* 
PSCA10100P Dynamics of Calcium-Dependent Processes Essential for Cadherin 
Function in Hearing and Deafness
; PI: David Corey, HHMI & Harvard Medical School [Returning user, identified for 100,000 node-hours] 
PSCA10102P Capturing Large-Scale Structural Transitions in Membrane 
Transporters at Atomic Resolution
; PI: Emad Tajkhorshid, University of Illinois, 
Urbana-Champaign 
[Returning user, identified 
for 100,000 node-hours] 
The time allocations for the 44 proposals identified by the committee as m
eeting or exceeding the 
selection criteria for time allocations total approximately 2,890,000 node-hours. Of the 44 
proposals identified, 15 were identified at the 100,000 node-hour level and 29 at the 50,000 node-
hour level.2 A total of 1,340,000 node-hours were allocated to 23 proposals whose principal 
investigator did not receive time on Anton during the past year (identified as ﬁnew usersﬂ). The 
remaining 1,550,000 node-hours are allocated to 21 proposals from investigators who had 

received first round time allocations (indentified as ﬁreturning usersﬂ). 
After considerable deliberation, the committee has 
concluded that the most appropriate use of the 
remaining 110,000 node-hours would be for the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center to use its 
discretion to allocate additional time to Group 1 proposals under the following guidelines: 
1. No PI should be allocated more than a total of 100,000 node-hours 
2. PIs may petition PSC for additional time after they have used their initial allocation 
3. Preference should be given to PIs who did 
not receive allocations in the first round In carrying out its task, the committee identifie
d as many promising proposals as possible given 
the constraints on the total available simulation 
time.  The committee also encourages D.E. Shaw 
Research and the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center
 to establish a collective repository to share 
data generated, because the trajectories obtained may be of use to other investigators in the 

community. 

 
The committee would like to thank D.E. Shaw Re
search, the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, 
and all of the 2011 Anton applicants for the opportunity to assist in identifying the proposals best 
meeting the selection criteria for time allocati
ons on the Anton machine. The committee members 
were universally enthusiastic about the potential advances in the field that are facilitated by Anton 
and are looking forward to seeing the important new results from the Anton users. 
 Sincerely, 
 Robert L. Jernigan 
Chair  
cc:  Dr. Markus Dittrich, Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center 
Dr. Warren Muir, National Research Council 
   Dr. Frances Sharples, National Research Council  
                                                 2 The 100,000 node-hour level is defined as proposals that were identified for 70,000 node-hours or greater.  
The 50,000 node-hour level is defined as proposals that were identified for less than 70,000 node-hours. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 Appendices: A. Table 1: Proposals Reviewed by the Committee 
B. Individual Proposal Summary Evaluations 
C. Proposal Evaluation Criteria 
D. Roster and Biographical Sketches 
of Committee Members and Reviewers 
E. The Board on Life Sciences, the Board on
 Chemical Sciences and Technology, and the 
National Academies 
F. Acknowledgment of Report Reviewer
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 APPENDIX A TABLE 1: PROPOSALS REVIEWED BY THE COMMITTEE  This appendix is not available to the public. 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 APPENDIX B INDIVIDUAL PROPOSAL SUMMARY EVALUATIONS 
 This appendix is not available to the public. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 APPENDIX C  PROPOSAL REVIEW CRITERIA  
 The committee used the points below to help guide
 its review of the proposals.  The reviewers 
were asked to comment on the strengths and weaknesses of the proposals by considering the 
following:   Level of scientific merit
  1. Potential to advance understanding of an impor
tant problem or question in the field; 
potential for breakthrough science resulti
ng in new discoveries and understanding 
2. Impact that successful completion of the proposed research would have on the 

knowledge, methods, and current barriers in the field  
3. Project is scientifically and technologically
 feasible with clear, well-developed, and 
appropriate goals, objectives, and approach to the proposed studies  Justification for requested time allocation 
1. Clear and well-justified need for multi-microsecond simulation time 
Clear and convincing justification that the 
length and number of proposed simulation runs 
and node-hours requested are necessary and suffi
cient to achieve the scientific objectives
  Investigator qualifications and past accomplishments
 1. Appropriate experience and training to 
successfully conduct the proposed studies 
2. Evidence of knowledge and prior experience with molecular simulations 
3. Past publications Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 APPENDIX D  COMMITTEE ON PROPOSAL EVALUATION FOR ALLOCATION OF 
SUPERCOMPUTING TIME FOR THE 
STUDY OF MOLECULAR DYNAMICS, SECOND ROUND  ROBERT L. JERNIGAN
 (Chair), Director, Laurence H. Baker Center for Bioinformatics and 
Biological Statistics and Professor, Depart
ment of Biochemistry, Biophysics and 
Molecular Biology, Iowa State University 
DAVID C. BAKER, 
Professor, Department of Chemistry
, University of Tennessee
 NILESH BANAVALI
, Research Scientist, Wadsworth Center and Assistant Professor, School of 
Public Health, State University of New York, Albany 
MICHAEL COLVIN, 
Interim Dean, Professor and Founding Faculty Member
, School of 
Natural Sciences
, University of California, Merced
 RUXANDRA I. DIMA
, Assistant Professor of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati 
PHILLIP GEISSLER, Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry
, University of California, 
Berkeley WILLIAM A. GODDARD III, 
Ferkel Professor of Chemistry, Materials Science, and Applied 
Physics, California Institute of Technology
 DAVID L. MOBLEY, 
Assistant Professor, Department of Chemistry
, University of New 
Orleans JOSE N. ONUCHIC, 
Professor of Physics and Co-Director Center for Theoretical Biological 
Physics, University of California, San Diego
 CAROL PARISH, 
Professor, Department of Chemistry
, University of Richmond
 JERRY M. PARKS, 
Research Staff Scientist
, Oak Ridge National Laboratory STEVEN SCHWARTZ, 
Director, Seaver Foundation, Center for Bioinformatics and Professor 
of Physiology, Biophysics and Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
 SADASIVAN SHANKAR, 
Senior Principal Engineer and Program Leader for Materials Design
, Design and Technology Solutions, Tech
nology and Manufacturing Group, Intel 
Corporation TIMOTHY A. SPRINGER, 
Latham Family Professor of Pathology
, Harvard Medical School
 ROBERT STROUD, 
Professor, Biochemistry and Biophysics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry
, University of California, San Francisco
 ARIEH WARSHEL
, Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Southern 
California HAREL WEINSTEIN, 
Chairman and Professor, Department of Physiology and Biophysics
 and Director, Institute for Computational Biomedicine
, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University  REVIEWERS 
 GERHARD HUMMER
, Chief, Theoretical Biophysics Section, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health  
DOUGLAS J. TOBIAS, 
Professor of Chemistry
, University of California, Irvine
  NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL STAFF 
 KATHERINE BOWMAN
, Senior Program Officer, Board on Life Sciences 
DOUGLAS FRIEDMAN, 
Program Officer, Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology
 KATHRYN HUGHES
, Program Officer, Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology 
ORIN LUKE
, Senior Program Assistant, Board on Life Sciences 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14  BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES OF
 COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND REVIEWERS 
 CHAIR 
 Robert L. Jernigan
 is the Director of the Laurence H. Baker Center for Bioinformatics and 
Biological Sciences as well as a Professor in the Department of Biochemistry, Biophysics, and 

Molecular Biology at Iowa State University.  
He received his B.S. in Chemistry from the 
California Institute of Technology in 1963 a
nd completed his Ph.D. in 1968 at Stanford 
University.  He has previously served as Deputy Chief of the Laboratory of Experimental and 

Computational Biology and Chief of the Section on Molecular Structure in the National Cancer 

Institute of the National Institutes of Health.  He is also a former Chair of the NIH Advisory 

Committee on Computer Usage and has served on many committees on computing resources.  Dr. 

Jernigan is currently on the editorial boards for the journals 
Biochemistry and Bioinformatics and Biological Insights
.  He is a Fellow of the Biophysical Society and a Fellow of the AAAS.  His 
recent research focuses on mechanics of proteins
 and RNA and the role of mechanics in the 
mechanisms of molecular machines. 

 MEMBERS 
 David C. Baker is Professor of Organic Chemistry at the University of Tennessee. He is active in 
the Carbohydrate, Medicinal, and Organic Divisions of the American Chemical Society. Prior to 

his academic career he worked at the Parke-Davis Pharmaceutical Research, following a 

postdoctoral at Syntex Research. He is a frequent 
reviewer for the National Institutes of Health 
and serves as an editor of Carbohydrate Research, an
 international journal in the field.  Dr. Baker 
received a Ph.D. in chemistry from The Ohio State University. 

 
Nilesh Banavali received his Ph.D. from the University of Maryland in 2001 for studies on 
nucleic acid force fields and base flipping with Alexander MacKerell Jr.  He pursued postdoctoral 
training at Weill Medical College of Cornell University and the University of Chicago with 
Benoît Roux on implicit and implicit/explicit solvent 
models and free energy characterization of 
conformational change and allostery in macromol
ecules.  He currently serves as a Research 
Scientist at the Wadsworth Center and as Assistant Professor in the School of Public Health at the 

State University of New York, Albany.  The prim
ary goal of his research is to use computational 
calculations and refined analysis techniques 
to optimally extract free energy landscapes 
describing biologically relevant macromolecula
r conformational change.  Dr. Banavali also 
develops techniques to facilitate validation of computational pr
edictions with structural and 
biochemical data. 
  
Michael Colvin is Interim Dean, Professor and Founding Faculty Member in the School of 

Natural Sciences at the University of California, Merced.  Dr. Colvin's research uses a wide range 
of simulation methods to model biological systems at different levels. Much of his research uses 
molecular modeling to study biochemical problem
s, with a particular emphasis on modeling the 
activity of DNA-binding food mutagens and antican
cer drugs. These methods involve computing 
the structures and energetics of biomolecules using either quantum or classical mechanics, and 

often require the use of supercomputers.  Dr. Co
lvin received his Ph.D. from the University of 
California, Berkeley. 

 
Ruxandra I. Dima 
has an interdisciplinary training in th
eoretical and computational physics and 
physical chemistry and her current research 
focuses on the area of computational biophysical 
chemistry with special emphasis on single molecule experiments and aggregation.  After 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 receiving her undergraduate degree from the Univer
sity of Bucharest, Romania in 1994, she studied at the Pennsylvania State University wh
ere she obtained her Ph.D. in 1999.  Her thesis 
was concerned with the determination of mean 
field free-energy potentials between amino acids 
in proteins.  She then took a postdoctoral appointment (2000-2005) at the Institute for Physical 
Science and Technology, University of Mary
land where she worked on problems related to 
protein aggregation, allostery, RNA folding, and single-molecule biophysics.  In 2005 she took a 

faculty position at the University of Massachuset
ts, Lowell.  She joined the faculty at the 
University of Cincinnati in 2006. Dr. Dima™s 
research focuses on the micromechanics of large 
protein assemblies from cytoskeletal 
filaments to fibrin fibers, using multi-scale models that are 
continuously developed in her group to a
ccess experimental length and timescales.   
 Phillip Geissler is an Associate Professor in the Departme
nt of Chemistry at the University of 
California, Berkeley. Dr. Geissler is also a faculty member of the Biophysics Graduate Group at 
the University of California, Berkeley, a faculty scientist in the Chemical Sciences, Physical 
Biosciences, and Materials Sciences Divisions of
 the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 
and a faculty affiliate at the California Institute
 for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3).  His research 
focuses on the microscopic behavior of complex bi
ological and material systems, particularly 
theories and simplified models for chemical 
phenomena in condensed phases, for biomolecular 
structure and dynamics, and for the role of fluctuations in nanoscale materials.  Among his 

current interests are the polymeric framework of 
living cells and the dynamics of nanometer-sized 
solutes in a liquid undergoing phase change.  In 200
6, Dr. Geissler was named a Kavli Frontiers 
Fellow.  He received his bachelor™s degree in 
chemistry from Cornell University and Ph.D. in 
chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley. 
 
William A. Goddard III is the Charles and Mary Ferkel Professor of Chemistry and Applied 
Physics, and Director, Materials and Process Simulation Center at the California Institute of 

Technology.  He has made many contributions to
 theoretical chemistry, such as the generalized 
valence bond (GVB) method for ab initio electroni
c structure calculations and the ReaxFF force 
field for classical molecular dynamics simulations. 
He is a member of the International Academy 
of Quantum Molecular Science.  His research 
interests include quantum mechanics for the 
electronic wave functions of large molecules 
and crystals, including the many-body effects 
needed to describe reactions, force fields to d
escribe the dynamics of atomic motions, molecular 
dynamics of large molecules and solids to determine the structure, vibrations, and dynamical 

processes of materials and statistical mechan
ics to describe phase diagrams (mixtures of 
molecules and polymers; metallic alloys). Dr. Goddard received his Ph.D. from the California 

Institute of Technology.  He is an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences. 
 David L. Mobley is an Assistant Professor in the Departme
nt of Chemistry at the University of 
New Orleans.  His research focuses on applying
 computational and theoretical methods to 
understand and quantitatively predict fundamenta
l biological processes such as protein-ligand 
binding, solvation, and solubility. His research in
terests include the binding of small-molecule 
ligands to proteins and the interactions of small 
molecules with water and other solvents.  Current 
computational methods have limited accuracy 
for pharmaceutical drug discovery applications, 

and his laboratory seeks to devel
op and apply more accurate me
thods for computing and even 
predicting binding affinities.  Recent work has al
so examined solute geometry and the role of 
entropy in small molecule solvation.  Dr. 
Mobley received the Hewlett-Packard Outstanding 
Junior Faculty Award in Computational Chemistr
y from the American Chemical Society (2009).  
He received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in phys
ics from the University of California, Davis.
  Jose N. Onuchic is the co-Director of the Center for Theoretical Biological Physics and 
Professor of Physics at the University of California, San Diego. His research group introduced the 
concept of protein-folding funnels to show the ty
pes of amino acid sequences that can fold into a 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 unique protein structure. Dr. Onuchic and his colla
borators also created the concept of tunneling 
pathways and the methodology for reducing proteins
 into a combination of relevant tubes of 
pathways that provides a new way of designing el
ectron transfer proteins. His research interests 
include exploring theoretical and computationa
l methods for molecular biophysics, chemical 
reactions in condensed matter and gene networks. Dr. Onuchic received his Ph.D. in chemistry 
from the California Institute of Technology 
and M.S. degree in applied physics from the 
University of California, San Diego. He is an elected member of the National Academy of 

Sciences. 
 Carol Parish is Professor of Chemistry, Computational and Theoretical Physical Chemistry at 
the University of Richmond.  Her research fo
cuses on understanding the dynamical behavior of 
molecular systems using the tools of quantum mechanics, conformational searching and free 
energy simulation to answer questions about the structure, energy and dynamics of HIV-1 

protease inhibitor drugs, Bergman cyclization in 
enediyne anti-cancer warhead drugs, homology 
modeling of membrane-bound desaturase enzymes, investigations of the flexibility of 

polyoligomeric silsesquioxane cages (POSS), the role
 of O-to-N acyl migration in insect defense 
secretions, and oligomeric models for synthetic 
enzymes that display enzyme-like acyltransferase 

activity. Dr. Parish is a member of the American
 Chemical Society. She received her Ph.D. in 
physical chemistry from Purdue University. 
 Jerry M. Parks is a Research Staff Scientist for the Center for Molecular Biophysics in the 
Biosciences Division at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. His research involves molecular 

simulations and free energy calculations to solve chemical problems.  Dr. Parks received his 

Ph.D. in Chemistry from Duke University and hi
s M.S. in Chemistry from Southern Methodist 
University. 

 Steven Schwartz 
is Director of the Seaver Foundation, Center for Bioinformatics and Professor 
of Physiology, Biophysics and Biochemistry at th
e Albert Einstein College of Medicine. He was elected as a Fellow of the American Physical Society and a Fellow of the American Association 

for the Advancement of Science. Dr. Schwartz
's selection recognizes his development of the 
theory of the coupling of protein vibrations to cat
alytic function in enzymes. Dr. Schwartz is the 
executive editor of the Journal of Theoretical a
nd Computational Chemistry. He also serves on 
the editorial boards of the Biophysical Journa
l and Progress in Theoretical Chemistry.  His 
research interests include theoretical studies of biophysical systems and theoretical condensed 
phase chemistry.  Dr. Schwartz received his Ph.D. in theoretical chemical physics from the 

University of California, Berkeley. 

 Timothy A. Springer
 majored in Biochemistry at the Univer
sity of California, and graduated Phi 
Beta Kappa with Distinction and the Departmental Citation. He received his Ph.D. in 
biochemistry working with Jack Strominger on the isolation, protein chemistry, and organization 
in the membrane of major histocompatibilit
y complex antigens. Realizing the power of 
monoclonal antibodies for the characterization of proteins on the cell surface, Springer did 

postdoctoral work with César Milstein. He star
ted as an Assistant Professor at Harvard Medical 
School in 1977 where he has been
 ever since, moving a few blocks down the street to the Dana-
Farber Cancer Institute in 1981 and to the CBR Ins
titute for Biomedical Research in 1988. He is 
an elected member of the National Academy of Sciences. 

 Robert Stroud
 is Professor of Biochemistry and Bioph
ysics and Pharmaceutical Chemistry and 
Principal Investigator of the Stroud laboratory at the University of California, San Francisco. At 
the Stroud laboratory, scientists seek to understand molecular mechanisms of certain key 

biological processes, as well as signal transduction between processes at the level of protein 

structure, dynamics, and mechanism. Three-dimensional molecular structures are defined 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17 primarily by x-ray crystallography and are often 
used to facilitate structure-based drug design, 
providing a quintessential test of our understanding of the relationship between structure and 
recognition. Currently the integration enzyme from HIV is subject to molecular biological, 
biochemical, and structural approaches. The mole
cular mechanisms of thymidylate synthase are 
derived from numerous structural studies in the laboratory. An important cancer target, these 
mechanisms pertain directly to our structure 
and mechanism based design of anticancer drugs.  
Dr. Stroud received his PhD in Biological Crystallography from Birkbeck College, London 

University, U.K. He is an elected memb
er of the National Academy of Sciences. 
 Arieh Warshel received his BS degree in Chemistry, Summa Cum Laude, from Technion Israel 
in 1966, and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in Chem
ical Physics in 1967 and 1969, respectively, 
from the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel. 
After his PhD, he did postdoctoral work at 
Harvard University. From 1972 to 1976, he was at the Weizmann Institute and at the MRC 

Laboratory for Molecular Biology in Cambridge, England. In 1976 he joined the faculty of the 
Department of Chemistry at USC, where he now 
is Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry and 
a Full Member of the USC Norris Cancer Center. Dr. Warshel has authored over 350 peer-
reviewed research articles (H index 92) and book chapters, two books, and several key computer 

programs.  Dr. Warshel™s research focuses on simulations of the functions of biological system 

and other challenging problems in modern comput
ational biophysics and chemistry. He and his 
coworkers have pioneered the key approaches 
for simulating the functions of biological 
molecules, including introducing molecular dynami
cs (MD) in Biology, developing the quantum 
mechanical/molecular-mechanical (QM/MM) approach, introducing simulations of enzymatic 

reactions, developing simulations of electron tran
sfer and proton transfer processes in proteins, 
pioneering microscopic modeling of electrostatic effects in macromolecules and introducing 

simulation of protein folding. Dr. Warshel receive
d the Tolman Medal in 2003, has been elected a 
Fellow of the Biophysical Society in 2000, a Fello
w of the Royal Society of Chemistry in 2008, 
and a Member of the National Academy of Sciences in 2009. 

 
Harel Weinstein
 is the Maxwell Upson Professor of Physiology and Biophysics and Chairman of 
the Department of Physiology and Biophysics, and 
the Director of the Institute for Computational 
Biomedicine at Weill Cornell Medical College (WCM
C) of Cornell University in New York City. 
As a Tri-Institutional Professor, he holds prof
essorial appointments at Rockefeller University, 
Sloan-Kettering Institute and Cornell University. He
 is the founding director of the Institute for 
Computational Biomedicine (ICB), which he de
veloped it into an academic and research unit 
responsible for a novel approach to biomedicine 
that involves the mathematical, physical and 

computational sciences in combination with engi
neering and medical informatics. The ICB aims 
at fundamental study and practical use of the 
basic, quantitative understanding of physiological 
function and disease, in an integrative, multi-scal
e approach based on gene structure and defects 
responsible for properties and behaviors at all levelsŒfrom protein, to cell, tissue and organ. He 

has received numerous honors and awards, he was elected to the Executive Board of the 

International Society for Computational Biology in 2006, and President of the Biophysical 
Society in 2008. He has also served as President 
of the Association of Chairmen of Departments 
of Physiology, President of the International 
Society for Quantum Biology and Pharmacology, 
Chair of the Biophysics Section of the New Yo
rk Academy of Sciences and Councilor of the 
Biophysical Society and of the New York Academ
y of Medicine. His research interests include 
studies in molecular and computational biophysi
cs that address complex systems in physiology, 
and to the development and application of bioi
nformatics and engineering approaches to systems 
biology. 
 
 
 
 Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 REVIEWERS 
 Gerhard Hummer
 received a doctoral degree in physics for work done jointly at the Max-Planck 
Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in Göttingen an
d the University of Vienna (1992).  In 1996, 
he started his independent career in the Theore
tical Division of Los Alamos National Laboratory 
after his postdoctoral work there.  In 1999, Dr. Hummer joined the Laboratory of Chemical 
Physics in the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases at the National 
Institutes of Health where he is a Senior Investigator.  His research focuses on areas including 
theory of single-molecule experiments; channel 
function; peptide and protein folding; complex 
formation and ligand binding; pr
oton pumping and bioenergetics; 
reaction-rate calculations; and the development of new methods for biom
olecular simulation a
nd electrostatics.  
Douglas J. Tobias
 is a Professor in the Department of Chem
istry at the University of California, 
Irvine. His research involves the use of atomic-s
cale computer simulation techniques to study the 
structure and dynamics of biological molecules 
and biomimetic material
s and aqueous interfaces with air. A substantial portion of his work is 
devoted to the development, implementation, and 
optimization of novel simulation methodology and 
analysis tools. Current projects include 
interactions of peptides and proteins with lipid
s, molecular mechanisms of ion channel gating, 
and the dynamics of native and denatured proteins
 and their hydration water, among others. Dr. 
Tobias is an elected Fellow of the American Asso
ciation for the Advancement of Science.  He 
received his bachelors and masters degrees in 
chemistry from the University of California, 
Riverside and his Ph.D. in Chemistry and 
Biophysics from Carnegie Mellon University. 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19 APPENDIX E  THE BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES, TH
E BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES 
AND TECHNOLOGY, AND THE 
NATIONAL ACADEMIES   BOARD ON LIFE SCIENCES 
 KEITH R. YAMAMOTO
 (Chair), University of California, San Francisco, California 
BONNIE L. BASSLER
, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 
VICKI L. CHANDLER
, Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, Palo Alto, California 
SEAN EDDY
, HHMI Janelia Farm Research Campus, Ashburn, Virginia 
MARK D. FITZSIMMONS,
 John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation, Chicago, Illinois 
DAVID R. FRANZ
, Midwest Research Institute, Frederick, Maryland 
LOUIS J. GROSS, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 
CATO T. LAURENCIN, 
University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, Connecticut 
BERNARD LO, University of California, San Francisco, California 
ROBERT M. NEREM
, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 
CAMILLE PARMESAN, 
University of Texas, Austin, Texas MURIEL E. POSTON, Skidmore College, Saratoga Springs, New York 
ALISON G. POWER, 
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York BRUCE W. STILLMAN
, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York 
CYNTHIA WOLBERGER
, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland 
MARY WOOLLEY
, Research!America, Alexandria, Virginia 
  NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL STAFF 
 FRANCES E. SHARPLES,
 Director JO L. HUSBANDS
, Scholar/Senior Project Director
 JAY B. LABOV, 
Senior Scientist/Program Director for Biology Education 
KATHERINE BOWMAN
, Senior Program Officer 
MARILEE K. SHELTON-DAVENPORT,
 Senior Program Officer 
INDIA HOOK-BARNARD
, Program Officer 
KEEGAN SAWYER, 
Associate Program Officer
 ANNA FARRAR,
 Financial Associate
 CARL-GUSTAV ANDERSON
, Program Associate 
SAYYEDA AYESHA AHMED, 
Senior Program Assistant 
ORIN LUKE
, Senior Program Assistant 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 BOARD ON CHEMICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY 
  CO-CHAIRS 
 
RYAN R. DIRKX
, Arkema Inc., King of Prussia, Pennsylvania 
C. DALE POULTER
, University of Utah, Salt Lake City  
 MEMBERS   
 ZHENAN BAO
, Stanford University, California 

ROBERT BERGMAN
, University of California, Berkeley 
HENRY BRYNDZA
, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Delaware 
EMILY CARTER
, Princeton University, New Jersey 
PABLO DEBENEDETTI
, Princeton University, New Jersey 
MARY JANE HAGENSON
, Chevron Phillips Chemical Company, LLC, The Woodlands, 
Texas CAROL J. HENRY
, The George Washington University, Washington, D.C. 
JILL HRUBY
, Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
CHARLES E. KOLB
, Aerodyne Research, Inc., Billerica, Massachusetts 
JOSEF MICHL, University of Colorado, Boulder 
MARK A. RATNER
, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois 
ROBERT E. ROBERTS
, Institute for Defense Analyses, Washington, D.C. 
DARLENE J. S. SOLOMON
, Agilent Laboratories, Santa Clara, California 
ERIK J. SORENSEN
, Princeton University, New Jersey 
JEAN TOM, Bristol-Myers Squibb, West Windsor, New Jersey 
WILLIAM C. TROGLER
, University of California, San Diego DAVID WALT
, Tufts University, Medford, Massachusetts 
 
 NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL STAFF 
 
DOROTHY ZOLANDZ
, Director AMANDA CLINE
, Administrative Assistant 
DOUGLAS FRIEDMAN
, Program Officer 
KATHRYN HUGHES
, Program Officer 
TINA M. MASCIANGIOLI
, Senior Program Officer 
SHEENA SIDDIQUI
, Research Associate 

RACHEL YANCEY
, Program Assistant 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21   The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and e
ngineering research, dedicated to the furtherance 
of science and technology and to their use for th
e general welfare.  Upon the authority of the 
charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, 
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to 
advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is 
president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
 The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel or
ganization of outstanding engineers.  It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National 

Academy of Sciences the responsibility for ad
vising the federal government.  The National 
Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer
ing programs aimed at m
eeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes th
e superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. 

Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering. 

 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to 
secure the services of eminent members of appropr
iate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health of the public. 
 The Institute acts under the responsibility given to 
the National Academy of Sciences by its congressiona
l charter to be an adviser to the federal 
government and, upon its own initiative, to iden
tify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is 
president of the Institute of Medicine. 

 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to 
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 

furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance with 
general policies determined by the Academy, 
the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Scien
ces and the National Academy of Engineering in 

providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities.  
The Council is administered jointly by both Academ
ies and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph 
J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair 
and vice chair, respectively, of the National 
Research Council.  www.national-academies.org 
Report of the Committee on Proposal Evaluation for Allocation of Supercomputing Time for the Study of Molecular Dynamics: Second RoundCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 APPENDIX F  ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REPORT REVIEWER 
  This report has been reviewed in draft form by
 an individual chosen for his perspective and 
technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the NRC's Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review
 is to provide candid and critical comments 
that will assist the institution in making its pub
lished report as sound as possible and to ensure 
that the report meets institutional standards for 
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the 
study charge. The review comments and draft ma
nuscript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to 
thank the following individual for his review of this report: 
 
Sean Eddy, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Janelia Farm Research Campus 
 
Although the reviewer listed above has provide
d many constructive comments and suggestions, 
he was not asked to endorse the conclusions. In
 addition, he was asked to ensure that an 
independent examination of th
is report was carried out in accordance with institutional 
procedures and that all review comments were ca
refully considered. Responsibility for the final 
content of this report rests entirely with 
the authoring committee and the institution. 
