DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13352Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention:Workshop Summary164 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38474-2 | DOI 10.17226/13352Katherine M. Blakeslee, Deepali M. Patel, and Melissa A. Simon, Rapporteurs;Forum on Global Violence Prevention; Board on Global Health; Institute ofMedicine; National Research CouncilCommunications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Katherine M. Blakeslee, Deepali M. Patel, and Melissa A. Simon, 
RapporteursForum on Global Violence Prevention
Board on Global HealthCommunications and Technology for Violence PreventionWORKSHOP SUMMARYCommunications and Technology for Violence PreventionWORKSHOP SUMMARYCommunications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Govern-ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the 
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer-ing, and the Institute of Medicine. 
This study was supported by contracts between the National Academy of Sci
-ences and the Department of Health and Human Services: Administration on 
 
Aging, Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, Of˜ce of Women™s Health; 
 
Anheuser-Busch InBev; the Avon Foundation for Women; BD (Becton, Dickinson 
and Company); Catholic Health Initiatives; the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention; the Department of Education: Of˜ce of Safe and Healthy Students; 
the Depart ment of Justice: National Institute of Justice; Eli Lilly and Company; 
the F. Felix Foundation; the Fetzer Institute; the Foundation to Promote Open 
 
Society; the Joyce Foundation; Kaiser Permanente; the National Institutes of Health: 
 
National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse, National Institute on Drug 
Abuse, Of˜ce of Research on Women™s Health, John E. Fogarty International 
Center; the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; and the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or 
recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily re˚ect the view of the organizations or agencies that provided support 
for this project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-25351-2International Standard Book Number-10:
 978-0-309-25351-9Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
 For more information about the Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page 
at: www.iom.edu. 
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost 
all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The serpent ad
-opted as a logotype by the Institute of Medicine is a relief carving from ancient 
Greece, now held by the Staatliche Museen in Berlin.
Suggested citation: IOM (Institute of Medicine) and NRC (National Research Coun-cil). 2012.
 Communications and technology for violence prevention: Workshop 
summary.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society 
of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. 
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Acad-emy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c 
and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engi
-neers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, 
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the 
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is presi
-dent of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in 
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Insti-tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its 
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. 
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of  Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. 
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the 
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to 
the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The 
 
Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. 
Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, 
of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPLANNING COMMITTEE FOR WORKSHOP 
ON COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY 
FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION1JAMES A. MERCY (Chair), Special Advisor for Strategic Directions, 
Division of Violence Prevention, National Center for Injury 
Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease Control and PreventionFRANCES HENRY, 
Advisor, F. Felix Foundation
BRIGID MCCAW, 
Medical Director, NCal Family Violence Prevention 
Program, Kaiser Permanente
JODY RANCK, 
Principal Investigator, Public Health Institute
MARK L. ROSENBERG
, President and Chief Executive Of˜cer, The 
Task Force for Global Health
KASISOMAYAJULA ﬁVISHﬂ VISWANATH, 
Associate Professor, 
Harvard School of Public HealthLISA WITTER, 
Partner and Chief Change Of˜cer, Fenton
1  Institute of Medicine planning committees are solely responsible for organizing the work
-shop, identifying topics, and choosing speakers. The responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viFORUM ON GLOBAL VIOLENCE PREVENTION
JACQUELYN C. CAMPBELL 
(Co-Chair), Anna D. Wolf Chair and 
Professor, Johns Hopkins University School of Nursing
MARK L. ROSENBERG 
(Co-Chair), President and Chief Executive 
Of˜cer, The Task Force for Global Health
ALBERT J. ALLEN, 
Senior Medical Fellow, Bioethics and Pediatric 
Capabilities, Global Medical Affairs and Development Center of 
Excellence, Eli Lilly and Company
CLARE ANDERSON, Deputy Commissioner, Administration on 
Children, Youth, and Families, Department of Health and Human 
ServicesFRANCES ASHE-GOINS
, Deputy Director, Of˜ce on Women™s Health, 
Department of Health and Human Services
KATRINA BAUM
, Senior Research Of˜cer, Of˜ce of Research 
Partnerships, National Institute of Justice, Department of Justice
SUSAN BISSELL
, Associate Director, Child Protection Section, United 
Nations Children™s Fund 
ARTURO CERVANTES TREJO
, Director General, National Center for 
Injury Prevention, Ministry of Health, Mexico
XINQI DONG
, Associate Director, Rush Institute for Healthy 
Aging; Associate Professor of Medicine, Behavioral Sciences, and 
Gerontological Nursing, Rush University Medical CenterAMIE GIANINO
, Senior Global Director, Beer & Better World, 
Anheuser-Busch InBev
KATHY GREENLEE
, Assistant Secretary for Aging, Administration on 
Aging, Department of Health and Human ServicesRODRIGO V. GUERRERO
, Mayor, Cali, Colombia
JOHN R. HAYES,
 Executive Director, National Network of Depression 
Centers, Indiana University School of Medicine
DAVID HEMENWAY
, Director, Injury Control Research Center and the 
Youth Violence Prevention Center, Harvard University School of 
Public HealthFRANCES HENRY
, Advisor, F. Felix Foundation
MERCEDES S. HINTON
, Program Of˜cer, Initiative on Confronting 
Violent Crime, Open Society Institute
LARKE NAHME HUANG, Senior Advisor, Of˜ce of the Administrator, 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, 
Department of Health and Human Services
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiL. ROWELL HUESMANN, Amos N. Tversky Collegiate Professor of 
Psychology and Communication Studies; Director, Research Center 
for Group Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, The University of 
MichiganPAUL KESNER
, Director, Safe and Supportive Schools Program, Of˜ce 
of Safe and Healthy Students, Department of Education
CAROL M. KURZIG, President, Avon Foundation for Women
JACQUELINE LLOYD
, Health Scientist Administrator, Prevention 
Research Branch, Division of Epidemiology, Services and Prevention 
Research, National Institute on Drug Abuse 
BRIGID MCCAW
, Medical Director, NCal Family Violence Prevention 
Program, Kaiser Permanente
JAMES A. MERCY, Special Advisor for Strategic Directions, Division 
of Violence Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
MARGARET M. MURRAY
, Director, Global Alcohol Research Program, 
National Institute for Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National 
Institutes of Health
MICHAEL PHILLIPS
, Director, Suicide Research and Prevention Center, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
COLLEEN SCANLON
, Senior Vice President, Advocacy, Catholic Health 
InitiativesKRISTIN SCHUBERT
, Interim Team Director, Public Health and 
Program Of˜cer, Vulnerable Populations, Robert Wood Johnson 
FoundationEVELYN TOMASZEWSKI
, Senior Policy Advisor, Human Rights and 
International Affairs, National Association of Social Workers
ELIZABETH WARD
, Chairman, Violence Prevention Alliance, University 
of the West Indies, Mona Campus 
StaffDEEPALI M. PATEL
, Program Of˜cerRACHEL M. TAYLOR
, Research AssociateMEGAN M. PEREZ, 
Senior Program AssistantKATHERINE M. BLAKESLEE, 
Global Program AdvisorMELISSA A. SIMON, Institute of Medicine Anniversary FellowJULIE WILTSHIRE, 
Financial Of˜cer
PATRICK KELLEY, 
Board Director
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix˜˚˛˝˚˙˚ˆˇThis report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for 
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report 
Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide 
candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the 
study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain con˜den-tial to protect the integrity of the process. We wish to thank the following 
individuals for their review of this report:
AUDIE ATIENZA
, Program Director, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health
ROBBIN CRABTREE, Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences, 
Fair˜eld University
FRANCES HENRY
, Advisor, F. Felix Foundation 
PATRICK MEIER
, Director of Crisis Mapping, UshahidiAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they did not see the ˜nal draft of the report be-fore its release. The review of this report was overseen by Don E. Detmer, 
Professor Emeritus and Professor of Medical Education at the Department 
of Public Health Sciences of the University of Virginia School of Medicine. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x REVIEWERS
Appointed by the Institute of Medicine, he was responsible for making 
certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in 
accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments 
were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report 
rests entirely with the author and the institution.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiThe Forum on Global Violence Prevention was established to develop 
multisectoral collaboration among stakeholders. Violence prevention 
is a cross-disciplinary ˜eld that could bene˜t from increased dialogue 
among researchers, policy makers, funders, and practitioners. As awareness 
of the insidious and pervasive nature of violence grows, so too does the 
imperative to mitigate and prevent it. The Forum seeks to illuminate and 
explore evidence-based approaches to the prevention of violence.
A number of individuals contributed to the development of this 
workshop and report. These include a number of staff members from the 
IOM and the National Academies: Patrick Kelley, Angela Christian, Julie 
Wiltshire, Marton Cavani, Daniel Bethea, Christina Fedak, Meg Ginivan, 
Yeonwoo Leibowitz, Patsy Powell, and Eileen Milner. The Forum staff, 
including Deepali Patel, Rachel Taylor, and Megan Perez, also put forth 
considerable effort to ensure this workshop™s success. The staff at the Em
-bassy of Canada provided excellent support for the event.
The planning committee contributed several hours of service to develop and execute the agenda, with the guidance of forum membership. Review-ers also provided thoughtful remarks in reading the draft manuscript. 
Finally, these efforts would not be possible without the work of the Forum 
membership itself, an esteemed body of individuals dedicated to the concept 
that violence is preventable. 
The overall successful functioning of the Forum and its activities de-pends on the generosity of its sponsors. Financial support for the  Forum on 
Global Violence Prevention is provided by the Department of Health and 
Human Services: Administration on Aging, Administration on Children, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii
 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Youth, and Families, Of˜ce of Women™s Health; Anheuser-Busch InBev; 
Avon Foundation for Women; BD (Becton, Dickinson and Company); 
 
Catholic Health Initiatives; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 
Depart ment of Education: Of˜ce of Safe and Healthy Students; Depart-ment of Justice: National Institute of Justice; Eli Lilly and Company; 
F. Felix Foundation; Fetzer Institute; Foundation to Promote Open Society; 
the Joyce Foundation; Kaiser Permanente; National Institutes of Health: 
 
National Institute on Alcoholism and Alcohol Abuse, National Institute 
on Drug Abuse, Of˜ce of Research on Women™s Health, John E. Fogarty 
International Center; Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; and the Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii1 Introduction 1PART I: WORKSHOP OVERVIEW
2  Transforming Violence Prevention Through New Communications
 93   
Methodological Considerations of New Communications 
 Platforms 174  Addressing Disparities and Vulnerabilities
 255  Framing Violence Prevention Communication
 32PART II: PAPERS AND COMMENTARY FROM SPEAKERS
6   
Foundations of mPreventViolence: Integrating Violence 
 Prevention and Information and Communications Technologies
 43 The Role of Information and Communications 
   
Technologies in Violence Prevention
   
Cathryn Meurn 44 The State of Global Violence Prevention: Progress and 
    
Challenges    
Mark L. Rosenberg, James A. Mercy, Frances Henry, and 
Alexander Butchart 60Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv
 CONTENTS
 Information and Communications Technologies and the 
   
Future of Global Health   
Jody Ranck 66 Evaluation of mHealth   
William T. Riley
 727  Practical Applications of mPreventViolence
 87 Using Mobile Phones to Enhance Parent Engagement in a 
    
Home Visiting Intervention to Prevent Child Maltreatment 
    
Judith J. Carta, Kathryn Bigelow, Jennifer Burke Lefever, 
 and John Borkowski 88 Bell Bajao!
 as a Case Study
   
Jael Silliman
 91 Dating Violence Prevention: Using Information and 
    
Communications Technologies for Global Dating Violence 
Prevention    
Andra Teten Tharp, Alan Dowell, Tessa Burton, 
 Laura Chaing, and Constance DeCherney
 105 Leveraging Social Media and Technology to Advance the 
    
Field of Elder Abuse
   XinQi Dong, Eric Brown, and Donna Levin
 111 Using Big Data to Understand and Prevent Suicide 
    
Daniel J. Reidenberg and John Gordon 118APPENDIXESA Workshop Agenda
 129B Speaker Biographical Sketches 134Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1The past 25 years have seen a major paradigm shift in the ˜eld of 
violence prevention, from the assumption that violence is inevitable 
to a recognition that violence is preventable. As evidence-based in-terventions increasingly demonstrate measurable impacts on the prevalence 
of violence, those who work in the ˜eld of violence prevention face the 
challenge of ˜nding new ways to disseminate information and to rapidly 
deploy or scale up new programs. 
At the same time, a massive change in communications platforms and 
standards has occurred around the globe. These new technologies have 
disrupted traditional means of communication and have provided oppor-tunities for reaching farther and wider. Furthermore, new media make it 
possible to empower whole groups to engage in community-based efforts 
to prevent violence by making available the vast body of evidence-based 
knowledge previously only accessible in the academic realm. 
Although it is tempting to push forward quickly in order to take 
advantage of these opportunities, that desire should be tempered by the 
importance of advancing both holistically and cautiously to avoid the 
unintended consequences of new ideas as much as possible. The ˜elds of 
communications and communications technology offer much in terms of 
1  The planning committee™s role was limited to planning the workshop, and the workshop 
summary has been prepared by the workshop rapporteurs as a factual summary of what 
occurred at the workshop. Statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those 
of individual presenters and participants and are not necessarily endorsed or veri˜ed by the 
Forum, the Institute of Medicine, or the National Research Council, and they should not be 
construed as re˚ecting any group consensus. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
out-of-the-box thinking that could assist in overcoming persistent obstacles, 
while the violence prevention ˜eld draws on careful and considerable scien
-ti˜c expertise in building successful interventions. Combining the strengths 
of these ˜elds, while minimizing potential harm, could prove bene˜cial for 
preventing violence and promoting well-being around the world. 
On December 8Œ9, 2011, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) Forum on 
Global Violence Prevention convened a workshop to explore the intersec
-tion of violence prevention and information and communications tech-nology (ICT). Dubbed ﬁmPreventViolence,ﬂ
2 the workshop provided an 
opportunity for practitioners to engage in new and innovative thinking 
concerning these two ˜elds with the goal of bridging gaps in language, 
processes, and mechanisms. Part of the Forum™s mandate is to engage 
in multisectoral, multidirectional dialogue that explores cross-cutting 
evidence-based approaches to violence prevention, and the Forum has con-vened three workshops to explore various elements of violence prevention.3 To that end, this workshop was designed to examine such approaches from 
multiple perspectives and at multiple levels of society. In particular, the 
workshop was focused on exploring the potential applications of ICT to 
violence prevention, drawing on experience in development, health, and the 
social sector as well as from industry and the private sector. Speakers were 
invited to share the progress and outcomes of their work and to engage in 
a dialogue exploring the gaps and opportunities in the ˜eld. 
The workshop was planned by a formally appointed committee of the 
IOM, whose members created an agenda and identi˜ed relevant speakers. 
Because the topic is large and the ˜eld is broad, presentations at this event 
represent only a sample of the research currently being undertaken. Speak
-ers were chosen to present a global, balanced perspective but by no means a 
comprehensive one. Working within the limitations imposed by its time and 
resource constraints, the planning committee members chose speakers who 
could provide diverse perspectives upon which further discussion could 
occur. The agenda for this workshop can be found in Appendix A. The 
2  ﬁmﬂ is shorthand for ﬁmobile,ﬂ and is often used to de˜ne the concept of the application 
of mobile technology to a particular ˜eld, such as health, ˜nance, etc. Other similar terms such 
as ﬁeﬂ for ﬁelectronic,ﬂ ﬁdﬂ for ﬁdigital,ﬂ or ﬁopenﬂ re˚ect similar concepts of differentiating 
traditional or analog approaches from new and innovative ones (particularly those involving 
new technology or communications tools). The use of ﬁmﬂ here re˚ects a growing notion that 
communications is increasingly mobile vs. ˜xed.
3  Previous workshop summaries include Preventing Violence Against Women and Children 
(IOM and NRC, 2011) and 
Social and Economic Costs of Violence
 (IOM and NRC, 2012). 
Additionally, the National Academy of Engineering sponsored a workshop in 2007, resulting 
in the summary Information and Communication Technology and Peacebuilding: Summary of 
a Workshop
 (NRC, 2008) that explored a similar intersection of ICT and con˚ict resolution.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 3speakers™ presentations can also be found on the website for the workshop: 
www.iom.edu/mpreventviolence.
ORGANIZATION OF THE REPORT
This summary provides an account of the presentations given at the 
workshop. Opinions expressed within this summary are not those of the 
IOM, the Forum on Global Violence Prevention, or their agents but rather 
of the presenters themselves. Such statements are the views of the presenters and do not re˚ect conclusions or recommendations of a formally appointed 
committee. This summary was authored by designated rapporteurs based 
on the workshop presentations and discussions and does not represent the 
views of the institution, nor does it constitute a full or exhaustive overview 
of the ˜eld.BOX 1-1
 Statement of Task
Over the past 25 years those working in the ˜eld of violence prevention 
have brought about a major paradigm shift from an assumption that violence is 
inevitable to the recognition that violence is preventable, through the application 
of evidence-based programs to prevent speci˜c types of violence. As practitioners 
gain further insight into successful avenues of research and intervention, the abil
-ity to transport such information to new settings is crucial in advancing the ˜eld. 
How could traditional tools of dissemination be used more effectively? How could 
newer tools such as the Internet and mobile technologies be introduced into this 
˜eld? How can we better translate what works in one setting to another using 
such tools and media?The Institute of Medicine (IOM) will convene a 2-day workshop to explore 
gaps in the four areas of knowledge management (knowledge generation, integra
-tion, dissemination, and application) and how closing these gaps might accelerate 
violence prevention in low- and middle-income countries. 
The public workshop will be organized and conducted by an ad hoc commit
-tee to examine (1) the use of traditional and new media to communicate evidence-
based information for violence prevention and (2) new applications of social media 
and new communications technologies to prevent violence. It will also highlight 
evidence-based best practices from other arenas of global health where use of 
such tools show potential for success.
The workshop will include invited presentations and panel discussions. Ex
-perts will be drawn from the public and private sectors as well as from academic 
organizations to allow for multi-lateral, evidence-based discussions. An individually 
authored summary of the workshop will be prepared by a designated rapporteur, 
in accordance with institutional policy and procedures.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
The workshop summary is organized thematically, covering the major 
topics that arose during the 2-day workshop, so as to present these issues 
in a larger context and in a more compelling and comprehensive way. The 
thematic organization also allows the summary to serve as an overview of 
important issues in the ˜eld; however, such an organization results in some 
repetition because themes are interrelated and the presented examples sup-port several different themes and sub-themes as raised by speakers. The 
themes presented in this summary were the most frequent, cross-cutting, 
and essential elements that arose from the various presentations of the 
workshop, but the choice of these themes does not represent the views of 
the IOM or a formal consensus process. 
The ˜rst part of this report consists of an introduction and four chap-ters which provide a summary of the workshop; the second part consists of 
submitted papers and commentary from speakers regarding the substance 
of the work they presented at the workshop. These papers were solicited 
from speakers in order to offer further information about their work and 
this ˜eld; not all speakers contributed papers. The appendixes contain ad-ditional information regarding the agenda and participants.DEFINITIONS AND CONTEXTViolence is de˜ned by the World Health Organization (WHO) as ﬁthe 
intentional use of physical force or power, threatened or actual, against 
oneself, another person, or against a group or community that either results 
in or has a high likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, 
maldevelopment, or deprivationﬂ (WHO, 2002). WHO further categorizes 
violence into seven types: child abuse, elder abuse, sexual violence, intimate 
partner violence, youth violence, collective violence, and self-directed vio-lence. This workshop examined, to various extents, the prevention of all 
seven types of violence.
The workshop organizers and participants took a broad de˜nition of 
what the ˜eld of information and communications technology entails. To 
some extent, they included traditional media, including print and television. For the most part, however, speakers focused on new technologies, such 
as new and social media, mapping, large datasets, networks, and others. 
They also explored how information messaging and delivery has changed 
through new platforms. 
 The workshop explored the changing paradigm of communications 
and how that might be relevant to violence prevention, particularly in 
low- and middle-income countries. Speakers described both the current 
status of violence prevention and the current applicability of communica-tions technology to health, and they offered thoughts on the intersection 
of all three ˜elds. Several speakers presented examples of their work that 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 5employed innovative uses of ICT. Because this area is a relatively new one 
and because technology changes at a rapid pace, many speakers presented 
theoretical or preliminary ideas, pointing the way toward how a body of 
work might be developed but by no means providing a comprehensive one 
at the workshop. 
The next four chapters in Part I examine the four major themes that 
arose from participants™ presentations and discussions: Transforming Vio
-lence Prevention Through New Communications (Chapter 2), Method-ological Considerations of New Communications Platforms (Chapter 3), 
Addressing Disparities and Vulnerabilities (Chapter 4), and Framing Vio
-lence Prevention Communication (Chapter 5). Part II includes the submit-ted papers, organized into two chapters: Foundations of mPreventViolence: 
Integrating Violence Prevention and Information and Communications Tech
-nologies (Chapter 6) and Practical Applications of mPreventViolence (Chap
-ter 7). These papers provide speakers™ perspectives on the foundation and 
future of the integration of violence prevention and ICT. 
Finally, the appendixes contain the workshop agenda (Appendix A) and 
the speakers™ biographies (Appendix B).
REFERENCESIOM (Institute of Medicine) and NRC (National Research Council). 2011. 
Preventing vio
-lence against women and children: Workshop summary.
 Washington, DC: The National 
Academies Press.IOM and NRC. 2012. Social and economic costs of violence: Workshop summary.
 Washing
-ton, DC: The National Academies Press.
NRC. 2008. Information and communication technology and peacebuilding: Summary of a 
workshop. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2002. 
World report on violence and health.
 Geneva: 
World Health Organization.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9


Billions of men, women, and children around the world have been ex-posed to violence. More than 1.6 million people a year die from vio-lence, and many more are injured. Low- and middle-income countries 
bear 90 percent of the burden of violence (IOM, 2008). Many workshop 
participants believed that the potential of information and communications 
technology (ICT) to help in violence prevention efforts is great, but that ICT 
could also be used to facilitate violence and abuse.
Speaker and Forum co-chair Mark Rosenberg of the Task Force for 
Global Health noted that violence has traditionally been considered to be 
the product of evil and, consequently, not preventable. But today, he said, 
more people believe that violence is preventable, which is an important step 
in understanding violence and moving toward prevention. Dr. Rosenberg 
outlined a public health model that the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) and others have applied to the prevention of violence. 
This model includes four steps: (1) de˜ning the problem, (2) identifying risk factors, (3) exploring potential points of intervention, and (4) designing, 
implementing, and evaluating solutions (further information can be found 
in Chapter 6). This model has yielded much data on what works in violence 
prevention, and, as ready access to information and resources increases, 
dissemination of knowledge about how to prevent violence also increases.
VIOLENCE IN THE MEDIASpeaker and planning committee member Vish Viswanath of the Har
-vard School of Public Health discussed the relationship between exposure 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
to media violence and aggressive behavior in some individuals. Although 
the evidence is not solid, some studies indicate that the impact of continued 
exposure to violence can desensitize individuals to violence and lead to the 
belief that the world is unsafe. Violence in television programming or in 
cartoons models violent behavior for viewers. It can also lead to the belief 
that physical aggression is the way to resolve con˚ict. 
Speaker Dale Kunkel of the University of Arizona said that there is 
consensus in the literature that media violence risks harmful effects on 
children and that greater exposure increases the risk. He cited a number of 
institutions that are part of this consensus, including the American Medical 
Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Psycho-logical Association, the National Academy of Sciences, and the National 
Institute of Mental Health. Dr. Kunkel sees violence in the media as a risk 
factor for aggressive behaviorŠnot the only and not the most powerful 
factor, but one that is ﬁconsistent and meaningful.ﬂ He explained that 
contextual factors can increase the risk of later violent behavior. There 
is less research on the impact of violent video games than there is on the 
effect of violent TV, but there is enough to say there is a correlation be
-tween aggression and playing violent video games. A recently published 
meta-analysis of the effects of video games found that when the games are 
violent, exposure to them can increase aggression and decrease empathic 
behaviors. Dr. Viswanath also discussed cyberbullying through social media 
and its connection to violence. He said there is now evidence that text-based 
harassment is increasing, while harassment through other Internet media is 
neither increasing nor decreasing. 
Dr. Kunkel brought up policy steps that could reduce children™s expo
-sure to media violence. One such step would be to reduce the violent media 
content production and its distribution. The First Amendment, which guar-antees freedom of speech, limits what can be done in restricting production 
and distribution of media that contain violence. Another policy direction 
would be to ﬁfacilitateﬂ industry self-regulation, which would avoid the is-sue of First Amendment rights. Formal government restrictions could, for 
example, regulate the hours during which such media could be shown, as 
has been done in the United Kingdom. The United States uses this strategy 
to regulate indecency but not violence, because there is less public concern 
in the United States about violence than there is about sex. Dr. Viswanath 
speculated that there is probably much more organized opposition to por-trayals of sex than there is to violence in the United States, despite the fact 
that most likely there is more programming with violence than with sexual 
content. Dr. Kunkel cited a study showing that children are more attracted 
to high action and that violent media generally has lots of action. The 
United Nations Children™s Fund™s (UNICEF™s) of˜ce of research, Innocenti, 
published a report in December 2011 titled Child Safety Online: Global 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEW COMMUNICATIONS
 11Challenges and Strategies (UNICEF, 2011). It explores the links between 
child abuse and information and communications technology and suggests 
ways to build a protective environment for children. 
Media can be used for positive aims; for example, Sesame Street uses 
positive modeling for pro-social behavior. The Sesame Workshop is in more 
than 150 countries, and in 30 of them it is indigenously produced. It is de-signed to counter the negative images children see, particularly in relation 
to con˚ict and violence. 
CREATING CONVERSATIONS AND EMPOWERING PEOPLE
Throughout the workshop, a number of speakers referred to the rapid 
change that has occurred in the technology space and to the transforma-tional impact it has had on society. In his keynote address, Erik Hersman, 
co-founder of Ushahidi, illustrated how technology has provided tools for 
interaction among ever-expanding networks. Technology is no longer used 
only to send out information, but is instead used as a two-way communica
-tion channel and for the creation of dialogue among multiple parties. Such 
community networking is replacing, to some degree, one-way communica-tion by experts or authority ˜gures. 
Gaming is another information and communications technology that 
has potential to in˚uence behavioral change through empowerment, as 
noted by speaker Ben Sawyer from Games for Health. For example, the 
President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief has created a game to get 
Kenyan youth engaged in HIV prevention. Speaker and planning commit-tee member Jody Ranck of the Public Health Institute mentioned another 
game, Owning Asthma, which enables youth with high rates of asthma to 
˜gure out where they are when they encounter their triggers. The game 
encourages their engagement with the politics of environmental pollution, 
particularly in relation to race and class. Mr. Sawyer
 discussed Games for 
Health as an example of organizations being able to identify, package, and 
make available accessible tools that allow people to model and play with 
health as a form of intervention. He said that when people think about 
games, ﬁit really starts . . . with an engaging and motivating experience, 
but it also can be a supporting experience.ﬂ Games can give people models 
and frameworks focused on concepts such as positive health behaviors that 
they can use in their lives to make better choices.
Dr. Rosenberg discussed the paradox of disconnection. As people are 
becoming more connected through technology, they have less face-to-face 
time. Increasing our disconnectedness poses a risk, he said, because people 
may be less cautious about hurting those they have not met or seen than 
people they have met or seen. Other speakers spoke of technology as creat-ing ﬁtrustﬂ between groups who may never have met.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
COMMUNITY BUILDING AND FLATTENING HIERARCHY
Interactive social media are facilitating the development of communities 
from which ideas and innovative solutions to a wide array of problems can 
emerge. Participation in these networks by individuals from different disci-plines and backgrounds allows boundaries to be bridged and cross-cutting 
ideas to develop. Social media are affecting societies and lowering barriers 
and, in the process, disrupting the status quo of hierarchical structures. 
The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline was presented by speaker 
Ashley Womble as an example of a violence prevention initiative that is 
utilizing ICT to carry out its work. Established in 2005 and focused on 
the prevention of suicide, the hotline now receives about 2,200 calls per 
day. Lifeline also works with Facebook to reach out to individuals who 
have posted suicidal messages and refer them to a help center. It also has 
an online space where users can create avatars, interact virtually, and share 
their experiences. 
Another example of a violence prevention initiative that is utilizing ICT 
is Bell Bajao!, presented by speaker Eesha Pandit of Breakthrough, which 
was established in India in 2008 to interrupt violence against women. The 
campaign urges people who hear or notice domestic violence taking place 
near their homes to ring the bell of the home where the disturbance is oc
-curring in order to alert the perpetrator that the community is watching 
and does not condone the violence. 
Mr. Hersman spoke about the ability of the new interactive technol
-ogy and the communities it helps build to bypass hierarchies and experts. 
New technologies allow people to organize to solve their own problems. 
 
Ushahidi arose in response to the post-election violence in Kenya in 2008, 
and it allowed people to send reports of violence through the Web, which 
could then be put on a public map. The technology was built by people 
fascinated with innovation and driven by urgency, despite a lack of cre
-dentials, permissions, funding, and time. Mr. Hersman referred to the 
space in which the most innovation takes places as ﬁwhite spaceﬂŠa place 
ﬁwhere the rules are vague, authority is fuzzy, strategy unclear, and budgets 
non-existent.ﬂ 
Speaker John Pollock of Technology Review
 described how, during 
the Arab Spring, live-streaming created a space where people of all back-grounds could meet to acquire and share information that could be used 
to protect people and save lives. In situations of urgency, trust between 
people who have never met can be built through technology. Skype, in 
particular, provides a relatively secure environment in which to strengthen 
relationships, raise pro˜les, raise funds, shape stories, and help journal-ists get stories, quotations, and interviews. The ˚exibility of networks is a 
tremendous advantage vis-à-vis hierarchical institutions, which can freeze 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEW COMMUNICATIONS
 13up in crisis situations. Mr. Pollock talked about the strength of diversity in 
networks, saying, ﬁmonocultures collapse as soon as there™s rapid change.ﬂ
As several speakers noted, one of the key barriers to the use of new 
technologies is the need for accompanying organizational change. Using 
networking technologies with ﬁanalog mindsets and analog organizationsﬂ 
is a challenge for organizations and individuals. Formal institutions may 
take 2 years to gather data, making the information about a health problem 2 years old before it is released. The appearance of severe acute respiratory 
syndrome, or SARS, brought about a change in response in managing a 
rapidly spreading epidemic, and more such changes are needed. Reporting 
information rapidly and acting on it quickly, whether the information con
-cerns post-election violence, rape, sexual harassment, or disease, requires 
huge shifts in the ways institutions do their business.
Speaker Mick Fealty, founder of Slugger Consults, discussed the post-
con˚ict challenges Northern Ireland has faced in sustaining peace. There 
was a huge loss of trust not only between the Catholic and Protestant 
communities but also among those within each community who were most 
affected by the con˚ict. In the early l990s, the advent of the digital age fa-cilitated conversation beyond the power groups that negotiated cease˜res 
and peace. Mr. Fealty set up a blog, 
Slugger O™Toole
, through which those 
outside the establishment could bypass politicians and the mainstream 
media and speak directly to each other. In order to preserve the pluralism 
of the conversation over the blog, Mr. Fealty established some rules, the 
principal one being that participants had to stay with the argument and 
not attack the other person. Mr. Fealty also felt that diversity was critical 
to gaining new perspectives on old issues that already have champions who 
do not want to be displaced. These conversations and connections take 
power away from authorities and put it in the hands of the users. ﬁThis 
is a show-me, not a tell-me paradigm,ﬂ he said. Mr. Fealty also discussed 
consultation, which he said has to be part of the design of a solution, not 
something that is done after a solution already has been proposed. People 
want to have agency through partnerships built on trust.
Speaker John Gordon of Fenton said that social media allow an ﬁex-traordinary degree of diversity.ﬂ People from across the socioeconomic and 
socio-demographic spectrums self-organize. Mr. Pollock also noted that 
the diversity is not just in identity, but also in cognition. Forum member 
Rowell Huesmann of the University of Michigan agreed, saying that there 
is also diversity of opinion and communication messages. He warned that 
a consequence of the explosion of new information and communications 
technology may be that each of us is exposed to less diversity of opinion, 
as we focus more on what we want to hear; these platforms readily allow 
these ˜lters.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
NEAR REAL-TIME DATA
Mr. Hersman stressed that technology is not a panacea and that it is 
actually less important than the use case.1 He gave several examples. Ha-rassmap, developed in Egypt, uses Medic:Mobile tools that receive messages 
that are then mapped to show the public where sexual harassment is hap-pening in Cairo. The beauty of these maps is that they are based on near 
real-time data. Bully Mapper in Australia, Hollaback in the United States, 
and ApartheidWatch in Israel and Palestine perform similar services. In In
-dia, Maps4Aid is tracking violence against women. PeaceTXT in Chicago 
brings together people within the community who can interrupt violence, 
with CeaseFire as the largest user. 
In Benin, Plan International has focused on violence against children. 
Kids or adults who see violence against children can send text messages to 
alert the government and the police. There are plans to scale it up to eight 
countries across the region. A new website called Street Watch Palestine 
was launched in late 2011 to draw attention to harassment of women in 
Ramallah, Palestine. Near real-time data make it possible to respond to a 
problem almost immediately; it is no longer necessary to wait a long time 
for information or data before interventions can be mounted. 
Speaker Devon Halley of Deloitte Research GovLab (XBC) suggested 
that the most powerful idea circulating now is the idea of turning citizens 
into ﬁsensors.ﬂ These sensors are low-cost, put forth a tremendous amount 
of data, and they feed directly into the ﬁhere and the now.ﬂ Whether it is 
through Twitter feeds or Facebook feeds or other mechanisms, ﬁpeople are 
putting a tremendous amount of information out there.ﬂ With technology, 
it is now easy to set up networks or to detect patterns in datasets that one 
might not otherwise recognize. These data can help people discover various 
actionable areas or ﬁhot spots to act in.ﬂCOLLABORATION AND CONNECTION
Connections through today™s large networks can link those who deal 
with speci˜c types of violence, helping break down the barriers between 
disciplines and different approaches to violence. Successful violence preven-tion depends upon effective collaboration between public health agencies, 
members of law enforcement, social services providers, educators, and 
other actors. Linking those who work on prevention and treatment is also 
important. 
1  A use case describes the interaction between an actor or ﬁuserﬂ (either a person or an 
organization) and a system or enterprise. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NEW COMMUNICATIONS
 15Many speakers stated that collaboration is fundamental to ˜nding in-novative solutions to prevent violence. Mr. Hersman talked about the fact 
that both networks and technological innovations are often created by peo
-ple driven to organize to resolve problems to which existing institutions are 
not responsive. Dr. Rosenberg cited the need for establishing connections 
between the of˜cials who can respond to a problem and the people who are 
reporting the violence as well as the need to incentivize participation and 
reporting. At present, the connections between a citizen making a report 
and the institutional responders are tentative or inconsistent, and a ﬁtrust 
bridgeﬂŠa term offered by Mr. HersmanŠshould be formed between the 
two sides. Huge institutional shifts might be required to form such connec-tions and trust. Law enforcement is beginning to make this shift through 
the combination of social media, citizen reporting, and police practice. Dr. 
Viswanath cited the importance of institutions maintaining contact with 
citizens, especially those under stress, so they have an ongoing connection.Mr. Halley echoed other speakers, agreeing that the larger the network, 
the more powerful it is, and that cross-boundary connections are impor-tant for innovation. His remarks were based on a paper he co-authored, 
ﬁXBC: Creating Public Value by Unleashing the Power of Cross-Boundary 
Collaboration.ﬂ2 The central questions that this work tries to answer are: 
How can maximum value come from a network? What network structures 
are best for which purpose? How does one manage structures, and what 
should be considered in developing a network? Technologies for online col
-laboration can allow much larger numbers of people to become involved 
than is possible with the traditional networks used to ˜nd information 
or solve problems. Mr. Halley cited three steps that are at the heart of 
cross-boundary collaboration: connect, innovate, and execute. Connections 
break down barriers and increase the broad awareness of situations. When 
organizations take advantage of connectivity, they can rapidly source in
-formation and solutions at lower cost. Given the transboundary issues and 
complexity in the world today, Mr. Halley said an approach able to rapidly 
handle complex situations is needed. 
Dr. Rosenberg mentioned the important role that advocacy groups have 
played in preventing and countering violence. Advocates began working to 
prevent violence against women 35 years ago. Attention to HIV/AIDS was 
galvanized by advocacy groups. Other types of violence prevention are now 
being supported by emerging advocacy networks, often facilitated through 
social media.2  See http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-Global/Local%20Assets/Documents/Public%20
Sector/dtt_ps_xbc_060311.pdf.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
BOX 2-1 
 Key Messages Raised by Individual Speakers
˜˚
˚Use of information and communications technologies disrupts the ˚ow of 
information and hierarchies, with a transformational impact on society. 
˜˚
˚An important barrier to the realization of the potential of new technologies is 
the need for and resistance to organizational change.
˜˚
˚The use case is more important than the technology itself.
˜˚
˚The dialogue about the advantages, disadvantages, and dangers of commu
-nications in the ˜eld of violence prevention might bene˜t from greater stake
-holder prioritization.
REFERENCESIOM (Institute of Medicine). 2008. Violence prevention in low- and middle-income countries. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
UNICEF (United Nations Children™s Fund). 2011. 
Child safety online: Global challenges and 
strategies. Florence, Italy: UNICEF Innocenti Research Centre. http://www.unicef-irc.org/
publications/pdf/ict_eng.pdf (accessed March 30, 2012).
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.“
†˚˙

In a knowledge society of the sort existing today, being a ﬁtechnological 
citizenﬂ requires that one understand how to use current technologies 
as well as be able to learn how to use new ones that appear. Ensuring 
that the poor have access to these technologies and the knowhow to use 
them may require design of new approaches. Some speakers suggested 
that a curriculum to teach people how to use the new media in the most 
informed way should be developed and tested. As well, they believed it 
would be essential to develop rapid evaluation methodologies to ensure that 
interventions are evidence-based and successful. Several participants noted 
that as information and communications technology (ICT) moves forward, 
people should look for innovative ways that the old and new media can be 
used together. 
COMPUTING POWER AND SPEED OF TRANSMISSION
Today™s technology is characterized by an increasingly rapid trans
-mission of information and large datasets that can be stored and mined. 
Speaker and planning committee member Jody Ranck of the Public Health 
Institute discussed the effect of more pervasive computing power. He noted 
that the mobile phone of today is more powerful than NASA™s computing 
power in the 1960s. 
As the use of mobile technology in the practice of medicine and public 
health has become more pervasive, it has evolved into a de˜ned ˜eld known as mHealth. SMS, which can be used on all mobile devices, is the most com
-mon platform for mHealth; however, as the prices of smartphones decrease 
17Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
it will be important to think about their design and uses as well.1 In 2009 
the number of smartphones imported to Africa was equal to the number 
of SMS-only phones. Citing Cisco™s estimates that by 2020 there will be 
more than 50 billion things connected to the Internet, Dr. Ranck spoke of 
the coming of an ﬁInternet of Things.ﬂ These things may be, for example, 
sensors looking at air and water, and connected through a smartphone. 
Dr. Ranck noted that access to the Web is becoming more mobile, with 
most connections to the Web now being made by mobile phones. Because 
smartphones are also designed to collect data, this increasing connectivity 
raises the question of who is collecting data, what data are being collected, 
and who owns the data. 
The proliferation of social media platforms is changing culture. Small 
numbers of people can raise the pro˜le of the issues they care about by 
generating content for social media platforms and connecting to more 
people. There are a large number of mHealth deployments worldwide, 
ranging from HIV prevention messages and information via text to diagnos-tic tools and peripherals that can attach via Bluetooth wireless for remote 
diagnostics, acute treatment, and drug adherence. Dr. Ranck predicted that 
more democratic engagement in public health will result from the growth 
of peer-to-peer mHealth implementation, making it imperative to address 
ﬁtechnological citizenshipﬂ in greater detail.Dr. Ranck also cautioned that an intervention that worked well in one 
setting may not work in the same way in another cultural context. The issue 
of power often may be ignored in the development of mobile applications. 
He mentioned that there are some examples of domestic violence applica-tions, successful in one area, that actually increased the level of domestic 
violence in other areas because of gender and control issues over the mobile 
phone. 
PRIVACY AND MISINFORMATION
Security is a growing issue for ICTs, and tools are being developed 
to anonymize data that are sent through mobile devicesŠfor example, to 
ensure the safety of human rights workers. Dr. Ranck noted that the poten
-tial for de-anonymizing large datasets could raise privacy concerns. Many 
participants and speakers felt that innovations in ICT are ahead of current 
policies regarding privacy.
One workshop participant expressed concern over the implications 
of citizen reporting, vigilantism, and ﬁtrial by publicity.ﬂ Speaker Erik 
1  Short Message Service (SMS) is a text messaging data application for phone, Web, or 
mobile communication systems, using standardized communications protocols that allow the 
exchange of short text messages between
 ˜xed line or mobile phone devices.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
 19Hersman of Ushahidi responded that the police are already using cameras 
to gather information on behavior, so that citizen reporting may actually 
level the playing ˜eld. He predicts that this will settle out in different ways 
depending upon the country. Mr. Hersman also said that although data 
can be poisoned by misinformation, the best way to counteract that is with 
more information. Despite concerns over data corruption, he said, it has 
been found that as more people use the data the better the data become. 
CROWDSOURCING AND OPEN INNOVATION
2The emerging open health paradigm, in which access to information 
and decisions about health are available to all, includes open innovation 
and crowdsourcing. One example, InnoCentive, is a platform supported 
by Eli Lilly to ˜nd solutions to challenging scienti˜c problems that had 
remained unsolved in the lab, and it relies on the success of this paradigm. 
Crowdsourcing and open innovation platforms can signi˜cantly reduce the 
time and expense needed to ˜nd a solution. Dr. Ranck also mentioned the 
work of Deborah Estrin at the University of California, Los Angeles, and 
Ida Sim at the University of California, San Francisco, to create an open 
mHealth structure that can allow many new applications that cross data 
silos. 
Speakers shared a number of examples of open innovation, including

-posed on video. Such visibility can strengthen political will, as hap-pened when a video reached and in˚uenced the Libyan ambassador to the United Nations just before the UN Security Council vote on 
NATO™s potential involvement. 

-˚ict, when land lines can be compromised, satellite phones can 
place users at risk if used outside. A mobile network established 
in Benghazi with funding raised by the son of the deputy prime 
minister made it much safer for citizens. 

-pan earthquakeŠit is important to get information from many 
sources, and when traditional communication lines are down, plat-forms like Twitter can be very valuable. There were more than 
1,000 tweets per minute when the quake struck. 
2  Crowdsourcing is the outsourcing of task completion to an unde˜ned group of people, such 
as the general public, in an attempt to leverage the problem-solving power of large groups. 
Open innovation is the process of reducing barriers to internal and external collaborations as 
well as the inclusion of increased or different partners in ˜nding new solutions. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION

mapping has been used. Mr. Hersman mentioned the mapping 
of sexual harassment in Egypt and India. Speaker John Pollock 
of Technology Review
 said that in Tunisia, accounts of human 
rights abuses in prisons were disseminated using a technique called 
ﬁgeobombing,ﬂ in which geo-tagged3 YouTube videos show up in 
Google Maps and Google Earth. In this particular case, nongovern-mental organizations (NGOs) geo-tagged videos to the presidential 
palace. 

CNN, and BBC also play a role, if not their usual one. Because de-liberate misinformation is present in con˚ict situations, particularly 
in con˚icts between freedom ˜ghters and governments, veri˜ability 
becomes very important, and it is sometimes possible through col-laboration between traditional and new media. 
Mr. Hersman noted that the bigger the network, the more powerful it 
has the potential to be. However, open data do not necessarily empower 
the disenfranchised. In India, more af˚uent people of higher socioeconomic 
status used land records, released on an open data platform, to acquire 
more land from people of lower socioeconomic status. It will be important 
to consider possible downsides and unintended consequences and to think 
about ways to protect against them. 
Public health prevention successes over the past century depended 
upon huge social change, and ICTs can be used to accelerate change. Dr. 
Ranck noted that a person with a design mentality looks at how to develop 
technology in order to achieve a particular outcome, not how to solve a 
problem within the traditional infrastructure. A platform should be devel-oped for public health that enables innovation but provides protection at 
the same time. 
SCALING UP
Most speakers noted the need for and challenges of scaling up. In-novation is most likely to happen outside of large institutions, but these 
institutions are often important for supporting the scaling up of tech-nologies created elsewhere. 
Speaker and planning committee member Vish 
Viswanath of the Harvard School of Public Health
 cited policy as a means 
of enabling scale-up. Scaling up can also occur through social media, which 
3  Geo-tagging is the process of adding a geographical location to a piece of information 
(such as videos, tweets, or blogs). Geo-tags are not necessarily accurate because they re˚ect 
the location the user has chosen to add.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
 21Mr. Pollock described as having the ability to transform small events into 
large-scale change. Speaking of Tunisia, Libya, and Egypt, he described 
how protestors, most of them young, were protesting part-time while they 
worked or studied. He also described how doctors, dentists, and shopkeep-ers in Libya joined together with students and became organized. 
Speaker Mike Fealty, founder of Slugger Consults, 
 referred to work 
that he is doing with partners at Queen™s University of Belfast on commu
-nity asset transfer. The objective is to scale up ideas in spaces where people 
can converse and be part of the solution. In this way, if the audience is 
consulted and involved in the design from the beginning, problems that 
later arise are easier to manage. 
Speaker Joseph McCannon of the Innovation Center at the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services spoke about the failure to bring innova-tions to scale and to bring about change. He suggested that the rewards in 
health care go to those who publish papers and post new information on 
the Internet rather than those who improve and scale up existing projects. 
One exception is Johns Hopkins University where successful improve-ments or the scaling up of a project is given equal weight with publications 
of original discovery in prestigious journals when determining academic 
advancement. 
EVALUATION, DATA COLLECTION, AND PROGRAM DESIGN
Many speakers and participants felt that the lack of evaluation data 
is a large challenge. Evaluation methodologies that are applicable to the 
new technology and innovative programs are often necessary to convince 
governments, particularly those in low- and middle-income countries, to 
invest in the innovations and new policies under consideration. Speaker 
Harriet MacMillan of McMaster University said that interventions are too 
often scaled up too quickly without evidence, so that programs are often 
in existence even though there is no proof of their effectiveness. Speaker 
Judith Carta of the University of Kansas said she believes in starting with 
pilot studies, which make it possible to determine ﬁat close rangeﬂ whether 
the intervention is effecting small changes before moving to a larger study. 
Speaker Ben Sawyer of Games for Health concurred and also noted the 
importance of controlling for users™ interpretations of technologies. 
The speed at which new technological applications are developed also 
calls for new evaluation methodologies more appropriate to the technology 
and its uses. Speaker William Riley of the National Institutes of Health said 
that the length of time required for traditional evaluations using random-ized control trials (RCTs) would result in a situation in which the ˜ndings 
of an evaluation would not be available until long after the technology 
had become obsolete or modi˜ed. For example, research on the ef˜cacy of 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
mobile technology that was begun in 2005 and completed in 2010 would 
have missed YouTube, the iPhone, Android, and the iPad, all of which 
happened between those years. Dr. Riley said there is a tension between 
researchers and computer engineers; researchers want the technology to 
stay unchanged while the research is ongoing, and engineers want to tinker 
with the technology through continuous iteration. 
The ˜eld of technology and violence prevention has great potential, but 
it lacks a strong evidence base. Dr. Riley said he believes that randomized 
clinical trials will eventually be necessary, although he also said that com
-munity interventions can generally not be randomized. Standards for evalu-ations and metrics are needed as well as a virtual space where evaluations 
can be shared and methodologies re˜ned. It is also critical that evaluation 
of the interventions takes place in speci˜c cultural, social, economic, and 
political contexts. What works in one place may not necessarily work in 
another. Further information on evaluation methodologies and consider
-ations can be found in Chapter 6. 
On the positive side, new technologies may prove to be helpful for 
meeting the challenges in data collection and analysis. For example, instead 
of relying on patients to call in their information daily, wireless technology 
today can take the information from the patients™ devices to the server, 
making the data available in real-time and gathered continuously. Further
-more, using mobile technologies for recruiting and retaining individuals in 
trials will help streamline the process. 
FINDING SIGNALS IN THE NOISE
A tremendous amount of data is now being collected through new tech
-nology. Datasets that are too large to be stored traditionally are called ﬁbig 
data.ﬂ These can be analyzed with cloud computing. Dr. Ranck noted that 
although such large datasets can make it dif˜cult to ˜nd some important 
signals, today™s computing power can allow physicians to see certain sig
-nals that they ordinarily might have missed, such as predictors of domestic 
violence, because of increased statistical power. 
An interesting example of the power of big data concerns Camden, 
New Jersey, medical billing records. A physician analyzed 8 years™ worth 
of medical billing records in Camden, which included shootings and homi-cides. His analysis of the records for 600,000 hospital visits over the 8-year 
period found that most of the treatment received was neither cost-effective 
nor medically effective. It also emerged that the majority of the costs could 
be attributed to a small number of patients. These ˜ndings resulted in a 
coalition of people concerned about how to target interventions to address 
the violence in Camden. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.METHODOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
 23Dr. Ranck cited the need for better commons-based tools and resources 
and better use of the commons. Several existing platforms spaces, includ-ing InnoCentive and Science Commons, deal with biomedical issues, but it 
would also be useful to have data commons and innovation for social and 
behavioral sciences.Addressing the Digital Divide
Panelist Michele Moloney-Kitts of Together for Girls pointed out that 
if sexual violence data were publicized the same way that data on infectious 
diseases are, the effect would galvanize action. She also noted that 9 out 
of 10 women feel safer with a mobile phone. However, the gap in mobile 
ownership between men and women is great. Women in the Middle East 
and Africa are 25 percent less likely than men to have a phone. In South 
Asia women are 37 percent less likely to own a mobile phone than men. 
Among the poorest classes, the gap is even greater. Ms. Moloney-Kitts said 
it is important that those who are disempowered have access to technol-ogy, and cited mWomen, a program supported by the U.S. government, the 
Cherie Blair Foundation, and GSMA, an association of mobile operators. 
One of mWomen™s primary objectives is to reduce the gender gap between 
male and female owners of mobile devices, particularly among men and 
women in lower socioeconomic brackets. 
Panelist Kathleen McGowan of the U.S. Agency for International De-velopment spoke about Afghanistan in order to illustrate the potential 
and risks that come with the proliferation of mobile technology. Mobile 
technology has transformed the country and its economy since 2001, and 
it continues to spread among the population. Eighty-˜ve percent of Afghans 
live where there is mobile coverage. This mobile technology reaches where 
there is lack of infrastructure, ongoing insecurity, and high illiteracy rates. 
Women provide a great potential market for mobile phones, but cost can 
be prohibitive. Furthermore, control issues in a conservative society make it 
dif˜cult for women to own phones. One operator in Afghanistan is trying 
to provide mobile devices to women through a package that the husband 
or father controls, which raises the issue of whether the reinforcement of 
traditional gender roles is harmful. One negative aspect of the spread of 
mobile technology in Afghanistan is that improvised explosive devices can 
be detonated by mobile phones.Designers and implementers trying to prevent violence with technol-ogy must work to avoid doing harm, or, if that is not possible, at least to 
mitigate the harm. One audience member raised the issue of keeping child 
and female victims of domestic violence safe and helping them stay out of 
violent situations. Ms. Moloney-Kitts agreed and added that more public 
discussion about the issue, commensurate with its prevalence within society, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
BOX 3-1
 Key Messages Raised by Individual Speakers
˜˚
˚There is a need for an evidence base concerning the effectiveness of new 
technologies for violence prevention.
˜˚
˚The speed with which new technologies are evolving renders traditional evalu
-ation methodologies infeasible. However, the new technologies may actually 
help with both the collection in real time of large sets of data and the analysis 
of those sets of data.
˜˚
˚Privacy issues have arisen because of the data collection capabilities and the 
computing power of the new information and communications technologies. 
˜˚
˚Open-source platforms and crowdsourcing provide a means for the audience 
to become part of the solution to problems more quickly and less expensively 
than traditional ﬁexpert onlyﬂ problem solving. 
˜˚
˚The growing community of ﬁcitizen scientistsﬂ and their efforts may foreshadow 
future trajectories for open data systems.
˜˚
˚Scaling up can occur in several ways: through policies made by governments, 
through adoption of innovations by large institutions, and through social media 
raising the pro˜le of an issue.
is required. She said she believes that the priorities include addressing child 
traf˜cking, pornography, and prostitution. Speaker and Forum member 
XinQi Dong of the Rush Institute for Healthy Aging works with the elderly, 
where the most vulnerable to abuse are cognitively or physically impaired, 
socially isolated, and have mental health problems, and he stressed the need 
to adapt technology so that these vulnerable people can access and use it.
Forum co-chair Jacquelyn Campbell 
of Johns Hopkins University 
School of Nursing 
brought up the challenge of making not only phones 
but also the ongoing cost of phone minutes affordable for poor women. Ms. 
Moloney-Kitts said it does not have to be one phone per person. Phones 
can be shared by communities, or individuals can rent their phones by the 
minute to others. 
Health professionals also need to know how to develop a business 
plan and to negotiate with mobile operators for lowered costs. Dr. Ranck 
said there has been a lot of recent work in the mHealth ˜eld on negoti-ating deals with operators for uses that could be free or subsidized. At 
InSTEDD a guide for NGOs on setting up such deals with operators was 
being developed. 
 Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.’

The increase in technologies including smartphones, crowdsourcing 
tools, remote diagnostics, and other innovations does not offer a 
panacea for ending violence or leveling the power imbalance innate 
in violent acts. Rather, the increase in technologies used in prevention of 
violence has fostered an increase in the debate over the positive and nega-tive impacts these innovations have within communities and worldwide. 
Some of the downsides of technology related to violence include cyberbul-lying, losses of privacy and security, and stories of perpetrators targeting 
victims through social media sites. 
In the developing world the adoption of technologies such as the mobile 
phone creates a new path for combating longstanding, ingrained violence. 
But technology can be only a small part of a solution to help vulnerable 
populations that suffer from violence. Any successful program that inte-grates information and communications technology (ICT) into violence 
prevention will also need strong outreach, branding and publicity, veri˜ca
-tion, documentation, integration with other existing systems, and careful 
evaluation. 
Including communications technologies in violence prevention strate-gies would offer great potential to address vulnerabilities among those 
populations that are most at risk for exposure to violence. 
25Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
MARKET PENETRATION
1With the increasing knowledge about and widespread use of informa
-tion and communications technology, there is an increased opportunity to 
reach vulnerable and isolated populations globally. 
For example, mobile technologies increase the reach and communica-tion abilities of community health workers, allowing them to affect larger 
portions of communities and geographic areas. Con˜dential hotlines, which 
were described by several speakers, offer one of the most common ways to 
penetrate a community and affect wider geographic areas. An example is 
the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline in the United States, which indi-viduals at risk for suicide can call for help or reach online. 
Online platforms can aid in the dissemination and sharing of knowl-edge among creators, directors, and funders of programs. Furthermore, 
social media platforms allow an increased dissemination of a victim™s ex
-periences and also make it possible for the victims to quickly receive social 
support, advice, and companionship. Finally, communications technologies 
can provide a powerful source of funding for such programs and interven
-tions, as text campaigns allowing individuals to donate to certain causes 
via their mobile phones and the Internet have become increasingly popular 
over the past few years.
Speaker Erik Hersman of Ushahidi emphasized the broad, large-scale 
impact of mobile technology on the spread of information. He said that 
new technology is lowering barriers and ﬁjust by its existence it is disrupt
-ing things.ﬂ He spoke about the vast penetration rate for mobile phones, 
noting that more than 600 million phones are in Africa, a continent with a 
total population of approximately 1 billion. 
Speaker John Pollock of Technology Review
 discussed one example 
of wide-scale community penetration was the power of social media to 
impact revolutions. He said that youth were starting the revolution, and, 
importantly, women were involved. In leveraging social media to build a 
revolution, people were able to ˜nd each other in real-time.
Networks are another important way to penetrate communities with 
violence prevention messages, as noted by Mr. Hersman and speaker Devon 
Halley of Deloitte Research GovLab (XBC) and discussed in previous chap-ters. The advantage of networks is they are more ˚exible, innovative, and 
resilient rather than command-and-control hierarchies. 
Social support is another meaningful component of interventions and 
programs that can be improved with communications technologies. Social 
media platforms can help extend the reach of connections and experience 
1  Market penetration is the entry into a community, gaining new users or enhancing current 
users™ experiences.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADDRESSING DISPARITIES AND VULNERABILITIES
 27sharing. In Senegal, Tostan and UNICEF launched the Jokko Initiative, 
which allows community members to use SMS to send out various text 
messages, such as information on vital events, service announcements, and 
information on income-generating activities. It especially allows women 
the opportunity to promote their goods and share information and event 
announcements. 
Finally, research dissemination is another area facilitated by the use 
of information and communications technology. Forum member Kristin 
Schubert of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation said that it is frequently 
dif˜cult to get information about research to public health providers in a 
community with target populations. Thus, this is an area where establishing 
important partnerships with researchers and experts in technology is essen-tial to successful implementation and evaluation. The ability to penetrate 
markets and spread information more widely could be of huge importance 
in this respect. 
EMPOWERING VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
Several examples were cited throughout the workshop of ways in which 
information and communications technologies can empower vulnerable 
populations. 
Collective Violence
Technologies lead not only to increased communication but also to 
increased accountability and transparency. For instance, the organization 
Witness works to use the power of video advocacy by documenting and 
sharing human rights abuses. By working with constituents on the use of 
video as a medium for documentation, it has shed light on the repression of 
ethnic minorities in Burma and has helped to prosecute recruiters of child 
soldiers in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
Sexual Violence and Intimate Partner Violence
SMS and geocoding technologies can be used to display incidents of 
violence in real time, which can be particularly effective in combating 
sexual violence. In Egypt, Medic:Mobile, in conjunction with the  Ushahidi 
platform, has been used for Harassmap. The basic idea behind the pro-gram is that if a woman is sexually harassed she can send an SMS to the 
Harassmap number with details of the incident. This information will then 
be mapped on the website, allowing ﬁhotspotsﬂ of harassment to be identi-˜ed. Harassmap also provides help and information for victims. This use 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
of technology is a way to break the silence that surrounds the issue, and it 
helps empower vulnerable groups of women in this geographic area. 
Digital storytelling is another powerful tool for empowering victims 
and educating offenders on the effects their actions can have. The Mobile 
Cinema Foundation program uses short ˜lms to expose soldiers in camps 
to the consequences of rape. The goal is to educate the soldiers of the 
Congolese National Army through victims™ testimonies and post-viewing 
discussions. 
Conventional forms of technology and media can also play integral 
roles in the prevention of intimate partner violence. For example, hotlines 
and awareness campaigns can use both traditional and new media. Bell 
Bajao! is a series of public service announcements in India urging men and 
boys to combat domestic violence by notifying abusers that the community 
is watching. Liz Claiborne™s Love Is Not Abuse iPhone application helps 
teach parents about teen dating abuse and demonstrates how technology, 
such as text messages, e-mails, and phone calls, can be conduits for com-mitting abuse. 
Texting is also used in some programs to prevent intimate partner 
violence. FamilyFirst is a program in the United States that uses a texting 
service that allows victims to report incidents silently via a simple SMS 
message and to make contact with a crisis intervention worker or police 
without making an actual phone call. 
The Grameen Phone Foundation™s Village Phone model is based on pro
-viding a small loan and a ﬁbusiness-in-a-boxﬂ to entrepreneurs to provide 
customers with access to a mobile phone and mobile airtime. Providing 
women with access to mobile devices allows them to move toward eco-nomic independence, which reduces their vulnerability to violence.
Elder AbuseHotlines and sharing of information via the Internet are integral to 
helping increase awareness of and to decreasing the incidence of elder 
abuse. The National Center on Elder Abuse has state resources, such as 
helplines and hotlines. 
Social media platforms have been integrated into many elders™ resi
-dences. For example, MyWay Village is a social network installed in nursing 
homes that allows residents to connect with new people and their families 
in order to share memories, information, and experiences, to play games, 
and most important, to feel less isolated.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADDRESSING DISPARITIES AND VULNERABILITIES
 29Youth Violence
Youth are the fastest adopters of new media and mobile technology. 
The National Dating Abuse Helpline recently made its services available via text message by allowing teens to text a number and, in return, to receive 
help from trained peer advocates. CeaseFire in Chicago, Illinois, tracks vio-lence in real time so that interrupters can intervene in tense situations. With 
Ushahidi, Medic:Mobile, and PopTech, the project PeaceTXT will look at 
how mobile tools can help accelerate CeaseFire™s success.
Speaker Ben Sawyer of Games for Health said that games are an em
-powerment intervention for youth but that sometimes the empowerment 
and aspiration developed stay contained within the game. ﬁWhat we have 
to ˜gure out is whether or not we can take this really powerful concept that 
exists within games and . . . make it translatable outside of their world,ﬂ he 
said. With Play2Prevent, he aims to prompt youth to discuss how they can 
translate the ideas that they have within games into their real lives. 
Another example of a youth violence prevention program, Cool School, 
is made by Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service and is an animated 
adventure series produced by a game developer that takes a character-based 
approach to talking about bullying and violence prevention in schools. 
Other examples include NSTeens from the National Center for Missing and 
Exploited Children and Web Wise Kids.
Child Abuse
There has been an increase in health text messaging programs that 
target medically underserved populations. Text4Baby, guided by the De
-partment of Health and Human Services, is a publicŒprivate partnership 
that provides pregnant women and new mothers with free text messages 
concerning health. The messages range from tips on how to care for the 
baby to information about what to expect during pregnancy. The mobile 
phone also offers a way both to report child abuse and to increase aware-ness of the issue. As well, hotlines are available to both adults and children, 
including the National Child Abuse Hotline, which is run by Childhelp. 
Speaker Judith Carta of the University of Kansas noted that mobile 
phones can be used to enhance any kind of home visiting or parenting 
intervention. In particular she suggested they could be used for improving 
home safety for children and for improving early intervention for children 
with developmental problems. With certain smartphones or tablets, video 
streaming is being used to transmit information to parents. The next step 
is to move toward broad-scale implementation in order to affect a larger 
number of parents.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Self-Directed Violence
Telehelp, life and crisis lines, and call centers are important in dealing 
with self-directed violence. There are several online support groups that 
allow those at risk to reach out and connect with others, thus ensuring 
that they know that they are not alone. Awareness of and access to services 
permits many to move past the social stigma that is often attached to de-pression and suicide. 
As in other areas of violence, there is controversy regarding the creation 
and use of some mobile applications, such as suicide-prevention applica-tions. Some mobile applications let users track their moods and experiences, 
providing supplemental information for them as well as for their therapists. 
As is the case with youth violence, blame is often placed on technol-ogy and media for suicide, and for teen suicide in particular, because of 
the presence of cyberbullying. Several speakers said that, in reality, it is 
dif˜cult to determine how great a role media and technology have played 
in these deaths. 
Potential Application to Disability and ImpairmentSome speakers discussed the potential of information and communica-tions technologies to reach and empower those populations who have cog-nitive or functional impairments or disabilities, but they noted this area has 
yet to be explored fully. Speaker and Forum member XinQi Dong of Rush 
Institute for Healthy Aging commented that the area of elder abuse involves very vulnerable groups, including those with Alzheimer™s disease and those 
who are highly dependent on others. People with disabilities are also at very 
high risk for experiencing all forms of violence. Speaker and Forum co-chair 
Mark Rosenberg of the Task Force for Global Health asked, ﬁHow can we 
use social media to compensate for some of the disabilities that people may 
have to start to protect them against some of the violence?ﬂ
REFINING AND TARGETING OF MESSAGES
Messaging needs to be at a pro-social level that is valuable and targeted 
for speci˜c groups. For example, speaker Charlotte Cole of the Sesame 
Workshop spoke about her work in the Middle East, where she and her 
colleagues are trying to introduce kids in con˚ict situations to ﬁthe otherﬂ 
to reduce acrimony between groups. Their messages seek to model the 
interactions between the parent and the child. Ms. Cole said, ﬁHaving just 
gotten back from Kabul and watching kids watch this is just amazing. They 
are just riveted. Part of that is because there isn™t much on the screen that 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ADDRESSING DISPARITIES AND VULNERABILITIES
 31BOX 4-1
 Key Messages Raised by Individual Speakers
˜˚
˚Information and communications technologies play a powerful role in spreading 
messages, building movements, and reaching vulnerable, isolated populations. 
˜˚
˚The spread of information and communications technologies can positively 
affect those vulnerable and isolated populations most at risk for violence, but 
it could be useful to further explore how best to maximize the advantages of 
such technology while minimizing the disadvantages.
has been created for them.ﬂ In this case messaging is trying to build pride 
in self, an awareness for and tolerance of others, and an opportunity to 
identify models for pro-social behavior onscreen. 
Dr. Rosenberg said that these examples of messaging demonstrate the 
power of going beyond the individual level. It is important, he said, to 
realize the ability of technology to bring these messages out and to make 
communication a shared experience for everybody. He also emphasized 
the importance of the ability of technology to amplify rather than supplant 
one-to-one interactions. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

The ˜eld of global violence prevention has made some advances in the 
past 35 years, but, as many speakers in the workshop noted, in some 
ways the dialogue around the ˜eld has stalled. The speakers sug
-gested that technology can help frame communication regarding violence 
prevention in such a way so as to advance the ˜eld. 
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS 
TECHNOLOGY IN CHANGING MESSAGING
Several speakers emphasized the observation that information and 
communications technology (ICT) is changing traditional violence preven-tion messaging, making it more accessible to wider audiences, ˜ltering and 
targeting messages, and opening lines of multidirectional conversation. 
Speaker Erik Hersman of Ushahidi said that Ushahidi was born out of 
the 2008 post-election violence in Kenya. He described the initial start-up 
as an ad hoc group of volunteers who came together over 3 days in response 
to an urgent need. Blogging and media played integral roles in accelerating 
the company™s timeline. It is worth noting that Ushahidi is a broad-band 
platform that has since been used in many countries all over the world. It 
has been used for disaster response, such as in Haiti and Japan, for election 
monitoring, and for citizen journalism.
Speaker and Forum member Jim Mercy of the Centers for Disease Con
-trol and Prevention said that information and communications technologies 
disrupt hierarchies, change the ˚ow of information, and allow failure to 
occur more quickly so that progress can take place more quickly. Other 
32Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAMING VIOLENCE PREVENTION COMMUNICATION
 33speakers added that these technologies contribute to the democratization 
of information, by allowing ordinary citizens to discover solutions to their 
own problems.Speaker and planning committee member Jody Ranck of the Public 
Health Institute spoke about key developments in ICT and about their ef-fects on the future of public health. These key developments include more 
pervasive computing power, the appearance of cultures of sharing and co
-operation, open health, biocitizenship and technological citizenship, and the 
rise of the infosphere1 and the information organism.2 Noting that global 
mobile network coverage has reached 90 percent, Dr. Ranck commented 
that social media has engendered a culture of sharing, of collective selves, 
and of real-time informatics. Dr. Ranck also emphasized the paradigm shift 
that has occurred in rethinking health with respect to the impact of technol-ogy: Internet and communications technologies have the power to make the invisible visible and to increase public engagement with data. Several speak
-ers cautioned that as this paradigm changes, there will be a strong need to 
evaluate these new, faster, and more streamlined approaches in rigorous 
and appropriate ways that adapt to the rapidly changing technologies. Dr. 
Ranck also discussed new approaches to utilizing data, include the mining 
of ﬁbig data,ﬂ or datasets too large to store in a traditional manner. Big 
data has the ability to provide more nuanced information regarding com-munications trends and cultural and social norms. 
NEW LITERACIES OR COMPETENCIESHarnessing the power of ICTs could require adaptation of traditional 
communications tools. Several new literacies or competencies are required 
for adapting and incorporating information and communications technolo-gies into violence prevention work.
Mr. Hersman spoke about one of the ˜rst competencies required for 
Ushahidi: the understanding from organizations that they should share 
their data. Large nongovernmental organizations were not sharing infor-mation or verifying if an event occurred. This barrier led to the building 
of a platform that could bypass these inef˜ciencies. Along the Ushahidi 
development path, many lessons were learned that are important to lay the 
groundwork for others developing their own ICT programs. The required 
skills include the ability to discerningly examine data sources and data, 
to question assumptions, to embrace innovation, and to take risks boldly 
1  The infosphere is the informational environment in which entities, processes, and interac-tions related to information exist.
2  An information organism is an entity interconnected with other information organisms 
that operates through the use and sharing of information. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
knowing that such risktaking allows one to fail and then subsequently 
adjust more quickly. 
Mr. Hersman also discussed the skill of dealing with ﬁwhite space,ﬂ 
where sometimes the most innovative ideas emerge. In Mr. Hersman™s 
opinion, the best disruptive ideas come from the edge, and this is where 
the intersection of technology and violence prevention has the potential to 
push the boundaries of innovation. The last competency that Mr. Hersman 
emphasized was the importance of humility with respect to approach, 
implementation, and advancement technologies for preventing violence. 
Dr. Mercy agreed that there is a need for literacy in these areas, and 
he raised more questions: ﬁWhat do we need to do to help us and help our 
colleagues, help our own ˜elds to get up to speed? And where do we need 
to get up to speed? Do we need to know the intricacies of the technology, 
or what are the areas that we need to learn in order that we can advance 
and apply these technologies in useful ways?ﬂ
Dr. Ranck added that the area of visual cultureŠwhich includes visual 
data representation such as mapping, infographics, new media, and artŠis 
expanding and these tools are helping to reframe health. That is, instead 
of simply displaying statistics and other numbers by themselves, people are 
using pictures to demonstrate the statistics and to send messages across 
populations and audiences with a wide range of background, knowledge, 
and literacy levels. More and more often data are being displayed in visually 
appealing ways in order to create more effective and meaningful messages. 
Dr. Ranck also listed a number of other new literacies that are impor
-tant for public health, including service design and change management, 
technological literacy, new methods in health informatics, and management 
of public Œprivate partnerships. Transparency is also increasingly important 
because there are more participatory media and more distributed knowl-edge. Public health, he said, should address these arenas and could be lever-aged as a platform to offer services that catalyze change. 
Speaker Devon Halley from Deloitte Research GovLab (XBC) dis-cussed the potential of cross-boundary collaboration and creating public 
value through ICT. He discussed the power of global networks in helping 
to buttress the use of knowledge. Social media and social networks offer a 
tremendous opportunity to develop new ways of engaging people and al-lowing them to collaborate and innovate. Thus, he said, new competencies 
are needed to manage this power. 
As an example, Mr. Halley offered the story of a physician™s powerful 
use of Sermo, which is a collaboration platform for medical professionals. 
This physician, who was in the emergency department, had a patient who 
had a serrated saw blade completely through his thumb, and the physician 
was uncertain of which approach to removing the blade would result in the 
least collateral damage. In the past, Mr. Halley said, the doctor would have 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAMING VIOLENCE PREVENTION COMMUNICATION
 35turned to a colleague he knew in his own hospital or perhaps in some other, 
and the solution could have taken a long time to present itself. In this case, 
however, he posed the question online using Sermo, and very quickly an
-other doctor who had seen this type of injury before posted a solution: use 
a drinking straw split along the length as leverage. Thus the physician, who 
had the knowledge, ability, and access to use Sermo, was able to effectively 
tap into the knowledge base of the entire medical community accessed on 
this website, not just those doctors in his immediate social sphere. As well, 
the solution itself was relatively low-tech and easy to manage, but would 
not have so readily manifested without this innovative tool. 
Speaker Vish Viswanath of Harvard University of Public Health spoke 
of teaching children ﬁmedia literacyﬂ and how to develop a curriculum to 
do so. ﬁSince we teach people how to buy clothes, how to buy cars, how 
to go to the restaurant from Yelp,ﬂ he said, ﬁhow do we do this for the use 
of media? We should develop an evidence-based curriculum around these 
new kinds of media and literacy and how we teach our kids to consume it 
in a more informed way.ﬂ
Breakout leader Kim Scott from the Child Resiliency Programme in 
Jamaica brought up another important competency related to the breaking 
down of the silos within the violence prevention ˜eld. In Jamaica, she said, 
the violence prevention ˜eld is splintered into sectors as well as within silos 
of types of violence. As had many other speakers in this workshop, she 
emphasized the importance of learning to perform multidisciplinary col
-laborations because so much effort and time is spent by researchers in one 
silo going over ground that has already been covered by others in similar 
˜elds. Being able to work across sectors and share information would allow 
researchers to work from existing knowledge and would thus require fewer 
resources. Speaker and Forum member Mark Rosenberg of the Task Force 
for Global Health responded to Dr. Scott, saying that collaboration is not 
easy. ﬁIt is not easy to get the people who work in HIV to go over and talk 
to the people who work in violence prevention or go talk to the people who 
work in polio eradication to share the lessons that they have learned. It is 
not easy, but it is possible. If we work only in silos, we lose that ability to 
get the bigger picture. If we are going to make progress, it is going to be 
because we see the details and the bigger picture at the same time, but that 
is going to take getting us together in ways that are hard but possible.ﬂ Be-cause social and new media encourage sharing and collaboration, this goal 
might be easier to achieve through the lens of communications technology. 
Speaker Judith Carta of the University of Kansas also noted the chal-lenge in designing, evaluating, and scaling programs in an environment 
that changes rapidly, sometimes to the point that a particular innovation 
is no longer needed by the time the evaluation is ˜nished. Dr. Rosenberg 
responded that the program design and evaluation cycle is going to undergo Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
changes because of our ability to use communications technology. Some ap
-plications will be put forth that become widespread before we understand 
why they work and before they are tested on the small scale. An important 
competency in building, Dr. Rosenberg said, is learning how to embrace 
this rapid change and incorporate what is learned from research to modify 
the process successfully. 
Facilitator and planning committee member Lisa Witter of Fenton 
spoke about competencies that are needed in the workplace. She said that 
social media are changing people and changing what hierarchies look like. 
For instance, those who would be traditionally considered ﬁexpertsﬂ are 
changing as younger people often mentor their more experienced (and 
often older) counterparts in technology. In turn, this is affecting organiza
-tions with traditional workplace structures and offering a democratization 
of empowerment in workers. ﬁThere is power leverage along what was a 
ladder,ﬂ she said, ﬁand is now a lattice.ﬂ 
Speaker William Riley from the National Institutes of Health spoke 
about the need to improve evaluation competencies given the burdensome 
length of time required for a full randomized controlled trial to be carried 
out. A typical randomized trial, even one that does not require any revi
-sions or other things that might extend the process, lasts at least 7 years. 
During this time the researcher could be left behind by evolving technology 
and end up with an intervention that is no longer relevant. On the other 
hand, speeding up the timeline could result in inadequate development, 
use, or evaluation of the technology. Although RCTs are considered to be 
the gold standard for evaluation, he said, there are a number of types of 
uncontrolled trials that could be useful as well, particularly because mobile 
technology can assist in the real-time capture of data, and so it is possible 
to embed evaluation into the intervention itself. 
In the research world, a new measure must be both reliable and valid, 
but sensitivity to change should also be taken into account. ﬁWe have to 
actually be able to look at how we can truncate these things and have mea-sures that are more responsive to these short periods of time we™re trying 
to assess,ﬂ Dr. Riley said. ﬁWe have to get to the point in the behavioral 
sciences and the epidemiologic world where our scales stay standard. Our 
instrumentation can improve, our processes and methods can improve, we 
can become more precise as we go along, but everything stays standard in 
terms of the scale, so that we can always talk to each other: clinicians to 
researchers, researchers to researchers, and we™re talking about the same 
scale.ﬂ Speaker Joe McCannon of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) noted that new evaluation methodologies are being de-veloped, such as methodologies that integrate formative and summative 
evaluation. 
Speaker Michael Feigelson of the Bernard van Leer Foundation offered 
a ˜nal important competency that the violence prevention community 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAMING VIOLENCE PREVENTION COMMUNICATION
 37needs to keep in mind when educating its donors and its potential donors: 
while reasonable attempt at prediction should be made, it should be made 
clear that exploring new ˜elds requires accepting some level of uncertainty. 
ﬁThe problem that I came up against, which is a similar one that you will 
come up against, is, I could not prove anything. I could not even tell that 
reasonable a story because when you are in ‚white space,™ where it™s a little 
uncomfortable because the rules aren™t clear, you don™t know what™s going 
on, you don™t know what™s going to happen. The white space should be 
made attractive and not a scary phenomenon.ﬂ
APPROPRIATE MESSAGING AROUND VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Several speakers said that it is essential to ensure that violence preven-tion messages delivered with new communications tools are still appropri-ate and relevant. Breakout session leader Scott Goodstein of Revolution 
Messaging illustrated the importance of understanding who the target 
audience is and how usable the tools will be to that audience. Speaker and 
Forum member Kristin Schubert of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation 
commented on the power of going beyond the individual level and amplify-ing the experience so it can be shared by everyone, while still ensuring that 
the experience is relevant.Breakout leader Daniel Reidenberg from SAVE said that it is impor
-tant to talk about and better understand the differences between the risk 
of something occurring, and predicting that something will occur. He also 
noted that deciding where to intervene on the continuum (that is, low- 
to-high) of risk requires careful examination of expected consequences. 
Speaker John Gordon of Fenton said that it is important to meet individu-als where they are currently, so they are most receptive to messages, and 
both he and Dr. Reidenberg agreed that it will be important to move the 
messages past traditional public health gatekeepers directly to the target 
audience. 
Breakout leaders Dahna Goldstein of Philantech and Harriet MacMillan 
of McMaster University both commented about the need ˜rst to clearly 
de˜ne the problem and then to identify important tools versus the other 
way around. Dr. MacMillan also noted that it would be useful for violence 
prevention practitioners to learn to create short messages, especially as 
people are growing increasingly more accustomed to receiving news and 
information in a short-message format. 
Breakout leader Constance DeCherney of iCrossing noted that the 
best approach is not to try to solve a problem with one technology or one 
person but rather to involve all of the audiences affected by the issue in 
a variety of platforms, including mass media. Breakout leader and Forum 
member XinQi Dong of Rush Institute for Healthy Aging said that there 
is great ignorance concerning how to frame research-advocacy messages in 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
order to reach decision makers, while Dr. Viswanath noted that some of the 
evaluation research offers insight into this framing. Dr. MacMillan added 
to this by saying that it is important to bring the decision makers into the 
process from the beginning rather than planning to disseminate informa-tion to them after the process is done. Mr. Gordon posed one possibility 
of creating an ICT prototype, to brand something quickly and disseminate 
the message, before scaling up into a full program. 
FRAMING ISSUES
Framing the issue is an essential part of building a message for violence 
prevention. Dr. Rosenberg spoke about challenges that come up in framing 
violence prevention issues. The challenges he listed included




in˚uence 


Speaker Eesha Pandit of Breakthrough spoke about the Bell Bajao! campaign. The message in this campaign is carefully framed to push the 
audience to make a conceptual shift from placing the responsibility for 
violence prevention on the government to putting that responsibility on 
individuals, because it allows people to engage with these issues from where they are. 
She noted that another key component of the campaign is its effort to 
use culture to change culture. She said that media, arts, and technology can 
be used for more than just to improve productivity and disseminate infor-mation; they can also be vessels for communicating cultural values, such 
as human rights. She emphasized that their program ﬁtransforms the way 
people think about domestic violence by pervading the culture in that way.ﬂ
Third, she stated, ﬁWe really believe that everyone needs to be a part of 
the solution. . . . Having an intersectional approach to identity is really the 
core of this work. Asking men and boys to participate in ending violence 
against women is not only about stopping violence against women and em
-powering women but also about changing the way we think about commu-nity and accountability and identity. It moves us from this us-versus-them 
model of rights and rights violations.ﬂ Thus, this type of framing shifts the 
paradigm away from a victims-and-perpetrators model into a paradigm 
about collective and shared responsibility and reimagining a community.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FRAMING VIOLENCE PREVENTION COMMUNICATION
 39Dr. Carta discussed the paradox that the highest-risk families have the 
greatest need for effective parenting intervention, but those parents are 
the ones who are the hardest to keep engaged in a series of home visiting 
interventions. Given this situation, Dr. Carta and her colleagues created a 
mobile phone component for their intervention that aimed to teach parents 
positive ways of interacting with their children in the hopes that the mobile 
component would increase the participation rate.
Ms. DeCherney discussed the need to frame the conversation around 
healthy relationships rather than only reacting to a victim or someone who 
is being victimized in a relationship. Breakout leader Eric Brown of Impact-Games discussed the importance of knowing the audience in order to help 
frame the conversation. 
Mr. McCannon commented that it is important to understand that 
people are inundated with information, and that the creation of new infor-mation is incentivized. However, less effort is put toward translating the 
information into action or taking something to scale. This is changing, and 
technology can be part of creating new incentives because of the ability 
to use more existing information. Mr. McCannon also noted that when 
framing messages, people need to consider how assumptions can change. 
For example, assumptions about how long something can take to develop 
can be challenged in situations where an urgent need drives the creation of 
a disruptive innovation, so assuming that everything takes time can limit 
possibilities. On the other hand, rushing to push new products or interven-tions can back˜re when quality improvement, monitoring and evaluation, 
and adaptation are not included in the design. 
BOX 5-1
 Key Messages Raised by Individual Speakers
˜˚
˚It is important ˜rst to have a deep understanding of the audience and the 
desired outcome and then to approach the solution technologically, if there is 
a technological solution.
˜˚
˚Existing self-organized and self-identi˜ed communities of people can be used 
to address gaps or challenges in translating experiences or messaging in order 
to improve service provision.
˜˚
˚Networks maximize value and power and increase reach; they might also as
-sist in breaking down boundaries and silos. Information and communications 
technology has the potential to amplify this effect. 
˜˚
˚Literacy in the use of information and communications technologies is critical 
in an information-based society.
˜˚
˚Promoting new media and technological literacy and building human capital 
could help make accomplishments in violence prevention real, while address
-ing or diminishing harmful unintended consequences.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.


Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.—




In considering the potential usefulness of information and communica
-tions technology (ICT) to violence prevention, speakers at the workshop explored the existing structures and processes within their respective 
˜elds and assessed any potential overlap between the two. These papers 
provide the beginnings of a foundation upon which this new integration 
can be built. 
In the ˜rst paper, Cathryn Meurn presents a scan of existing ICT ap
-plications to violence prevention. Ms. Meurn explores the design and plan-ning of interventions for various types of violence, the gaps that still exist 
in designing ICT-enhanced violence prevention interventions, and potential 
needs for monitoring and evaluation. 
The second paper, by Mark L. Rosenberg and colleagues, examines the 
current status of violence prevention, including a discussion of the idea that 
violence prevention can be addressed from a public health perspective. This 
paper also addresses current obstacles and needs in violence prevention, and 
potential avenues for the inclusion of ICT. 
In the third paper, Jody Ranck explores the current state of ICT and 
how ICT might meet the needs of public health and violence prevention 
now and in the future. He also discusses how ICT affects the means of data 
collection, program design, and community-based interventions, a situa-tion that could pose both solutions and challenges for violence prevention 
practitioners. 
In the ˜nal paper, William T. Riley describes current and potential 
evaluation methodologies for determining the success of ICT-enhanced in
-terventions. After examining the gap between the time required to perform 
43Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
traditional evaluations and the speed at which technology changes, Dr. 
Riley also suggests several adapted methodologies that might be better 
suited for rapidly changing environments. 
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS 
TECHNOLOGIES IN VIOLENCE PREVENTIONCathryn MeurnIntroductionViolence is a global problem that crosses cultural and socioeconomic 
boundaries. From collective to interpersonal to self-in˚icted violence, its 
impact on health is substantial. Violence is one of the leading causes of 
death worldwide for people between 15 and 44 years of age (WHO, 2002). 
However, the actual cost and extent to which violence occurs is dif˜cult to 
measure. Countless violent acts happen out of public view in of˜ces, homes, 
or even public institutions. 
Violence can be prevented, and this assertion has been proven true 
within the ˜eld of public health. Action to prevent violence has been 
undertaken at various levels, from the local and community level to the 
international system. Methods have ranged from primary prevention, aim
-ing to prevent a violent act before it occurs, to the tertiary level, which 
encompasses approaches that focus on long-term care. 
The goal of this background paper is to provide a brief introduction 
to the current and potential role that ICTs can play in the reduction and 
prevention of violence. This paper by no means offers an extensive study on the intersection of ICTs and violence prevention. There are many ongoing 
projects, and a deeper landscape analysis is recommended. Furthermore, the 
use of ICTs in the ˜eld of public health is in its early stages. Much of the 
research cited in this paper can be classi˜ed as pilot projects, and, to date, 
there have been no in-depth measurements of their impacts. Therefore, this 
paper is intended to introduce the potential of the area and to encourage 
collective action going forward. 
The Technology and the Debate
Technologies such as the smartphone, crowdsourcing tools, remote 
diagnostics, and other technological innovations have proliferated over the 
past decade, and many of them have shifted over to mainstream use. With 
this technological expansion, debate has also arisen concerning the positive 
and negative impacts that these innovations have within communities and 
worldwide.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 45ICT can be de˜ned as a set of technological tools and resources used 
to communicate, create, disseminate, store, and manage information. These 
can include video, radio, television, Internet programs, social media plat-forms, and mobile phones. Distinctions are emerging between ﬁoldﬂ and 
ﬁnewﬂ forms of media and technologyŠthat is, between the use of televi
-sion, radio, and other forms of traditional media that have been employed 
for decades and newer forms of media, including social media and the 
mobile phone. 
Particularly in the case of the developing world, the adoption of the 
mobile phone has created a new avenue for combating longstanding prob-lems. With more than 5 billion mobile subscriptions worldwide, phone 
ownership has exploded. Two-thirds of these subscriptions are in develop
-ing countries, and it is predicted that soon 90 percent of the world™s popu
-lation will be within the coverage of wireless networks. Furthermore, the 
number of unique users active on social networks is up nearly 30 percent 
globally, having risen from 244.2 million in 2009 to 314.5 million in 2010 
as reported by the Nielsen Company (Grove, 2010). There are more than 
800 million users on Facebook; Twitter is estimated to have more than 
200 million users; and more video content is uploaded to YouTube in a 
60-day period than three major U.S. television networks created in 60 years 
(Elliott, 2010). Teens are texting at record rates, and areas such as eLearn
-ing, remote diagnostics, and mServices are growing steadily.
Despite the hype, these various technologies are simply tools that can 
be used either for social good or for harm. The same was true for the inven-tion of paper, the printing press, and the telephone, all of which changed 
the way in which we interact with each other. These innovations all had 
a positive impact on society, but these tools were also conduits for such 
negative things as yellow journalism and mass media campaigns against 
ethnic groups and certain minorities. It is also important to keep in mind 
that technology is only a small part of any solution. 
Today, these new forms of communication and new technologies have 
led to some fantastic outcomes, as discussed in the next section. On the 
other hand, they have also elicited unintended adverse consequences in the 
pursuit of preventing and reducing violence. Trends in cyberbullying, losses 
in privacy and security, and stories of perpetrators targeting victims through 
social media sitesŠall of these must be kept in mind when we speak of us-ing these tools for social good.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Program and Intervention DesignsCollective Violence
Collective violence is perhaps the most visible type of violence and of-ten receives a high level of public and political attention. Whether arising 
from violent intrastate con˚icts that account for the majority of con˚icts 
today, from the ˚ow of displaced persons, from acts of terrorism, or from 
genocide, the effects of such violence can be immense. Violent con˚icts 
have profound health effects on civilian society via increased mortality, 
morbidity, and disability. The World Health Organization (WHO) de˜nes 
collective violence as
the instrumental use of violence by people who identify themselves as a 
member of a groupŠwhether this group is transitory or has a more per-manent identityŠagainst another group or set of individuals, in order to 
achieve political, economic or social objectives. (WHO, 2002)
With the rise of new media, and advances in and increased access to 
technology, opportunities exist to prevent some of this violence. One of 
the most popular types of programs using mobile phones is based on short 
message service (SMS) messaging, better known as text messages. The most 
frequent use of SMS has been the use of one-way messaging for educational 
awareness, such as in Amnesty International™s SMS urgent-action appeals 
campaign in the Netherlands. This campaign raised the awareness of tor-ture victims through text campaigns and in turn enabled the agency to 
collect ﬁsignaturesﬂ when immediate action from supporters was necessary 
(New Tactics in Human Rights, n.d.). 
One of the most cited cases of the use of SMS, which exempli˜ed its 
potential beyond simple awareness campaigns, occurred during the 2007 
Kenyan election. Although initial results indicated the opposition candidate 
Raila Odinga was in the lead, incumbent President Mwai Kibaki was an-nounced as the of˜cial victor. Six weeks of violence ensued during which 
the in˚uential role of mobiles became apparent. Through the Ushahidi 
platform, those with mobile phones were able to send texts to a speci˜c 
number to report on human rights abuses and incidents, which were then 
mapped geographically on a website. This use of both texts and online 
tools not only enabled the reporting of events in real time but also aided 
the mobilization of groups to prevent further violent outbreaks (Harvard 
Humanitarian Initiative, 2011). Other examples of the use of the Ushahidi 
platform have been during the earthquake in Haiti and, more recently, in 
the protests in Egypt and the crisis in Libya (Ushahidi, 2011). Nevertheless, 
it is important to note that this mode of communication can also make it 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 47cheap and easy for others to spread hateful messages to incite additional 
violence, as happened in Kenya.Traditional types of ICT, such as phone networks, radio, and television, 
can also play important roles. Radio and television have been used in many 
forms since their invention. One project of note that used phone networks 
was devised by Interaction Belfast, which created a mobile phone network 
to prevent outbreaks of violence between warring neighborhoods in Belfast. Volunteers in both Protestant and Catholic communities were given mobile 
phones to enable communication with their counterparts when potentially 
violent crowds gathered or when rumors of violence started to spread, with 
the goal of resolving the issue peacefully. 
Technologies provide not only increased communication but also in
-creased accountability and transparency. The organization Witness works 
to use the power of video advocacy by documenting and sharing human 
rights abuses via cameras. By working with constituents to use video to 
shed light on certain atrocities, the organization has helped to shed light on 
the repression of ethnic minorities in Burma and has helped to prosecute 
recruiters of child soldiers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.1 The 
organization™s training includes information on how to use video safely, 
which is important given the complexities to which this type of interven-tion can give rise.
An opportunity that deserves highlighting, particularly in the develop-ing world, is the increasing role of the health worker. As task shifting con
-tinues to progress in these countries, community health workers can help 
to draw attention to indications of violence. With multiple programs now 
using these health workers for community outreach, data collection, and 
reporting via the use of ICTs and mobile phones, opportunities for leverag
-ing technology for violence prevention exist.
Interpersonal Violence
Opportunities for leveraging technology exist with respect to inter-personal violence as well. This category includes sexual violence, intimate 
partner violence, elder abuse, youth violence, and child abuse. 
Sexual violence
 Sexual violence is de˜ned as ﬁany sexual act, attempt to 
obtain a sexual act, unwanted sexual comments or advances, or acts to 
traf˜c, or otherwise directed, against a person™s sexuality using coercionﬂ 
(WHO, 2002). Research suggests that at least one in four women in the 
United States has experienced sexual violence (National Center on Domes-tic and Sexual Violence, n.d.). Sexual violence is a universal problem, and it 
1  For more information, see www.witness.org/about-us/witness-background.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
can have deep impacts on both physical and mental health, including injury, 
stigma, and even death. One regularly noted aspect of this type of violence 
is the lack of information surrounding the magnitude of the problem. Data 
tend to be limited because many women do not report the violent act or 
seek medical services immediately afterward. Further complicating matters, 
data come from varying sectors, such as clinical settings, nongovernmental 
organizations, and the police. 
SMS and geocoding can be applied to the prevention of interpersonal 
violence in much the same way that it has been applied to collective vio-lence, as in the example of the aftermath of the election in Kenya. In Egypt, 
Medic:Mobile, a text messagingŒbased system, was used in combination 
with the Ushahidi platform in a project called Harassmap. In Egypt 83 
percent of women are exposed to sexual harassment (Heatwole, 2010). The 
basic idea behind the program is that if a woman is sexually harassed she 
can send an SMS to the Harassmap number with corresponding details of 
the incident. This information will then be mapped on the website, allowing 
ﬁhot-spotsﬂ of harassment to be identi˜ed. The project also provides help 
and information for victims (Heatwole, 2010). This program aims to help 
break through the silence that surrounds this issue.
Another program aiming to break through cultural barriers is the Mo-bile Cinema Foundation. This program travels to various soldiers™ camps 
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and uses short ˜lms to expose 
soldiers to the consequences of rape. The goal is to educate the soldiers of 
the Congolese National Army through victim™s testimonies and discussions 
that are held after the viewing of the ˜lm. This form of digital storytelling 
can be a powerful tool both for empowering the victims and for educating 
offenders on the effects their actions can elicit.
Other programs are based on con˜dential hotlines, such as the National 
Sexual Assault Hotline in the United States, which victims can call for help. 
In a related use, in 2007 the International Organization for Migration part-nered with Ukrainian mobile phone service providers to allow victims to 
dial a certain number to receive information and advice on migration and 
traf˜cking issues (Verclas, 2007). 
Often it is an intimate partner that commits sexual violence, making 
sexual violence dovetail closely with intimate partner violence. Thus many 
interventions can help with both areas, including programs that promote 
gender equality, additional awareness campaigns, and micro˜nance pro
-grams and support networks for women.Intimate partner violence
 Intimate partner violence is one of the most 
common forms of violence against women. This category refers to any 
ﬁbehavior within an intimate relationship that causes physical, psychologi-cal or sexual harm to those in the relationshipﬂ (WHO, 2002). Intimate 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 49partner violence occurs throughout the world and crosses social, economic, 
and religious divisions. Women who are uneducated, low income, and lack 
support are most likely to fall victim to this behavior (WHO, 2002).
Conventional forms of technology and media have been used to pre-vent intimate partner violence. Examples include hotlines and awareness 
campaigns through both traditional and new media. Bell Bajao!, or Ring 
the Bell!, is an Indian program that provides a series of public service an-nouncements urging men and boys to stand against domestic violence. The 
idea is that if one is hearing violence in progress, one should ring the bell 
and ask a simple question, such as ﬁCan I borrow a cup of sugar?ﬂ It is 
likely the perpetrator recognizes that the person has heard the violence, 
which will interrupt the action. The organization also hosts a blog for vic-tims to voice their experiences and access information and guidance (
Bell 
Bajao!, n.d.).In the United States the company Liz Claiborne initiated a Love Is Not 
Abuse program, which provides information and tools for men, women, 
and children (including teens) to learn more about the issue of domestic 
violence. In August 2011 it launched the Love Is Not Abuse iPhone applica-tion, which helps teach parents about teen dating abuse and demonstrates 
how technology, such as text messages, e-mails, and phone calls, can be 
conduits for committing abuse. Parents receive real-time communication 
that mimics the abusive and controlling behaviors teens might face in their 
relationships.2 This program illuminates the negative role technology can 
play. 
On the other hand, texting can be a cheap and effective way to prevent 
intimate partner violence, as demonstrated by a case in Ohio in which a 
texting service allowed victims to report incidents silently via a simple SMS 
message and to make contact with a crisis intervention worker or the police 
without making an actual phone call. The total cost to set up the program, 
which used the Medic:Mobile platform, was about $380. FamilyFirst, as it 
was termed, processed between 6,000 to 8,000 texts per month during its 
˜rst year and helped convict 18 abusers whose victims were able to report 
con˜dentially (Papillon, n.d.).Technology can also play a role in helping to transform some of the 
underlying causes of intimate partner violence. Helping women gain ac-cess to both economic and societal support, such as is done through the 
Village Phone project by Grameen Phone Foundation, can lead to positive 
outcomes. The idea behind the Village Phone model is to provide a small 
loan and a ﬁbusiness in a boxﬂ to enable an aspiring entrepreneur to pro-vide customers with access to a mobile phone and to sell mobile airtime. In 
March 2011, the program reports, 85 percent of the 6,876 entrepreneurs 
2  See http://loveisnotabuse.com/web/guest/iphone.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
who had been recruited into the network were women (Grameen Founda-tion, n.d.). This idea of women having access to a mobile device can also be 
found in the report Women & Mobile: A Global Opportunity
, published in 
2010. This report states that 9 out of every 10 women surveyed who had a 
mobile phone felt safer, and 85 percent felt more independent (Vital Wave 
Consulting, n.d.). With the rise of mobile payments and mobile money, 
or mFinance, and with increasing access to mobile devices, women are 
beginning to gain more economic independence in areas where they have 
traditionally been limited.Finally, social support is important for women who have found them
-selves in domestic violence situations. In the developed world, such support 
may be derived from in-person working groups or community groups as 
well as from social media platforms and the Internet, which allow women 
to connect and share their experiences. In the developing world, however, 
mobile phones can play a unique role in garnering this type of support. In 
Senegal, the organizations Tostan and UNICEF launched the Jokko Initia
-tive. Using SMS technology, the program allows community members to 
send out messages on various topics, including information on vital events, 
service announcements, and income-generating activities (Vital Wave Con
-sulting, n.d.). This allows women the opportunity to promote their goods 
and to provide information about events they organize. Not only does 
this provide a chance for women to connect with each other and provide 
support, but also the program is also tied into Tostan™s literacy and math 
program. 
Elder AbuseElder abuse has received the least public attention among the various 
forms of violence, having historically been de˜ned as a ﬁprivate matter.ﬂ 
Today it is seen as an important problem that is likely to grow because of 
the rise in aging populations in many countries (see Figure 6-1). Elder abuse can be ﬁeither an act of commission or of omission,ﬂ and it may be either 
intentional or unintentional (WHO, 2002). The elderly can experience vio-lence physically, sexually, or psychologically, and they are also susceptible 
to economic abuse.Again, the use of hotlines and the sharing of information via the Inter-net are integral to dealing with this type of violence. The National Center 
on Elder Abuse has state resources such as helplines and hotlines listed 
directly on its website in addition to listing where to report nursing home 
abuses and providing information about Adult Protective Services. There 
are also National Elder Abuse Awareness public service announcements 
that call attention to the issue.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 51Some sources state that a key prevention tactic could be the further use 
of intervention programs in hospital settings, which are currently lacking 
because of an absence of training in this area (WHO, 2002). Recently there 
has been an increase in the use of electronic checklists within the hospital 
setting concerning surgical procedures. Certain elements, such as signs and 
symptoms of abuse, could be integrated into these checklists. As tablets 
and electronic records become more common, a unique opportunity will 
appear to progress to a more holistic approach in health care. Furthermore, 
with the ability to train remotely, technology can be used to keep those in 
the health care industry abreast of the proper diagnosis of elder abuse and 
what to do about it.
The role of social media should also be mentioned. Social media plat-forms such as Facebook and Twitter, along with communications tools 
such as Skype, allow those traditionally cut off from the outside world to 
connect with both family and the wider community. According to a 2009 
study by AARP, about one-third of people 75 or older live alone (Clifford, 
2009). MyWay Village, a social network installed in nursing homes, allows 
residents to connect with new people and share their memories and expe
-riences. Training sessions make it easy to pick up, and residents can send 
messages, play games, and, most important, not feel that they are isolated 
(Clifford, 2009).8.18.510.814.921.911.715.521.427.432.66.46.18.512.520.20510
152025303519501975200920252050PercentageWorldMore-Developed RegionsLess-Developed RegionsPercentage of Population Aged 60 or OverWorld and Development Regions, 1950-2050Figure 6-1R02165editable vectorsFIGURE 6-1 Percentage of population aged 60 or over.
SOURCE: United Nations, 2009.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Youth Violence
Youth violence is closely linked with other forms of violence, because 
youths who are exposed to other types of violence have an increased pro
-pensity toward committing violent acts themselves. Adolescents and young 
adults are often both victims and perpetrators of youth violence. The WHO 
says that violence involving youth greatly adds to the costs of welfare and 
health services, decreases productivity, and ﬁundermines the fabric of soci
-etyﬂ (WHO, 2002).Technology, particularly social media, is frequently thought to have 
a negative effect on youth. From online bullying to violent YouTube vid
-eos and video games, the various technologies are often cited as leading 
to increased violence among youth. The type of harassment that occurs 
through e-mail, instant messaging, and websites or via the mobile phone 
has even been given a name: ﬁelectronic aggressionﬂ (Hertz and David-Ferdon, 2008).Regardless of the potential harm, youth are increasingly using social 
media, and there are ways in which it can be used positively. The increase 
in use of mobile phones by teens makes it possible to reach each one on 
an individual basis. A program in South Africa called loveLife launched a 
Web-based mobile program called MYMsta. This mobile social network 
allows the youth population to access information about HIV, employment 
opportunities, scholarships, and tips to improve their lives (Ngcobo, 2010). 
It also allows them to talk about concerns relating to sexual health and get 
responses from trained counselors. 
loveLife employs other services to reach youth, such as its call-back 
service, which offers users free mobile connectivity to counselors. A user 
sends a message to the service saying, ﬁPlease call me,ﬂ and the automated 
system calls back and links the caller to a trained counselor.
3 A similar 
program exists in the United States. The National Dating Abuse Helpline 
recently made its services available via text message by providing teens who 
text ﬁloveisﬂ to 77054 with help from trained peer advocates.
4In another effort to reach out to teens, particularly in cases of intimate 
partner violence or dating violence, Futures Without Violence developed the 
online campaign That™s Not Cool. The campaign encourages teenagers to 
decide for themselves what is okay and what is not okay in their relation-ships through the use of videos, interactive games, and an online forum 
for teens to share their stories and receive advice. That™s Not Cool recently 
launched an avatar application that lets teens create their own personalized 
mobile phone characters in response to animated videos addressing digital 
3  See www.lovelife.org.za/what/call_me.php.
4  See www.loveisrespect.org.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 53dating abuse. Using text-to-speech technology, the character speaks the 
teen™s response, and the result is a speaking avatar video that can be posted 
and shared with peers on Facebook and Twitter.
5To deal with youth gangs, an innovative partnership involving the 
Chicago-based organization CeaseFire had been developed that combines 
science and street outreach to track where violence is heating up and to in-terrupt in order to calm the situation down. With Ushahidi, Medic:Mobile, 
and PopTech, the project PeaceTXT will look at how mobile tools, such 
as those used by other crisis-mapping organizations, and mobile messag-ing can accelerate CeaseFire™s existing success in decreasing deaths (Meier, 
2010). 
Child Abuse
Child abuse includes infanticide, mutilation, abandonment, and other 
forms of physical and sexual violence (WHO, 2002). It is a universal prob
-lem and often increases the likelihood of adverse health outcomes in adult-hood. There is also a cultural aspect to child abuse because the standards 
and expectations of proper parenting can vary in different countries and 
societies. More often than not, the term ﬁtechnologyﬂ combined with the 
idea of child abuse conjures up images of child pornography on the Internet 
and other negative ways in which recent innovations have harmed children. 
But technology also offers unique ways to prevent this type of abuse.
One underlying risk factor for a parent committing child abuse is a 
lack of education concerning a child™s development (WHO, 2002). There 
has been a recent rise in health text messaging programs geared toward 
reaching traditionally underserved groups with important health informa-tion. For instance, in the United States the Text4Baby program piloted by 
the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is a publicŒprivate 
partnership that provides pregnant women and new mothers with free 
health text messages. The messages range from tips on how to care for a 
baby to information on what to expect during pregnancy. Evaluations of 
the program are scheduled to be made available in 2013, and the model 
is already being taken abroad with interactive voice response technology, 
which relies on voice instead of text. Another text program that HHS is ex-pected to roll out next year is Text4KidsHealth. The Health Resources and 
Services Administration (HRSA) will develop text messages on nutrition 
and physical activity to be used for future programs targeting the parents 
of children from 1 to 5 years of age (HHS, n.d.).
The mobile phone can act as a reporting tool for cases of child abuse. 
As seen with regard to collective violence, there is power is capturing 
5  See www.loveisrespect.org.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
images of typically ignored issues and bringing them to light in the main-stream media. Using one™s mobile phone in combination with community 
reporting is an easy way for stories to hit the Web that will be shared across 
masses of people through YouTube, blogs, and other social media channels 
(Nyirubugara, 2010). One can do a simple Google search online and ˜nd 
numerous online campaigns, blogs, and other videos calling for action and 
for attention to the issue of child abuse.
The traditional hotlines available to children, such as the National 
Child Abuse Hotline that is run via Childhelp, offer another approach to 
assistance and prevention. Childhelp also has information on its website 
to help children determine if they are being abused and what actions to 
take.6 Also, because health professionals play a key role in identifying any 
signs of child abuse in their patients, incorporating such identi˜cation as 
part of their trainingŠor including information and prompts in the tools 
they use, such as checklists or remindersŠcould help prevent additional 
cases of abuse. 
Self-Directed Violence
Violent acts that a person in˚icts upon himself or herself are clas
-si˜ed as self-directed violence. This includes both suicidal behavior and 
self-abuse. In the United States more than 35,000 people commit suicide 
every year, not including suicide attempts or self-abuse. Annually more 
than 1 million people attempt to take their own lives, and approximately 
60 million Americans experience a mental health disorder, including post
-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and depression, which can be risk factors 
for self-directed violence (National Alliance on Mental Health, 2010).
The WHO says that proper diagnosis of mental disorders is important, 
as is support for those who are contemplating destructive acts. Again, 
Telehelp lines and call centers are in˚uential. Numerous lifelines, hopelines, 
and other crisis services are available. Opportunities now also exist for 
easy access to information and therapies online. The rise of online support 
groups also allows for those who are suffering to reach out and connect 
with others, which helps them understand that they are not alone. Aware
-ness and access to services permits many to move past the social stigma 
often attached to depression and suicide.
There has been some debate over the creation and use of suicide pre
-vention applications on mobile platforms. To have the applications veri˜ed 
and appropriate for the user, in addition to the possibility of producing 
any impact, is challenging. The QPR Institute released an Android app that 
turned the book The Tender Leaves of Hope: Helping Someone Survive 
6  See www.childhelp.org.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 55a Suicide Crisis into a digital booklet in hopes of reaching more families 
and individuals.7 Some mobile applications let users track their moods and 
experiences, providing supplemental information for them as well as for 
their therapists. An app called ﬁmobile therapyﬂ has a ﬁmood mapﬂ that 
pops up on a user™s screen that allows the user to indicate how he or she is 
feeling. The app responds by offering ﬁtherapeutic exercisesﬂ ranging from 
ﬁbreathing visualizations to progressive muscle relaxationﬂ as well as ways 
to disengage from a stressful situation (Trudeau, 2010).
Again, there are risks involved. Technology and media are often blamed 
for suicide, particularly teen suicides related to cyberbullying. It is dif˜cult 
to determine how great a role media and technology play in these deaths. 
Some instances become sensationalized, such as the 2008 case of a Florida 
teenager who posted online a live-stream video that showed his suicide, 
as he was encouraged by others he was chatting with online at the time 
( Friedman, 2008). With more than 87 percent of teens (ages 12 to 17) 
 using 
the Internet and 19 million teens sharing their lives through text messages, 
this is de˜nitely a cause for concern. As much as mobile phones, chat 
rooms, and other forms of communication can help teens work through 
their issues, they can also push teens in the opposite direction.
Overarching Gaps and Trends
From the program implementation cases above, several overarching 
gaps and trends begin to emerge, many similar to other ˜elds using similar 
tools. In this section we will examine some of these gaps and what can be 
done about them.Data Collection and Surveillance 
A common problem in the ˜eld is the collection, analysis, and distribu-tion of valid and useful data. As stated in the ˜rst WHO 
World Report on 
Violence and Health
, countries around the world are at different stages of 
capacity for collecting data (WHO, 2002). There is a lack of quality and 
uniformity in the data. In addition, the problem of only knowing ﬁthe tip 
of the icebergﬂ remains, as research indicates many instances of violent acts 
remain unreported.The use of ICTs can create certain ef˜ciencies in data collection as well 
as improving its quality and associated information ˚ows (Ranck, 2011a). 
Currently, in part because of the need for donor reporting, data collection 
is fragmented and siloed. Opportunities to increase the collection of and 
access to data and health information have increased, in large part because 
7  See https://market.android.com/details?id=qprinstitute.crisis.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
of the use of mobile phones in the developing world. Electronic capture of 
data can decrease human error and increase the speed of analysis. 
Increasingly, people in the ˜eld of ICTs and their uses have been talk
-ing about the use of unique identi˜ers, such as biometric data, and the 
use of electronic health records to track patients has become increasingly 
commonplace. This type of data capture and storage can create better co-ordination across health systems and allow them to share data horizontally 
(Ranck, 2011a). Having access to broader data could lead to different ac-tions and outcomes. Furthermore, the use of ICTs and mobile devices could 
aid health professionals, from doctors to community healthcare workers, in 
accessing and retrieving information.
EpiSurveyor and Commcare are examples of tools that have just started 
to be used in this area. EpiSurveyor allows anyone to create an account, 
design forms, and download the forms to a mobile phone in order to col-lect data for free. Commcare is free and open-source software that provides 
community healthcare workers with aid in case management through their 
mobile phones. The software contains registration forms, checklists, danger 
sign monitoring, and educational prompts and is designed to help manage 
the enrollment, support, and tracking of all of a community health worker™s 
clients and activities. The data that are collected are sent to the cloud for 
easy analysis and retrieval. 
Another project, ChildCount+, is a platform designed and used by the 
Millennium Villages Project. ChildCount+ uses SMS to assist and coordi
-nate the activities of community-based healthcare providers such as com-munity health workers. These workers can use text messages to register 
patients and report on their health status. This information is sent to a 
central Web-based dashboard that can then provide a real-time view of the 
current status of the community.
8 There are also numerous other software 
kits being used in the developing world, such as EpiInfo, OpenXdata, Open 
Data Kit, Open Dream, Open MRS, OpeneLIS, Open-Clinica, District 
Health Information System, Managing News, Sahana, Geo-Chat, Riff/Evolve, Mesh4x, Ushahidi, and Epidefender.
Research and EvaluationAlong with the needs listed above for data collection and surveillance, 
there is also a lack of common metrics for monitoring and evaluation, 
especially for programs using ICTs and mobile devices. There are serious 
insuf˜ciencies in rigorous evaluation of the many pilot programs that are 
using these new mediums of communication and determining their overall 
impact.8  See www.childcount.org.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 57A unique advantage of ICTs is that they offer the possibility of real-time 
evaluation. Furthermore, linking data from one program to others could 
lead to a clearer view of where the ˜eld is and where it is heading. This 
could have important effects. However, issues remain, including a lack of 
understanding of the capabilities around the use of ICTs, a lack of com
-mon data standards that support interoperability, and the need to develop 
information-sharing policies (Ranck, 2011a). Conversations concerning 
the ﬁenterprise architectureﬂŠthe ﬁplumbingﬂ of systemsŠare in the early 
stages. We have yet to hit a point where projects are no longer functioning 
in siloes and where sharing data leads to a leveraging of each other™s results. 
ﬁInteroperability,ﬂ or the ability to share data quickly and accurately across 
different application and through the health system, will be an important 
property to develop in the coming years if the full potential of ICTs and 
mobile devices is to be realized.
A ˜nal issue related to sharing data across silos is the problem of pri-vacy and security. Concern about the ability of users to retain anonymity, 
especially given the nature of collective violence or intimate partner vio-lence, is understandable, and such concerns should remain at the forefront 
of any project implementation. Data ownership is another issue that raises 
various concerns, particularly as projects strive for scale in implementation 
or begin to share data between programs or with the health system at large.Dissemination and ImplementationICTs can play a pivotal role in the implementation of violence preven
-tion programs throughout the program and intervention design section. 
Multiple modes of telecommunications exist, but the mobile explosion both within and outside the United States provides additional opportunities for 
impact (see Figure 6-2). Common elements of program implementation 
can include the use of electronic forms and checklists, remote training for 
healthcare professionals, the use of crowdsourcing and social media plat-forms, and the use of SMS and video or television. 
A larger issue remains, however, which is the exchange of information 
and lessons learned throughout not only the violence prevention community 
but also the public health ˜eld at large. Online platforms can aid in the dis-semination and sharing of knowledge. Although not yet widely instituted, 
GHD Online and the mHealth Alliance™s Healthunbound platforms offer a 
peek into what is possible. With the rise of webinars and remote access to 
meetings, and with the ability to share presentations online through web-sites such as slideshare, avenues for information sharing and collaboration 
have increased.Finally, institutions should not overlook these platforms for sup
-porting their advocacy campaigns and their ability to raise funds for the 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
implementation of programs. Multiple programs now use e-cards and on
-line petitions or request advocates to share program information with their 
social networks. Text campaigns have become particularly popular over 
the past few years, allowing individuals to donate to certain causes via 
their mobile phones. Eight days after the earthquake in Haiti in 2011, the 
American Red Cross had raised approximately $22 million via text messag-ing (Heath, 2010). Donors texted the word ﬁHaitiﬂ to 90999, and a $10 
pledge was automatically added to the person™s phone bill.
Recommendations1.  
Undertake a full-landscape analysis of the use of ICTs in violence 
prevention.Time and resources should be dedicated to a full-landscape analysis on 
the intersection between ICTs and the ˜eld of violence prevention, with par
-ticular emphasis on the mobile phone in relation to the developing world.
2. Learn from other ˜elds and each other.
The mServices and mHealth spaces in particular have a lot to offer 
in terms of uses of new innovations and lessons learned. Conversations 
about the employment of electronic health records, interoperability, and 
the development of common metrics to evaluation are being explored. 
Furthermore, the types of violence outlined in this paper are interrelated 
Figure 6-2R02165uneditable bitmapped imagescaled for portrait aboveFIGURE 6-2 Global ICT developments, 2000Œ2010.
SOURCE: ITU, 2011.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 59and interdependent in various ways. Using new platforms for information 
sharing and collaboration as well as sharing data and lessons learned could 
greatly push the ˜eld forward.
3. Develop common metrics for monitoring and evaluation. 
With the ever-pressing need to know if these technologies are making 
a positive impact, the development of common metrics for monitoring and 
evaluation is important. With the ability for near real-time analysis of data, 
and given the infancy of this ˜eld, collaboration on metrics and the evalua-tion of programs will be vital for knowing what works and what does not. 
4. Further explore privacy issues.Given the sensitivities that surround certain types of violence, such as 
intimate partner violence, the need for anonymity is of utmost importance. 
Issues concerning user privacy, the sharing of data, reporting, and so forth 
need to be further explored. The technologies themselves must be investi-gated to make certain that they are not allowing sensitive information to 
be leaked to a wider public, for example via GIS mapping or forums on 
the Internet.5. Address development factorsŠmove beyond intervention.
Emphasis must be given to many of the underlying development fac-tors that can lead to the instigation and continued perpetration of violence. 
Factors such as poverty, lack of access to the health care system, lack of 
access to education, and economic inequality can make any person or 
society ripe for violence. ICTs can be pivotal in addressing these issues, 
as with the use of mFinance to address poverty or with community health 
workers using computers or mobile phones to help expand access to health 
care and education.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
THE STATE OF GLOBAL VIOLENCE PREVENTION: 
PROGRESS AND CHALLENGESMark L. Rosenberg, M.D., M.P.P.
 The Task Force for Global Health
James A. Mercy, Ph.D. 
 National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Frances Henry, M.B.A.
 Advisor, F. Felix Foundation
Alexander Butchart, Ph.D., M.A. Department of Violence and Injury Prevention, 
 World Health Organization
9The ˜eld of global violence prevention has made some tremendous 
advances in the past 35 years. In some very important ways, however, it 
remains ﬁstuck,ﬂ facing a number of serious obstacles, some that are ge-neric for global health and others that are unique to the ˜eld of violence 
prevention. This paper sets the stage by describing some of these advances 
and then presenting the obstacles in order to explore whether ICTŠinclud-ing the new social mediaŠcan inspire ways to surmount these obstacles. 
Perhaps the most important advance the ˜eld has made is to have 
helped people understand that violence is not inevitable, that it is not just 
an unavoidable aspect of daily life, and that it is not just one aspect of the 
existence of evil in this world. The importance of this advance can be seen 
in the story of smallpox, a disease that for centuries killed tens of millions 
of people every year. For many people, smallpox was seen as a recurring 
and unavoidable plagueŠuntil it became the ˜rst and the only human 
disease that has ever been eradicated (Foege, 2010). In 1806 President 
Thomas Jefferson wrote to congratulate Edward Jenner on his discovery 
that inoculating an individual with cowpox vaccine could confer immunity 
to smallpox. Jefferson told Jenner that within a few years his discovery 
would make smallpox a disease known only to history. It took a few more 
years than Jefferson thought. In 1973 Dr. Bill Foege was sent to India, 
where there were 87,000 cases of smallpox and the situation appeared quite 
hopeless. Foege shifted the strategy from mass immunization to the contain-ment of outbreaks by vaccinating only those within or exposed to infected 
villages. This led to the eradication of smallpox in India and then the rest 
9  One of the authors is a staff member of the World Health Organization. The authors 
alone are responsible for the views expressed in this publication, and they do not necessarily 
represent the decisions, policy, or views of the World Health Organization.
 Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 61of the world. Smallpox eradication was the holy grail of global health, and 
this was an extraordinary achievement. 
Sometimes tremendous leaps are made with a disruptive innovation; 
smallpox eradication was achieved when the containment strategy replaced 
mass immunization. The Swedish strategy for eliminating road traf˜c deaths 
was inspired by the eradication of smallpox. In 
Vision Zero
, Claus Tingval 
put forward the idea that road traf˜c injuries are not ﬁaccidentsﬂŠnot un-predictable and unpreventable acts of fateŠbut rather are very predictable 
and preventable events, and he suggested that we do not have to accept any 
number over zero. He was at ˜rst ridiculed for this idea, but now Sweden is 
well on its way to achieving this goal, and the European Union has adopted 
the Vision Zero
 goal for 2050. The idea that violence can be prevented is a 
similar sort of paradigm shift that can change the future.
The substantial changes that this paradigm shift brought about can be 
seen in the area of child sexual abuse. This was a problem to which the re-sponse used to be denial until it happened, and then perpetrators were sent 
to jail and victims to therapy. However, Fran Henry, through Stop It Now, 
helped to change the paradigm and demonstrated that identifying people at 
risk for perpetration and providing them help could actually 
prevent abuse 
from occurring. She made the case for prevention, and it has now become 
commonplace for the public to expect that preventive steps be taken. The 
failure to prevent child sexual abuse associated with the Catholic Church 
has provoked huge protests, and the most recent scandal involving a foot
-ball coach at Penn State resulted in high-level ˜rings. These are the results 
of a change in the paradigmŠof a new and widespread belief that child 
sexual abuse can and must be prevented. Many believe that media attention 
to the Penn State case contributed to the response. This raises the possibility 
that change happens more quickly when the whole world is watching and 
suggests that ICT can help to spread the notion that violence is preventable 
and can accelerate positive change. 
Signi˜cant ProgressSigni˜cant progress has been made in making it clear that violence is 
not ﬁevil in the worldﬂ through the clari˜cation of a de˜nition of violence 
developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and 
the WHO. The agencies have de˜ned violence as ﬁthe intentional use of 
physical force or power, threatened or actual, against oneself, another per
-son, or against a group or community that either results in or has a high 
likelihood of resulting in injury, death, psychological harm, maldevelop
-ment, or deprivationﬂ (WHO, 2002). The agencies have also helped to 
identify speci˜c categories of violence: child maltreatment, intimate partner 
violence, youth violence, collective violence, sexual violence, elder abuse, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
suicide, and self-directed violence. And they have helped to make substan-tial progress in each of these areas by asking and answering four questions: 
What is the problem? What are the causes? What works to prevent it? How 
do you do it? (Figure 6-3). We can see substantial progress has been made 
in answering each of these questions.
Progress Has Been Made in Achieving a Better Understanding of the 
Problem 
We have developed a substantial science base ranging from knowledge 
generation (research) and knowledge integration to knowledge dissemina-tion and knowledge application (delivery). We have demonstrated that the 
burden of violence is large and truly global; there are an estimated 1.5 
million deaths each year, with more than 90 percent of the burden born 
by low- and middle-income countries. We also now understand that the 
burden of violence is exacerbated by its impact on other health and social 
problems. Exposure to violence increases the risk of mental health issues 
(e.g., depressions and anxiety) and physical health problems (e.g., diabe-tes, heart disease, and cancer) across the lifespan (Repetti et al., 2002). 
Exposure can also compromise cognitive development as well as the social 
development of communities and nations (WHO, 2008). Most important, 
Figure 6-3R02165editable vector image grabbed form original presentationDefine the  Problem Identify Risk Factors Find What   Prevents the Problem Implement & Evaluate  Programs What™s the problem? What are the causes? What works? How to do it? Discovery Delivery FIGURE 6-3 CDC Public Health Model.SOURCE: CDC, 2008. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 63we have generated important knowledge about what works to prevent vio-lence (Rosenberg et al., 2006; Mercy et al., 2008; WHO, 2010), although 
we have much to learn about how this can be applied in low- and middle-income countries.We Also Have Made Progress in Understanding the Causes and 
Connections Among Different Types of Violence
There are identi˜able risk factors and protective factors for each type 
of violence, many of which affect more than one type of violence, e.g., 
alcohol-related, child maltreatment, and exposure to violence (Rosenberg et 
al., 2006). We have learned that different types of violence are connected in 
many ways. A cycle of violence can begin, for example, with child neglect 
at birth, leading to hypervigilant children who are less likely to be calmed 
and more likely to participate in youth violence, and then intimate partner 
violence, elder abuse, and suicide when they get older.
We have a much better understanding of how to implement violence 
prevention programs and interventions. We have learned the value of col
-laboration among different sectors and disciplines, and we have seen the 
value that is added when police and public health, instead of ˜ghting for 
control, work to collaborate effectively (Rosenberg et al., 2010). We have 
seen the important role that advocacy groups, often led by survivors, can 
play in program design and delivery. Advocacy groups have made substan
-tial progress in many areas of violence prevention as they have expanded 
from treatment only to treatment and prevention, with prevention and 
treatment components working together rather than competing for funds. 
The place of public health in violence prevention has been well established, 
with the CDC and WHO providing leadership. The WHO has adapted 
the CDC model for use around the world. The organizations™ success is 
re˚ected in a substantial worldwide demand for technical assistance for 
violence prevention, with 44 countries around the world receiving WHO 
technical support as of September 2011 (A. Butchart, personal communica-tion, 2011). The institutions that work in the ˜eld of violence prevention 
have also been strengthened: The WHO established a growing network of 
of˜cially appointed Ministry of Health focal points for violence prevention, 
with a global total of more than 130 focal points in 2011. 
The Challenges Before Us
But in some important ways we are still stuck. In fact, we are still stuck 
getting answers to the ﬁfour questionsﬂ: 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
1. What is the problem? There is much more work to do in overcoming 
the sense of fatalism that pervades so much of our thinking about violence, 
in countering the notion that violence is an inevitable part of human life 
and thus not preventable. We also need to overcome the separation of 
different types of violence into silos, so that researchers and practitioners 
in different ˜elds of violence prevention can bene˜t from understanding 
the common roots and interconnections among different types of violence 
across the lifespan. We need more resources for a better understanding of 
the social and economic determinants of violence. One consequence of these 
root causes is that violence affects the most needy, poor, and vulnerable
 disproportionately but they do not set the spending priorities. There is still 
a need for more interdisciplinary collaboration. Many people still do not 
believe that violence is really a public health problem, but instead feel that 
it ﬁbelongsﬂ to criminal justice. We need to overcome the ﬁprivacy ruseﬂŠ
the belief that interpersonal or self-directed violence is a family affair and 
that what happens in the family (or nation) stays in the family (or nation). 
Stigma and shame keep people and countries from reporting many kinds of 
victimization, such as rape. Nations do not want to stigmatize themselves 
by saying they hurt their children, their women, their elderly, or themselves.
We are also hindered in our understanding of violence prevention be
-cause we use the wrong calculus to identify costs and bene˜ts. Tradition
-ally the biggest threats to our own health have been traditional infectious 
diseases, such as smallpox, polio, MDRTB, HIV/AIDS, and cholera. Most 
people do not realize that the well-known philosopher Martin Buber was 
really the ˜rst philosopher of surveillance. His work tells us that there 
are two types of surveillance. The ˜rst is ﬁI and IT surveillance,ﬂ which 
follow the principle, ﬁMy country is at the center of the universe, and I 
relate to others only insofar as they contribute to my own little agendas or 
pose threats to my own health.ﬂ The second type of surveillance is ﬁI and 
THOUﬂ surveillance: ﬁWe ˚ourish best when we treat others with respect, 
care, and equality. We add value to this global human endeavor by under
-standing the needs and contributing to the lives of others. We are compas
-sionateﬂ (Buber, 1923). The International Health Regulations look at I and 
IT surveillance, taking account only of those conditions that pose a direct 
threat to the security of other countries. But if we let this guide our efforts, 
then we fail to account for the costs to the people who suffer in the develop-ing world from interpersonal and self-directed violence because this is not 
seen as contagious and importable into our own countries. Using ﬁI and Itﬂ 
surveillance will mislead our efforts in formulating policy and setting our 
priorities if we fail to see that interpersonal violence is intimately connected 
to group violence and in the end it will pose a threat to our own security.
ICT may help facilitate ﬁI and THOUﬂ surveillance by contributing 
to the breakdown of the walls and borders that separate us as residents of 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 65countries. They open whole new possibilities for conducting surveillance 
and open up the participation of many new groups and types of people to 
the process of surveillance, to analysis, and to the application of surveil-lance data.2. What are the causes? Positive relationships are crucial for violence 
prevention. There is much more work to be done in understanding how to 
improve relationships and break the cycle of violence. Additionally, there is 
a particular risk that faces all of us: becoming disconnected while believing 
that we are becoming more connected. There is a risk that increased reli-ance on indirect communication methods such as cell phones and e-mail 
may diminish direct personal communications and thereby make it more 
likely that violence will be employed against someone whose face and per-sona are not known. Thus, we must also be cognizant of the limitations of 
these new technologies and realize that they may also be used to cause or 
facilitate violence.3. What works to prevent it? Although much progress has been made in 
understanding what works to prevent violence, we lack suf˜cient proof of ef-fectiveness for many interventions in low- and middle-income countries,
 and, 
without the proof of effectiveness, donors do not want to invest in preven-tive interventions. Ideally we should be able to provide a short list of speci˜c 
interventions or ﬁbest buysﬂ that have been proven to be effective and are 
ready for application in developing countries. However, few interventions 
have been implemented in developing countries with the capacity to evalu
-ate the outcomes and collect the data needed to measure cost- effectiveness. 
This is a vicious cycle because without the necessary investment, we cannot 
develop the evaluation capacity needed to demonstrate effectiveness. The 
strongest case possible must therefore be made for investing in building 
the capacity to take interventions that have proven effective in developed 
countries and systematically implement and evaluate them in developing 
countries (WHO, 2008). What role can new information and communica-tions technologies play in preventing violence in low- and middle-income 
countries? These technologies may enable us to accelerate progress in ˜nding 
viable and effective strategies in low-resource environments.
4. How do you do it? One fundamental obstacle to progress is the ab-sence of commitment by decision makers
 to enact solutions and try ideas. 
This ˜eld is markedly under-resourced. The consequences of this include 
an intense rivalry among organizations that compete for the same limited 
pool of dollars and a lack of resources to build the violence prevention 
foundations that, at a country level, are required to ensure that prevention 
activities are sustained over time. We need to overcome skepticism about 
the feasibility of delivering complex social interventions in resource-poor 
settings, and we struggle with the large time lag between prevention pro-gram delivery and reduced rates of violence for interventions such as parent 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
training and life skills training. Those working in global violence prevention 
also have to deal with the signi˜cant cost of preventive interventions. In the 
current economic climate, with increasing cut-backs in foreign aid, people 
want to stick with what we have already started (i.e., programs dealing 
with AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and infectious diseases) and not get into 
something that is new and therefore a lower priority.
 We also do not know 
how to reach out to high-risk groups. In addition, we have a lot to learn 
about scalabilityŠwe can do demonstration projects, but we have had little 
experience with scaling up programs that work. We also need to do a better 
job at integrating the different phases of the public health model. Ideally, 
surveillance, evaluation, and response would be closely linked. Instead, we 
collect the data, analyze it, and then 3 years later perhaps it is applied or 
used. We have not developed the capacity to implement solutions to over
-come the many bottlenecks that occur here. This is a universal problem for 
global health and one where ICT may be of great help. 
INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES 
AND THE FUTURE OF GLOBAL HEALTH
Jody Ranck, Dr.P.H.
 Public Health InstituteIntroductionThe past decade has witnessed a remarkable and truly global technol-ogy revolution unlike virtually any other. The mobile phone has placed 
more computing power in the hands of more people than even telecom
-munications experts in the 1980s thought would be possible. An executive 
from AT&T predicted that the global market for cell phones would peak 
at approximately 100,000. But by the end of 2011, according to the Inter
-national Telecommunications Union, almost 6 billion people had access to 
mobile phones (ITU, 2011). The average smartphone today contains more 
computing power than all of NASA™s computing resources at the time the 
˜rst man was sent to the moon. Social media is an important driver of this 
growth. 
In contrast to most public health practitioners™ perspectives, Africa 
is one of the fastest-growing markets for Facebook. In fact, Facebook is 
becoming an important driver of Internet growth in Africa, because it has 
now become the leading site visited by Internet users on the African conti
-nent (Jidenma, 2011). Although Africa has become the continent with the 
fastest growth in Facebook use, there are important disparities in access 
and growth rates. Nevertheless, the developing world has rapidly become 
a major focus of the marketing departments of most major social media 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 67platforms, such as Twitter, Facebook, and Google. The role that these plat
-forms played in the Arab Spring of 2011 can certainly be overstated, but 
there is little denying that access to social media platforms that are essen-tially many-to-many self-publishing platforms, mostly accessible by mobile 
phones, is having a major impact on the way ideas are communicated, new 
knowledge is generated, and, as we will soon see, new research on the un-derstanding of human behavior is being conducted. 
Global health experts can no longer afford to view social media as 
trivial playthings of adolescents. These are major platforms with which to 
engage the public and to innovate in areas such as civic engagement, public 
policy, and technology development, and they are transforming the way we 
think about education, technology development, the media, politics, social 
movements, and science. These are all critical dimensions of public health, 
more largely, and for developing the next generation of global violence 
prevention tools and policies.In this paper I will outline some of the most important technological 
innovations involving the mobile and social media platforms and provide 
some preliminary examples of the key lessons and impacts that these tools 
have had. There have been many early research studies on mHealth and 
social media tools, but these often suffer from small sample sizes and vari-ous other methodological shortcomings, so there are relatively few robust 
evaluations of the technologies (Mechael et al., 2010). In the discussion that 
follows, I will focus on innovations in mHealth and social media and how 
these have created the enabling conditions for open data, crowdsourcing, 
citizen science, new visual cultures and advocacy, the gami˜cation of health, 
and open innovation, all of which can lead to a new approach called ﬁopen 
health.ﬂ I will conclude with some observations on how these may lead to 
new strategies for global violence prevention efforts.
Social Media: Amplifying the Self and New Forms of CooperationSince the early 2000s, social media tools have grown dramatically 
in use and scope, becoming mainstream communications tools that have 
helped foster what some have termed ﬁnew economies and cultures of shar-ing.ﬂ From Flickr to Facebook, the demographics of the adoption of these 
tools have grown in unexpected ways, and they have become important, 
if not central tools, for companies, nongovernmental organizations, and 
governments to share information and communicate. Early on, platforms 
such as Flickr proved to be virtual spaces where acts of resistance to gender 
norms could be acted out by youth; for example, in the Arabian Gulf states, 
where public spaces are strictly segregated by gender, teenagers used Flickr 
as a space for interacting across gender lines. Such examples illustrate how 
the use of many-to-many communications platforms can take on distinctly 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
political tones. The Arab Spring was just one of many instances in recent 
history in which mobile devices and social media were used to amplify 
voices of dissent and tell compelling oppositional narratives in public life. 
The Orange Revolution in the Ukraine and the toppling of Philippine 
president Joseph Estrada are further examples of the use of SMS or text 
messaging to coordinate resistance movements or what Howard Rheingold 
has termed ﬁsmart mobsﬂ (Rheingold, 2003).
In January 2008 one of the most powerful examples of the use of social 
media and mobile devices and of the new forms of cooperation that they 
entail occurred. During the Kenyan electoral violence, bloggers critical of 
the national government™s media blackout created an open-source platform 
for crowdsourcing information about both violence and counter-violence 
via SMS messages that could be mapped on the platform called Ushahidi 
(Swahili for ﬁTestimonyﬂ or ﬁWitnessﬂ). Blogger Ory Okolloh suggested 
the need for a platform for information gathering, and a network of blog-gers created the site in approximately 1 week. Incidents could be reported 
via mobile devices using a short code and were then veri˜ed by local groups 
on the ground and mapped in order to provide a visualization of the vio-lence. Today this platform is used globally from Russia to Washington, DC, 
by groups involved in a variety of humanitarian and human rights issues. In 
its wake, a number of similar tools have been developed to raise awareness 
of gender harassment in Egypt (HarassMap) and violence against girls; in 
one example, a reporting tool similar to Ushahidi was even merged with 
open data initiatives in order to map murder rates (Evans, 2011). Social 
media have been a major driver in the move toward greater transparency 
and in the growing area of open data initiatives that have taken place in a 
number of formerly closed institutions, such as the World Bank.
Such examples point to the sorts of roles that the phenomenon of 
crowdsourcing that has arisen from the social media landscape can play in 
global health. Several years ago the pharmaceutical giant Eli Lilly launched 
an open innovation platform called InnoCentive to tackle dif˜cult-to-solve 
scienti˜c problems. The ˜rm, after spending millions of dollars and many 
person-years without solving speci˜c problems, began to reach beyond its 
own walls and disciplines to ˜nd assistance in solving these challenges. It 
placed problems on the site, which allowed potential solution ˜nders to 
register and submit approaches to solving the problems. Frequently the 
company discovered to its surprise that the problems were easily solved by 
scientists halfway around the world who approached the problem through 
a different paradigm or discipline that made the challenge quite easy to 
solve. The success of InnoCentive has unleashed a wave of platforms and 
strategies to drive innovation and solve dif˜cult scienti˜c and health chal-lenges by recognizing that our traditional forms of knowledge creation have 
not necessarily kept up with the technologies and new forms of sociality 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 69that they engender. A new science of asking questions has arisen, and plat
-forms are now being used to ﬁmicro-taskﬂ problems and work into smaller 
pieces that can be easily solved, often providing income to micro-taskers 
using platforms such as Amazon™s Mechanical Turk or the developing world 
platform, Jana. An example of such work that has taken place in developing 
countries is the group of Trinidadian and Brazilian students who developed 
a micro-tasking tool for performing medical diagnostics of digitized X-rays 
on mobile phones that users would scan for eye conditions; this was the 
winner of InfoDev™s microwork challenge, ﬁm2workﬂ (InfoDev, 2012).
Cooperation and the Commons
Elinor Ostrom won the 2009 Nobel Prize in economics for her path-breaking work on the commons and the strategies and tools used to man-age the commons in the area of natural resources. Her work is all the more 
salient in our new world of ICT, because the examples demonstrate the 
power of the tools of cooperation. The commons can become an invaluable 
companion to these tools through creating a basis for shared resources. 
From open-source software to innovation commons such as the Science 
Commons or public goods such as health, we see a growing movement to 
deploy commons-based assets alongside the tools of cooperation in order 
to drive innovation and problem solving. As much of the world enters a 
period of prolonged ˜nancial crises, global health experts will need to be-come more literate and skilled in strategies for commons-based approaches 
that rest on an economics of sharing that can be disruptive to traditional 
approaches. In the biological sciences we have examples such as the Proteo
-meCommons, which involves protocols for sharing terabytes of data over 
the Web (Weinberger, 2012).
mHealth and Public Health 2.0
The near-ubiquity of cell phones in most low- and middle-income 
countries has created an unprecedented opportunity to extend the reach 
of community health workers as well as to provide a channel for public 
health messages and two-way communications. Mobile devices are increas-ingly playing an important role in data collection with open-source tools 
such as DataDyne™s Epi-Surveyor or INSTEDD™s Geochat, which enable the 
creation of forms and the transmission of data. The Praekelt Foundation 
and organizations such as Cell Life in South Africa have pioneered the use 
of SMS for HIV prevention, testing, and drug-adherence regimens. Beyond 
texting, there are new tools for eye exams, infectious diseases, vital signs 
measurement, and microscopy that are in various stages of development 
and that will be able to take advantage of the augmented computing power 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
of smartphones. Smartphones are coming down in price as well, as exempli-˜ed by the $80 offering that HTC has developed for the Kenyan market. In 
countries such as Kenya and the Philippines, where the mobile industry has 
made extensive inroads, there are new possibilities for mHealth to piggy 
back on the mobile industry to enable micro-insurance schemes, such as the 
one by Changamka aimed at enabling pregnant women to cover antenatal 
care, child delivery, and postnatal care. These systems can also be extended 
to vouchers for supplementary feeding, cash incentives, and the payment of 
health workers (Gencer and Ranck, 2011).Beyond mobile devices, the broader social media system is increasingly 
playing a public health role in the areas of epidemiology, participatory 
planning, and biosurveillance. Public Health 2.0 offers a new paradigm that 
democratizes the way science is practiced. In February 2011 a mysterious 
fever appeared among participants at the DomainFest Global Conference 
(Garrity, 2011). One of the attendees used Facebook to reach out to other 
participants to inquire about their symptoms. Within a few days, before the 
Los Angeles County health department and the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention had even launched an investigation, the participants had 
diagnosed the outbreak themselves as legionellosis and had entered the 
diagnosis on Wikipedia. HealthMap and Google™s Flu Tracker, along with 
Twitter, are some of the more robust mapping/crowdsourcing tools that are 
becoming increasingly prevalent in public health science and practice. Rumi 
Chanara of Harvard used Twitter to track the 2010 cholera outbreak in 
Haiti (Chunara et al., 2012). These platforms are in essence large reposi-tories of data which new data-mining tools can use that to make sense of 
much faster than is possible with traditional methods. 
Big Data and Data Mining
Given the proliferation of mobile devices and data-collection devices, 
particularly with the emerging Internet of things including the billions 
of devices that can collect data and send them to the Internet, the major 
challenge has been to make sense of all of this data (Ranck, 2011b). The 
combination of cloud computing and big-data analytical tools such as 
Hadoop has enabled data scientists to take vast volumes of data, too big 
to ˜t on the typical server, and parse these data very rapidly. Tools such 
as IBM™s Watson can now scan several hundred million pages of medical 
text in seconds or fractions of a second. These tools are capable of sort-ing through hundreds of millions of tweets and making sense out of this 
chaos, often at a much lower price than conventional approaches. Such 
tools have already been used to analyze data about violence, such as shoot-ings in Camden, New Jersey. Jeffry Brenner used big-data analytics to sort 
through 8 years of medical billing records and to discover that 80 percent 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 71of costs were associated with 13 percent of patients, and that much of the 
care was neither medically effective nor cost-effective. This discovery cre-ated the foundation for a new partnership to address violence prevention 
efforts. Another research effort, this one carried out by Harvard University 
researchers, uncovered indicators of risks of domestic violence in patients™ 
electronic medical records that may help clinicians identify early risk factors 
that can prompt earlier interventions (Joelving, 2009).
Gami˜cationA ˜nal area where social media and ICTs can play a role in the future 
of global health is gaming. Gami˜cation refers to the deployment of gaming 
tools, incentives, and technologies within the worlds of business, research, 
creativity, and innovation. In 2011 a major breakthrough in the area of 
HIV research came to light through the success of the online research and 
gaming platform Fold.it (Marshall and Nature, 2012). Researchers from 
the University of Washington created an online game that allowed users to 
manipulate three-dimensional structures of proteins on their home comput-ers, which were then scored for the best (lowest-energy) con˜gurations of 
the enzyme critical to some HIV drug therapies. For several years bench 
scientists had failed to come up with better con˜gurations and thus had 
sought to crowdsource alternatives. Within several weeks amateur gamers 
had solved a problem that had plagued these scientists for years. There is 
growing use of games such as this designed for mobile devices to use the 
incentives and critical thinking fostered by game dynamics in order to en-courage public participation in citizen science or behavioral change (Fogg, 
2002; Bogost, 2010).
ICTs and Global Violence Prevention: Lessons 
for the Future of Global Health
In this paper I have outlined some of the key technology trends that 
are likely to play a signi˜cant role in general public health efforts in the 
future. Although many of the examples are from developed countries, we 
are seeing a dramatic growth of these tools for global health efforts. Some 
of the tools have been developed with violence prevention efforts in mind, 
but the violence prevention arena lags signi˜cantly and could explore these 
tools in more detail. For example, the United Nations Global Pulse platform 
is a big-data project that seeks to stimulate data philanthropy, sharing, and 
analytics in order to predict political crises much earlier through ˜nely 
tuned analyses of the ﬁdata exhaustﬂ from media, NGOs, evaluations, 
and so forth. A number of mapping tools for visualizing violence against 
women exist, such as HarassMap and Map4Aid™s Fighting Violence Against 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Women in India campaign, and text messaging is being used for a number 
of campaigns aimed at preventing domestic violence and violence against 
women. Take Back the Tech! is an effort mobilized during the 16 Days of 
Activism Against Gender-Based Violence that has developed various inno
-vations in the use of SMS for public awareness campaigns.
Although the ˜eld is in its nascent stages, the time is ripe to begin 
building the evidence base for these tools and the lessons learned, with 
particular attention paid to the various cultural contexts. For example, 
some SMS campaigns to prevent domestic violence have actually back˜red 
in some contexts because of the particular power and gender dynamics at 
the household level. This is an important element that often gets overlooked 
in the rush to deploy technologies, and it will be critical for the ˜eld to 
have more case studies seen through the prism of gender and power as it 
moves forward. Furthermore, the same technologies used for interventions 
can also help in evaluating these technologies. Data-collection tools used 
for health and human rights, such as the KoBo Project (KoboProject.org), 
provide open-source data-collection tools that also offer the encryption 
functionality that can protect users in con˚ict or human rights situations 
while also building the capacity of local organizations. Directories of these 
tools and case studies are in great need at the moment. Furthermore, the 
public health ˜eld itself can no longer afford to fall behind in its thinking 
about technology. Increasingly one™s ability to realize one™s capabilities, in 
the sense articulated by Amartya Sen, will require technological literacy 
that many in our ˜eld do not have. This emerging notion of technological 
citizenship (Barry, 2001) is likely to play a determining role in the social 
divides of the future as well as in the growing one within public health 
ranks, where new techno-political thinking is desperately needed.
EVALUATION OF 
MHEALTH
William T. Riley, Ph.D.
 National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health
The past decade has witnessed an explosion of mobile technologies. 
Eighty-three percent of U.S. adults own cell phones (Pew Internet and 
American Life Project, 2010). Worldwide there are approximately 6 billion 
cell phone subscriptions, and the rapidly growing rates in developing coun-tries, where wireless technologies have leapfrogged the wired infrastructure, 
have made it possible to reach people in remote villages and communities 
(ITU, 2011). The public health community has begun to leverage these 
mobile devices in order to perform real-time assessments and to intervene 
at the times when these interventions would be most useful (e.g., in the 
context of the behavior). 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 73Despite the rapid growth of mobile technologies applied to health 
(mHealth), the evaluation of mobile technologies has not kept pace with 
the development and deployment of these technologies. Although there also 
needs to be considerable emphasis on the reliability, validity, and sensitiv
-ity of measurements in mHealth, the focus of this summary is on research 
evaluations of mHealth interventions. 
Randomized Controlled Trials 
The randomized controlled trial (RCT) is the standard for intervention 
research. Meta-analyses such as those performed by the Cochrane Review 
routinely include only RCTs in their reviews (Higgins, 2011). The U.S. 
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommendations are developed 
predominately from the ˜ndings of RCTs (USPSTF, 2010). The Institute of 
Medicine relies heavily on RCTs as the basis for its consensus reports (IOM, 
2011). Given the reliance on RCTs as the accepted standard for biomedical 
and behavioral evidence, mHealth interventions, including violence preven-tion programs delivered via mobile devices, need to be subjected to this 
same standard if they are to be accepted as a valid and effective method. 
Appropriate Comparison Conditions in mHealth
One challenge of evaluating the ef˜cacy of mobile interventions via 
RCTs is the choice of a comparison condition. How the mHealth interven
-tion is intended to be used is an important consideration for determining an 
appropriate comparison condition. If the mHealth intervention ˜lls a gap 
where no other viable intervention exists, then a no-treatment or usual care 
condition is appropriate. If the mHealth intervention is intended to aug-ment an existing intervention, then an additive design in which the existing 
intervention is compared to the existing intervention plus the mHealth 
intervention would be used. If the mHealth intervention is intended to 
supplant or replace an existing low-tech equivalent interventions, then the 
low-tech intervention may be the appropriate comparison condition. 
The comparison condition in which the mHealth intervention is in-tended to augment or supplant the existing intervention is a high outcome 
standard to exceed. One solution to this dilemma is to use or develop a 
minimal-contact version of the low-tech intervention (e.g., a self-help book 
or non-interactive Web pages) as the comparison condition, but this dilutes 
the effect of the low-tech intervention and often delivers it in a form that 
was never intended. Therefore, it becomes critical to ask in what way the 
mobile intervention is hypothesized to be better than the other interventions 
currently available. In many cases, it may not be the case that the mobile 
intervention is expected to produce better outcomes, but rather that it is 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
expected to provide comparable outcomes while delivering the intervention 
either more consistently across individuals (e.g., with less variability in out-comes) or at less cost. For many mobile health applications, the hypothesis 
should not be that the mobile intervention will produce better outcomes 
than its low-tech equivalent, but rather that it will produce comparable 
outcomes at a lower cost. As a result, a cost-per-unit change is often a 
better indicator of mHealth intervention outcomes. Furthermore, because 
most mobile or other technology intervention costs are ˜xed (e.g., initial 
development and equipment) while most of the low-tech intervention costs 
are variable (e.g., professional time), extrapolating cost-per-unit changes 
across large numbers of individuals, not just those in the study, gives a bet
-ter estimate of the reach possible from the high- vs. low-tech intervention.
Technology Outpacing RCTs 
 A more substantive issue regarding the ˜t of RCTs and mobile health 
interventions is the length of time required to perform an RCT. Previous 
research has shown that the median time from start of enrollment to pub-lication is 5.5 years and substantially longer for negative trials (Ioannidis, 
1998). From the initiation of a grant submission, an RCT can be expected 
to take 7 or more years to complete, a timeframe that does not keep pace 
with recent technological advances. As shown in Figure 6-4, an RCT with 
the primary results published at the end of 2011 would have required 
developing the initial project idea and submitting the grant application by 
2005, prior to the advent of many Internet, mobile, and wireless advances, 
including YouTube, iPhone, Android, and iPad. As a result, most of the 
Figure 6-4R02165editable vectors grabbed from original presentation2005 2006 20072008 2009 2010 2011 Grant Submit and Award Development and Pilot Testing Recruit and Randomize Follow-ups Analyze and 
Publish iPhone Android YouTube iPad FIGURE 6-4 Mobile technology advances outpace traditional research design.
SOURCE: Riley, 2011.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 75mobile health research published today was developed on dated technolo-gies and mobile platforms. 
Fortunately, mobile technologies can be used not only to provide inter
-ventions but also to streamline the RCT process. Mobile technologies can 
be used to recruit participants rapidly and to conduct the trial remotely. In 
one of the ˜rst uses of mobile phones for smoking cessation, Rodgers et 
al. (2005) recruited participants and conducted the study remotely across 
the continent of Australia. By being able to recruit with a text message to 
all mobile phone users and to conduct the study remotely, the researchers 
were able to make the study convenient for participants (e.g., no travel for 
in-person visits) and to reduce study costs (e.g., fewer research staff and 
facilities were required). This remote study capability is based in part on 
leveraging the mobile phone to deliver not only the intervention but also 
the study outcome measures. The frequent longitudinal assessments and 
the automated reminder prompts to complete the study assessments also 
potentially reduce missing data and the number of participants needed to 
˜nd the hypothesized effect. The value of technology in streamlining the 
RCT process and performing remote RCTs has extended beyond those do
-ing mobile interventions. P˜zer™s REMOTE trial uses technology to evaluate 
medication for overactive bladder disorder without requiring the patient 
to visit a health clinic (Pharmacy Times, 2009). As a result, not only will 
P˜zer be able to perform this RCT faster and at less cost, but also it will 
be able to include patients who would otherwise not be able to participate. 
By leveraging the capabilities of mobile technologies to streamline 
RCTs and by selecting the appropriate control condition and outcomes 
for comparison, RCTs can be conducted on mHealth interventions. RCTs, 
however, are not the only methodŠor even the most appropriate method 
in some casesŠfor evaluating mHealth interventions. The remainder of this 
paper discusses alternative methodologies that can be used to evaluate the 
development and dissemination of an mHealth intervention. 
Evaluating While Developing mHealth InterventionsEvaluation During DevelopmentThe empirical evaluation of mobile health interventions should be inte
-grated throughout the development process. The initial design and content 
should be based on theory and on prior empirical literature on the effective-ness of various interventions for the target problem (Riley et al., 2011). Be
-cause mobile technologies can deliver some intervention components better 
than others, an in-depth understanding of the mechanisms or components 
of an intervention and their relative contribution to intervention effective-ness is critical to mobile health intervention development. In addition to 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
its theoretical and empirical underpinnings, the core of the software de-velopment process is iterative and incremental development (Larman and 
Basili, 2003), which utilizes qualitative methodologies to obtain user input 
throughout the development process. A range of qualitative methods, both 
from health informatics (Borycki et al., 2011) and from violence research 
(e.g., Testa et al., 2011), can be used to elicit end-user perspectives on the 
usability and functionality of various design features during the develop-ment process. 
Prototype EvaluationsAs prototypes or components of the mHealth intervention are devel-oped and tested (e.g., debugged), a number of research methodologies are 
available to evaluate ef˜cacy prior to any full-scale RCT. These prelimi
-nary evaluations are particularly important for newly developed mHealth 
interventions in order to insure that the interventions have been optimized 
before subjecting them to an RCT. Although a single-arm pre-post pilot 
trial with a small sample is commonly used to determine if the mHealth 
intervention produces a signi˜cant change and to test the procedures for a 
subsequent RCT, this design may not provide the ˚exibility needed to test 
and further optimize the intervention before subjecting it to an RCT.
N-of-1 designs Instead of testing a group of participants pre- and post-trial, detailed testing of individuals longitudinally throughout the interven-tion period (AB) provides the development team with important information 
on how the intervention is used by each user and the effect on the target 
problem during the intervention. By staggering these N-of-1 trials, mHealth 
developers can detect potential improvements after a few users have been 
evaluated, modify the program, and then test the new version on the next 
N-of-1 users. (See Lillie et al., 2011, for a review of N-of-1 trials in person
-alized medicine and utilizing wireless and mobile devices for N-of-1 trials.)To increase the internal validity of these N-of-1 studies, reversal and 
interrupted time series designs can be considered. When the effects of the 
intervention are expected to quickly dissipate once the intervention is with-drawn, a reversal design (ABA) can be considered. Although the improve
-ment in the target behavior from baseline (A) to intervention (B) can be 
the result of a number of confounders, many of these confounders can be 
eliminated from consideration if the individual returns to baseline levels of 
the target behavior after the intervention has been withdrawn (A). 
If the intervention is expected to have an enduring effect after the inter
-vention is withdrawn (or if the intervention continues for as long as the user 
wants to use it), then an interrupted time series design can be considered 
(Biglan et al., 2000). This design is essentially an AB design, but the baseline 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 77values are used to predict future values of the outcome variable. If after the 
intervention is introduced, the values for the target problem exceed what 
would have been predicted from baseline, then it is reasonable to conclude 
that the intervention produced this effect. Of course, extraneous variable 
outside of the researcher™s control (e.g., a signi˜cant life event) could also 
have produced this effect, but such confounders can be minimized by stag-gering the initiation of the intervention across multiple users. If the im-provement is seen for each user following interventions that are initiated at 
different times for different individuals, then the causal inference is stronger. 
N-of-1 designs were commonly used in early behavioral intervention 
research and are still used regularly in many applied behavior analysis set-tings (e.g., developmental disabilities). The challenge with these designs is 
the frequent outcome assessments required to establish a stable baseline and 
to determine if the intervention affects the subsequent assessments. Mobile 
health interventions, however, are uniquely suited to generate the frequent 
longitudinal assessments needed to conduct these various N-of-1 designs. 
For example, an mHealth intervention is likely to have some speci˜ed 
baseline period (e.g., 7 days) and can be designed to continue the baseline 
period until a stable baseline has been achieved. The mHealth intervention 
can then introduce the intervention and continue frequent assessments and 
fully automate these N-of-1 designs so that every user of the mHealth in-tervention also contributes ef˜cacy data.
Intervention optimization designs Even with a solid empirical basis, the 
development of mobile health interventions still involves guesswork. Which 
components should get a higher or lower dose in the mHealth intervention? 
Which modality would be best for delivering a speci˜c intervention com-ponent? Should all of the intervention components be delivered simultane-ously or in some pre-speci˜ed order? To address these questions, there are 
a number of intervention optimization design issues to consider. For N-of-1 
designs, systems modeling, such as control systems engineering modeling, 
can be used to test the model (Rivera et al., 2007). For example, if the inter-vention model indicates that an intervention to identify potential violence 
or victimization will result in the avoidance of these situations and thereby 
reduce violence, the process of this change can be assessed and modeled. 
The intervention can then be revised based on how well the model ˜ts. 
Group-level randomized optimization designs include factorial, frac-tional factorial, and sequential multiple assignment randomized trials 
(SMARTs) (Collins et al., 2007). Fractional factorial designs mix and match 
the various intervention components and modes of delivery that need to 
be evaluated and determine which components in which combination pro
-duce the largest effect. SMART designs are similar in analysis but isolate 
the sequence of the components according to various considerations. For 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
example, if a user responds well to the ˜rst phase of the intervention, what 
should be the next phase? If the user responds poorly, should the ˜rst phase 
be repeated or should the user move on to a different phase of treatment, 
and, if so, which one? These optimization designs take time and resources 
to conduct, but they are important to consider before subjecting an inter-vention to a standard two-arm RCT, especially if considerable questions 
about how best to deliver the various components of the intervention 
remain. 
Evaluating While DisseminatingAlthough an RCT to establish the ef˜cacy of an mHealth intervention 
in a controlled study is an important step to take before disseminating and 
implementing the intervention, it is not always feasible to conduct an RCT. 
There may, for example, be inadequate resources to conduct an RCT, or the 
mHealth intervention may have been developed for a pressing public health 
need and the intervention needs to be deployed immediately. The organiza
-tion employing the mHealth intervention may not want a random selection 
of those it serves to not receive the intervention. In these cases, the mHealth 
intervention should, at the very least, have been developed empirically and 
evaluated on some small scale (e.g., pilot or N-of-1) before implementation. There are, however, a number of designs that can be employed to evaluate 
the intervention while it is being disseminated and implemented. Many of 
these designs have been used in community-based interventions in which it 
is impractical to randomize communities to an intervention. 
The same interrupted time series design described above for single 
subject users can be used for groups. The community or setting in which 
the intervention is being implemented is evaluated recurrently to obtain a 
stable baseline. This stable baseline can come from routinely collected pub-lic health data, but it can also be generated via the mHealth intervention 
itself by incorporating a baseline assessment prior to intervention initiation. Once the baseline is established, the intervention can be implemented with 
continued assessment to determine if the intervention is associated with a 
signi˜cant change in the outcome variable. 
For example, if a community-based youth violence prevention program 
(e.g., Vivolo et al., 2011) incorporated a mobile or wireless intervention 
component, then the addition of this component could be evaluated in a 
single community by monitoring the relevant outcomes over time before 
and after the addition of the mobile or wireless component. An illustra-tion of an interrupted time series design applied to a technological solu-tion (radio-frequency identi˜cation, or RFID) for improving work˚ow and 
reducing hospital service wait times is shown in Figure 6-5. By tracking 
wait times for weeks before and after the implementation of the RFID 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 79system, Kim and colleagues (2010) were able to show that wait times were 
signi˜cantly reduced. Greater con˜dence in the causal inference from this 
design can obtained by using a matched control (e.g., a health service that 
did not receive the intervention, as shown in Figure 6-5), by staggering the 
intervention across communities, or by applying propensity-score weight-ings (Linden and Adams, 2011). Given that an RCT is often not feasible 
for community, hospital, or school-based interventions, the interrupted time 
series design provides a quasi-experimental alternative that requires only 
one (or slightly more than one) community for evaluation. 
The stepped-wedge design rolls out the intervention in a staggered or 
sequential manner to individuals or clusters of individuals over a number of assessment periods (see Figure 6-6, adapted from Brown and Lilford, 2006, 
for a graphical representation of this design). This design is particularly ap-propriate if there are well de˜ned cohorts (i.e., communities), all of whom 
should receive the intervention for ethical reasons, and especially if there 
are insuf˜cient resources to introduce the intervention to all of the groups at 
once. The groups are de˜ned a priori and randomized as to when they will 
Figure 6-5R02165uneditable bitmapped imageaxis labels retypedMean Waiting Time (minutes)WeeksFIGURE 6-5 Interrupted time series example.SOURCE: Kim et al., 2010.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
receive the intervention. Compared to interrupted time series, the stepped-
wedge design typically requires less frequent assessments (i.e., one for each 
new rollout) but more cohorts (e.g., communities, schools, or hospitals). 
To see how the stepped-wedge design might be applied to mobile ap
-plications to prevent violence, consider a mobile intervention developed to 
reduce youth violence in schools. The schools receiving the intervention 
collect monthly data on violent behavior throughout the school year. The 
schools are randomly assigned to the order of intervention initiation. After 
a baseline month, the ˜rst randomly selected school receives the interven-tion and continues to use it throughout the school year. In each subsequent 
month the intervention is rolled out in the next randomly selected school 
until all of the schools have received the intervention, and violent behavior 
within and between schools can then be compared. In contrast to an RCT, 
every school eventually receives the intervention. The stepped-wedge design 
also makes better use of staff to roll out the intervention because the initial 
orientation, training, and deployment are performed at a different school 
each month instead of simultaneously. Newer technologies that have not 
been fully ˜eld-tested are often rolled out sequentially to detect problems 
before fully deploying, which ˜ts a stepped-wedge model well. (See Handley 
et al., 2011, for a more detailed description of the stepped-wedge design.) 
Figure 6-6R02165editable vectors grabbed from original source54321123456Shaded cells represent intervention periodsBlank cells represent control periodsEach cell represents a data collection pointTime periodsParticipants/ClustersFIGURE 6-6 Stepped-wedge design.SOURCE: Brown and Lilford, 2006.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 81The regression discontinuity design assigns participants to an interven-tion based on a cutoff variable and then analyzes the change in slope or 
intercept at the cutoff between those receiving and those not receiving the 
intervention. The design is often used when only those deemed more in need 
or at risk are provided the intervention. For example, if only those at risk 
for dating violence are referred to receive a mobile application to change 
dating violence attitudes, the intervention can be evaluated by comparing 
dating violence attitudes of those referred with the attitudes of those not 
referred by analyzing differences in the prediction of dating violence at-titudes from the risk variable used as the cutoff for referral. It is critical in 
the regression discontinuity design, however, that the cutoff criteria remain 
unchanged. Any variation in referral cutoff based on the risk score will 
introduce bias. Performed rigorously, the regression discontinuity design 
produces results similar to those of an RCT (Linden and Adams, 2011; 
Shadish et al., 2011). Regression discontinuity is preferable to an RCT 
when the referring agency wants all of those referred, not just those ran-domly assigned to the treatment group, to receive the intervention. 
These examples of evaluating interventions during dissemination clearly 
show that dissemination should not represent the end of the research evalu-ation process. These methodologies do allow for evaluation during dis-semination, and often these designs are more externally valid than RCTs 
because the intervention is being evaluated in actual users and, if well de-signed, the internal validity of these designs is comparable to RCTs (Shadish 
et al., 2011). The frequent longitudinal assessments often integrated into 
mHealth interventions can be leveraged to perform automated evaluations 
of the intervention while it is being disseminated and implemented using 
these designs. 
ConclusionInterventions delivered via mobile technologies (mHealth) have many 
potential advantages over traditional interventions. The mobile and wireless 
infrastructure already exists, so the costs of intervention delivery are greatly reduced. mHealth and other computerized interventions are completely 
standardized (i.e., they never deviate from the intervention protocol). They 
can be tailored and adapted over time to the user™s needs. mHealth interven
-tions can be more engaging, especially for younger users, because of their 
graphics and gaming modalities. There are no time or space constraints: 
mHealth interventions can be delivered at any time or any place. mHealth 
interventions are fully scalable, which greatly improves their reach when 
compared with traditional intervention delivery. The ability for frequent 
and real-time monitoring provides both a base for research and program 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
evaluation as well as for interventions that can adapt to ongoing changes 
in the users™ responses. 
All of these advantages, however, are more promise than proven. Public 
health has a long history of assuming that new technologies will improve 
public health. The Health Belief Model was developed in response to the 
failure of a new technology, mobile tuberculosis screenings in the 1950s, 
to substantially increase these screenings (Rosenstock, 1974). The mobile 
delivery of violence prevention interventionsŠand, indeed, of all public 
health interventionsŠrequires rigorous evaluation. Although RCTs are the 
standard by which most of these interventions are judged, numerous other 
research designs can be used throughout the development and dissemina-tion of mHealth interventions. 
REFERENCESBarry, A. 2001. 
Political machines: Governing a technological society. New York: Athlone 
Press.Biglan, A., D. Ary, and A. C. Wagenaar. 2000. The value of interrupted time-series experiments 
for community intervention research. Prevention Science 1(1):31Œ49.Bogost, I. 2010. Persuasive games. The expressive power of videogames. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.Borycki, E. M., M. Househ, A. W. Kushniruk, and C. Kuziemsky. 2011. Use of qualitative 
methods across the software development lifecycle in health informatics. Studies in 
Health Technology Information
 164:293Œ297.Bell Bajao! n.d. Breakthrough. My cause. www.bellbajao.org/my-cause/ (accessed October 
1, 2012).
Brown, C. A., and R. J. Lilford. 2006. The stepped wedge trial design: A systematic review. 
BMC Medical Research Methodology 6:54.Buber, M. 1923. 
I and thou
, translated by Walter Kaufman in 1996
. New York: Touchstone.
CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2008. The public health approach to 
violence prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/overview/publichealth
 approach.html (accessed March 7, 2012). 
Chunara, R., J. R. Andrews, and J. S. Brownstein. 2012. Social and news media enable estima-tion of epidemiological patterns early in the 2010 Haitian cholera outbreak. American 
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
 86(1):39Œ45.Clifford, S. 2009. Online, ﬁa reason to keep on going.ﬂ New York Times,
 June 2. www.
nytimes.com/2009/06/02/health/02face.html (accessed October 1, 2011).
Collins, L. M., S. A. Murphy, and V. Strecher. 2007. The Multiphase Optimization Strategy 
(MOST) and the Sequential Multiple Assignment Randomized Trial (
SMART
): New 
methods for more potent eHealth interventions. American Journal of Preventive Medicine 32(Suppl 5):S112ŒS118.Elliott, A. 2010. YouTube facts: 10 things you may not have known. 
Mashable Business, 
February 19. www.mashable.com/2011/02/19/youtube-facts/ (accessed October 1, 2011).
Evans, L. 2011. Mapping murder throughout the world. 
The Guardian. October 10, 2011.
Foege, W. H. 2010. 
House on ˜re: The ˜ght to eradicate smallpox. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.Fogg. 2002. Persuasive technology: Using computers to change what we think and do. Elsevier. 
http://public.eblib.com/EBLPublic/PublicView.do?ptiID=294303 (accessed April 2, 2012).
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 83Friedman, E. 2008. Florida teen live-streams his suicide online. ABCNews, November 21. 
www.abcnews.go.com/Technology/MindMoodNews/story?id=6306126 (accessed Octo
-ber 1, 2011).Garrity, B. 2011. Social media join toolkit for hunters of disease. 
New York Times
, June 13. 
Gencer, M., and J. Ranck. 2011
. Advancing the dialogue on mobile ˜nance and mobile health. Country Case Studies. mHealth Alliance, Washington, DC. http://www.slideshare.net/
mpayconnect/mpay-connect-mhealth-m˜nance-country-studies-dec-2011 (accessed Feb-ruary 20, 2012).
Grameen Foundation. n.d. Mobile livelihoods. www.grameenfoundation.org/what-we-do/
mobile-phone-solutions/livelihoods (accessed October 1, 2011).
Grove, J. 2010. Social networking usage surges globally. 
Mashable Business, March 19. www.
mashable.com/2010/03/19/global-social-media-usage/ (accessed October 1, 2011).Handley, M. A., D. Schillinger, and S. Shiboski. 2011. Quasi-experimental designs in practice-
based research settings: Design and implementation considerations. 
Journal of American 
Board of Family Medicine
 24(5):589Œ596.Harvard Humanitarian Initiative. 2011. Disaster relief 2.0: The future of information sharing 
in humanitarian emergencies. Washington, DC: UN Foundation and Vodafone Technol
-ogy Partnership.Heath, T. 2010. U.S. Cellphone users donate $22 million to Haiti earthquake relief via 
text. Washington Post
, January 18. www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/
article/2010/01/18/AR2010011803792.html (accessed April 2, 2012).Heatwole, A. 2010. Harassmap: Tracking sexual harassment in Egypt with SMS.
 http://mobileactive.org/harassmap-plan-track-sexual-harassment-egypt (accessed October 1, 
2011).Hertz, M. F., and C. David-Ferdon. 2008. 
Electronic media and youth violence: A CDC is-sue brief for educators and caregivers. Atlanta, GA: Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). n.d. HHS text4health projects: Open 
government at HHS. www.hhs.gov/open/initiatives/mhealth/projects.html (accessed Oc
-tober 1, 2011).
Higgins, J. P. T. 2011. 
Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions
, Ver
-sion 5.1.0 (updated March 2011). Cochrane Collaboration. www.cochrane.org/training/
cochrane-handbook (accessed April 2, 2012).InfoDev. 2011. 
Student from Trinidad wins m2work™s ˜rst spot prize
. www.infodev.org/en/
Article.798.html (accessed on February 20, 2012).
Ioannidis, J. P. 1998. Effect of the statistical signi˜cance of results on the time to completion 
and publication of randomized ef˜cacy trials. Journal of American Medical Association 279(4):281Œ286.IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2011. Finding what works in health care: Standards for system-atic reviews
. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
ITU (International Telecommunications Union). 2011.
 Key global telecom indicators for 
the telecommunications service sector. www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/at_glance/Key
 Telecom.html (accessed February 20, 2012).
Jidenma, N. 2011. Facebook™s explosive growth in Africa. The next web.
 http://thenextweb.com/africa/2011/05/02/facebooks-explosive-growth-in-africa/ (accessed February 20, 
2012).Joelving, F. 2009. Data mining records could predict domestic violence. 
Wired Science
, September. www.wired.com/wiredscience/2009/09/domestic-abuse-prediction/ (accessed 
February 20, 2012).Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Kim, J. Y., H. J. Lee, N. S. Byeon, H. C. Kim, K. S. Ha, and C. Y. Chung. 2010. Development 
and impact of radio-frequency identi˜cation-based work˚ow management in health 
promotion center: Using interrupted time-series analysis. IEEE Transactions Information 
Technology in Biomedicine
 14(4):935Œ940.Larman, C., and V. R. Basili. 2003. Iterative and incremental development: A brief history. 
Computer 36(6):2Œ11.Lillie, E. O., B. Patay, J. Diamant, B. Issell, E. J. Topol, and N. J. Schork. 2011. The N-of-1 
clinical trial: The ultimate strategy for individualizing medicine? Personalized Medicine 8(2):161Œ173.Linden, A., and J. L. Adams. 2011. Applying a propensity score-based weighting model to in-terrupted time series data: Improving causal inference in programme evaluation. Journal 
of Evaluation in Clinical Practice
 17(6):1231Œ1238.Marshall, J., and Nature. 2012. Online gamers achieve ˜rst crowd-sourced redesign of protein. 
Scienti˜c American, January 22. www.scienti˜camerican.com/article.cfm?id=victory-for-
crowdsourced-biomolecule2 (accessed February 20, 2012).
Mechael, P., H. Batavia, N. Kaonga, S. Searle, A. Kwan, A. Goldberger, L. Fu, and J. Ossman. 
2010. Barriers and gaps affecting mHealth in low and middle income countries. Wash
-ington, DC: mHealth Alliance and Earth Institute.
Meier, P. 2010. Launching peacetxt. 
The Ushahidi Blog, October 29. http://blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2010/10/29/peacetxt (accessed October 1, 2011).
Mercy, J. A., A. Butchart, M. L. Rosenberg, L. Dahlberg, and A. Harvey. 2008. Preventing 
violence in developing countries: A framework for action. International Journal of Injury 
Control and Safety Promotion
 15(4):197Œ208.National Alliance on Mental Health. 2010. Election 2010: Will candidates address the facts? 
Check out state suicide rates and new Obama administration numbers; unemployed 
persons and veterans are especially at risk. Washington, DC: National Alliance on Mental 
Illness.National Center for Health Statistics. n.d. Facts and ˜gures. www.afsp.org/index.
cfm?fuseaction=home.viewpage (accessed October 1, 2011).
National Center on Domestic and Sexual Violence. n.d. 
Sexual assault statistics. http://www.
ncdsv.org/images/sexualassaultstatistics.pdf (accessed October 1, 2011).
New Tactics in Human Rights. n.d. 
Wk 214 mobile phones: Communicating for action.
 www.
newtactics.org/wk214 (accessed October 1, 2011).
Ngcobo, N. 2010. Mobile lovelife goes global. 
Daily Sun
. November 1. www.lovelife.org.za/
press/media/article.php?uid=2982 (accessed October 1, 2011).Nyirubugara, O. 2010. Unmasking child abuse with mobile phones. Haarlem, The Nether-lands: Voices of Africa Media Foundation.
Papillon, A. n.d. Developing a text messaging based community domestic violence response 
system using FrontlineSMS. www.frontlinesms.com/_PREV/user-resources/download/
Building-Community-Based-SMS-System-Using-FrontlineSMS.pdf (accessed October 1, 
2011).Pew Internet and American Life Project. 2010. Americans and their cell phones. www.pewin
-ternet.org/~/media//Files/Reports/2011/Cell%20Phones%202011.pdf (accessed February 
6, 2012).
Pharmacy Times. 2009. 
P˜zer announces ﬁvirtualﬂ clinical trial pilot in US
. November 6. 
www.pharmatimes.com/article/11-06-09/P˜zer_announces_virtual_clinical_trial_pilot_
in_US.aspx (accessed February 6, 2012).
Ranck, J. 2011a. 
Health information and health care: The role of technology in unlocking 
data and wellnessŠdiscussion paper. Washington, DC: United Nations Foundation and 
Vodafone Foundation Technology Partnership.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FOUNDATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 85Ranck, J. 2011b. 
The Internet of things: Creating tomorrow™s healthcare. 
http://pro.gigaom.com/2011/11/the-internet-of-things-creating-tomorrows-health-care/ (accessed February 
20, 2012).Repetti, R. L., S. E. Taylor, and T. E. Seeman. 2002. Risky families: Family social environments 
and the mental and physical health of offspring. Psychological Bulletin 128(2):330Œ366.Rheingold, H. 2003. Smart mobs: The next social revolution
. Cambridge, MA: Basic Books.Riley, W. T. 2011. 
Evaluation of mHealth. Presentation at Workshop on Communications and 
Technology for Violence Prevention, Institute of Medicine, Washington, DC. December 9. 
Riley, W. T., D. E. Rivera, A. A. Atienza, W. Nilsen, S. M. Allison, and R. Mermelstein. 2011. 
Health behavior models in the age of mobile interventions: Are our theories up to the 
task? Translational Behavioral Medicine
 1(1):53Œ71.Rivera, D. E., M. D. Pew, and L. M. Collins. 2007. Using engineering control principles to in
-form the design of adaptive interventions: A conceptual introduction. Drug and Alcohol 
Dependency 88(Suppl 2):S31ŒS40.
Rodgers, A., T. Corbett, D. Bramley, T. Riddell, M. Wills, R. B. Lin, and M. Jones. 2005. Do 
u smoke after txt? Results of a randomised trial of smoking cessation using mobile phone 
text messaging. 
Tobacco Control
 14(4):255Œ261.Rosenberg, M. L., A. Butchart, J. Mercy, V. Narasimhan, H. Waters, and M. Marshall. 2006. 
Interpersonal violence. In Disease control priorities in developing countries (2nd ed.), 
edited by D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. 
Evans, J. Prabhat, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove. Washington, DC: Oxford University Press 
and the World Bank.
Rosenberg, M. L., E. S. Hayes, M. H. McIntyre, and N. Neill. 2010. Real collaboration: What 
it takes for global health to succeed
. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Rosenstock, I. M. 1974. Historical orgins of the health belief model. Health Education Mono-graphs 2:328Œ335.Shadish, W. R., R. Galindo, V. C. Wong, P. M. Steiner, and T. D. Cook. 2011. A randomized 
experiment comparing random and cutoff-based assignment. Psychological Methods 16(2):179Œ191.Testa, M., J. A. Livingston, and C. VanZile-Tamsen. 2011. Advancing the study of violence 
against women using mixed methods: Integrating qualitative methods into a quantitative 
research program. Violence Against Women
 17(2):236Œ250.Trudeau, M. 2010. Mental health apps: Like a ﬁtherapist in your pocket.ﬂ 
National Public 
Radio, May 24. www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=127081326 (accessed 
October 1, 2011).
United Nations. 2010. 
World population aging 2009. 
New York: United Nations, Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. http://www.un.org/esa/population/
publications/WPA2009/WPA2009-report.pdf.
Ushahidi. 2011. Mapping the Egypt protests and Libya crisis. 
The Ushahidi Blog, April 7. 
www.blog.ushahidi.com/index.php/2011/04/07/mapping-egypt-and-libya/ (accessed Oc
-tober 1, 2011).
USPSTF (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force). 2010. 
The guide to clinical preventive services 
2010-2011: Recommendations of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
. No. 10-05145. 
Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Verclas, K. 2007. 
Human traf˜cking hotline: Mobile phones in the ˜ght against slavery.
 http://mobileactive.org/human-traf˜cking-hotlin (accessed October 1, 2012).
Vital Wave Consulting. n.d. 
Women & mobile: A global opportunity: A study on the mobile 
phone gender gap in low- and middle-income countries.
 Cherie Blair Foundation.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Vivolo, A. M., J. L. Matjasko, and G. M. Massetti. 2011. Mobilizing communities and 
building capacity for youth violence prevention: The National Academic Centers of 
Excellence for Youth Violence Prevention. 
American Journal of Community Psychology 48(1Œ2):141Œ145.Weinberger, D. 2012. 
Too big to know: Rethinking knowledge now that the facts aren™t the 
facts, experts are everywhere, and the smartest person in the room is the room. New 
York: Basic Books.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2002. 
World report on violence and health.
 Geneva: 
WHO.WHO. 2008. Preventing violence and reducing its impact: How developing agencies can help. http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2008/9789241596589_eng.pdf (accessed February 
28, 2012).WHO. 2010. Violence prevention: The evidence.
 http://www.who.int/violenceprevention/pub
-lications/en/index.html (accessed February 28, 2012).
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ƒ

Although the use of information and communications technology 
(ICT) in violence prevention is fairly new, some interventions have 
already capitalized on this new avenue with promising results. This 
chapter includes papers from presenters at the workshop who explored this 
intersection and its potential. 
The ˜rst paper presents data from an intervention designed to assess 
the impact of adding a mobile phone component to an existing intervention 
that teaches parenting skills. The paper describes the intervention design 
and evaluation and results of the study. 
The second paper is a case study in using video and community educa-tion to raise awareness and reduce the prevalence of domestic violence, as 
part of the Bell Bajao! campaign in India. The case study examines the im-pact of the campaign and explores the potential for expanding the program.In the third, fourth, and ˜fth papers, the authors describe the appli-cability of ICTs to dating violence, elder abuse, and suicide prevention, 
respectively. These authors, who had previously not collaborated before, 
worked together before the workshop to frame breakout discussions on day 
2 of the workshop. Their papers explore the needs and challenges of each 
type of violence prevention, the use (or potential use) of ICTs, and any ad
-ditional gaps or questions that needed to be addressed. 
87Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
USING MOBILE PHONES TO ENHANCE PARENT 
ENGAGEMENT IN A HOME VISITING INTERVENTION 
TO PREVENT CHILD MALTREATMENT
Judith J. Carta, Ph.D., Kathryn Bigelow, Ph.D.
 University of Kansas  Jennifer Burke Lefever, Ph.D., John Borkowski, Ph.D.
 Notre Dame University
A recent worldwide study of child maltreatment reported that from 80 
to 98 percent of children suffer physical punishment in their homes, with 
a third or more experiencing severe physical punishment from the use of 
implements. In the United States, approximately 800,000 cases of child 
maltreatment are reported each year. Of these cases, child neglect remains 
the largest single category. A disproportionate number of cases of abuse 
and neglect occur with mothers who have their own personal histories of 
maltreatment. As a result, an intergenerational pattern of inappropriate and 
destructive pattern is continued. As the cycle passes from one generation 
to the next, societyŠas well as the families directly involvedŠbear enor-mous costs, including mounting mental health concerns, increased medical 
expenses, greater needs for public assistance, and excessive burdens on the 
criminal justice system.
In the United States and other countries, a growing number of home-visiting parenting programs have shown positive results in reducing child 
maltreatment and enhancing parenting skills in high-risk populations (Olds 
et al., 2002; Barlow, 2006). However, studies of home-visiting programs 
have not found uniformly positive outcomes for parents and children. 
Rather, meta-analyses of these studies have produced mixed results (Layzer 
et al., 2001; Sweet and Appelbaum, 2004; Astuto and Allen, 2009). One 
barrier to achieving improved outcomes is parent participation (McCurdy 
and Daro, 2001). Program retention rates vary widely, and, as the pre
-scribed duration of the programs increases, so do the programs™ rates of at-trition for familiesŠespecially for the highest-risk families (McCurdy et al., 
2003). When families fail to show up for their home visit or drop out of in-terventions early, even the most powerful interventions will have diminished 
effects. A second determinant of effectiveness is parent engagementŠthe 
extent to which parents carry out the behavioral or affective components 
of the intervention program, such as keeping up with learning activities be-tween visits and seeking more information (Berlin et al., 1998; Korfmacher 
et al., 2008). Programs that are able to maintain parents™ participation and 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 89keep them involved and actively engaged are thus more likely to achieve the 
desired results of improved parenting outcomes (Gomby, 2005).
A recently developed innovation for preventing attrition and promot-ing engagement in a variety of health promotion interventions is the use 
of mobile phones to increase contact with patients, provide reminders of 
patient behaviors in the health protocol, and send messages that encour-age continued involvement. For example, researchers have recently tested 
the effectiveness of using mobile phones to increase HIV-positive patients™ 
adherence to antiretroviral medication therapies (Villanueva, 2007) and to 
maintain smokers™ involvement in smoking cessation programs (Lazev et 
al., 2004). 
The CPAT Program
In a recently completed project, we sought to examine whether enhanc
-ing an evidence-based parenting intervention, Planned Activities Training 
(PAT), by using mobile phones for increasing contact between home visits 
would increase parents™ engagement in the intervention, decrease their attri-tion, and result in greater improvements in their parenting skills compared 
to parents who received the parenting intervention without mobile phone 
enhancements. 
PAT is one component of Project SafeCare, an approach to prevent
-ing child maltreatment that has been shown to improve positive parenting 
practices and parentŒchild interactions and to reduce challenging child 
behaviors (Silovsky et al., 2011). The current project employs a three-group experimental design with random assignment of parents to one of 
three groups: Planned Activities Training as usual (PAT), cellular phoneŒ
enhanced PAT (CPAT), or a waitlist control group (WLC).
For both PAT and CPAT groups, family coaches teach parents posi
-tive ways to interact with their children and to engage in appropriate 
behavioral expectations for common family activities and routines. Across 
approximately ˜ve sessions that take place in home visits, coaches help 
parents learn how to use PAT strategies in a play situation and in at least 
two daily routines that parents self-select as ones that have been dif˜cult or 
challenging. Within the experimental design, parents assigned to the PAT 
or CPAT intervention groups were assessed prior to the intervention, as 
well as at 1-, 6-, and 12-month post-intervention time points. The control 
group participants completed assessments at time points similar to those 
of the intervention groups. Several outcomes were examined to measure 
intervention effects, including child maltreatment risk and occurrences, 
parent behaviors, and child behaviors. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Results thus far show the following:
˜˚
Parents in the CPAT group were more likely to complete the inter
-vention, with 79 percent of the CPAT and 66 percent of PAT par
-ents ˜nishing [
˛2 (1, n = 255) = 5.42, 
p = .02, 
˝ = .15].
˜˚
Parents in the CPAT group were rated as being more highly en
-gaged during the home visits (M = 14.97, SD = 2.21) than parents 
in the PAT group [
M = 14.16, SD = 2.72; F(1, 220) = 5.69; p = .02, 
d = .32]. 
˜˚
Parents in the CPAT group were just as likely to learn new posi
-tive parenting practices as those in the PAT group, with parents 
in both groups demonstrating more signi˜cant improvements in 
positive parenting practices than those in the control group. These 
improved parenting skills were still apparent even 6 months after 
the training ended. 
˜˚
Improved child behavior was apparent for children whose parents 
had received either PAT or CPAT intervention compared with chil
-dren whose parents were in the control group when behaviors such 
as their responsiveness to their parent or their general affect were 
measured 6 months following the end of parent training. 
ConclusionsOne of the major challenges in preventing child maltreatment is the 
fact that across available sets of studies, only 30 to 80 percent of families 
who are at risk for child maltreatment actually complete prevention pro-grams. Our ˜nding that parents were signi˜cantly more likely to stay in 
parenting programs enhanced with cellular phone technology may point 
to a promising approach to keeping families involved in interventions that 
help them learn new approaches to interacting with their children, and thus 
lead to much larger reductions in overall rates of child neglect. Moreover, 
this approach using mobile phones can be useful for other home visiting 
programs with high-risk groups, such as those that seek to improve health 
outcomes of women who are pregnant or mothers of young infants. Even 
more broadly, mobile phones can be applied to any intervention in which 
continuous support from a coach or counselor is important, such as suicide 
prevention, bullying and youth violence prevention, prevention of intimate 
partner violence, and prevention of elder abuse. We look forward to apply
-ing this type of support for these and other issues and to using other more 
recent technological innovations to enhance the effectiveness of violence 
prevention efforts. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 91BELL BAJAO!
 AS A CASE STUDY
1Jael Silliman, Ph.D.
 BreakthroughOverviewBell Bajao! is a cultural, organizing, and media campaign strategy that 
calls on men and boys to join efforts to end violence against women. As 
such, it provides an object lesson in the principles, procedures, and pro-cesses that Breakthrough2 uses to achieve its objectives. Breakthrough has 
been conducting Bell Bajao! in India since 2008, and it announced in late 
2010 that the campaign would become global in scope starting in 2011. 
The campaign™s media component was its most prominent and vis
-ible featureŠa series of television, radio, and print ads created pro bono 
by Ogilvy & Mather (O&M), which were disseminated widely through a 
partnership with the Indian Ministry of Women and Child Development. 
Bollywood actor Boman Irani was the campaign™s ˜rst male ambassador. 
The powerful television advertisements show a man or a boy who hears a 
woman being beaten behind the closed door of her home. After a moment 
of deliberation, the man or boy then rings the doorbell of the woman™s 
home. When the abuser comes to the door, the man or boy asks to borrow 
a cup of milk (in one advertisement) or use the phone or to retrieve a lost 
cricket ball (in others). In watching advertisements it is clear that the bell 
ringer is making the request as a pretext: He heard violence committed 
against the woman, and he is putting the abuser on notice that the violence 
will not be tolerated. 
The media campaign was accompanied by a strong community mo-bilization initiative in the Indian states of Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh, 
led by Breakthrough™s Rights Advocates Program (RAP). The mobilization 
initiative involved extensive leadership training, mass outreach, and face-to-face educational events. In 2010 Breakthrough released a series of three 
new TV advertisements asking if people had ﬁrung the bellﬂ and taken 
action against domestic violence. To date the campaign has reached more 
than 130 million people in India and has won multiple awards, including 
1  This paper is an excerpt from the report Breakthrough™s
 Bell Bajao!: A Campaign to 
Bring Domestic Violence to a Halt
. The full report is available at http://www.breakthrough.
tv/ images/downloads/147/BellBajao_Insight.pdf.2  Breakthrough is a global human rights organization that uses the power of media, arts, 
pop culture, and community-based action to inspire people to take bold action for dignity, 
equality, and justice. Working out of centers in the United States and India, Breakthrough 
addresses critical global issues, including violence against women, HIV and sexuality, im
-migration, and racial justice.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
the prestigious Silver Lion at the 2010 Cannes International Advertising 
Festival. 
The Bell Bajao! campaign provides an excellent example of the Break-through methodology: 
˜˚
Bell Bajao! is Breakthrough™s most evolved and sustained campaign 
to date; it has had the greatest impact, scale, and the most compre-hensive set of partners. 
˜˚
Bell Bajao! integrates mass media with community mobilization 
tools and leadership development training. 
˜˚
Bell Bajao! incorporates lessons from Breakthrough™s preceding 
campaigns, What Kind of Man Are You? and Is This Justice?, 
as well as using new social media tools such as Facebook, Twit
-ter, YouTube, and blogging that it learned about from its U.S. 
programs. 
˜˚
Bell Bajao! has been thoroughly evaluated and monitored using 
state-of-the-art tools and techniques. 
˜˚
Bell Bajao!
 has demonstrated its ef˜cacy in furthering knowledge 
about domestic violence, changing attitudes and perceptions to-ward such violence at the individual and community levels, and 
bringing about behavior change that challenges violence against 
women and reduces stigma and discrimination toward women liv-ing with HIV/AIDS. 
At a time when Bell Bajao! is going global, this paper provides insight 
into how the campaign was conceived and rolled out as well as its scale 
and impact. 
Message Development
Conceptualizing and Framing the Message 
The ˜rst task for 
Bell Bajao!
 was to create a message, which is a rig
-orous and critical process. The goal of the campaign was to advance the 
current discussion and knowledge about violence against women while re-maining consistent with Breakthrough™s philosophy and mission. The mes
-sage also needed to respond to current political realities and opportunities, 
build on past learning, and draw from what has been learned from research 
into violence against women in India and globally. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 93Employing a Variety of Research Instruments and Findings to Direct Its 
Message 
Breakthrough retained the Centre for Media Studies (CMS), a media 
research organization, to conduct a baseline survey to determine the extent 
of the public™s knowledge about the Protection of Women Against Domestic 
Violence Act of 2005. It also asked CMS to research attitudes toward and 
responses to domestic violence among a cross-section of the public. The 
center™s ˜ndings showed that very few people take any action when they 
are aware of domestic violence occurring around them. The ˜ndings also 
showed that men and women were equally likely to take some action to 
stop domestic violence and that men typically take the lead to intervene in 
such situations. 
Breakthrough also studied the literature in the ˜elds of domestic vio-lence and violence against women that focused on the attitudes that deter 
people from acting to stop domestic violence. The research pointed to 
several prevailing social norms: Domestic violence is viewed as a private 
matter, people resist intervening because of a fear of retaliation, and people 
are unwilling to get involved in protracted family issues. 
The prominent ˜nding that men play a central role in intervening in 
situations of domestic violence led Breakthrough to undertake secondary 
research on programs that engaged men and boys in various parts of the 
world to stop violence. This dataset provided additional background infor
-mation that informed the message-development process. 
After this research process, Breakthrough concluded that a single, direct 
media message to stop domestic violence was required for its campaign. The 
message needed to be grounded in women™s rights, guided by research on 
the topic, and reinforcing of the political moment occasioned by the Indian 
government™s commitment to end domestic violence. Men and boys were 
identi˜ed as the critical targets for this campaign. 
Developing Media Components and Messages for Bell Bajao!
Once the leadership team agreed upon the message framework, Break-through located an appropriate partner, O&M, to deliver the message using 
multiple media techniques and instruments. 
Determining the Media Message 
O&M™s creative team suggested two campaign directions based on 
Breakthrough™s feedback: (1) direct actionŠ
Bell Bajao! and (2) unpacking 
masculinity. Breakthrough chose to move forward with the direct action 
concept. The message that O&M developed was ﬁRing the Bell: Can I Have 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Some Milk?ﬂ After considerable discussion, the team decided that implicit 
in the ads would be the idea that the ringing of the bell was an ﬁexcuseﬂ 
to intervene when domestic violence was occurring. The bell ringer, the 
domestic violence perpetrator, the woman, and the audience would all be 
ﬁin the knowﬂ about the bell-ringing being a pretext to stop violence. From 
this concept, a tagline emerged: ﬁBring domestic violence to a halt. Ring 
the bell.ﬂ 
Dissemination StrategyThe dissemination strategy for Bell Bajao! was determined after exam-ining media viewership as documented by Mindshare, a media-planning 
agency, and a baseline survey carried out by CMS. Using the opinion-
research datasets, Breakthrough determined the platforms and channels 
for the campaign. Breakthrough determined that Bell Bajao! should be 
broadcast on news channels, sports channels, and general entertainment 
channels as well as Doordarshan, the government-owned national televi
-sion network. 
Selection of Media Formats for Campaign 
In keeping with commercial best practices, Breakthrough used a range 
of media platforms to disseminate its message. This is based on the widely 
accepted belief that audiences are heterogeneous and access information 
from multiple platforms. Repetition through multiple channels reaf˜rms 
messages and places them ˜rmly in the minds of viewers. 
For Bell Bajao! Breakthrough decided to use a mix of traditional and 
new media tools for dissemination: television spots, radio and print ads, 
a robust online presence (including a campaign website and social media 
tools such as Facebook, Twitter, and blogs), and a retail strategy of mobile 
video vans to ensure face-to-face communication. 
Television proved to be by far the most effective and far-reaching dis
-semination tool for the campaign, reaching more than 130 million viewers 
through multiple channels during the ˜rst and second phases of the cam
-paign. Radio and print advertising were most effective in some areas, such 
as the city of Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh, but they did not achieve the wide 
reach and recall of television. The Bell Bajao! microsite engaged public 
audiences through its blog and social media tools.
33  The 
Bell Bajao! microsite received praise from media leaders such as IndiaSocial™s 
Casebook. Breakthrough is now exploring the expansion of the campaign into mobile 
platforms and user-generated materials. Because there are few precedents for these kinds 
of programs, Breakthrough is experimenting with an Internet and mobile solution that was 
piloted in Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, in November 2010. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 95Dissemination via video vans proved to be extremely effective. Vans 
carrying the campaign message were accompanied by staff and youth ad-vocates who engaged directly with individuals, enabling the public to ask 
questions about domestic violence and women™s rights. This strategy was 
especially effective in sustaining community engagement over a 2-year 
period. 
Bell Bajao! has been more ambitious than previous Breakthrough cam-paigns in using the blogosphere. To raise awareness and stimulate dis
-cussion, Breakthrough developed a domestic violenceŒthemed blog on its 
website. The blog is an interactive and dynamic virtual space where users 
leave comments and share their experiences. Bell Bajao! expanded its online 
presence in key social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter, where 
news and views of domestic violence and other women™s issues and causes 
are regularly posted. These social networking sites operated as discussion 
forums and as traf˜c generators for the campaign site and blog. 
Integrating Media and Community Mobilization to Roll Out 
Bell Bajao!
The two strategic approaches that Breakthrough uses in its workŠmedia and edutainment (entertainment designed to educate) development, 
and training activities for the community mobilizationŠoccur in tandem 
and often overlap with one another. In this way partner organizations are 
trained and ready to conduct community mobilization efforts to deepen the 
media message. At the same time media products are ˜nalized for rollout. 
With the partner organizations ready and the media products ˜nal
-ized, Breakthrough was poised to initiate the next set of activities: At the 
local level, in four districts in Karnataka and another four districts in Uttar 
Pradesh, a ﬁ360-degreeﬂ comprehensive multimedia campaign was initi-ated. At the national level, Breakthrough conducted a media launch. It also 
deployed video vans in the cities of Mumbai and Delhi. This combination 
of national and local initiatives is a critical component of the Bell Bajao! campaign. 
Activities at the District Level: Building a Sense of Ownership Among 
Partners 
Prior to the Bell Bajao! campaign launch, partners had to develop a 
sense of ownership of the campaign. In its campaigns Breakthrough builds 
campaign ownership by collaborating on launch activities, including pro
-viding its partners with a road map of the intervention strategies that they 
will jointly undertake. Campaign publications designed by BreakthroughŠbrochures, pamphlets, information booklets, and postersŠare shared with 
partners for review. Partner logos are incorporated in all publication mate
-rials, enhancing the partners™ sense of ownership and giving them greater 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
visibility in the campaign. For example, Breakthrough developed a CD with footage and voice-to-camera interviews with local opinion leaders, heads 
of collaborating organizations, artists, and local government of˜cials for 
screening in the larger community during the campaign. This CD provided 
local speci˜city as well as partner buy-in. 
Working with Government at National and District Levels for Campaign 
Rollout 
The Indian Ministry of Women and Child Development (MWCD) re
-leased the ˜rst phase of Bell Bajao! in 2008Œ2009 at the national level on all 
prime-time channels, including entertainment, news, and sports channels. 
Breakthrough optimized the national commitment of MWCD and collabo-rated with its district- and state-level of˜cials to demonstrate local govern-ment support to end violence and empower women. Breakthrough also 
networked with government of˜cials to involve them in campaign activities. 
Protection of˜cers lent legitimacy to Breakthrough™s human rights mes
-saging by their participation in trainings. Public and government of˜cials 
spoke at Breakthrough events and in public venues. Government of˜cials 
that took a public stand on violence against women during the campaign 
gave legitimacy to the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act 
(PWDVA) of 2005 and signi˜ed their willingness to implement it. 
Gearing Up the Video Van 
The video van is a mobile unit with audiovisual screenings on violence 
against women issues that was developed by the Breakthrough media team. 
Managed by selected rights advocates, the van carries video endorsements 
featuring local opinion leaders on campaign issues and interactive games 
and theater on the topic. The rights advocates, who accompany the van 
and lead most of the interactive sessions with the public, receive a small 
stipend and certi˜cate for their participation. Handouts and other public-ity materialsŠitems such as t-shirts, caps, and ˚ashlightsŠare dispensed 
from the van. 
Trained youth advocates accompany the video van and perform activi
-ties such as street theater, interactive games, and puppet theater in order 
to amplify campaign messages. Rights advocates conduct games to draw 
in crowds, serving as a prelude to engagement on issues of violence against 
women. Once a critical mass gathers, street theater is performed, Bell 
Bajao! videos are screened,4 and questions are ˜elded on violence against 
4  In Karnataka the video ads were transferred by Bluetooth technology to viewers™ mobile 
phones so that they could be watched and shared at viewer convenience.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 97women. The van is stationed at each site for approximately 1 hour, which 
includes time for setting up and winding down, allowing at least 35 minutes 
of substantive engagement on the campaign themes. 
Audience Reach of Video Van 
The van travels in each of the eight campaign districts of Uttar Pradesh 
and Karnataka from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. for 25 days. It is estimated that in 
2009 the video van reached 2.5 million people with the Bell Bajao! mes-sage, with an intended outreach by 2011 of 6 million people. The van 
will revisit the eight districts of Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh to reinforce 
Bell Bajao! messages with additional materials and new public service an-nouncements (PSAs). In addition, the van will circulate for 15 days each in 
the cities of Delhi and Mumbai. 
National Level Activities for Roll Out of 
Bell Bajao! 
Campaign rollout at the national level is focused on getting optimum 
exposure for the campaign. Media planningŠsuch issues as when to start 
the campaign and how to mix the media platformsŠis done with the help 
of a professional agency. Breakthrough launched 
Bell Bajao! with its televi-sion campaign because television has the widest coverage. All other plat-formsŠradio, print, advertising, and the video vanŠfollowed the television 
broadcasts in a staggered rollout. 
Media Rollout for National TV 
The decisions about the rollout of Bell Bajao! on national television 
were made by evaluating the ef˜cacy and popularity of different platforms. 
Mindshare provided Breakthrough with state- and district-level data on the 
ef˜cacy and popularity of different platforms. In 2008Œ2009 an investment 
from MWCD enabled Bell Bajao! PSAs to air during prime-time on all TV 
channels. Additionally, Breakthrough made direct media buys for print and 
radio dissemination. In 2010 Breakthrough commissioned Doordarshan, 
IBN7, Zee News, TV Today, Suvarana News, Zee Kannada, ETV Kannada, 
and Asia Net to broadcast the 
Bell Bajao!
 PSAs. Radio partners for the 
PSAs included AIR, Big FM, and Red FM. Breakthrough™s print partners 
for the campaign rollout included Vijay Karnataka, Praja Vani, and Dainik 
Jagran. As a nongovernmental organization (NGO), Breakthrough was able 
to leverage good rates for media buys and often had additional value-added 
features, such as viewing in other television programs. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Using Publicity and Public Relations to Enhance Campaign Visibility 
Breakthrough has consciously added earned media as a key strategy 
to generate greater exposure and impact for Bell Bajao!, actively soliciting 
media outlets to cover campaign-related events and to write editorials about 
violence against women and about Bell Bajao!. Breakthrough has found it 
prudent to outsource this task to a public relations agency because of staff 
capacity and the specialized nature of public relations work.
5 Engaging Media Figures and ﬁIn˚uentialsﬂ 
To generate publicity for 
Bell Bajao!, Breakthrough strategically en-gaged high-pro˜le artists, such as actor Boman Irani, lyricist Javed Akhtar, 
and various fashion industry leaders, including designers Akki Narula, 
Laconet Hemant, and Narendra Kumar. 
Connecting Users to Services 
Breakthrough launched an interactive Google map feature on the Bell 
Bajao! website (www.bellbajao.org), which provides users with information 
about national, regional, and local service providers in the states in India 
where Breakthrough has a presence. Breakthrough is currently developing 
an interactive mobile-messaging platform to connect rights advocates. 
Monitoring and Evaluation of Bell Bajao!
The evaluation of Bell Bajao! captures how a multimedia campaign, 
supported by in-depth community mobilization activities, can increase 
knowledge, change perceptions and attitudes, and mobilize action to re-duce domestic violence. 
A range of monitoring and evaluation techniques have been used to 
assess the extent to which the Bell Bajao! campaign has met its goals of 
actualizing changes in individual ﬁhearts and minds,ﬂ reaching wide audi-ences with the Bell Bajao! message to initiate public conversations on issues 
of domestic violence, and changing the ways in which the issue is framed 
in the broader culture. 
The extensive monitoring and evaluation techniques that were used for 
Bell Bajao! are instructive for organizational learning. The feedback from 
monitoring and evaluation activities has enabled Breakthrough to re˜ne 
5  Breakthrough™s experience in working with individuals, small and medium public relations 
˜rms, and large national companies has led the organization to the conclusion that it is more 
productive and effective to work with smaller ˜rms that may have only city-level presence. 
Breakthrough has developed a list of ˜rms and individuals across Breakthrough coverage areas to do public relations for the campaign. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 99and revise Bell Bajao! to be more effectiveŠand to give it greater potency 
as the campaign takes on a global scope. 
Breakthrough drew on both in-house and external evaluators to moni-tor and evaluate the Bell Bajao! program. In this section we discuss the 
various methodologies that Breakthrough used to measure the effectiveness 
of Bell Bajao! as well as the ˜ndings regarding the ef˜cacy of the campaign. 
This section also discusses the human and ˜nancial investment required to 
implement a thorough evaluation and monitoring process, along with some 
of its challenges. 
Data Collection 
Primary data collected Breakthrough undertook primary research in order 
to obtain detailed, state-speci˜c information related to domestic violence 
and HIV/AIDS. This research provided more information on the forms of 
domestic violence, the level of knowledge concerning PWDVA 2005, and 
the actions that are taken in cases of violence. Such granular information 
is generally not available in larger studies. 
Breakthrough hired CMS to conduct this primary research. CMS con-ducted a baseline study in the intervention areas, performed ﬁrapid assess-mentﬂ surveys in the mid-period of the campaign, and did an end-line survey 
to see what changes occurred as a result of Breakthrough intervention. 
Secondary data sources Secondary datasets were used to establish the 
prevalence of domestic violence and violence toward women with HIV/AIDS. These included data culled from the National Family Health Survey 
(NFHS) in India and from the World Health Organization (WHO).
6 The 
data provided a global understanding of violence and its intersection with 
HIV. It was apparent that physical and sexual violence are not adequately 
addressed in India. Breakthrough used state-level NFHS data from Uttar 
Pradesh and Karnataka regarding the level of violence against women in 
the domestic sphere. This enabled Breakthrough to establish state-level 
benchmarks and parameters on violence against women. 
Qualitative tools applied Breakthrough used state-of-the-art evaluation 
techniques for assessing the Bell Bajao! program. CMS recommended the 
use of the Most Signi˜cant Change Technique (MSCT), a method of col
-lecting stories that indicate behavior change that occurs because of a par
-ticular intervention. MSCT is used to ascertain changes in practice, and it 
obtains more nuanced outcomes of community education and leadership 
6  NFHS, 2005Œ2006; WHO Multi-Country Study on Women™s Health and Domestic Vio
-lence Against Women, 2005.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
development programs. MSCT allows bene˜ciaries and stakeholders to 
participate in a dynamic and integrated way in de˜ning what constitutes 
success. 
CMS and Breakthrough provided MSCT training to 15 people from 
different organizations who had received Breakthrough training on is
-sues of domestic violence and HIV/AIDS so that they could monitor and 
evaluate their work in the community. Story collectors gathered stories 
originating from their ˜elds, and story selectors validated and selected the 
best stories that showed signi˜cant change. To date, more than 100 stories 
have been collected. These stories track changes experienced by those who 
have received RAP training and as well as changes reported by community 
members who were affected by Breakthrough interventions. 
MSCT also serves as an in-house monitoring tool. Every 6 months, 
stories are selected and used by Breakthrough staff and trainers to gauge 
if the people they are training are continuing to progress in terms of their 
knowledge and attitudes toward domestic violence. 
In-depth interviews
 CMS has conducted in depth interviews with different 
Breakthrough partnersŠorganizational heads, cultural groups, people who 
travel with the video vanŠto ascertain the extent to which Breakthrough 
partners have taken ownership of the campaign and the issue of domestic 
violence. The key ˜ndings of this study were: 
˜˚
There has been an increase in knowledge and a shift in attitudes 
and behavior among Breakthrough partners concerning domestic 
violence and HIV/AIDS issues. 
˜˚
Partners have started disseminating information about domestic 
violence and HIV/AIDS in their own spheres of work through one-on-one interactions, group meetings, theater, folk art, and so forth. 
˜˚
Many of the partner organizations have incorporated Break
-through™s campaign issues as part of their work mandate. For in
-stance, CARDTS adapted issues of HIV/AIDS and violence against 
womenŠin particular, domestic violenceŠas a priority in its policy 
and planning. 
Longitudinal panel study
 A longitudinal panel study is currently being 
conducted by the International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) to 
track long-term attitude changes that have occurred among the 60 advo-cates who received a comprehensive RAP training. The participants have 
been selected to represent the different target audiences of Breakthrough: 
youth from college, youth from marginalized communities, members of 
NGOs, and people living with HIV/AIDS. Representatives from each of 
these groups will participate in an in-depth, 2-hour interview to ascertain 
whether the training they received led to shifts in attitudes and behavior. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 101
Two follow-up interviews, 6 months apart, will examine whether changes 
that resulted from the training have been sustained. 
ICRW will produce a report that is expected to provide insights on how 
the Breakthrough training has affected trainees and if it has led to changes 
in their interactions with peers. Insights from this study will be used to 
improve training modules. 
Quantitative tools applied CMS designed and conducted baseline, mid-line, and end-line studies in the states of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, and 
Karnataka to statistically record how the Bell Bajao! campaign changed 
knowledge, attitudes, and behavior as they relate to domestic violence, 
PWDVA 2005, and HIV/AIDS. The baseline survey explored attitudes 
and practices toward issues of gender, condom use and negotiation, inter-
spousal communication, HIV/AIDS, and domestic violence. The mid- and 
end-line surveys made it possible to compare shifts that occurred at both 
timeframes as a way to capture campaign impact. The survey also sought 
to capture where people obtained information on these issues. 
In order to assess the differential impact of Breakthrough™s education 
and media interventions, a control group technique was employed. Two 
districts were selected for research under the assumption that when both 
media messaging as well as educational and training outreach activities 
were undertaken, the effect of the campaign would be greater. One district 
that used education and media components and one district that used only 
mass media were chosen for studyŠand comparisonŠso Breakthrough 
could see if there were differences in impact. 
Key Findings of the End Line Surveys
The key ˜ndings from the end-line survey indicated signi˜cant changes 
in knowledge, attitudes, and behavior at both the individual and com-munity levels with regard to domestic violence, HIV/AIDS, and safe sex. 
Important outcomes include˜˚
Increased knowledge and awareness of what constitutes domestic 
violence. The end-line survey showed that as a result of the 
Bell 
Bajao! campaign there was greater knowledge and community 
awareness about the various forms of domestic violence. For exam-ple, a signi˜cantly higher proportion of respondents expanded the 
de˜nition of domestic violence beyond physical abuse to include 
emotional abuse, threats, economic deprivation, and sexual abuse. 
˜˚
Increased knowledge and understanding regarding PWDVA 2005. 
Respondents had a better grasp of PWDVA 2005 and the protec
-tions it offers victims of domestic violence. There was a signi˜cant 
increase in the proportion of respondents who knew that a woman 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
had the right to stay in her house even after ˜ling a complaint 
against her husband. There was signi˜cantly more knowledge 
among the public regarding the other bene˜ts to which survivors 
of violence are entitled, including monetary compensation, right to 
residence, and custody rights. 
˜˚
Changes in attitudes toward domestic violence. Public attitudes 
showed less acceptance and justi˜cation for domestic violence as 
a result of the campaign. For example, fewer people justi˜ed wife 
beating, even when a husband suspected in˜delity. The majority of 
respondents listed many justi˜able reasons for a woman refusing to have sex with her spouse: 93 percent of respondents thought it was 
justi˜able to refuse sex when a husband had a sexually transmitted 
disease, 90 percent thought it was justi˜able to refuse sex when a 
woman was not in the mood for sex, 87 percent felt a woman feel-ing tired was a justi˜able reason, and 86 percent thought that the 
man having sex with other women was a justi˜able reason. Fewer 
respondents felt that it was justi˜able for a man to have sex with 
other women, to have sex forcefully, or to stop providing ˜nancial 
support if a wife refused sex. 
˜˚
More women took action against perpetrators of violence. Women 
are increasingly taking proactive stands against domestic violence 
as a result of Breakthrough™s campaign. A majority of respondents 
favored taking legal action (90 percent) in cases of domestic vio-lence. There was a signi˜cant decrease in the number of respon-dents who felt that taking legal action would bring shame to the 
family. 
˜˚
Rising concern and greater intervention by community members in 
cases of domestic violence. There was a signi˜cant increase in the 
proportion of respondents reporting that community intervention 
had taken place in cases of domestic violence. Only 9 percent of 
respondents thought that domestic violence is a private matter in 
which nobody should intervene. Nearly 61 percent of respondents 
(as compared to 53 percent at baseline) of those who came across 
incidents of domestic violence reported that the community had 
taken action to stop it. 
  
The end-line study indicated that community support for legal 
action against domestic violence is of utmost importance. There 
was a signi˜cant increase in the proportion of respondents report-ing that both men and women were taking action against domestic 
violence but that men continued to be the majority. 
˜˚
A decline in ignorance and reduced stigmatization of people with 
HIV/AIDS. There was signi˜cant decrease in ignorance and atti-tudes of shame and blame toward people with HIV/AIDS among 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 103
respondents. For example, the percentage of respondents who felt 
that a woman should be ashamed of her HIV status dropped from 
25 percent to 8 percent. The end line study indicated less fear 
associated with the spread of HIV/AIDS. A signi˜cantly lower 
number of respondents said that an HIV-positive woman should 
be kept away from her children and that her belongings should be 
segregated. Stigma and discrimination against women living with 
HIV/AIDS also showed a signi˜cant decrease: Some 86 percent of 
respondents at end-line said that an HIV-positive woman should 
not be ostracized from society. The reduction in stigma was also 
apparent in the signi˜cant decrease in respondents wanting to keep 
family members™ HIV status secret. The percentage dropped from 
45.3 percent at baseline to 6.3 percent at end line. 
˜˚
Increased knowledge and responsibility regarding the practice of 
safe sex. In the end-line report there was a signi˜cant increase in 
knowledge about safe sex among respondents. Roughly 81 percent 
promptly referred to ﬁcondom use,ﬂ while nearly 31 percent could 
correctly identify safe sex as ﬁconsistency in the use of condoms 
for safe sex.ﬂ More than two-thirds of respondents reported that 
being monogamous is a safe sex practice. Both base- and end-line 
data revealed that men are comparatively more aware than women 
about safe-sex issues. 
˜˚
Increased joint decision making between spouses.
 Breakthrough™s 
campaign led to greater respect for women™s role in decision mak
-ing within the family. A majority of the respondents indicated that 
decisions relating to children™s education, children™s marriage, the 
purchase of major household items, and visits to a wife™s relatives 
were being made by both the husband and wife. A signi˜cantly 
higher proportion of respondents reported joint decision making 
on family planning matters, including whether to have sex. 
˜˚
Continued unwillingness among unmarried men to discuss sexual 
partners. The end-line data underscored the continuing unwilling-ness of men and women to disclose sexual relationships outside of 
marriage. Only 6 percent of unmarried, widower, and separated 
men reported having a sexual partner, and none of their partners 
asked them to use condoms. None of the unmarried women re-ported having a sexual partner. 
The end-line study also revealed a greater openness to express one™s 
sexual inclinations and disinclinations. Both male and female respondents 
indicated a greater willingness to say whether or not they wished to engage 
in sexual activity with their spouse. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
 Key Results Regarding Numbers Reached by 
Bell Bajao!
Audience-reach measurement tools show the extent and scale of the 
Bell Bajao! campaign and identify the numbers and demographic informa-tion of people reached. Television, radio, print, and online audience mea
-surement tools provide estimates of: 
˜˚
When and how often Bell Bajao! ads, music, or music videos are 
played on television, radio, or print outletsŠdata provided by 
Television Audience Measurement (TAM), the National Readership 
Survey, Nielsen ratings, and similar industry standards. 
˜˚
Website viewership and participation through the use of Google 
AdWords, Google Analytics, and online commentary on the Break
-through website as well as online platforms such as Facebook, 
YouTube, The Hub, and MySpace that feature 
Bell Bajao!
 ˜˚
Audience reach through 
Bell Bajao!
 press coverage, including blogs and online coverage. 
˜˚
Videographic, photographic, and written documentation of 
Bell 
Bajao! presentations at workshops, trainings, conferences, forums, 
and ˜lm festivals. 
˜˚
Use of Bell Bajao! materials by other groups, including civil society 
actors, educational institutions, the United Nations, and govern
-ment agencies. 
˜˚
Number of Bell Bajao! media products and curriculum materials 
disseminated online, downloaded, or provided in hard or soft copy. 
These various measurements indicate that the Bell Bajao! campaign 
has had extraordinary reach and impact. According to TAM, in 2008Œ
2009 Bell Bajao! reached 130 million people (via television, radio, and 
print), and the video van reached 2.5 million people. In 2010 Bell Bajao! reached 115 million people through television ads, and the video van 
reached 2.4 million people. In addition, since 2008 Breakthrough has built 
capacities of more than 75,000 people through RAP to take the Bell Bajao! message forward. The website (www.bellbajao.org) has reached millions 
more people. 
It is important that Bell Bajao! reach scale because Breakthrough seeks 
to change public conversations and to change the dialogue around issues of 
domestic violence, which can be achieved only when signi˜cant numbers 
of people are reached by the campaign and the issues of women™s rights 
and ending domestic violence enter the public imagination and lexicon. 
Bell Bajao! continues to resonate in varied mainstream popular culture 
spaces. For example, Breakthrough™s reach expanded exponentially when 
Bell Bajao! was featured on the popular television soap opera series Is Desh Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 105
Na Aana Laddo and as a question and correct response on Kuan Banega 
Crorepati (Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?
). 
Challenges in Evaluation 
Monitoring and evaluating social change is not an exact science but is 
instead a challenging and constantly evolving ˜eld of social science. There 
are always new methodologies and new techniques that can be used to 
capture the complex change process. To conduct comprehensive evaluation 
and monitoring requires a great deal of capacity building so that the Bell 
Bajao! staff them may represent the data they are receiving from analysts 
in an accurate and meaningful way as well as to use it internally to improve 
performance and outcomes. 
Furthermore, social scientists who design and carry out the research 
face the issue of communicating with nonpro˜t organizations that must 
translate the research ˜ndings to make them accessible to non-specialists. 
Too often the social scientists™ reports are technical and hard to adapt for 
reporting purposes, making the results dif˜cult to communicate to a larger 
public. 
Despite these dif˜culties, the evaluation of Bell Bajao! captures how 
a multimedia campaign, supported by in-depth community mobilization 
activities, can increase knowledge, change perceptions and attitudes, and 
mobilize action to reduce domestic violence. 
DATING VIOLENCE PREVENTION: USING INFORMATION 
AND COMMUNICATIONS TECHNOLOGIES FOR 
GLOBAL DATING VIOLENCE PREVENTION
7Andra Teten Tharp, Ph.D., Alan Dowell, A.B.J., Tessa Burton, M.P.H., 
CPH, and Laura Chaing, M.A.
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
  Constance DeCherney iCrossingDe˜nition and Prevalence
Dating violence is a type of intimate partner violence that occurs be-tween two young people in a close relationship. The nature of dating 
7  Author note: The ˜ndings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and 
do not necessarily represent the of˜cial position of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
violence can be physical, emotional, or sexual, or it can involve stalking 
behaviors (CDC, 2010a). Dating violence can occur in person or electroni-cally, such as through text messages or on social networking sites. Across 
studies, the prevalence of dating violence varies by the age and location of 
the sample as well as by the type of violence that is measured. For example, 
in the United States it is estimated that 1 in 10 high school students has 
experienced physical violence from a dating partner in the past 12 months 
(Eaton et al., 2010) and that about 1 in 5 women and nearly 1 in 7 men 
who have ever experienced rape, physical violence, or stalking by an inti
-mate partner ˜rst experienced some form of partner violence between 11 
and 17 years of age (Black et al., 2011). The rates of teen dating violence 
(TDV) in middle school vary across settings, ranging from 5 percent in ru-ral Canada to 21 percent in rural North Carolina and 45 percent in urban 
Philadelphia (O™Leary and Slep, 2011). Studies across 48 countries indicate 
that 10 percent to 69 percent of women report having experienced physical 
violence from an intimate partner during their lifetimes (Heise et al., 1999; 
Heise and García-Moreno, 2002). Emerging data from national surveys of 
violence against children suggest that many individuals experience sexual 
violence in a dating relationship. For example, in Tanzania 25 percent of 
women and 50 percent of men who experienced sexual violence before 
age 18 reported that a dating partner perpetrated the violence (United Re-public of Tanzania, 2011), and in Swaziland 26 percent of sexual violence 
experienced by girls prior to age 18 was perpetrated by a boyfriend (Reza 
et al., 2009). 
Risk Factors for Victimization and Perpetration
Risk factors for experiencing dating violence include having dysfunc-tional coping strategies, destructive or dysfunctional problem-solving 
skills, and poor communication skills and experiencing stress (Lewis and 
Fremouw, 2001). Risk factors associated with perpetrating dating violence 
include experiencing anger, perpetrating aggression toward peers, holding 
traditional gender views or beliefs that are accepting of violence in dat
-ing relationships, using drugs or alcohol, having multiple sexual partners, 
experiencing or witnessing violence in the home, and having friends who 
experience or perpetrate dating violence (Vagi et al., in preparation). 
Research examining the effects of societal norms and customs on dating 
violence is scant, but communities in which cultural or social norms ac-cept, promote, or excuse violence against a dating partner may create a 
context in which dating violence is viewed as acceptable and permissible 
and in which policies that sanction such violence do not exist or are not 
enforced. Moreover, norms, practices, and policies that re˚ect or support 
harmful traditional gender roles may also foster and reinforce violence in 
dating relationships.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 107
Primary PreventionA shift in primary prevention approaches has taken place over the past 
several years. Although early work focused only on preventing and re
-sponding to violence, current approaches to prevention focus on promoting 
respectful, nonviolent, and healthy relationships.8 Healthy relationships are 
relationships in which each partner feels empowered (as opposed to feeling 
in power), respected, safe, and supported. Such relationships are character
-ized by trust and shared decision making. Currently, four primary preven
-tion programs have demonstrated effectiveness in preventing physical or 
sexual dating violence: Safe Dates (Foshee et al., 1998), Fourth R (Wolfe et 
al., 2009), Youth Relationships Project (Wolfe et al., 2003), and the Shifting 
Boundaries school-level intervention (Taylor et al., 2011). However, these 
programs have been developed and evaluated only among middle or high 
school students in the United States and Canada. Their ef˜cacy in contexts 
with different cultural or social norms is unknown, and their uptake in 
other countries has been minimal and has not been evaluated. Globally 
there have been HIV behavioral prevention programs targeting youth that 
address harmful gender norms and dating violence as a part of broader 
agendas. For example, Stepping Stones (Jewkes et al., 2008) has been evalu-ated and shown to be effective in reducing HIV risk-taking behaviors but 
has not speci˜cally been evaluated in terms of changing harmful gender 
norms or the incidence of dating violence. The use of information and com-munications technologies (ICTs) in these programs is limited to the inclu
-sion of electronic aggression in vignettes and the option to use technology 
in some of the activities. Although numerous organizations have developed 
ICT-based approaches to raise awareness of dating violence
9 and facilitate 
help seeking, these approaches have not yet been evaluated.10 Next Steps for Global Dating Violence Prevention
In light of the limited evidence base concerning what works to prevent 
dating violence among young people, universal primary prevention efforts 
implemented globally may initially focus on increasing awareness about 
the frequency and risk factors for dating violence and countering cultural 
and social norms that support harmful gender norms and the social accept-ability of violence in relationships. Increasing awareness may be targeted 
8  E.g., Start Strong: Building Healthy Teen Relationships: www.startstrongteens.org/; Dating 
Matters: Strategies to Promote Healthy Teen Relationships: www.cdc.gov/violenceprevention/
DatingMatters/; and CDC Strategic Direction for Intimate Partner Violence Prevention: www.
cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pdf/IPV_Strategic_Direction_Full-Doc-a.pdf.
9  E.g., www.thatsnotcool.com; www.loveisnotabuse.com; www.breakthecycle.org.
10  E.g., the National Dating Abuse Helpline can be called or texted: www.loveisrespect.org/
about-national-dating-abuse-helpline.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
at policy and decision makers to build political will for dating violence 
prevention. Efforts to counter harmful cultural and social norms may focus 
on individuals who are dating or about to initiate dating and on their in˚u-encers (e.g., parents, educators, and religious leaders) and may address such issues as negative portrayals of women in the media, media representations 
that support harmful gender roles, norms that perpetuate intergenerational 
relationships or child marriage, and norms that promote entitlement rather 
than respect in relationships. 
ICTs provide a vehicle for reaching a speci˜c audience with targeted 
prevention messages, strategies, and resources in an ef˜cient and cost-
effective manner. Popular among health agencies, such as the U.S. Depart
-ment of Health and Human Services, SMS/text messaging campaigns often 
link subscribers to resources, such as clinics, treatment facilities, and other 
resources, based on geographic location. For example, the National Insti
-tutes of Health has implemented a SmokefreeTXT campaign that tailors 
smoking cessation SMS/text messaging to the user™s projected quit date and 
includes a mobile application to enhance the user™s interaction with tools, 
tips, and resources provided by the agency. Because mobile technology is 
so widely accessible, it is an ideal mechanism for disseminating information 
about healthy relationships as well as dating violence prevention messages. 
Furthermore, in the global context, dating violence prevention should be in
-corporated into HIV prevention and broader development agendas. Dating 
violence increases sexual risk-taking behavior and the risk of HIV infection 
and, at a broader level, can affect and impede social and economic develop-ment in developing countries.
Considerations for ICTs and Global Dating Violence Prevention
Besides identifying the focus of prevention efforts globally, our work 
integrating ICTs with dating violence prevention suggests a number of con
-siderations are warranted as the ˜eld moves forward.
Collaborate on Development of Dating Violence Prevention ICTs 
It is critical that the development of ICTs for primary prevention of 
dating violence re˚ects and extends the state of the ˜eld and the current 
evidence base on what works to prevent dating violence, including known 
risk and protective factors for dating violence and best practices in preven-tion (e.g., Nation et al., 2003). This would entail, for example, targeting 
prevention strategies to age groups and communities at risk, countering the 
speci˜c norms and practices that sustain violence in different communities, 
and building healthy relationship skills. ICTs also should take into account 
the range of audiences who may be key agents in prevention. For example, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 109
traditional approaches build skills among parents, educators, and youth, 
and prevention delivered through ICTs may engage these groups. Unfortu
-nately, technology applications for prevention are often developed without 
taking the best-available science into account and, as a result, do not have 
the maximum potential to affect violence. Similarly, prevention scientists 
are often reluctant to entertain alternative modes of delivering prevention 
(vs. school-based curricula) and, as a result, do not take full advantage of 
the reach and relevance that ICTs offer. Ideally, the development of global 
dating violence prevention will be informed by the best available science 
and will use ICTs to make prevention accessible and engaging to young 
people and their in˚uencers. Given the length of time that is traditionally 
involved in developing effective prevention, crowdsourcing techniques such 
as app challenges (e.g., Apps Against Abuse) may be used to stimulate the 
rapid development of innovative prevention strategies. When crowdsourc-ing is used, prevention scientists and technologists may be encouraged to 
work together to ensure that the strategy re˚ects the current state of the 
˜eld as well as being feasible and sought after by the intended users.
Evaluate New Approaches
 Similarly, new technologies that are developed and used in preven
-tion must be evaluated for effectiveness. To minimize the dissemination 
of ineffective or harmful approaches and to maximize the use of limited 
resources, new evaluation techniques must be integrated into the develop-ment and re˜nement of preventative ICTs. Digital and personal technology, 
including SMS, mobile applications and social platforms, should encourage 
a ﬁtest and learnﬂ approach to evaluation. Gathering real-time, human-experience feedback while programs are being developed allows programs 
to be launched with insights embedded in the ˜nal product. Moreover, new 
technology and digital media programs encourage an iterative approach to 
programming in which a project can be launched with groups in phases so 
that researchers can evaluate the impact, success, and shortcomings while 
the program is running. A special consideration with ICTs is the potential 
use of technologies for violence perpetration rather than prevention. For 
example, many violence prevention applications currently integrate global 
positioning system (GPS) to enable friends, families, and law enforcement 
to know where an individual is in case he or she needs help. However, GPS 
could also be used to control one™s partner by tracking his or her activi
-ties and location. Therefore, it will be critical to carry out evaluations to 
detect misuse and iatrogenic effects. Although ICTs may necessitate novel 
evaluation approaches and evaluation timelines may need to be abbreviated 
to account for the rapid evolution of technologies, nonetheless evaluation 
should be a cornerstone of the global prevention of dating violence. The 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
pace of technology innovation and adoption is rapid. Programs should be 
built to adapt and evolve with technology. 
Combine Technology with Traditional Approaches 
In order to develop prevention that is both comprehensive and has a 
suf˜cient dose (Nation et al., 2003), a ˜rst step may be to combine tradi-tional classroom-based approaches with ICTs. For example, the CDC™s Dat
-ing Matters youth communication campaign will utilize both social media 
(e.g., Facebook) and mobile media (e.g., SMS/text messaging) to engage 
the youth audience with primary prevention messages. The messages will 
complement the content delivered in the classroom model, but social and 
mobile media channels present an opportunity for youth to interact with 
the messages on their terms, in environments where they are comfortable, 
as well as an opportunity to use the in˚uence of the youths™ own social 
networks. In addition, ICTs can expand the reach of traditional models in 
a more cost-effective manner. For example, a teen could opt in to the text 
message program to receive tips about healthy relationships as well as in-formation about local campaign events. This would be supplemented by a 
Facebook page on which teens can interact with their peers and talk about 
the kinds of relationships they see in their communities. While classroom 
instruction might reach 30 students at a time, mobile and social media have 
the capacity to reach thousands of teens in that same community. Moreover, 
a need exists to combine primary and secondary prevention approaches 
when ICTs are used, so that individuals who are utilizing ICTs and are 
already experiencing violence may access resources and referrals for dating 
violence services as well as dating violence prevention.
Be Aware of Regulations Related to Engaging Youth Through Technology 
Although the use of ICTs to communicate with multiple audiences, 
particularly youth, has increased dramatically in recent years, access to 
youth through technology is often governed by stricter laws and regula-tions than the laws that regulate similar communications with adults. For 
example, the Children™s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998 (COPPA) 
prohibits the collection of personal information from youth under the age 
of 13 by all ﬁcommercial websites and online servicesﬂ unless veri˜able 
consent is obtained from a parent or guardian.11 Proposed changes to 
COPPA made as recently as 2011 would further delineate a data retention 
and deletion requirement when such information is collected from youth 
under 13, mandating that information collected should be stored only 
for the length of time necessary to achieve the purpose for which it was 
11  See www.ftc.gov/os/1999/10/64fr59888.pdf.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 111
obtained. Other countries have passed or are considering similar legislation 
to protect youths under the age of 13. In addition to national laws, consid
-eration should be given to state, territorial, and local regulations further 
limiting access to youth because some jurisdictions may provide for even 
less access to youth under a certain age. Because primary prevention must 
be implemented before dating violence begins, restrictions on interacting 
with middle-school-aged youth complicate the task of implementing pre-vention during this key phase in development. 
ConclusionDating violence is a preventable but all-too-frequent form of violence 
among young people around the world. ICTs offer the potential to increase 
the reach and relevance of prevention; however, to maximize the opportu
-nity to stop dating violence before it begins, several considerations must be 
taken into account as the ˜eld moves forward. Collaboration, evaluation, 
and prevention-informed regulation will ensure that ICTs are applied in a 
way that promotes healthy relationships globally.
LEVERAGING SOCIAL MEDIA AND TECHNOLOGY 
TO ADVANCE THE FIELD OF ELDER ABUSE
XinQi Dong, M.D., M.P.H.
 Rush Institute for Healthy Aging and Rush University Medical Center
  Eric Brown, M.E.T.
 Impact Games  Donna Levin
 Care.comIntroductionElder abuse is a substantial global public health and human rights prob-lem. Elder abuse includes physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse, 
neglect (both caregiver and self-neglect), and ˜nancial abuse. Available 
prevalence data suggest that at least 10 percent of the elderly population in 
the United States experiences abuse each year, and many of them experience 
it in multiple forms (Acierno et al., 2010; Beach et al., 2010). Furthermore, 
data from U.S. adult protective services agencies depict an increasing trend 
in the reporting of elder abuse (Teaster et al., 2004). This trend is particu
-larly alarming because the literature suggests that elder abuse is associated 
with increased risk of morbidity and mortality (Lachs et al., 1997, 1998, 
2002; Dong et al., 2005, 2009, 2011a, 2011b; Dong, 2011). 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Despite the accessibility of adult protective services and the existence 
of nursing home regulations in all 50 states as well as mandatory reporting 
laws for elder abuse in most states, an overwhelming number of abused 
elderly pass through the health care system undetected and untreated. It is 
estimated that only 1 in 14 cases of elder abuse comes to the attention of 
social services (NRC, 2003). In this paper we review the epidemiology of 
elder abuse and describe how social media and technology could synergisti
-cally advance societal awareness of elder abuse at the broad level. 
Risk Factors
Available evidence suggests that those over 75 years old, African Ameri
-cans, and those of lower socioeconomic status are at particularly high risk 
for elder abuse (Mosqueda and Dong, 2011). A number of cross-sectional 
studies have found that cognitive impairment and physical disability are 
associated with increased risk for elder abuse. Recent studies suggest that 
older adults with higher levels of psychological distress and lower levels 
of social relations are also more likely to be reported to adult protective 
services (Mosqueda and Dong, 2011). There are few longitudinal studies 
examining the factors associated with elder abuse. A study of 5,519 older 
adults from the Chicago Health and Aging Project (CHAP) found that both 
the presence and severity of self-neglect were related to a decline in physical 
performance tests as well as a decline in self-reported physical function. The 
study also found that a decline in cognitive function, particularly execu-tive function, was associated with increased risk of encounters with adult 
protective services (Dong et al., 2009, 2010).
Morbidity and MortalityDespite major gaps in our knowledge about the rami˜cations of elder 
abuse, available evidence suggests that it is associated with signi˜cant 
adverse health outcomes. Prior studies of 2,812 older adults in the EPESE 
(Established Populations for Epidemiologic Studies of the Elderly) cohort 
suggest that elder abuse is associated with an increased risk for nursing 
home placement and with higher all-cause mortality. Recent data from 
Dong et al. (2009), who examined the relationship between elder abuse and 
mortality (all-cause and cause-speci˜c) for 9,813 participants within the 
CHAP study, found that elder abuse was associated not only with increased 
all-cause mortality but also with increased cardiovascular-related mortality 
over the 15 years of follow-up. In addition, mortality associated with elder 
abuse was most prominent among those with the lowest levels of cognitive 
function and physical function and the highest levels of psychological dis-tress and social isolation (Dong et al., 2009, 2011a). Dong and colleagues 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 113
also found that black older adult victims had signi˜cant higher mortality 
risk than white older adults in the same CHAP cohort (Dong et al., 2011b). 
Raising the Awareness of Elder Abuse
We examined the types, prevalence, risk factors, and consequences 
of elder abuse and discussed reasons why the majority of the abuse goes 
unreported and unnoticed. For the workshop we were asked to examine 
prevention strategies globally; therefore, issues of cultural and social norms 
needed to be considered. Our hypothesis: If we raised awareness of elder 
abuse at the community level, it would have a positive impact on families 
and help build the groundswell required to raise awareness and action with 
policy makers. 
Approach We researched successful taglines used in national awareness 
campaigns on other important societal issues, in order to determine what 
might be applicable to elder abuse.
We identi˜ed common elements found in all of the campaigns: a memo
-rable tagline that empowered the reader or viewer and, in most cases, a call 
to action. The campaigns made it clear that the reader could do something 
to make a difference. The taglines were frequently combined with startling 
imagery.
We generated a list of tagline ideas to help facilitate the brainstorming 
session:˜˚
Get LOUD about elder abuse.˜˚
This is the unexpected face of abuse.
˜˚
Unfortunately, you™re never too old to need protection.
˜˚
Treat your elders how you want to be treated. Your children are 
watching.˜˚
Cherish a life. Report elder abuse.
˜˚
Don™t abuse your parents. And your children won™t abuse you.
˜˚
Don™t be mean to your elders. Remember, you will be an elder 
someday, too.
˜˚
Stop elder abuse. It is a national shame.
A few of the taglines (Figure 7-1) were paired with images found in 
the public domain to conceptualize what an actual elder abuse awareness 
campaign might look like.
Of the three concepts, Concept C came closest to capturing most of 
the elements of the brand awareness campaigns that we examined. It em
-powered the viewer with the call to action ﬁGet LOUD,ﬂ indicating that it 
was okay to talk about a topic that may have been traditionally considered 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
taboo. This tagline and message were used to mock up awareness cam-paigns using social media and existing technology.
Social Media We compiled a list of websites, technology tools, and social 
media campaigns (Table 7-1) with which members of our group had experi
-ence, and we imagined what these would look like when translated to the 
vocabulary and demographic of elder abuse. 
Current understanding of the types of elder abuse that exist has been 
formed by what is reported in mainstream media, which misses much of 
the breadth of abuse being perpetrated, such as the abuse an elder may 
experience at the hands of family. In the face of the overwhelming yet un
-derexposed issues and statistics, a general awareness campaign that could 
address any of the issuesŠand, more importantly, raise the overall aware
-ness of the need to actŠwould be a monumental task yet a great starting 
Concept AConcept BConcept CFigure 7-1R02165collection of bitmapped imagesbut ﬁconceptﬂ type vector editableFIGURE 7-1 Concepts for elder abuse awareness campaign.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 115
TABLE 7-1
 Examples of Successful Social MediaUser-Generated Content Tools
Witness.org
Allows users to upload videos of human rights violations that 
have been captured on cameras or phones or by whatever means 
are available. Elder abuse is a human rights violation issue, so 
it was easy to imagine a dedicated version of the Witness model 
focused on elder abuse. (See #1 in the mock-up website: Figure 
7-2.)ItGetsBetter.org
This project started with the aim of collecting and displaying 
user-generated videos of LGBT adults telling their stories of 
abuse and how they have since found happiness. A similar model 
could be employed for collecting and distributing personal 
narratives of elder abuse to help elders being abused feel less 
alone in their situation and envision a future without abuse. (See 
#2 in the mock-up website: Figure 7-2.)
Web Utility Tools
FamilyWatchDog.us
Allows users to conduct a search based on speci˜c locations to 
˜nd registered sex offenders within a certain radius. This simple 
interface and concept could be used to create a search tool for 
convicted predators of the elderly or to map reported cases of 
abuse down to speci˜c care facilities. (See #3 in the mock-up 
website: Figure 7-2.)AFSP.org 
The American Foundation for Suicide Prevention has a very 
simple search function for ˜nding suicide bereavement support 
groups. It would be very easy to create this type of search 
function for elder abuse support networks, something that 
we were unable to ˜nd in a simple Google search. (See #4 on 
mock-up website: Figure 7-2.)
Change.orgAn online tool for creating, distributing, and broadcasting 
petitions online. Petitions can easily be spread through social 
networks, requiring a minimal level of effort to engage. We have 
envisioned a similar tool for galvanizing people around pledging 
to end elder abuse. (See #5 on mock-up website: Figure 7-2.)
Broadcasting and Network Tools
AmberAlert.govThis program has implemented a mobile phone text noti˜cation 
system that broadcasts children to be on the lookout for, which 
increased the speed and breadth of the organization™s alert 
network. This same approach has been applied to mentally 
disabled and elders through nationalsilveralert.org. We 
envisioned this same system being used for such things as alerts 
for ˜nancial scams currently targeting the elderly. (See #6 on 
mock-up website: Figure 7-2.)
continuedCommunications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Facebook Groups
It is easy to imagine the moment when a friend asks you to sign 
a pledge to combat elder abuse for which the commitment is 
small and the social pressure to do so high. While following the 
link from Facebook to the pledge on the Loud.org site, users 
discover all of the other valuable tools and content available to 
them, leading them to subscribe to the feeds themselves. These 
feeds, such as the Silver Alert, are then published to that user™s 
news feed, both broadening awareness and providing a service to 
the elder community. (See #7 on mock-up website: Figure 7-2.)
TABLE 7-1
 Continuedplace. And for an awareness campaign, the most important place to start is 
with the brand and the messaging.
Brand awareness
 We created a mock-up of how different re-purposed 
Web and social media tools would look if implemented with the taglines 
and messaging expressed in the awareness and messaging section of this 
paper and under the faux organizational name Loud.org (Figure 7-2). In 
exploring why elders do not report abuseŠusually because of fear of being 
removed from the home or from a facility, the fear of change, and the fear 
of the unknownŠthe value becomes clear of some of the ideas represented 
in the list of social media examples, such as providing a place to ﬁtell your 
storyﬂ for others to bene˜t, generating a pledge that people could take to 
help end elder abuse in their communities, or using technology to identify 
violence hot zones.Scoping and understanding what actions or inactions constitute elder 
abuse across different cultures, situations, and demographics leads to look-ing at tools that allow de˜nitions and descriptions to be ˚exible enough to 
evolve and incorporate new research and perspectives. For example, Wiki
-pedia uses user-generated content to create an encyclopedia of knowledge 
to de˜ne words, concepts, and events. Using this concept, we thought about crowdsourcing the de˜nition and spectrum of elder abuse by allowing users 
to complete the phrase ﬁElder abuse is ________.ﬂ Over time this could be 
re˜ned and edited in different ways to create a growing and ever-changing 
taxonomy of elder abuse. This concept was informed by the messaging 
concept formulated in Donna Levin™s brainstorm of ﬁElder abuse = ﬂ and 
could carry the experience from the messaging to the actionable items in 
the campaign (not included in the mock-up).
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 117
Figure 7-2R02165uneditable bitmapped imageFIGURE 7-2 Mock-up website for elder abuse.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
SummaryElder abuse is a pervasive public health and human rights issue and is 
associated with premature morbidity and mortality. Despite the fact that an 
older adult is victimized every 2.7 minutes, there remain major challenges 
and barriers in raising social awareness on these issues. The three authors 
of this paper collaborated synergistically outside our traditional comfort 
zones to tackle the global issue of elder abuse. We believe this process 
demonstrated that fruitful collaboration is possible and that it is feasible 
to combine scienti˜c knowledge with input from experts in technology and 
social media to increase community and societal awareness of elder abuse 
and to improve the health and aging of an extremely vulnerable population. USING BIG DATA TO UNDERSTAND AND PREVENT SUICIDE
Daniel J. Reidenberg, Psy.D.
 Suicide Awareness Voices of Education
  John Gordon FentonThere is no greater tragedy or malady in our world than the loss of life 
by self-harm. While many people today will say the word ﬁsuicide,ﬂ on a 
global level, it remains a taboo word in most cultures. Suicide still invokes 
questions and curiosity, myth and misery, especially for the survivors (those 
left behind after a suicide). For researchers there are more questions than 
answers, and the more that is learned, the more that is still unknown comes 
into view. Often suicide is said to be the most preventable fatality, and al
-though this may be true, there is a long way to go before claiming victory 
over this complicated and devastating form of death.
Historically we have approached suicide prevention as a traditional 
public health campaign and used traditional ﬁgatekeepersﬂ (individuals, 
family, friends, and survivors after a suicide) as the target audience for these 
campaigns. Unfortunately, these efforts have proven less than successful, 
and the rates of suicide have not been reduced despite widespread efforts 
using this approach.
We can summarize the current situation as follows: 
1. There are few good data on suicideŠwhat causes it and what truly 
can prevent it.
2. Up to now programs have focused primarily on education instead 
of intervention.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 119
3. Society is moving to an increasing public lifestyle using social (on-line) media and technology.
4. Current online behavior is generating massive data streams (ﬁbig 
dataﬂ) that might be helpful in identifying people at risk of suicide 
as well as effective intervention approaches.
To begin understanding the links between suicide, online behavior, 
and the goal of saving lives on a global scale, it is important to start with 
knowledge-sharing in order to form a basis for where to go next. The most 
interesting thing about this process is that this is not only where we began, 
but also where we ended in our thinking about suicide prevention and 
technology. Ultimately, what we know about suicide is almost as limited as 
what we know about how technology can help prevent suicide. Thankfully, 
the potential is far greater than what heretofore has been imagined, and, 
once clari˜ed and implemented, it could offer the ˜rst real opportunity to 
save more lives. 
De˜nition of Suicide
Suicide is a fatal, self-in˚icted destructive act with an explicit or in-ferred intent to die (IOM, 2002). Suicide methods vary across the globe, 
with ingestion of pesticides being the leading one. However, suicide by ˜re
-arm, hanging, poisoning, and, to a far lesser percentage, jumping, falling, 
and drowning are also ways in which people take their life. 
A suicide attempt is a non-fatal, self-in˚icted destructive act with ex-plicit or inferred intent to die (IOM, 2002). The methods used in suicide 
attempts are similar to those used in successful suicides. Suicidal ideation refers to thoughts of harming or killing oneself (IOM, 2002). Estimates of 
the number of those who have suicidal ideation vary, but they are always 
in the millions, with the vast majority of those who think about suicide 
never actually dying by suicide. Yet, the idea that a person would contem
-plate taking his or her own lifeŠin particular, when paired with other risk 
factors, such as mental illness, prior attempt at suicide, family history of 
suicide, and substance abuseŠmakes those millions with suicidal ideation 
of great concern.
Global Aspects of the Issue
There are 1 million suicides every year in the worldŠone every 40 
seconds. More people have died by suicide than from all the wars in his-tory combined (WHO, 2012). Some countries have better reporting and 
monitoring systems than others, but it is believed that suicide occurs in all 
countries, among all ages and all demographic groups. More males die by 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
suicide than females (by a four-to-one ratio) in all countries except China. 
On the other hand, females attempt suicide more often (three to four times 
more often) than do males. The loss of life is tragedy enough, but com-pounding this tragedy is the fact that this topic remains largely unspoken 
in the media, by governments, and in health care systems. Imagine seeing 
a news report that there were 1 million deaths by suicide last year. There 
would likely be public outrage around the world, with people demanding 
more research, better treatments, and early intervention programs. Yet 
today suicide is one of the least funded health-related causes of death in 
our world.People at Risk for SuicideWe have learned much about the risk factors for suicide. For example, 
males are at a higher risk of completed suicide, while females are at greater 
risk of attempted suicide. A psychiatric disorder increases one™s risk of sui
-cide, and 90 percent of those who die by suicide have a psychiatric disorder 
at the time of their death. Mood disorders and substance abuse disorders in-crease one™s risk of suicide (Moscicki, 2001). By the year 2020 depression is 
projected to become the second-leading cause of loss of DALYs (death- and 
disability-adjusted life years) for all ages and both sexes. Today, depression 
is already the second-leading cause of DALYs among people aged 15 to 44 
(WHO, 2012). A prior suicide attempt signi˜cantly increases one™s risk, 
and older adults are disproportionately at risk of suicide (CDC, 2010b). 
Other risk factors include a history of impulsivity, mental illness, physical 
illness, violence and trauma (including physical or sexual abuse, exposure 
to war), substance abuse, suicide in one™s family, lack of access to care, and 
failed treatment. Persons with access to lethal means and who are socially 
isolated or lack connectedness are also at greater risk. Just knowing the risk 
factors does not by itself prevent suicide, but technology to better recognize 
the written, posted, and communicated risks could hold the key to more 
effective prevention efforts.
Prevention Strategies Shown EffectiveThere are several strategies currently used in suicide prevention. Public 
awareness campaigns show promise and are effective at getting a message 
out and reducing stigma; however, there is little research on their long-
term effectiveness. There is evidence that safe media reporting reduces the 
risk of suicide contagion (Gould and Davidson, 1988). Reducing access to 
lethal means (such as storing ˜rearms, providing for safe pill dispensing, 
and installing barriers for access to railroad tracks, bridges, dangerous 
buildings, and pesticides) has been shown to be effective at reducing sui-cide. Selected prevention programs include screening programs, gatekeeper 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 121
training, skills training, and the U.S. Air Force suicide prevention program. 
Indicated prevention programs address speci˜c populations, such as those 
in need of a crisis response and youths judged to be at risk because of a 
previous attempt. 
Cognitive behavioral therapy, a form of psychotherapy, has been shown 
to be effective at reducing the rate of repeated suicide attempts by 50 per-cent during a 1-year follow-up (Brown et al., 2005). Some medications, 
such as Clozapine, has been shown to be effective in preventing suicide 
among patients with schizophrenia (Meltzer et al., 2003), and lithium has 
been found to be effective in reducing suicide among patients with bipolar 
disorder. According to the National Institute of Mental Health, when com
-bined, psychotherapy and medications together effectively treat depression 
85 to 90 percent of the time. Treating mental illnesses (brain disorders of 
mood, thought, anxiety, and substance abuse) has been shown to prevent 
suicide.Strikingly, none of the prevention efforts mentioned above include the 
use of new technology and all it has to offer.
Need to Better Understand How Someone at Risk 
Communicates: Can Technology Help Save Lives?
Research shows that the majority of those who died by suicide commu-nicated their intent prior to their death (Michel et al., 2001). Sometimes this 
verbal communication was very directŠﬁI am going to kill myselfﬂŠwhile 
in other cases it was more indirect, such as, ﬁThe team would be better off 
without me.ﬂ Thus if we know how those at risk communicate, know their 
intent and ideation, and recognize the rapid advancements made in technol-ogy™s ability to help us communicate, we should be able to use technology 
to help us identify those individuals at risk and when these communications should occur to better prevent a suicide.
Although it is not a proven, evidence-based technique, consider the 
following approach: A person who has several risk factors for suicide uses 
his or her mobile phone to text, e-mail, post, or send out a message via 
one of the many current applications available. This hypothetical person 
might type something like, ﬁThanks for everything, checking out now,ﬂ or 
ﬁI know you™d be better off without me around. See ya.ﬂ Or the language 
could be more direct: ﬁI™m sorry. I just can™t take this pain any longer. I 
just want to die.ﬂ If we had a better sense of the language that people 
naturally use to communicate their intents, whether it is logical or not at 
the time, and if we had a better analysis of the online behaviors and rituals 
that precede an attempt, technology might be able to catch the pattern and 
offer interventions immediately. For example, a post as described above is 
sent out. The platform algorithms compare the words and phrases of the 
current post to past posts, and then an alert is sent to the sender. ﬁWe see 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
you posted something a few minutes ago. This is a little worrisome to us. 
Are you ok? Would you like to chat with someone?ﬂ The system could 
then be programmed to offer a chat service, to make a connection to a live 
phone contact, or to continue the monitoring of the posts. Further analysis 
will reveal if this is a suitable intervention, but ˜rst we need to determine 
the relevant information that helps us identify the early and late stages of 
suicide communication.Research Is the First Key to Developing Technology That Can Prevent 
SuicideTechnological advances have brought about remarkable capabilities 
and a wealth of new measurable data, but to date they have not been ap-plied to suicide prevention efforts. We must begin by acknowledging that 
data can help us develop better preventive strategies and possibly better 
intervention strategies. There is a virtually unlimited amount of data that 
already exists that we can use to begin to understand communication pat-terns. Why start here? Because going back to the previous example, what 
appears clear is that how people communicate (in this case, communica-tion about suicidal intent) does not appear to be the basis for how current 
suicide prevention strategies identify or assess the risk of suicide. 
We did a brief look into written communication messages about sui
-cidal intent. We found the following:
˜˚
There are far more searches performed on the phrases ﬁsuicide how 
toﬂ (7.4 million per month) and ﬁsuicide methodsﬂ (110,000 per 
month) than on ﬁsuicide helpﬂ (40,000 per month) and ﬁsuicide 
hotlineﬂ (49,000 per month).
˜˚
There is a high volume of natural speech searches like ﬁhow to 
kill yourselfﬂ (246,000 per month), ﬁI want to dieﬂ (368,000 per 
month), and ﬁhow you can kill yourselfﬂ (246,000 per month).
A Google search for ﬁcommit suicideﬂ yielded 12 million hits. A 
Google search for ﬁkill myselfﬂ yielded 17.8 million hits. In addition to the 
sites displayed by Google, advertisements appeared on the right side and 
at the top of the page containing the searches. While there have been few 
studies on advertising and suicide prevention, research by Klimes-Dougan 
et al. (2009) found that brief exposure to billboard campaigns resulted in 
increased maladaptive coping by viewers who were at risk of suicide. The 
billboards studied displayed the message ﬁPrevent Suicide. Treat Depres
-sion. See your doctor.ﬂ The brief messages portrayed in advertisements in 
search results might have the same unintended consequences as the short 
billboard signs and should be examined further. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 123
More research is needed to better understand the effects of ICT-based 
suicide prevention efforts. The ways in which people are thinking and us-ing technology may not be the same as current science-based assessment or 
intervention strategies would lead us to believe, and research is needed to 
better understand the effects. Existing technology has already provided us 
some idea of the power of language. If a person carries out a search using 
any of the terms in our ˜rst example, Google displays a red telephone with 
a National Suicide Prevention Hotline phone number as the ˜rst result. 
Interestingly, when the search terms from our second example are used 
instead, Google™s red phone and crisis number come up third on the list. 
Another example of an existing suicide program that uses information 
and communications technology can be found on Facebook™s social net
-working site. When someone is concerned about a person at risk of suicide, 
that person can immediately report his or her concern through Facebook™s 
Safety Center, and Facebook will contact the individual reported to be at 
risk and offer a national crisis line number and the ability to engage in an 
online chat with a certi˜ed mental health professional.
Even if we were able to gather all of the search engine data on people 
who typed in ﬁcommit suicideﬂ or ﬁkill myself,ﬂ we still might miss a 
substantial number of people at risk of suicide. On the other hand, if we 
learned more about how people are actually using technology to commu-nicate, it might allow us to do a better job of identifying people at risk. 
Taking this further, suppose we could use technology to intervene when 
someone at risk was identi˜ed. And suppose that technology could be used 
to alert others in the at-risk person™s life of the communication so that they 
too could reach out and intervene? Technology might also be able to be 
used to send a message to the at-risk person with information about lo-cal resources, hospitals, and crisis lines and other national resources, or it 
could provide messages of hope and recovery or immediate interaction with someone who could help through text, chat, or video platforms. In reality, 
there is no limit to how much could be done to immediately intervene and 
prevent a suicide, provided that we know who is truly at risk. 
What Are Some of the Questions We Need to Ask?
˜˚
Is there a pattern to online social behavior that mirrors of˚ine 
suicide behavior?˜˚
Is there posting or social behavior that is unique to social media?
˜˚
What words do people use when they decide to commit suicide?
˜˚
What role does or could anonymity play in outreach and engage-ment with our audiences?
˜˚
Are there media consumption patterns that precipitate an attempt?Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
There are some challenges and limitations to ICT-based suicide pre
-vention efforts that should be addressed. For example, privacy and con˜-dentiality are critically important to users as well as to the platforms and 
systems that obtain this information. It is important to address when and 
how communications that are believed to be private are shared with law 
enforcement, mental health agencies, and even within system staff. Another 
limitation is the workforce capacity of the systems that run these applica-tions. Most likely do not have mental health professionals on staff to deal 
with either user issues or work stress from addressing suicide risk. Further, 
most health care professionals™ lack of technological skills limits their abil
-ity to truly respond to and address this type of online content.
RecommendationsGiven the wealth of social media and online data already in exis
-tence from user content, we propose working with Facebook, Google, and 
Twitter to try to better understand the online behaviors of people consider
-ing suicide. We propose studying audience, behavior, language, and tone to 
look for patterns that match verbal communications and online communi-cations of people who have died by suicide or who have attempted suicide. 
We believe there could be signi˜cant bene˜ts to obtaining this information. 
Those bene˜ts could include˜˚
Direct online intervention strategies 
˜˚
Search and Facebook advertising˜˚
Search-optimized landing pages˜˚
Filters and noti˜cations
˜˚
Of˚ine education materials for gatekeepersTherefore, we recommend:
1. National suicide prevention (content) experts should continue to 
develop relationships with social media and new technology busi-nesses, including coding and development experts.
2. One or more major platforms (e.g., Facebook or Google) should 
conduct an analysis of user-generated content (posts or searches) 
and look for patterns that might help inform designers of programs 
about ways that technology can identify those at risk of suicide. 
This may require looking at content from users who have died by 
suicide or those who have attempted suicide and who allow access 
to the content for analysis.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 125
3. Development of policies and practices for technology platforms 
should be considered based on research on the language of users 
at risk of suicide.4. Suicide prevention experts and mental health professionals should 
be trained in the new technology and implications for use with 
patients.REFERENCESAcierno, R., M. A. Hernandez, A. B. Amstadter, H. S. Resnick, K. Steve, W. Muzzy, and D. G. 
Kilpatrick. 2010. Prevalence and correlates of emotional, physical, sexual, and ˜nancial 
abuse and potential neglect in the United States: The national elder mistreatment study. 
American Journal of Public Health 100(2):292Œ297.Astuto, J., and L. Allen. 2009. Home visitation and young children: An approach worth invest-ing in? SRCD Social Policy Report
 23(4):1Œ22.Barlow, J. 2006. Home visiting for parents of pre-school children in the UK. In 
Enhancing the 
well-being of children and families through effective interventions: International evidence for practice, edited by C. McAuley, P. J. Pecora and W. Rose. London: Jessica Kingsley.
Beach, S. R., R. Schulz, N. G. Castle, and J. Rosen. 2010. Financial exploitation and psycho
-logical mistreatment among older adults: Differences between African Americans and 
non-African Americans in a population-based survey. 
Gerontologist 50(6):744Œ757.Berlin, L. J., C. R. O™Neal, and J. Brooks-Gunn. 1998. What makes early intervention pro-grams work? The program, its participants, or their interaction. Zero to Three 18:4Œ15.Black, M. C., K. C. Basile, M. J. Breiding, S. G. Smith, M. L. Walters, M. T. Merrick, J. Chen, 
and M. R. Stevens. 2011. The national intimate partner violence and sexual violence 
survey: 2010 summary report. Atlanta, GA: National Center for Injury Prevention and 
Control, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Brown, G. K., T. Ten Have, G. R. Henriques, S. X. Xie, J. E. Hollander, and A. T. Beck. 2005. 
Cognitive therapy for the prevention of suicide attempts. 
Journal of the American Medi
-cal Association 294(5):563Œ570.CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). 2010a. Fact sheet: Understanding teen 
dating violence. www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/pdf/TeenDatingViolence2012-a.pdf.
CDC. 2010b. Suicide: Risk and protective factors. www.cdc.gov/ViolencePrevention/suicide/
riskprotectivefactors.html (accessed February 15, 2012).
Dong, M., R. Anda, V. Felitti, and W. Giles. 2005. The relationship of childhood abuse, neglect 
and household dysfunction to premature death of family members: Findings from the 
Adverse Childhood Experiences Study. 
American Journal of Epidemiology 161(11):S110.Dong, X. 2011. Prospective study of the elder self-neglect and emergency department use in 
a community population. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 59:S190ŒS191.Dong, X., M. Simon, C. Mendes de Leon, T. Fulmer, T. Beck, L. Hebert, C. Dyer, G. Paveza, 
and D. Evans. 2009. Elder self-neglect and abuse and mortality risk in a community-dwelling population. Journal of the American Medical Association
 302(5):517Œ526.Dong, X., M. Simon, T. Fulmer, C. F. Mendes de Leon, B. Rajan, and D. A. Evans. 2010. Physi
-cal function decline and the risk of elder self-neglect in a community-dwelling population. 
Gerontologist 50(3):316Œ326.Dong, X. Q., M. A. Simon, T. T. Beck, C. Farran, J. J. McCann, C. F. M. de Leon, E. Laumann, 
and D. A. Evans. 2011a. Elder abuse and mortality: The role of psychological and social 
wellbeing. Gerontology 57(6):549Œ558.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Dong, X. Q., M. A. Simon, T. Fulmer, C. F. M. de Leon, L. E. Hebert, T. Beck, P. A. Scherr, 
and D. A. Evans. 2011b. A prospective population-based study of differences in elder 
self-neglect and mortality between black and white older adults. Journals of Gerontology 
A: Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences
 66(6):695Œ704.Eaton, D. K., L. Kann, S. Kinchen, S. Shanklin, J. Ross, J. Hawkins, W. A. Harris, R. Lowry, 
T. McManus, D. Chyen, C. Lim, L. Whittle, N. D. Brener, and H. Wechsler. 2010. 
Youth risk behavior surveillanceŠUnited States, 2009. 
MMWR Surveillance Summaries 59(SSŒ5):144.Foshee, V.A., K. E. Bauman, X. B. Arriaga, R. W. Helms, G. G. Koch, and G. F. Linder. 1998. 
An evaluation of Safe Dates, an adolescent dating violence prevention program. 
American 
Journal of Public Health 88(1):45Œ50.Gomby, D. S. 2005. 
Home visitation in 2005: Outcomes for children and parents. Invest in 
kinds working.
 Working Paper No. 7: Committee for Economic Development.
Gould, M. S., and L. Davidson. 1988. Suicide contagion among adolescents. In Advances in 
adolescent mental health, Vol. III. Depression and Suicide
, edited by A. R. Stiffman and 
R. A. Felman. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Heise, L., and C. García-Moreno. 2002. Violence by intimate partners. In 
World report on 
violence and health, edited by E. G. Krug. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organiza
-tion. Pp. 87Œ121.
Heise, L., M. Ellsberg, and M. Gottemoeller. 1999. 
Ending violence against women. Baltimore, 
MD: Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, Center for Communications 
Programs.IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2002. Reducing suicide: A national imperative. Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.Jewkes, R., M. Nduna, J. Levin, N. Jama, K. Dunkle, A. Puren, and N. Duvvury. 2008. Im
-pact of Stepping Stones on incidence of HIV and HSV-2 and sexual behaviour in rural 
South Africa: Cluster randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journal 337:383Œ387.Klimes-Dougan, B., C. Y. S. Lee, and A. K. Houri. 2009. Suicide prevention with adolescents 
considering potential bene˜ts and untoward effects of public service announcements. 
Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention
 30(3):128Œ135.Korfmacher, J., B. Green, F. Staerkel, C. Peterson, G. Cook, L. Roggman, R. A. Faldowski, 
and R. Schiffman. 2008. Parent involvement in early childhood home visiting. Child & 
Youth Care Forum
 37(4):171Œ196.Lachs, M. S., C. S. Williams, S. O™Brien, L. Hurst, A. Kossack, A. Siegal, and M. E. Tinetti. 
1997. ED use by older victims of family violence. Annals of Emergency Medicine 30(4):448Œ454.Lachs, M. S., C. S. Williams, S. O™Brien, K. A. Pillemer, and M. E. Charlson. 1998. The mortal
-ity of elder mistreatment. Journal of the American Medical Association 280(5):428Œ432.Lachs, M. S., C. S. Williams, S. O™Brien, and K. A. Pillemer. 2002. Adult protective service 
use and nursing home placement. 
Gerontologist 42(6):734Œ739.Layzer, J., B. D. Goodson, L. Bernstein, and C. Price. 2001. 
National Evaluation of Family 
Support Programs ˜nal report. Volume A, the meta-analysis. Report submitted to Ad
-ministration for Children, Youth and Families.
 Abt Associates.Lazev, A. B., D. J. Vidrine, R. C. Arduino, and E. R. Gritz. 2004. Increasing access to smoking 
cessation treatment in a low-income, HIV-positive population: The feasibility of using 
cellular telephones. 
Nicotine & Tobacco Research
 6(2):281Œ286.Lewis, S. F., and W. Fremouw. 2001. Dating violence: A critical review of the literature. 
Clini-cal Psychology Review 21(1):105Œ127.McCurdy, K., and D. Daro. 2001. Parent involvement in family support programs: An inte
-grated theory. 
Family Relations 50(2):113Œ121.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRACTICAL APPLICATIONS OF 
mPREVENTVIOLENCE
 127
McCurdy, K., R. A. Gannon, and D. Daro. 2003. Participation patterns in home-based family 
support programs: Ethnic variations. Family Relations 52(1):3Œ11.Meltzer, H. Y., L. Alphs, A. I. Green, A. C. Altamura, R. Anand, A. Bertoldi, M. Bourgeois, 
G. Chouinard, Z. Islam, J. Kane, R. Krishnan, J. P. Lindenmayer, and S. Potkin, for 
the InterSePT study group. 2003. Clozapine treatment for suicidality in schizophre-niaŠInternational Suicide Prevention Trial (InterSePT). 
Archives of General Psychiatry
 60(1):82Œ91.Michel, K., P. Dey, and L. Valach. 2001. Suicide as goal-directed action. In 
Understanding 
suicidal behaviour: The suicidal process approach to research and treatment, edited by 
K. V. Heeringen. Chichester, UK: Wiley and Sons.
Moscicki, E. K. 2001. Epidemiology of completed and attempted suicide: Toward a framework 
for prevention. Clinical Neuroscience Research
 1(5):310Œ323.Mosqueda, L., and X. Q. Dong. 2011. Elder abuse and self-neglect: ﬁI don™t care anything 
about going to the doctor, to be honest . . . .ﬂ 
Journal of the American Medical Associa-tion 306(5):532Œ540.Nation, M., C. Crusto, A. Wandersman, K. L. Kumpfer, D. Seybolt, E. Morrissey-Kane, and K. 
Davino. 2003. What works in preventionŠPrinciples of effective prevention programs. 
American Psychologist 58(6Œ7):449Œ456.NRC (National Research Council). 2003. Elder mistreatment: Abuse, neglect, and exploitation 
in an aging America, edited by R. J. Bonnie and R. B. Wallace. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press.
Olds, D. L., J. Robinson, R. O™Brien, D. W. Luckey, L. M. Pettitt, C. R. Henderson, R. K. Ng, 
K. L. Sheff, J. Korfmacher, S. Hiatt, and A. Talmi. 2002. Home visiting by paraprofes
-sionals and by nurses: A randomized, controlled trial. 
Pediatrics 110(3):486Œ496.O™Leary, K. D., and A. M. S. Slep. 2011. Prevention of partner abuse by focusing on males 
and females. Prevention Science (12):1Œ11.Reza, A., M. J. Breiding, J. Gulaid, J. A. Mercy, C. Blanton, Z. Mthethwa, S. Bamrah, L. L. 
Dahlberg, and M. Anderson. 2009. Sexual violence and its health consequences for 
female children in Swaziland: A cluster survey study. 
Lancet 373(9679):1966Œ1972.Silovsky, J. F., D. Bard, M. Chaf˜n, D. Hecht, L. Burris, A. Owora, L. Beasley, D. Doughty, 
and J. Lutzker. 2011. Prevention of child maltreatment in high-risk rural families: A ran
-domized clinical trial with child welfare outcomes. Children and Youth Services Review
 33(8):1435Œ1444.Sweet, M. A., and M. I. Appelbaum. 2004. Is home visiting an effective strategy? A meta-analytic review of home visiting programs for families with young children. 
Child De
-velopment 75(5):1435Œ1456.Taylor, B., N. D. Stein, D. Woods, and E. Mumford. 2011. 
Shifting boundaries: Final report 
on an experientmental evaluation of a youth dating violence prevention program in 
New York City middle schools
. Document 236175. Washington, DC: National Institute 
of Justice.Teaster, P., T. Dugar, M. Moendiondo, E. Abner, K. Cecil, and J. Otto. 2004. 
The 2004 Survey 
of Adult Protective Services: Abuse of adults 60 years of age and older. www.elderabuse
 center.org/pdf/research/apsreport030703.pdf (accessed April 4, 2007).
United Republic of Tanzania. 2011. 
Violence against children in Tanzania: Finding of a na
-tional survey 2009. www.unicef.org/media/˜les/violence_against_children_in_tanzania_
report.pdf (accessed April 3, 2012).
Vagi, K., E. M. Rothman, N. Elkovitch, A. Teten Tharp, M. J. Breiding, and D. M. Hall. In 
preparation. Beyond correlates: A review of risk and protective factors for teen dating 
violence perpetration and victimization.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Villanueva, A. 2007. 
Can cell phone message service increase adherence in HIV/AIDS patients 
on therapy? http://apin.harvard.edu/research/takemi/˜les/RP216.pdf (accessed November 28, 2007).WHO (World Health Organization). 2012. 
Suicide prevention (SUPRE). www.who.int/
mental_health/prevention/suicide/suicideprevent/en/.Wolfe, D. A., C. Wekerle, K. Scott, A. L. Straatman, C. Grasley, and D. ReitzelŒJaffe. 2003. 
Dating violence prevention with at-risk youth: A controlled outcome evaluation. 
Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
 71(2):279Œ291.Wolfe, D. A., C. Crooks, P. Jaffe, D. Chiodo, R. Hughes, W. Ellis, L. Stitt, and A. Donner. 
2009. A school-based program to prevent adolescent dating violence: A cluster random-ized trial. 
Archives of Paediatrics & Adolescent Medicine 163(8):692Œ699.Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.˘

mPreventViolence: Communications and Technology for Violence 
Prevention A Workshop
 December 8Œ9, 2011AGENDAWorkshop Objectives
:˚˜˚
˚To transform the ˜eld of violence prevention by accelerating the 
integration of information and communications technologies 
(ICTs) into research and prevention activities;
˚˜˚
˚To explore and anticipate the application of innovative ICTs to 
violence prevention;˚˜˚
˚To highlight:

the use of traditional and new media to communicate 
 
evidence-based information for violence prevention; 

new applications of social media and new communications 
technologies to prevent violence; and
the negative impact and unintended consequences of tradi
-tional and new media along with ways to mitigate these 
impacts.129Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
DAY 1: T
HURS
DAY
, D
ECEMBER
 8
SESSION
 I. Setting the Stage 
 8:30 AM Œ 12:00 PM8:30 AM Œ Kickoff 
 DEEPALI
 PATEL
, 
Institute of Medicine  
JIM
 MERCY
, 
Division of Violence Prevention
, 
Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention L
ISA
 W
ITTER
, 
Fenton 9:00 AM Œ Keynote ERIK
 H
ERSMAN
, 
Ushahidi and iHub
9:30 AM Œ The State of Violence Prevention: Progress and Challenges
 M
ARK
 ROSENBERG
, 
The Task Force on Global Health
10:00 AM Œ Facilitated Audience Discussion
10:30 AM Œ 
BRE
AK10:50 AM Œ 
 The Field of Information and Communications Technologies 
and What It Promises for the Future
 JODY RANCK
, 
Public Health Institute11:10 AM Œ Response Panel
 KAT
HLEEN
 MCGOWAN
, U.S. Agency for International Development
 M
IC
HELE
 MOLONEY
-KITTS
, Together for Girls
 11:40 AM Œ Facilitated Audience Discussion
LUNCH
 IN
 THE
 CANADA
 ROOM
 12:00 PM Œ 1:00 PM
SESSION
 II
. Preventing Violence Using Information 
and Communications Technologies
The purpose of this session is to illustrate the myriad ways that ICTs can 
be used to prevent violence. A series of short, animated presentations will 
illuminate some of the most interesting current approaches.
 1:00 PM Œ Session Overview 
 KRISTIN
 SCHUBERT
, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 131
1:10 PM Œ Promising ICT Approaches 
 C
HARLOTTE
 COLE
, 
Sesame Workshop
 B
EN
 SAWYER
, 
Games for Health 
 E
ES
HA PAN
DIT
, 
Breakthrough 
 JUDIT
H CARTA
, University of Kansas 
 A
SHLEY
 W
OMBLE
, National Suicide Prevention Lifeline
2:00 PM Œ Facilitated Audience Discussion
SESSION
 III
. The Problem of Violence in the 
 Media and Potential Remedies
The purpose of this session is to acknowledge and discuss the role of 
traditional and new media in causing violence as well as potential avenues 
for preventing these unintended consequences. The session will outline 
the evidence base supporting such effects for both traditional and new 
media, review current approaches to mitigating the impact of such mediated 
violence on children and adolescents, and address the role of public policies 
governing media content and how it is shared.
2:30 PM Œ  
The Contribution of Traditional and New Media to Violence 
and Potential Remedies 
  VIS
H V
IS
WANAT
H, 
Department of Society, Human Development and 
Health, 
Harvard School of Public Health 
2:50 PM Œ The Use of Public Policy in Addressing Media Violence
 DALE
 KUNKEL
, 
University of Arizona 
3:10 PM Œ Audience Discussion and Interactive Dialogue
3:40 PM Œ BRE
AK SESSION
 IV. Social Technology and Large-Scale Change
 4:00 PM Œ 5:15 PM
The use of social media and ICTs to effect macro-level change has gained 
signi˜cant attention in the past year, particularly in the Middle East and 
North Africa. How have these tools changed the ways people mobilize? 
How can they be leveraged for positive and sustainable change?   
4:00 PM Œ  
Revolutions Gone Viral: How Social Media Transform Small 
Events into Large Change
 JOHN POLLOCK
, 
Technology Review
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
4:20 PM Œ Sustaining Peace Post-Con˚ict
 MICK
 F
EALTY
, Slugger Consults 
4:35 PM Œ Facilitated Audience Discussion
5:15 PM Œ End of Day 1
DAY 2: F
RI
DAY
, D
ECEMBER
 9
8:30 AM Œ Opening Remarks and Summary of Day 1
  
JIM
 MERCY
, 
Division of Violence Prevention
, 
Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention9:00 AM Œ Evaluations of mHealth 
  
WILLIAM
 RILEY
, 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National 
Institutes of Health
9:25 AM Œ Facilitated Audience DiscussionSESSION
 V
. Information and Communications 
 Technology for Violence Prevention 
 9:45 AM Œ 12:00 PMThe goal of this session is to connect ICT and violence prevention experts 
to brainstorm, innovate, and scale new or existing ideas, tools, and tactics 
to prevent violence.9:45 AM Œ Introduction FRAN
 H
ENRY
, F. Felix Foundation
10:00 AM Œ Breakouts: ICT Views of Violence Prevention
Child maltreatment prevention
   HARRIET
 MAC
MILLAN
, McMaster University  DAHNA
 GOL
DSTEIN
, 
Philantech, LLCSuicide prevention  DAN
 REI
DENBERG
, 
Suicide Awareness Voices of Education
  JOHN GOR
DON
, FentonYouth violence prevention
   
KIM
 SCOTT
, Child Resiliency Programme, Hope Counseling and 
Wellness Center
  SCOTT
 GOO
DSTEIN
, 
Revolution Messaging 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 133
Dating violence prevention
  ANDRA
 THARP
, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
  C
ONSTANCE
 D
ECHERNEY
, 
iCrossing  
JASON
 RZEPKA
, 
MT
VElder abuse prevention
  XIN
QI D
ONG
, 
Rush University Medical Center
  ERIC
 BRO
WN, 
ImpactGames  DONNA
 LEVIN
, Care.com11:00 AM Œ Presentations on Pre-Workshop Ideas and Breakout Sessions
11:45 AM Œ Full Audience Interaction
BRE
AK FOR
 L
UNCH
 12:00 PM Œ 1:00 PM
SESSION
 V
I. Use of Information and Communications Technologies in 
Dissemination and Implementation of Violence Prevention Concepts and 
Knowledge 1:00 PM Œ 2:00 PM
The purpose of this session is to describe the challenges inherent in dissemina-tion and implementation, to illustrate how ICTs can be used to address these 
challenges, and to discuss the implications for the ˜eld of violence prevention.1:00 PM Œ 
 Creating Public Value Through Cross-Boundary Collaboration: 
The Utility of ICT
 DEVON
 H
ALLEY
, Deloitte Research GovLab (XBC) 
1:20 PM Œ  
Scaling Up: Lessons Learned from Public Health and 
Applications to Violence Prevention
 JOE
 MCCANNON
, 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
 1:40 PM Œ Facilitated Audience Discussion 
2:00 PM Œ Closing Observations and Insights
  M
IKE
 F
EIGELSON
, Bernard Van Leer Foundation 
 JOHN GOR
DON
, Fenton B
RIGI
D MCCAW, Kaiser Permanente JIM
 MERCY
, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention3:00 PM Œ Workshop Adjourns 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.‹

Eric Brown, M.E.T., 
co-founded ImpactGames to in˚uence society and 
promote change through interactive media. Toward this end, ImpactGames 
developed PeaceMaker, a video game simulation of the IsraeliŒPalestinian 
con˚ict to promote dialogue and understanding. Unlike most serious games, 
PeaceMaker aims to bridge the gap between education and entertainment 
and reach a mass market. PeaceMaker has been sold in more than 60 coun
-tries, been featured in media outlets around the world, and won several in-ternational awards. ImpactGames also created Play the News, a Web-based 
platform to bring interactive gaming elements to the online news media 
industry. Play the News changes the paradigm of news consumption from 
passive reading to active engagement. Play the News won the ˜rst Knight 
Foundation News Game Award. Mr. Brown was listed as one of the ﬁ100 
Social Entrepreneurs Changing the Worldﬂ in 
Newsweek Japan. He holds 
a master™s degree in entertainment technology from Carnegie Mellon Uni
-versity and received a B.F.A. in painting, with focused studies in education 
and computer graphics, from Washington University in St. Louis.
Judith Carta, Ph.D., M.S., 
is director of early childhood research at the 
Juniper Gardens Children™s Project, a senior scientist in the Institute for 
Life Span Studies, and professor of special education at the University of 
Kansas. Her research focuses on developing strategies to minimize the ef-fects of poverty on children™s development and translating that research 
into practices that can be used by teachers, parents, and other caregiv
-ers to promote children™s school readiness and prevent child neglect. Her 
work has been funded by the National Institutes of Health, the Centers 
134Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 135
for Disease Control and Prevention, the Department of Education, and the 
Administration for Children and Families, and since 1984 she has received 
federal grants totaling more than $28 million. She has been the principal 
investigator or collaborating researcher of numerous federally funded cen-ters, including the Early Childhood Research Institute on Substance Abuse, 
the Early Childhood Research Institute for the Measurement of Growth 
and Development, the Centers for the Study of Child Neglect, Using Cel-lular Phones for Enhancing Parenting Interventions for Preventing Child 
Maltreatment, Early Head Start National Research and Evaluation Project, 
the Center for Response to Early Intervention in Early Childhood, and the 
Technical Assistance Center for Social-Emotional Intervention. She was 
recently appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to be 
part of the Advisory Committee on Head Start Research and Evaluation. 
Dr. Carta served for 10 years as the editor of 
Topics in Early Childhood 
Special Education and serves on the editorial boards of numerous scienti˜c 
journals. Since 1985 she has been responsible for more than 100 publica-tions in peer-reviewed journals and has authored books and several book 
chapters related to evidence-based practices to improve the language and 
social competence of young children, reduce risk factors affecting children™s 
development, advance approaches for monitoring progress in young chil
-dren, and promote parenting interventions to prevent child maltreatment. 
She is a national and international presenter and consultant to numerous 
projects in the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. 
Charlotte Cole, Ed.D., 
is senior vice president of global education at Sesame 
Workshop in New York, overseeing the nonpro˜t™s company-wide global 
strategies and leading the development of all curriculum and research 
around Sesame Workshop™s international projects. Working with educators 
and production teams throughout the world, she has most recently been en
-gaged in projects in Bangladesh, Colombia, Egypt, India, Indonesia, Israel, 
Jordan, Mexico, Nigeria, Northern Ireland, South Africa, and West Bank/
Gaza. Prior to joining the workshop, Dr. Cole worked as a senior researcher 
at Joslin Diabetes Center in Boston on a longitudinal study of families of 
children with acute and chronic illness funded by the National Institutes 
of Health. She has also served as a consultant to the Harvard Institute for 
International Development on several child-health projects in Thailand. Dr. 
Cole received her doctorate in human development and psychology from 
the Harvard Graduate School of Education at Harvard University. Her 
teaching experience includes serving as a course instructor at Boston Col-lege (Newton, Massachusetts), Lesley College (Cambridge, Massachusetts), 
and Saint Mary-of-the-Woods College (Terre Haute, Indiana). She has 
worked as a board member for several community service organizations, 
including the Council on Domestic Abuse in Terre Haute, Indiana; Oxford 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
Academy in Westbrook, Connecticut; and NetAid in New York. She is a 
member of the editorial board of the Journal of Children and Media and 
served as the publication™s ˜rst review and commentary editor. 
Constance DeCherney
 is a strategist for iCrossing, where she serves clients 
across numerous categories, including ˜nance, travel, and health care. 
iCrossing is a unit of the Hearst Corporation. Prior to joining iCrossing, 
Ms. DeCherney led global digital strategy and innovation for the Planned 
Parenthood Federation of America. She built an award-winning mobile 
program and implemented search and social media strategies as well as a 
national social governance program. Under her leadership, Planned Parent-hood was ranked 13th out of 100 by L2 Think Tank for the Public Sector 
Digital IQ Index and received an eHEALTHCARE Award for Best Design 
in 2010. She has lectured at Columbia University and New York University 
and has been interviewed on culture and the Web by the
 New York
 Daily 
News, BusinessWeek
, and MSNBC.com. She earned a dual B.A. in anthro
-pology and political science from the University of Delaware. 
XinQi Dong, M.D., M.P.H., 
is the associate director of the Rush Institute 
for Healthy Aging and an associate professor of medicine, nursing, and be-havioral sciences at the Rush University Medical Center. Having emigrated 
from China, he has had longstanding interests in human rights and social 
justice issues in vulnerable populations. Dr. Dong™s research focuses on the 
epidemiological studies of elder abuse in the United States and China, with 
particular emphasis on its adverse health outcomes and its relationship 
between psychological and social well-being. He currently is an American 
Political Science Association Congressional Policy Fellow/Health and Aging Policy Fellow working with a diverse group of policy leaders at the na-tional, state, and local levels on issues relevant to elder abuse. He has been 
working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National 
Institute on Aging, and the National Academy of Sciences on the state of 
the science for the issues of elder abuse. Moreover, he has been working 
with the Chicago Well-Being Task Force and the legislative task force to 
revise and ultimately pass the Illinois Elder Abuse Act. Currently, Dr. Dong 
serves as a senior policy and research advisor for the Administration on 
Aging at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and a senior 
policy advisor for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. He is 
actively working with Chinese communities to promote understanding and 
civic engagement on the issues of elder abuse through innovative, culturally 
and linguistically appropriate ways. He serves on the board of directors for 
the Chinese American Service League, the largest social services organiza-tion in the Midwest serving the needs of Chinese population. He is a fellow 
of the Institute of Medicine of Chicago and a member of the Institute of 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 137
Medicine™s Forum on Global Violence Prevention. He is a Beeson Scholar 
and is the recipient of the Nobuo Maeda International Aging and Public 
Health Research Award, the National Physician Advocacy Merit Award, 
and the Maxwell A. Pollack Award in productive aging from the Geronto
-logical Society of America.
Mick Fealty is a writer and analyst and is the founding editor of Slugger 
O™Toole
, one of Northern Ireland™s leading political blogs. His study of the 
future of unionism in Northern Ireland was widely acclaimed on all sides 
of the political divide. He has blogged for a number of other websites, 
including live reporting from the Commonwealth Heads of Government 
Meeting in Abuja, Nigeria, in December 2003. He is currently working in 
partnership with the British Council in Dublin as commissioning editor for 
the Britain and Ireland
 website which is tasked with examining the politi
-cal and cultural shifts in relations between the United Kingdom and the 
Republic of Ireland since the signing of the historic Belfast Agreement. He 
has also written for a number of publications on the subject of journalism 
and the challenge of the new media. He was born in Belfast and now lives 
in Dorset, where he also teaches the Irish language to adults.
Michael Feigelson, M.P.A., 
is a native of New York City and worked 
in Chiapas for the child-protection nongovernmental organization Melel 
Xojobal before completing a masters in public affairs at Princeton Univer-sity and joining the Bernard van Leer Foundation in 2007, initially as a 
program of˜cer. He has worked with various international organizations, 
including UNICEF and the International Rescue Committee, and was the 
recipient of a Thomas J. Watson Fellowship through which he worked with 
street children in Mexico, Ghana, and Romania. He also spent some time 
as a business analyst at McKinsey & Co.Dahna Goldstein, M.B.A., 
is the founder and chief executive of˜cer of 
PhilanTech, LLC, provider of the PhilanTrack online grants management 
system (patent pending), a Web-based platform that helps social sector 
organizations manage grant information more ef˜ciently for greater social 
impact. Prior to starting PhilanTech, Ms. Goldstein worked for venture phi
-lanthropies, including Ashoka and the Blue Ridge Foundation New York, 
and produced interactive eLearning programs for the Global Education 
Network and Harvard Business School Publishing, including the award-winning ﬁWhat Is a Leader?ﬂ program. A graduate of Williams College, she 
also holds a master of education degree, with a concentration in technology, 
from Harvard University, and an M.B.A. from the Stern School of Business 
at New York University.
 She has written extensively about change manage-ment and data integration in the nonpro˜t sector, including a chapter on 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
managing change for technology in Managing Technology to Meet Your 
Mission: A Strategic Guide for Nonpro˜t Leaders (Wiley, 2009). She serves 
on the board of JustGive.org and was recently named one of Business-Week
™s 25 Most Promising Social Entrepreneurs.
Scott Goodstein is founder and chief executive of˜cer of  RevolutionMessaging.com, a progressive digital and mobile technology company. Mr. Goodstein 
was external online director for Obama for America in 2008 and developed 
the campaign™s social networking platforms. His pioneering work included 
running the ˜rst political campaign effort to launch niche-based social 
networks such as BlackPlanet, Eons, MiGente, AsianAve, and Disaboom. 
He built the campaign™s lifestyle marketing strategy and developed the 
ﬁstreet teamﬂ materials used in battleground states. He also created and 
implemented Obama Mobile, an advanced communication strategy that 
included text messaging, downloads, interactive voice response communica-tion, a mobile website (WAP), and even an iPhone application. Prior to his 
work at Obama for America, Mr. Goodstein worked for the Democratic 
Legislative Campaign Committee, the Democratic Congressional Campaign 
Committee, and more than two dozen progressive political initiatives. In 
2004 he co-founded Punkvoter.com and Rock Against Bush, which became 
a $4 million young-voter mobilization effort. He has conducted political 
training for the National Democratic Institute, UNICEF, Democracy for 
America, the Campaign Management Institute, and the New Organizing 
Institute. Mr. Goodstein has spoken at Columbia University, American 
University, George Washington University,
 and the Milken Institute. He has 
been a featured speaker at events in Morocco, Hungary, Finland, Singapore, 
and Malaysia.John Gordon is senior vice president of digital in Fenton™s New York of
-˜ce and manages the social media practice ˜rm-wide. In that position he 
works to create successful engagement campaigns by integrating strategy, 
technology, and content for clients like the American Jewish World Service, 
ASPCA, and Stony˜eld Organics. Mr. Gordon was formerly the director of 
new media at Spit˜re Strategies, where he helped clients such as the Hewlett 
Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, and the Joint Ocean 
Commission use new media to drive supporters, win campaigns, and build 
capacity. While at Spit˜re, Mr. Gordon worked with the president of the 
˜rm to develop a comprehensive step-by-step guidebook to help nonpro˜ts 
plan public policy, advocacy, and social marketing campaigns. Prior to 
Spit˜re, Mr. Gordon was the director of interactive communications and 
marketing at the Girl Scouts of the USA (GSUSA), where he developed on-line marketing and communications initiatives that served the membership, 
fundraising, advocacy, and e-commerce goals of the national organization 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 139
and more than 300 Girl Scout councils nationwide. He created GSUSA™s 
˜rst online marketing campaign to support the $700 million annual cookie 
sale and led Web strategy for a Dove Super Bowl ad campaign in partner
-ship with Unilever. Prior to GSUSA, he was partner and creative director at 
the Carol/Trevelyan Strategy Group (CTSG), where he led the development 
of award-winning creative campaigns, including the reality showŒinspired 
cartoon series ﬁRepublican Survivorﬂ for the Democratic Congressional 
Campaign Committee and Amnesty International™s Stop Violence Against 
Women. His innovative efforts have been recognized with multiple Webby, 
Pollie, and Golden Dot awards.Devon Halley is a senior technology consultant at Deloitte Consulting LLP. 
He co-authored ﬁXBC: Creating Public Value by Unleashing the Power 
of Cross-Boundary Collaborationﬂ as well as ﬁWhat Geeks Can Teach 
Governmentﬂ for Governing magazine. He is a recent alumnus of Deloitte™s 
GovLab, which is a program that works closely with senior government ex
-ecutives and thought leaders to conduct research into critical and emerging 
issues shaping the public and nonpro˜t sectors in order to develop innova
-tive yet practical ways that governments can transform the way they deliver 
their services and prepare for the challenges ahead. Mr. Halley is currently 
helping the Transportation Security Administration ˜nd ways to leverage 
social computing to meet critical mission needs and improve the passenger 
experience. He holds degrees from Allegheny College and Carnegie Mellon 
University. 
Frances Henry, M.B.A., 
serves as advisor to the F. Felix Foundation. From 
2005 to 2009, she created and directed Global Violence Prevention, a 
project which advanced the science-based prevention of violence in low- 
and middle-income countries through a coalition of U.S. researchers and 
practitioners. Based on her experiences of childhood sexual abuse, for 13 
years she founded and directed Stop It Now!, an organization that prevents 
the sexual abuse of children. She is author of Vaccines for Violence
, a set of 
˜ve essays exploring how she learned to counter violence by dealing with 
fear, by balancing accountability and compassion, and by increasing her 
capacity to connect to others. Ms. Henry™s previous work includes owning 
a management consulting company and directing presidential and guberna
-torial commissions for women. She served as staff to the U.S. Commission 
on International Women™s Year. 
Erik Hersman,
 who was raised in Kenya and Sudan, is now a technologist 
and blogger who lives in Nairobi. He is a co-founder of Ushahidi, a free 
and open-source platform for crowdsourcing information and visualizing 
data. He is the founder of AfriGadget, a multi-author site that showcases 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
stories of African inventions and ingenuity and is an African technology 
blogger at WhiteAfrican.com. He currently manages Ushahidi™s operations 
and strategy and is in charge of the iHub, Nairobi™s Innovation Hub for the 
technology community, bringing together entrepreneurs, hackers, designers, 
and the investment community. Mr. Hersman is a TED Senior Fellow, a 
PopTech Fellow and speaker, and an organizer for Maker Faire Africa. You 
can ˜nd him on Twitter at @WhiteAfrican.
Dale Kunkel, Ph.D., is professor of communication at the University of 
Arizona. Dr. Kunkel studies children and media issues from diverse perspec
-tives, including television-effects research as well as assessments of media 
industry content and practices. He is a former Congressional science fellow 
and has testi˜ed as an expert witness on children™s media topics at numer
-ous hearings before the U.S. Senate, the U.S. House of Representatives, and 
the Federal Communications Commission. Dr. Kunkel previously taught at 
Indiana University and the University of California, Santa Barbara. Among 
the topics he examines are the effects of television violence, sexual content, 
and advertising on young people.
Donna Levin has had a 15-year career as a social entrepreneur, most re
-cently serving as vice president of operations at Upromise.com, an online 
service that helps families save for college. At Care.com, Ms. Levin has 
served on the management team as vice president, operations, establishing 
the company™s safety and customer service infrastructure. Care.com (www.
care.com) is the largest and fastest-growing service used by families seeking 
high-quality caregivers, providing a place to easily connect with hundreds 
of thousands of care providers, share care giving experiences, and get ad-vice. Care.com has been featured in national news outlets including NBC™s 
Today
, Good Morning America, the Wall Street Journal
, the New York 
Times
, USA Today
, Parenting, and Fortune. In September 2011 she transi-tioned to spearhead new programs for families who face some of the most 
challenging care situationsŠour nation™s military population and families 
with special-needs children and seniors. With a strong belief that both 
government and corporate entities have a fundamental responsibility to 
help improve their communities, she and her team are currently developing 
innovative technologies and resources to unite all sectors in their mission. 
Ms. Levin holds a B.A. from Emerson College.
Harriet MacMillan, M.D., Ms.C., is a psychiatrist and pediatrician con-ducting family violence research. She is a member of the Offord Centre for 
Child Studies and professor in the department of psychiatry and behavioural 
neurosciences and in the department of pediatrics at McMaster University, 
with associate memberships in the department of clinical epidemiology and 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 141
biostatistics and the department of psychology. Dr. MacMillan holds the 
David R. (Dan) Offord Chair in Child Studies and has received funding 
support from the WT Grant Foundation, the Canadian Institutes of Health 
Research, NARSAD and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
From 1993 to 2004, she was the founding director of the Child Advo-cacy and Assessment Program (CAAP) at McMaster Children™s Hospital, a 
multidisciplinary program committed to reducing the burden of suffering 
associated with family violence. Her research focuses on the epidemiol-ogy of violence against children and women, including prevention of child 
maltreatment and intimate partner violence. She has led randomized con-trolled trials investigating the effectiveness of such approaches as universal 
screening in reducing intimate partner violence and nurse home visitation 
in preventing the recurrence of physical abuse and neglect among children.Joseph McCannon is senior advisor to the administrator and group direc-tor of learning and diffusion in the Innovation Center at the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services. Prior to this, he was vice president and 
a faculty member on dissemination and large-scale improvement at the In
-stitute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI). He worked at IHI beginning in 
2001, leading organizational efforts to spread change in Africa, the United 
States, and several other regions. Speci˜cally, he supported IHI™s collabora
-tion with the World Health Organization to design and amplify its ﬁ3 by 5ﬂ 
initiative, an effort to deliver antiretroviral drugs to 3 million people glob-ally by the end of 2005. He also directed the organization™s major domestic 
initiatives to improve patient safety, the 100,000 Lives Campaign and the 5 
Million Lives Campaign, which involved more than 4,000 hospitals and 70 
˜eld of˜ces. He has advised or consulted on other national quality-improve
-ment efforts in the United States, England, Japan, Canada, and Denmark 
and on initiatives outside health care (e.g., homelessness and corrections) 
as well. Mr. McCannon started his career in the publishing industry, with 
roles at
 Fast Company, Atlantic Monthly
, and
 Outside magazines. He is 
a graduate of Harvard University and was a Reuters and Merck fellow at 
Stanford University in 2003Œ2004.Brigid McCaw, M.D., M.P.H., M.S., FACP, 
is medical director for the Fam-ily Violence Prevention Program at Kaiser Permanente (KP). Her teaching, 
research, and publications focus on developing a health systems response 
to intimate partner violence and the impact of intimate partner violence on 
health status and mental health. She is a fellow of the American College of 
Physicians. KP, a large nonpro˜t integrated health care organization serving 
8.6 million members in nine states and the District of Columbia, has imple-mented one of the most comprehensive health care responses to domestic 
violence in the United States. The nationally recognized ﬁsystems modelﬂ 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
approach is available across the continuum of care including outpatient, 
emergency, and inpatient care; advice and call centers; and chronic care 
programs. The electronic medical record includes clinician tools to facilitate recognition, referrals, resources, and follow-up for patients experiencing 
domestic violence and provides data for quality improvement measures. 
Over the past decade, identi˜cation of domestic violence has increased six-fold, with most members identi˜ed in the ambulatory rather than acute care 
settings. The majority of identi˜ed patients receive follow-up mental health 
services. KP also provides prevention, outreach, and domestic violence re-sources for its workforce. Violence prevention is an important focus for KP 
community bene˜t investments and research studies. The KP program, un-der the leadership of Brigid McCaw, has received several national awards.
  Kathleen (Kay) McGowan provides policy advice to the administrator of the 
U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) on political and devel
-opment issues pertaining to Afghanistan. A Persian speaker, Ms. McGowan 
has been involved in rebuilding Afghanistan since 2003, when she served 
as chief of staff to U.S. Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad at the American 
embassy in Kabul. At USAID she is responsible for identifying high-impact 
development opportunities that complement the U.S. government™s civilian 
assistance portfolio for Afghanistan and foster improved coordination with 
Afghan public- and private-sector stakeholders. Speci˜cally, she pursues 
foundational investments that are appropriate to Afghanistan™s current 
capacity and needs, that are sustainable, and that contribute directly to 
Afghanistan™s capacity to transition to full sovereignty. She leads USAID™s 
effort to leverage the success of Afghanistan™s mobile telephony network 
for economic and social development goals, including scaling the country™s 
nascent mobile money sector and building innovative extension services for 
agriculture, health, and education into USAID™s assistance portfolio. Before 
joining USAID, Ms. McGowan ran the political section at the Iran Regional Presence Of˜ce out of the U.S. consulate in Dubai. In 2006Œ2007, she was 
a Rusk teaching fellow at Georgetown University™s Institute for the Study 
of Diplomacy, where she remains a non-resident associate. She has written 
about Afghanistan for the New York Times
 and State magazine. She is a 
term member of the Council on Foreign Relations.
James A. Mercy, Ph.D., 
is Special Advisor for Strategic Directions at the 
Division of Violence Prevention in the National Center for Injury Preven
-tion and Control of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 
He began working at CDC in a newly formed activity to examine violence 
as a public health problem and, over the past two decades, has helped to 
develop the public health approach to violence and conducted and overseen 
numerous studies of the epidemiology of youth suicide, family violence, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 143
homicide, and ˜rearm injuries. Dr. Mercy also served as a co-editor of the 
World Report on Violence and Health
 prepared by the World Health Or
-ganization (WHO) and served on the editorial board of the United Nations 
Secretary General™s 
Study of Violence Against Children
. Most recently, he™s 
been working on a global partnership with UNICEF, PEPFAR, WHO, and 
others to end sexual violence against girls. His recent publications include 
ﬁAttention-De˜cit/Hyperactivity Disorder, Conduct Disorder, and Young 
Adult Intimate Partner Violenceﬂ (
Archives of General Psychiatry
, 2010) 
and ﬁSexual Violence and Its Health Consequences for Female Children in 
Swaziland: A Cluster Survey Studyﬂ (
Lancet, 2009).Michele Moloney-Kitts, M.A., is the managing director of Together for 
Girls, providing strategic leadership to the partnership as well as manage-ment and oversight of day-to-day operations. A staff member of UNAIDS, 
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, she also serves as a 
senior advisor to the executive director. Prior to joining Together for Girls, 
Ms. Moloney-Kitts served as the assistant global AIDS coordinator for the 
U.S. President™s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR). As a leader in 
international public health for more than 30 years, her primary focus has 
been on women and children. She has served as a health of˜cer for U.S. 
Agency for International Development, with long-term postings in Mo-rocco, Cambodia, South Africa, and Washington, DC. Within PEPFAR she 
was the deputy assistant secretary responsible for oversight of ˜eld imple-mentation and multilateral relations. In that capacity she also served on the 
board of the Global Fund for AIDS, TB, and Malaria and as the chairman 
of the Portfolio and Implementation Committee. Ms. Moloney-Kitts has 
worked as a nurse practitioner and a nurse midwife, with a particular focus 
on underserved populations, especially adolescents. She holds a bachelor™s 
degree from Boston College and a master™s degree from the University of 
Pennsylvania. 
Eesha Pandit 
is currently women™s rights manager at Breakthrough. She 
is the former director of advocacy at MergerWatch, where she worked on 
the Raising Women™s Voices project, a national initiative working to make 
sure women™s voices are heard and that women™s concerns are addressed 
in national health reform policy. Previously, Ms. Pandit served as associate 
director of programs at the Civil Liberties and Public Policy Program and 
has been a weekly staff writer for RH Reality Check. She has also worked 
with the Carr Center for Human Rights Policy at Harvard University and 
Amnesty International USA™s Women™s Rights Program. She serves on the 
board of the New York Abortion Access Fund and the National Network 
of Abortion Funds. She is a graduate of Mount Holyoke College and the 
University of Chicago. 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
John Pollock
 is an award-winning analyst, writer, and communicator.
 He 
has consulted at senior levels for nonpro˜t organizations, in the private 
sector, in the public sector, and for government. Former clients include in
-ternational organizations such as the United Nations, the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development, and the World Health Organiza
-tion; government departments, such as the United Kingdom™s Department 
for International Development; and ministers, including H.E. President 
Kagame of Rwanda and his cabinet. Private-sector clients include blue chips 
such as eBay (for which he was Chief Clue Elf), BlackBerry, and T-Mobile, 
as well as major nonpro˜t organizations such as Oxfam and Save the Chil-dren. A former research academic at Manchester
 University, he went on to 
become the UK government™s ˜rst social policy researcher specializing in the 
environment. For several years he specialized in exploring how the private 
sector could have an impact on the global HIV/AIDS epidemic. He has 
published in publications around the world, including Technology Review
, the Guardian, the Times
, and Red Herring. He has a longstanding interest 
in the nexus among creativity, policy, and technology.
 Recently he has been 
working on a series of high-level brie˜ng, and white papers on subjects as 
diverse as career advice and diversity, examining adaptive strategies during 
rapid global change. His most recent work includes long-form reporting 
and blogging for Technology Review
 on social media and the Arab Spring. 
He is currently working on a follow-up based on the Libyan con˚ict.
Jody Ranck, Ph.D., has a career in health, development, and innovation 
spanning nearly 20 years. In addition to his work with the mHealth Alli-ance, Dr. Ranck has consulted with InSTEDD, IntraHealth, Cisco, GigaOM, 
and a number of other organizations on innovation strategies, ehealth, and 
health policy. He is an adjunct faculty member at the University of San 
Francisco School of Business and Management and also a principal inves-tigator at the Public Health Institute in Oakland, CA. His previous work 
has included efforts in post-genocide Rwanda, risk and new biotechnologies 
(Zambia), the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, and leading the Global Health 
practice and Health Horizons at the Institute for the Future in Palo Alto, 
California. Dr. Ranck has a doctorate in health policy and administration 
from the University of California, Berkeley, as well as an M.A. in interna
-tional relations and economics (Johns Hopkins UniversityŒSAIS) and a B.A. 
in biology from Ithaca College.
Daniel J. Reidenberg, Psy.D.,
 is the executive director of SAVE (Suicide 
Awareness Voices of Education), a national nonpro˜t agency working 
to prevent suicide and help suicide survivors and people suffering from 
brain illnesses. Dr. Reidenberg also serves as managing director of the 
National Council for Suicide Prevention and is the U.S. representative 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 145
to the International Association for Suicide Prevention. Dr. Reidenberg 
has done extensive work with adolescents and adults who have serious 
and persistent mental illnesses, are chemically dependent, or have diverse 
personality disorders. He is a consultant to psychologists, attorneys, and 
businesses on health care and legal matters, is a nationally and internation-ally sought-after speaker, and sits on numerous national expert panels for 
suicide prevention and mental health issues. He is the chair of the Ameri-can Psychotherapy Association (APA) and of the Certi˜ed Relationship 
Specialists Board and is on the APA editorial board, the editorial board of 
Esperanza magazine, and the advisory board to Reachout.com. He has re-ceived numerous awards, including being named one of the Ten Outstand
-ing Young Minnesotans (2006), the B. Warren Hart Award for service to 
humanity (2007), and Nonpro˜t Professional of the Year (2010), and he 
was recognized as a Champion of Change by the Obama Administration 
(August 2011).William (Bill) Riley, Ph.D., 
is a program director in the Division of Car
-diovascular Sciences at the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and 
is responsible for managing grant portfolios in tobacco control and other 
cardiovascular and respiratory risk behaviors. He also serves as the chair of 
the National Institutes of Health mHealth Inter-Institute Interest Group. He 
is also an adjunct professor in the Department of Prevention and Commu-nity Health at the George Washington University School of Public Health. 
His research areas include eHealth and mHealth applications, tobacco de-pendence, diet and exercise adherence, insomnia treatment, and behavioral 
assessment. 
Mark L. Rosenberg, M.D., M.P.P., 
is executive director of the Task Force 
for Global Health. Previously, for 20 years, Dr. Rosenberg was at the Cen
-ters for Disease Control for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), where 
he led work in violence prevention and later became the ˜rst permanent 
director of the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. He also 
held the position of Special Assistant for Behavioral Science in the Of˜ce 
of the Deputy Director (HIV/AIDS). Dr. Rosenberg is board-certi˜ed in 
both psychiatry and internal medicine with training in public policy. He is 
on the faculty at Morehouse Medical School, Emory Medical School, and 
the Rollins School of Public Health at Emory University. Dr. Rosenberg™s 
research and programmatic interests are concentrated on injury control and 
violence prevention, HIV/AIDS, and child well-being, with special attention 
to behavioral sciences, evaluation, and health communications. He has au-thored more than 120 publications and recently co-authored the book Real 
Collaboration: What It Takes for Global Health to Succeed
 (University 
of California Press, 2010). Dr. Rosenberg has received numerous awards, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
including the Surgeon General™s Exemplary Service Medal. He is a member 
of the Institute of Medicine (IOM). Dr. Rosenberg™s organization, the Task 
Force for Global Health, participated in the IOM-sponsored workshop 
Violence Prevention in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: Finding a Place 
on the Global Agenda, and the Task Force remains interested in helping to 
continue the momentum of the workshop through the Forum on Global 
Violence Prevention. The Task Force is heavily involved the delivery of a 
number of global health programs and sees many ways that interpersonal 
violence and con˚ict exacerbate serious health problems and inequities.Jason Rzepka is vice president of public affairs at MTV. His charge, quite 
simply, is to use MTV™s superpowers for good. He does this by marshaling 
the network™s forces to engage and activate America™s youth on the big
-gest challenges facing their generation. He is responsible for the strategic 
direction of all of MTV™s ﬁpro-socialﬂ campaigns, including the boundary-
shattering, Peabody-winning ﬁIt™s Your (Sex) Life,ﬂ with the Kaiser Family 
Foundation, which has reached more than 200 million young people on 
sexual health issues; Emmy-winning ﬁChoose or Lose,ﬂ which has helped 
drive the largest youth voter turnouts in U.S. history; and Webby-winning 
ﬁA Thin Line,ﬂ which has inspired more than 1 million young people to 
draw their own line between digital use and digital abuse (all forms of digi
-tal bullying, dating abuse, and discrimination). Mr. Rzepka regularly serves 
as an expert resource on issues such as youth mobilization, social media 
for social change, cyberbullying, and sexual health. He has been a featured 
speaker at the White House, the United Nations, the U.S. Capitol, the 
U.S. State Department, the International AIDS Conference, TEDxPresidio, 
South by Southwest Interactive, the National Conference on Volunteering 
and Service, the Games for Change Conference, YPulse Youth Marketing 
Mashup, and the Council on Foundations Family Philanthropy Conference. He has also appeared on CNN and NPR and been quoted by the Wall Street 
Journal, Reuters, ABC News, Huf˜ngton Post, and others. Prior to his cur-rent role, he served as the head of communications at the PopTech Institute, 
a renowned social innovation incubator hatching breakthrough solutions 
to some of the world™s most intractable social challenges. Before PopTech, 
Mr. Rzepka held senior communications positions at MTV, mtvU, IMAX 
Corporation, and Ruder Finn. He serves on the board of directors of Pop-Tech; the advisory board of Coffee Party USA, a non-partisan organization 
working to bring civility and responsible citizenship back to American de-mocracy; and the Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Public Awareness 
taskforce. He holds a bachelor™s degree in business administration from the 
University of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 147
Ben Sawyer has pioneered major initiatives in the ˜eld of serious games and 
has become a nationally recognized leader within the games community 
since beginning his career in game development over 10 years ago. For the 
past 7 years Mr. Sawyer has dedicated his professional life to discovering 
new ways to expand the use of games beyond entertainment. In 2002 he 
co-founded the Serious Games Initiative, a project of the Woodrow Wilson 
International Center for Scholars. The following year Mr. Sawyer organized 
the ˜rst-ever Serious Games Summit, a conference that now annually at-tracts 300 to 500 attendees who meet to share best practices in the devel-opment of serious games. The Serious Games Initiative continues to serve 
as one of the leading organizations in the ˜eld of serious games. In 2004 
Mr. Sawyer also co-founded the Games for Health project, an initiative 
that has built the primary social and professional networks of the health 
games industry. Through online resources and regular regional and national 
events, Games for Health connects health professionals, researchers, and 
game developers to advance the development of health games and game 
technologies. The Games for Health project receives major funding from 
the Pioneer Portfolio, an initiative of the Robert Wood Johnson Founda
-tion. As a game developer with his own ˜rm, Digitalmill, Mr. Sawyer has 
worked on more than two dozen major serious game projects beginning 
in 2000, when he served as producer for the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation™s 
university simulation game, ﬁVirtual U,ﬂ which was an award ˜nalist at 
that year™s Independent Games Festival. Prior to pursuing his professional 
career, Mr. Sawyer graduated from the Bronx High School of Science and 
studied at Baruch College. 
Kim Scott, M.B.B.S., M.P.H., 
is an adolescent health and development 
consultant who completed her bachelor™s degree in human biology and 
psychology at the University of Toronto, Canada, and her medical degree 
at the University of the West Indies, Jamaica. After working in medical 
private practice and adolescent clinics, she went on to do her master™s de
-gree in public health in the Bronx, New York, focusing on behavioral and 
emotional development in adolescence. She analysed the Jamaican data of 
the Pan-American Health Organization 1997 Caribbean Adolescent Health 
Survey and has written three papers: ﬁAdolescent Violence,ﬂ ﬁAdolescent 
Suicide,ﬂ and ﬁAdolescent Resiliency.ﬂ From 2000 to 2002 she worked 
with the Ministry of Health, Health Promotion and Protections Division, 
advocating for and coordinating the National Adolescent Health Program. 
She worked with the Academy for Educational Development in Wash
-ington, DC, where she designed and conducted adolescent resiliency re-search and developed and implemented a home visiting parenting program 
for adolescents. She has conducted multiple training seminars for various 
private and public sectors around parenting and adolescent health risk 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
and resiliency (speci˜cally sexuality, HIV and pregnancy, drugs, violence, 
depression, and suicide) including coaches, pastors, guidance counselors, 
teachers and health service personnel. She contributed to the National 
Adolescent Development Strategic Plan 2005 and conducted an extensive 
parenting research literature review in 2006. She contributed to content 
writing, review, and ˜eld testing of the ﬁParenting the Adolescentﬂ curricu
-lum for Family Health International and JAŒStyle. She reviewed and revised 
the National Plan of Action for Children and Violence (NPACV) 2011 on 
behalf of the Organisation of American States and the Child Development 
Agency. In 2011 she conducted a situation analysis as to the child-friendly 
school status of the Jamaican Education Sector on behalf of the government and UNICEF. She is the founder and director of the Child Resiliency Pro
-gramme, an after-school program for children at risk for violence referred 
from primary schools. She is a member of the International Association of 
Adolescent Health, the Society of Adolescent Health and Medicine, and the 
Medical Association of Jamaica. 
Andra Teten Tharp, Ph.D.,
 is a health scientist in the Division of Violence 
Prevention (DVP) in the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control 
at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Dr. Tharp is 
currently leading Dating Matters: Strategies to Promote Healthy Teen Rela
-tionships, a teen dating violence prevention initiative at the CDC. Following 
her doctoral studies in clinical psychology at the University of Oregon, she 
conducted research and clinical work at the Michael E. DeBakey Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center and Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas. 
In 2008 she received the young investigator award from the International 
Society for Research on Aggression for her research examining violence 
among veterans with posttraumatic stress disorder. Dr. Tharp joined the 
CDC in 2008 as a behavioral scientist in the Prevention, Development, and 
Evaluation Branch in DVP. She continues to hold a clinical assistant profes
-sorship in the Menninger Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences 
in Houston, Texas, and is a licensed clinical psychologist in Texas. Dr. 
Tharp™s research interests include sexual and teen dating violence preven
-tion. She has written and contributed to numerous publications on trauma 
and violence-related topics.Kasisomayajula ﬁVishﬂ Viswanath, Ph.D., 
is an associate professor in the 
department of society, human development, and health at the Harvard 
School of Public Health (HSPH) and in the Division of Population Sciences 
at the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute. He is director of the Health Commu-nication Core of the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center (DF/HCC), and 
co-leader of the Cancer Risk and Disparities Program of DF/HCC. He also 
chairs the steering committee for the Health Communication Concentration 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 149
at HSPH. His additional appointments include director, Enhancing Commu
-nication for Health Outcomes (ECHO) Laboratory, DF/HCC, and asso
 ciate 
director, Lung Cancer Disparities Center, HSPH. Dr. Viswanath received his 
doctoral degree in mass communication from the University of Minnesota. 
His primary research is in documenting the relationship between commu-nication inequalities, poverty, and health disparities. He has written more 
than 110 journal articles and book chapters concerning communication 
inequalities and health disparities, public health communication campaigns, 
e-health and the digital divide, public health preparedness, and the delivery 
of health communication interventions to underserved populations. He is 
the co-editor of three books: Mass Media, Social Control and Social Change (Iowa State University Press, 1999), Health Behavior and Health Educa-tion: Theory, Research & Practice
 (Jossey Bass, 2008), and The Role of 
Media in Promoting and Reducing Tobacco Use
 (National Cancer Institute, 2008). He was also the editor of the ﬁSocial and Behavioral Researchﬂ 
section of the 12-volume International Encyclopedia of Communication (Blackwell Publishing, 2008). In recognition of his academic and profes-sional achievements, Dr. Viswanath received several awards, including the 
Outstanding Health Communication Scholar Award (2010), jointly given 
out by the International Communication Association and the National 
Communication Association, and the Mayhew Derryberry Award from 
the American Public Health Association (APHA) for his contribution to 
health education research and theory (2009). He delivered the 23rd Annual 
 
Aubrey Fisher Lecture at University of Utah in 2009. He was elected fellow 
of the International Communication Association (2011), the Society for Be
-havioral Medicine (2008), and the Midwest Association for Public Opinion 
Research (2006). He was also chair of the Board of Scienti˜c Counselors 
for the National Center for Health Marketing at the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention from 2008 to 2010.
Lisa Witter 
is the chief operating of˜cer of Fenton, the largest public interest 
communications ˜rm in the United States. She heads the ˜rm™s practice in 
women™s issues and global affairs for clients including Women for Women 
International, MoveOn.org, the William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, the 
David and Lucille Packard Foundation, the American Medical Association, 
the American Lung Association, and many others. She is a co-founder of 
the award-winning website SheSource.org, an online brain trust of women 
experts to help close the gender gap among commentators in the news 
media. She was honored as an outstanding activist and expert on women™s 
issues by Oxygen.com for her work on a national campaign against priva-tizing Social Security during the 2000 presidential election. Ms. Witter is a 
blogger and political commentator with work appearing on MSNBC, Fox 
News, the 
Huf˜ngton Post
, AlterNet, and 
Anderson Cooper 360. In 2004, 
Communications and Technology for Violence Prevention: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150
 COMMUNICATIONS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR VIOLENCE PREVENTION
she was a contestant on the Showtime reality show American Candidate. Witter is co-author of 
The She Spot: Why Women Are the Market for 
Changing the World and How to Reach Them
. She is on the advisory board for Indianapolis University™s Women and Philanthropy Institute, Pop!Tech, 
Momsrising.org, Women for Women International, and Climate Counts.
Ashley Womble 
has more than 8 years of experience working in the pub-lishing industry and has developed an expertise in digital communications 
and social media. As the online communications manager at the National 
Suicide Prevention Lifeline, Ms. Womble works to develop innovative on
-line marketing approaches and strategic partnerships with key stake
 holders 
in social media to reach more persons in emotional distress or at risk of 
suicide. Prior to joining the Lifeline, Ms. Womble worked as an editor 
for Hearst Digital Media and played a key role of the development of 
 
Cosmopolitan.com and CountryLiving.com. She created partnerships with 
media companies (from Google and Yahoo to Foursquare) and spoke about 
the Hearst Digital Media™s online and social media efforts. In these roles, 
Ms. Womble played a signi˜cant role in rebranding traditional print media 
into new media. 
