DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13415Computing Research for Sustainability172 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38769-9 | DOI 10.17226/13415Lynette I. Millett and Deborah L. Estrin, Editors; Committee on ComputingResearch for Environmental and Societal Sustainability; Computer Science andTelecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilComputing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITYCommittee on Computing Research for 
 Environmental and Societal SustainabilityComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesLynette I. Millett and Deborah L. Estrin, 
EditorsComputing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under 
award 115-0950451. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations 
expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily re˚ect 
the views of the organization that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-25758-9
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-25758-1
Copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360
Washington, DC 20001
(800) 624-6242 or
(202) 334-3313 
http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. 
Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR 
 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIETAL SUSTAINABILITY
DEBORAH L. ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles, 
Chair
ALAN BORNING, University of Washington
DAVID CULLER, University of California, Berkeley
THOMAS DIETTERICH, Oregon State University
DANIEL KAMMEN, University of California, Berkeley
JENNIFER MANKOFF, Carnegie Mellon University
ROGER D. PENG, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
ANDREAS VOGEL, SAP Labs
Staff
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˜cer
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Oracle (retired), 
Chair
 PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE, ABB
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University
JACK L. GOLDSMITH III, Harvard Law School
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc.
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN SWAINSON, Silver Lake Partners
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Of˜cer
EMILY ANN MEYER, Program Of˜cer
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˜cer
ENITA A. WILLIAMS
, Associate Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY
, Senior Program Assistant
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its web site at http://www.cstb.org, 
write to CSTB, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washing
-ton, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface
Computer science and information technologies offer a wide range 
of tools for examining sustainability challenges. Advances in computer 
science have already provided environmental and sustainability research
-ers with a valuable tool setŠcomputational modeling, data management, 
sensor technology, machine learning, and other toolsŠand additional 
research in computer science may provide advanced approaches, tools, 
techniques, and strategies toward understanding, addressing, and com
-municating sustainability challenges.
The present study emerged from an informal request to the National 
Research Council™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
(CSTB) from the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and 
Engineering, National Science Foundation (NSF). The project was funded 
by the National Science Foundation. The statement of task for the Com
-mittee on Computing Research for Environmental and Societal Sustain
-ability, established by the National Research Council to carry out this 
study, is as follows:
Computing has many potential ﬁgreenﬂ applications including improv
-ing energy conservation, enhancing energy management, reducing car
-bon emissions in many sectors, improving environmental protection 
(including mitigation and adaptation to climate change), and increasing 
awareness of environmental challenges and responses. An ad hoc com
-mittee would plan and conduct a public workshop to survey sustainabil-ity challenges, current research initiatives, results from previously-held 
topical workshops, and related industry and government development 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
efforts in these areas. The workshop would feature invited presentations 
and discussions that explore research themes and speci˜c research op
-portunities that could advance sustainability objectives and also result 
in advances in computer science and consider research modalities, with 
a focus on applicable computational techniques and long-term research 
that might be supported by the National Science Foundation, and with 
an emphasis on problem- or user-driven research.
   
The committee would obtain additional inputs through brie˜ngs 
to the committee and solicitations of comments and white papers from 
the research community. It would use additional deliberative meetings 
of the committee to develop a consensus report identifying promising 
research opportunities, cataloging applicable computational techniques, 
laying out an overall framework for ﬁgreenﬂ computing research, and 
recommending long-term research objectives and directions. The com
-mittee™s consensus report will include a summary of the workshop as 
an appendix.
The committee reviewed current efforts underway in industry (and 
other opportunities for the immediate application of existing information 
technology) and explored research themes and speci˜c research oppor
-tunities that could advance sustainability (energy and environmental) 
objectives and also result in advances in computer science. The committee 
considered research modalities, with a focus on applicable computational 
techniques and long-term research. 
The report, which includes as Appendix A the summary of the Work
-shop on Innovation in Computing and Information Technology for Sus
-tainability, identi˜es promising research opportunities, catalogs applicable 
computational techniques, lays out an overall framework for computing 
research for sustainability, and recommends long-term research objectives 
and directions. Chapter 1 provides examples of domains of potential 
impact, Chapter 2 describes methods and approaches, and Chapter 3, 
which is aimed primarily at computer science researchers, articulates why 
the interplay between addressing sustainability challenges and computer 
science research merits attention.
Meeting these challenges will involve advances in a number of com
-puting research areas, including the following: scalability; robustness; 
reliability; real-time observation and processing; low-power computing, 
and sensing and actuation; and human interaction with the environment, 
observations, and feedback systems. A number of speci˜c areas of com
-puter science and topics addressed in current research programs of NSF™s 
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering are 
relevant.
This report represents the cooperative effort of many people. The 
members of the study committee, after substantial discussions, drafted 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ixand worked through several revisions of the report. The committee would 
like to thank Jeannette Wing, Sampath Kannan, and Douglas Fisher for 
their encouragement and support of this study. The committee also appre
-ciates the insights and perspective provided by the following experts who 
presented brie˜ngs:
Adjo Amekudzi, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Peter Bajcsy, National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Eli Blevis, Indiana University, Bloomington,
David Brown, Duke University,
Randal Bryant, Carnegie Mellon University,
David Douglas, National Ecological Observatory,
John Doyle, California Institute of Technology,
Chris Forest, Pennsylvania State University,
Thomas Harmon, University of California, Merced,
Neo Martinez, Paci˜c Ecoinformatics and Computational Ecology 
Lab,
Vijay Modi, Columbia University,
Shwetak Patel, University of Washington,
Robert Pfahl, International Electronics Manufacturing Initiative,
David Shmoys, Cornell University, and
Bill Tomlinson, University of California, Irvine.
Finally, I thank CSTB staff members Lynette Millett and Virginia 
Bacon Talati for their efforts in steering the committee™s work, coordinat
-ing the meetings and speakers, and drafting, editing, and revising report 
material. 
Deborah L. Estrin, 
Chair
Committee on Computing Research for 
 Environmental and Societal Sustainability 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xxAcknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Alice Agogino, University of California, Berkeley,
Ruzena Bajcsy, University of California, Berkeley,
Jeff Dozier, University of California, Santa Barbara,
Brian Gaucher, T.J. Watson Research Center, IBM,
Roger Ghanem, University of Southern California,
Marija Ilic, Carnegie Mellon University,
David Shmoys, Cornell University, and
Bill Tomlinson, University of California, Irvine.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Katharine 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERS xiFrase, IBM. Appointed by the National Research Council,
 she was respon
-sible for making certain that an independent examination of this report 
was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures and that all 
review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal 
content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the 
institution.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
Contents
SUMMARY
 1 Relevance of Information Technology and Computer Science to 
Sustainability, 2
 The Value of the Computer Science Approach to 
 Problem Solving, 5
  
SystemsŠScale, Heterogeneity, Interconnection, Optimization, 
 and Human Interaction, 5
  
Iteration, 6
 Computer Science Research Areas, 7
 Strategy and Pragmatic Approaches, 9
  
Emphasize Bottom-Up Approaches and 
 Concreteness, 9
  
Use Appropriate Evaluation Criteria for Proposals 
 and Results, 9
  
Apply CS Philosophy and Approach, 10
  
Foster Sustainability Research Through Funding 
 Initiatives, 10
  
Foster Needed Multidisciplinary Approaches, 11
  
Blend Sustainability and Education, 12
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTS1 ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION 
 13
 TECHNOLOGY IN MEETING SUSTAINABILITY 
 CHALLENGES
 Opportunities to Achieve Signi˜cant Sustainability 
 Objectives, 17
  
Built Infrastructure and Systems, 18
  
Ecosystems and the Environment, 20
  
Sociotechnical Systems, 21
 Illustrative Examples in Information Technology and 
 Sustainability, 22
  
Toward a Smarter Electric Grid, 23
  
Sustainable Food Systems, 36
  
Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructures, 44
 Conclusion, 50
2 ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH 
 51
 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABILITY
 Measurement and Instrumentation, 55
  
Coping with Self-De˜ning Physical Information, 57
  
The Design and Capacity Planning of Physical
 Information Services, 59
  
Software Stacks for Physical Infrastructures, 60
 Information-Intensive Systems, 61
  
Big Data, 62
  
Heterogeneity of Data, 63
  
Coping with the Need for Data Proxies, 64
  
Coping with Biased, Noisy Data, 65
  
Coping with Multisource Data Streams, 66
 Analysis, Modeling, Simulation, and Optimization, 70
  
Developing and Using Multiscale Models, 70
  
Combining Statistical and Mechanistic Models, 71
  
Decision Making Under Uncertainty, 72
 Human-Centered Systems, 77
  
Supporting Deliberation, Civic Engagement, Education, 
 and Community Action, 79
  
Design for Sustainability, 81
  
Human Understanding of Sensing, Modeling, and 
 Simulation, 82
  
Tools to Help Organizations and Individuals Engage 
 in More Sustainable Behavior, 82
  
Mitigation, Adaption, and Disaster Response, 83
  
Using Information from Resource-Usage Sensing, 83
 Conclusion, 85
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS xv3 PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL 
 86
 OPPORTUNITIES TO ENHANCE COMPUTER 
 SCIENCE RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
 Computer Science Approaches for Addressing 
 Sustainability, 87
 Toward Universality, 93
 Education and Programmatics, 96
 Evaluation, Viability, and Impact Analysis, 100
 Conclusion, 103
APPENDIXES
A Summary of a Workshop on Innovation in Computing and
 107
 Information Technology for Sustainability
B Biographies of Committee Members and Staff
 149
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary
A broad and growing literature describes the deep and multidisci
-plinary nature of the sustainability challenges faced by the United States 
and the world. Despite the profound technical challenges involved, 
sustain ability is not, at its root, a technical problem, nor will merely 
technical solutions be suf˜cient. Instead, deep eco
 
nomic, political, and 
cultural adjustments will ultimately be required, along with a major, long-
term commitment in each sphere to deploy the requisite technical solu
-tions at scale. Nevertheless, technological advances and enablers have a 
clear role in supporting such change, and information technology (IT)
1 is a 
natural bridge between technical and social solutions because it can offer 
improved communication and transparency for fostering the necessary 
economic, political, and cultural adjustments. Moreover, IT is at the heart 
of nearly every large-scale socioeconomic systemŠincluding systems for 
˜nance, manufacturing, and the generation and distribution of energyŠ
and so sustainability-focused changes in those sys
 
tems are inextricably 
linked with advances in IT. In short, innovation in IT will play a vital role 
if the nation and the world are to achieve a more sustainable future. 
Although the greening of ITŠfor example, the reduction of electronic 
waste or of the energy consumed by computersŠis an important goal of 
the computing community and the IT industry, the focus of this report is 
1ﬁInformation technologyﬂ is de˜ned broadly here to include both computing and com
-munications capabilities.
1Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
ﬁgreening through IT,ﬂ that is, the application of computing to promote 
sustainability broadly. 
The aim of this report is twofold: to shine a spotlight on areas where 
IT innovation and computer science (CS)
2 research can help, and to urge 
the computing research community to bring its approaches and meth
-odologies to bear on these pressing global challenges. The focus is on 
addressing medium- and long-term challenges in a way that would have 
signi˜cant, measurable impact. 
The ˜ndings and recommended principles of the Committee on Com
-puting Research for Environmental and Societal Sustainability concern 
four areas: (1) the relevance of IT and CS to sustainability; (2) the value 
of the CS approach to problem solving, particularly as it pertains to 
sustainability challenges; (3) key CS research areas; and (4) strategy and 
pragmatic approaches for CS research on sustainability. 
RELEVANCE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 AND COMPUTER SCIENCE TO SUSTAINABILITY
An often-cited de˜nition of ﬁsustainabilityﬂ comes from 
Our Common 
Future
, the report of the Brundtland Commission of the United Nations 
(UN): ﬁ[S]ustainable development is development that meets the needs 
of the present without compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs.ﬂ
3 The UN expanded this de˜nition at the 2005 
World Summit to incorporate three pillars of sustainability: its social, 
environmental, and economic aspects.
4 This report takes a similarly broad 
view of the term. Although much of the focus in sustainability has been 
on mitigating climate change, with efforts aimed at managing the car
-bon dioxide cycle and increasing sustainable energy sources, there are 
other important sustainability challenges (such as water management, 
improved urban planning, supporting biodiversity, and food production) 
that can also be transformed by advances in computing research and are 
thus considered in this report. 
It is natural when viewing sustainability through the lens of computer 
science to take a systems view. An elaboration on the broad de˜nition of 
2 ﬁComputer scienceﬂ is de˜ned broadly here to include computer and information science 
and engineering.
3United Nations General Assembly, March 20, 1987, 
Report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development: Our Common Future
; transmitted to the General Assembly as 
an Annex to document A/42/427ŠDevelopment and International Co-operation: Environ
-ment; Our Common Future, Chapter 2: Towards Sustainable Development; Paragraph 1, 
United Nations General Assembly. Available at http://www.un-documents.net/ocf-02.htm.
 4United Nations General Assembly, 2005 World Summit Outcome, Resolution A/60/1, 
adopted by the General Assembly on September 15, 2005.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3sustainability above is that a system is not sustainable unless it can oper
-ate inde˜nitely into the future. For a system to do so inevitably requires 
optimization over time and spaceŠgoals that are central to much of 
computer science.
The report 
SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the Infor
-mation Age5 usefully groups opportunities for applying IT to sustainability 
into three broad areas: (1) built infrastructure and systems, (2) ecosystems 
services and the environment, and (3) sociotechnical systems. The fol
-lowing describes each of these areas and outlines applications of IT and 
opportunities for computer science research:




. This area includes buildings, trans
-portation systems (personal, public, and commercial), and consumed 
goods (commodities, utilities, and foodstuffs). IT contributes to sustain
-able solutions in built infrastructure in numerous ways, from improved 
sensor technologies (e.g., in embedded sensors in smart buildings) and 
improved system models, to improved control and optimization (e.g., 
of logistics and smart electric grids), to improved communications and 
human-computer interfaces (enabling people to make more effective 
decisions). 




. This area encompasses assessing, 
understanding, and positively affecting (or not affecting) the environment 
and particular ecosystemsŠthese efforts represent crosscutting challenges 
for many sustainability efforts. The scale and scope of efforts in this 
area range from local and regional efforts examining species habitats, to 
watershed management, to understanding the impacts of global climate 
change. The range of challenges itself poses a problem: how best to assess 
the relative importance of various sustainability activities with an eye 
toward signi˜cant impact. Additionally, computational techniques will be 
valuable for developing scienti˜c knowledge and engineering technolo
-gies, including improved methods for data-driven science, modeling, and 
simulation to improve the degree of scienti˜c understanding in ecology.


. Sociotechnical systems encompass society, 
organizations, and individuals, and their behavior as well as the tech
-nological infrastructure that they use. Large and long-lived impacts on 
sustainability will require enabling, encouraging, and sustaining changes 
in behaviorŠon the part of individuals, organizations, and nation-states 
over the long term. IT, and in particular real-time information and tools, 
can better equip individuals and organizations to make daily, ongo
-5 
The Climate Group, 
SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the Information Age
 (2008). Available at http://www.smart2020.org/publications/. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
ing, and signi˜cant changes in response to a constantly evolving set of 
circumstances. 
There are, of course, many points of intersection across these areas. 
For example, eco-feedback devices within the home (a sociotechnical 
system) interact with the larger, smart grid system (part of the built infra
-structure); personal mobile devices (relying on built infrastructure and 
deployed in a sociotechnical context) provide data that feed into more 
robust modeling (a crosscutting methodology itself); and so on. In addi
-tion, better information about what is happening at an individual or local 
level can inform broader policy making and decision making. 
Smarter energy grids, sustainable agriculture, and resilient infrastruc
-ture provide three concrete and important examples of the potential role 
of IT innovation and CS research in sustainability. 
 
Moving toward smarter and more sustainable ways of providing 
electricity will require a rethinking of many aspects of society, includ
-ing the fundamental electric grid. A forward-looking, sustainable grid 
scenario presents a fundamentally more cooperative interaction between 
demand and supply, as well as greater transparency throughout the 
energy supply chain, with the goal of achieving both deep reductions in 
peak demand and reductions in overall demand as well as deep penetra
-tion of renewables in the supply blend. Information and data manage
-ment with regard to both time (demand, availability, and so on) and 
space are essential to making progress toward a smarter, more sustainable 
electric grid. Computer science research and methodological approaches 
(in areas including user interfaces and improved modeling and analytical 
tools) will be needed at all levels to address the broad systems challenges 
presented by the smart grid. 

With respect to agriculture, there is growing concern regarding 
whether agricultural productivity can keep pace with human needs. A 
sustainable food system will be key to ensuring that the world™s popula
-tion receives necessary nutrition without additional damage being done 
to the environment and society. As with the electric grid, it is in the sys
-tems issues in sustainable agriculture that the opportunities for IT seem 
most salient. Approaches to a sustainable food system include taking a 
systems view of the challenge; developing methods for measuring the 
costs, bene˜ts, and impacts of different agricultural systems; assisting 
in the use of precision agriculture to minimize needed inputs; making 
information accessible for informed consumption; and developing social 
networks for local food sourcing. As with the smart electric grid, infor
-mation and data management are essential to making progress toward a 
smarter, more sustainable, global food system. Computer science research 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5and methodological approaches will be needed to address the broad sys
-tems challengesŠencompassing the environment and ecosystems, social 
and economic factors, and personal and organizational behaviors affect
-ing food production, distribution, and consumption. 

The development of sustainable and resilient infrastructures poses 
crosscutting challenges, especially when a broad view of sustainability is 
taken that encompasses economic and social issues. Contributing to the 
challenges of increasing the resilience of societal and physical infrastruc
-tures is the growing risk of natural and human-made disasters. Enhanc
-ing society™s resilience and ability to cope with inevitable disasters will 
con
 
tribute to sustainability. Even apart from climate change and resource 
consump
 
tion, the sheer magnitude of Earth™s population means that cri
-ses, when they happen, will be at scale. Sustainability challenges in this 
area involve planning and modeling infrastructure, and the anticipation 
of and response to disasters and the ways in which information technol
-ogy can assist with developing sustainable and resilient infrastructures. 
Sustainability, of course, encompasses much more than the areas and 
examples outlined above, which are used here to illustrate the breadth of 
the challenges that need to be faced and the role that computer science 
and information technology can play.
THE VALUE OF THE COMPUTER 
 SCIENCE APPROACH TO PROBLEM SOLVING 
As the sections below discuss, several key underlying philosophical 
and methodological approaches of computer science are well matched to 
key characteristics of sustainability problems. 
SystemsŠScale, Heterogeneity, 
 Interconnection, Optimization, and Human Interaction
Sustainability problems often share challenges of scaleŠsometimes 
due to the size of the problem space (e.g., geographic or planetary scale), 
sometimes due to the potential range of impact (e.g., widespread potential 
health or economic impacts), and often due to both. Sustainability prob
-lems are also typically heterogeneous in natureŠthere is almost never just 
one variable contributing to the challenge, or one avenue to a solution. 
Inputs, solutions, and technologies that can be brought to bear on any 
given problem vary a great deal. Most sustainability challenges emerge 
in part due to interconnectionŠmultiple interlocking pieces of a system 
all having effects (some expected, some not) on other pieces of the sys
-tem. Solutions to sustainability challenges typically involve ˜nding near-
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
optimal trade-offs among competing goals, typically under high degrees 
of uncertainty in both the systems and the goals. Hence, methods for 
˜nding robust solutions are critical. And ˜nally, human interaction with 
systems can play a role in both developing solutions and contributing to 
challenges.
6In addition to systems challenges, many sustainability challenges, 
particularly those related to infrastructure such as smarter transporta
-tion or electric systems, involve architecture. Architecture encompasses 
not just structural connections among subsystems, but also expectations 
regarding what a system will do, how it will perform, what behaviors are 
within bounds, and how subsystems (or external actors) should interact 
with the system as a whole. A system™s architecture instantiates early 
design decisions and has a signi˜cant effect on the uses, behaviors, and 
effects of the system over its life cycle long past the time when those 
decisions were made. As a result, larger-scale systems of necessity merit 
signi˜cant attention and resources devoted to architecture. As computer 
and information systems have become global in scale, the disciplines 
of computer science and software engineering have grappled with the 
challenges of architecture as they pertain to large-scale systems working 
over large geographic areas with countless inputs and millions of users. 
Lessons from architecting hardware, software, networks, and information 
systems thus have broader applicability to the processes of the structur
-ing, designing, maintaining, updating, and evolving of infrastructure in 
pursuit of sustainability.
FINDING: Although sustainability covers a broad range of domains, 
most sustainability issues share challenges of architecture, scale, het
-erogeneity, interconnection, optimization, and human interaction with 
systems, each of which is also a problem central to CS research. 
Iteration
Given the scope and scale of many of the sustainability challenges 
faced today, it is very likely that no one solution or approach will suf˜ce, 
even for those challenges that are comparatively easy to state (such as, 
ﬁReduce greenhouse gas emissionsﬂ). Thus, multiple approaches from 
multiple angles will need to be tried. Moreover, the urgency of acting 
in the face of threats to biodiversity and consequences of global climate 
change means that the best-known options need to be deployed quickly 
6Of course, many other scienti˜c disciplines offer useful methodological approaches to 
sustainability, some of which overlap with what computer science offers. This report focuses 
on computer science, as directed in the study committee™s statement of task (see the Preface).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 7while the adaptive redesign of the deployed system continues to be sup
-ported as advances in scienti˜c understanding, changes in technology, 
and evolution in political and economic systems are incorporated. Thus 
iterationŠadjusting, re˜ning, and learning from ongoing effortsŠwill 
be essential, and it will often have to be done at a societal and planetary 
scale.
Iteration is another core strength of computer science, and learning 
from iterative approaches to large-scale software systems and applica
-tions, and large-scale software engineering and system deployment gen
-erally, can help with large-scale sustainability challenges. The approach 
has been demonstrated in such speci˜c applications as the engineering of 
the global Internet and the deployment of web search and has been used 
effectively in a wide array of successful software engineering projects. 
Because sustainability challenges involve complex, interacting sys
-tems of systems undergoing constant change, a data-driven, iterative 
approach will be essential to making progress and to making needed 
adjustments as situations change. One approach is to deploy technol
-ogy in the ˜eld, using reasonably well-understood techniques, at ˜rst to 
explore the space and map gaps that need work. Data and models devel
-oped on the basis of this initial foray can then help provide context for 
developing qualitatively new techniques and technologies for contribut
-ing to even better solutions.
FINDING: Fast-moving iterative, incrementally evolving approaches 
to problem solving in computer science, which were critical to build
-ing the Internet and web search engines, will be useful in solving 
sustainability challenges.
COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AREAS
Despite numerous opportunities to apply well-understood technologies 
and techniques to sustainability, there are also hard problemsŠfor example, 
the mitigation of climate changeŠfor which current methods offer at best 
partial solutions and the pressing nature of the challenges motivates rapid 
innovation. This section describes some salient technical research areas and 
outlines a broad research agenda for CS and sustainability. 
FINDING: Although current technologies can and should be put 
to immediate use, CS research and IT innovation will be critical to 
meeting sustainability challenges. Effectively realizing the potential 
of CS to address sustainability challenges will require sustained and 
appropriately structured and tailored investments in CS research. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
The committee selected four broad CS/IT research areas meriting 
attention in order to help meet sustainability challengesŠall of which 
contain elements of sensing, modeling, and action. The following list is 
not prioritized. Efforts in all of these areas will be needed, often in tandem.












The areas correspond well to measurement, data mining, model
-ing, control, and human-computer interaction, which are well-established 
research areas in computer science. This overlap of selected research areas 
with established research areas has positive implications: research com
-munities are already established, and it will not be necessary to develop 
entirely new areas of investigation in order to effectively address global 
sustainability challenges. Nonetheless, ˜nding a way to achieve that 
impact may require new approaches to these problems and almost cer
-tainly new ways of conducting and managing research. 
The ultimate goal of much of computer science in sustainability can 
be viewed as informing, supporting, facilitating, and sometimes auto
-mating decision making that leads to actions with signi˜cant impacts on 
achieving sustainability objectives. The committee uses the term ﬁdecision 
makingﬂ in a broad senseŠencompassing individual behaviors, organiza
-tional activities, and policy making. Informed decisions and their associ
-ated actions are at the root of all of these activities. 
FINDING: Enabling and informing actions and decision making by 
both machines and humans are key components of what CS and IT 
contribute to sustainability objectives, and they demand advances 
in a number of topics related to human-computer interaction. Such 
topics include the presentation of complex and uncertain informa
-tion in useful, actionable ways; the improvement of interfaces for 
interacting with very complex systems; and ongoing advances in 
understanding how such systems interact with individuals, orga
-nizations, and existing practices. 
PRINCIPLE: A CS research agenda to address sustainability should 
incorporate sustained effort in measurement and instrumentation; 
information-intensive systems; analysis, modeling, simulation, and 
optimization; and human-centered systems. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 9STRATEGY AND PRAGMATIC APPROACHES
For computer science to play an effective part in meeting global 
sustainabil ity challenges, priority should be given to research that 
addresses one or more important sustainability challenges and that offers 
the prospect of tangible impact, either directly or through game-changing 
contributions that offer leveraging opportunities for other domains. The 
research areas listed in the section above are the committee™s recom
-mended starting place.
An ongoing challenge is for IT experts and CS researchers to ensure 
that technologies and approaches represent usable and appropriate 
solutions, that they are highly effective, and that they take advantage 
of the deepest and most powerful insights that can be brought to bear. 
Emphasize Bottom-Up Approaches and Concreteness
The committee believes that CS research on sustainability is generally 
best approached not by striving for universality from the start, but instead 
by beginning from the bottom up: that is, by developing well-structured 
solutions to particular, critical problems in sustainability, and later seek
-ing to generalize these solutions. Indeed, this has been a fruitful approach 
in many other application areas. Progress in many needed advances will 
require CS research (as described earlier), but those advances may not be 
immediately evident as universal approaches. 
 Rather, to be judged as a 
signi˜cant contribution at the intersection of CS research and sustainabil
-ity, the contribution must ˜rst have the potential to make a real difference 
in moving toward a more sustainable future. 
 Embracing the concrete 
will help researchers hone and ˜lter their approaches, and multiple and 
adapted applications will emerge. 
 Many potential new applications are 
developed and ˜nd their ultimate universality through bottom-up cycles 
of change and through the iterative process of design that promotes those 
cycles of change. Past successful examples of this approach include Inter
-net protocols, machine learning, object-oriented languages, and databases.
Use Appropriate Evaluation Criteria for Proposals and Results
A premature focus on universality would be damaging to high-
impact sustainability solutions. However, to be considered successful, 
CS research on sustainability must ultimately contribute to generalizable 
knowledge about sustainability, and the contribution or proposed solu
-tion should, at the same time, require new computational techniques or 
thinking beyond the current state of the art in computing. Establishing 
metrics for multidisciplinary work that are both actionable and meaning
-Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
ful across participating disciplines is challenging, and the speci˜c criteria 
for judging research success should evolve over time, with members of 
the community proposing and debating what constitutes the most worthy 
research. The committee emphasizes, however, the criterion of having the 
potential to make a real differenceŠthat is, to make signi˜cant progress 
on social, economic, and environmental sustainability challenges.
PRINCIPLE: There should be strong incentives at all stages of 
research for focusing on solving real problems whose solution can 
make a substantial contribution to sustainability challenges, along 
with in-depth metrics and evaluative criteria to assess progress.
Apply CS Philosophy and Approach
The solutions for real problems referred to in the principle above 
should be designed such that they embed the best of CS design and 
systems learningsŠmodularity, isolation, simplicity, and so on. Then 
researchers and practitioners should experiment with, apply, and pilot 
solutions to speci˜c problems, looking for the successes and reapplying 
and adapting them to other applications and developing universality, 
while building the applicability and impact. Such work will need to 
be done across disciplinary boundaries and involve experts from many 
˜elds. Just as speci˜c proposed solutions will need to be assessed in an 
iterative fashion, so too the research enterprise will need to have informed 
checkpoints and evaluative criteria in order to ensure that the goal of hav
-ing a real impact is being met. 
 Thus the committee urges an emphasis on 
interdisciplinarity, iteration, and high-level information sharing to assess 
progress.
 Foster Sustainability Research Through Funding Initiatives
Programmatically, traditional computer science research funding 
approaches are unlikely to be adequate to address the need discussed 
here. The National Science Foundation (NSF) is a primary funder of 
research in computer science in the United States. The former Information 
Technology Research programs at NSF and the current Cyber-enabled 
Discovery and Innovation Program are good examples of multidisci
-plinary programs, demonstrating that such efforts are feasible. But such 
programs are still a small minority among funding programs, and in the 
committee™s view most review panels on most of the programs related to 
CS research are not generally favorable toward funding domain-speci˜c 
projects. The committee is encouraged by the establishment of Science, 
Engineering, and Education for Sustainability (SEES) as an NSF-wide 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 11area of investment. SEES aims for a systems-based approach to ﬁadvance 
science, engineering, and education to inform the societal actions needed 
for environmental and economic sustainability and sustainable human 
well-beingﬂ
7 and places an emphasis on interdisciplinary efforts. It pro
-vides a programmatic opportunity to put the recommended principles of 
this report into practice at NSF. For the ˜eld of computer science, efforts 
such as this can serve as a model for conceptualizing funding structures 
in order to take the greatest advantage of the depth of IT and CS innova
-tion that the core discipline can offer to the rich and globally important 
problem space of sustainability. 
Foster Needed Multidisciplinary Approaches
The type of work described above will have to be done across dis
-ciplinary boundaries and to involve experts from many disciplines, as 
well as individuals who themselves have deep expertise in more than 
one discipline. Among the several opportunities for enhancing multidis
-ciplinary approaches are scholarships that emphasize the development of 
expertise in complementary disciplines, and regular, high-level summits 
involving CS and sustainability expertsŠpractitioners and researchersŠ
to inform shared research design, assess progress, and identify gaps and 
opportunities. 
Research institutionsŠboth universities and funding 
 organiza
   

-  
tionsŠcould better address the needs of authentic multidisciplinary 
research, in terms of adjustments to how individuals are evaluated and 
in terms of publications, funding, criteria for promotion, infrastructure for 
sustained collaboration, and cross training. 
PRINCIPLE: Encourage research at and across disciplinary bound
-aries, well informed by speci˜cs and well structured to handle 
scale, data, integration, architecture, simulation,  optimization, itera-tion, and human and systems aspects. CS research in sustainability 
should be an interdisciplinary effort, with experts in the various 
˜elds of sustainability being equal partners in the research.
PRINCIPLE: Re˜ne funding and programmatic options to reinforce 
and provide incentives for the necessary boundary crossing and 
integration in CS research to address sustainability challenges. In 
particular, funding, promotion, and review and assessment (peer 
7SEES mission statement. Available at http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.
jsp?pims_id=504707. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
review) models should emphasize in-depth integration with data 
and deployments from the constituent domains. 
Blend Sustainability and Education
A shifting of the culture of CS to embrace sustainability more fully as 
an important and fruitful application area for research needs to include 
educating CS students about ways to have an impact with computing, 
computation, and systems approaches in important areas. Such a shift 
in culture would encourage students to develop domain expertise and 
to collaborate directly with domain experts while in graduate school or 
in preparing for graduate work. Such a shift also requires a culture of 
experimentation and innovation in the application of computer science.
Adjusting education within the target domains is as important as 
shifting the culture in CS. Information and data are critical to understand
-ing the challenges, to formulating and deploying solutions, to communi
-cating results, and to facilitating learning and new behaviors based on 
the results of the work. Thus a signi˜cant component of meeting virtu
-ally all sustainability challenges is to infuse computational thinking and 
approaches that are rich in CS and IT into the deploying industry and 
agencies. 
 This component needs to include cross training students in 
multiple ˜elds to create ﬁchampionsﬂ who can bring a CS perspective into 
other arenas. 
 Sustainability is a challenge that will persist for generations; 
sustained commitment will be necessary, as well as continuing innovation 
in support of efforts to meet sustainability challenges.
PRINCIPLE: Undergraduate and graduate education in computer 
science should provide experience in working across disciplinary 
boundaries. Graduate training grants and postdoctoral fellowships 
should support training in multiple disciplines. Undergraduate and 
graduate programs should include tracks that offer introductory 
and intermediate course work in such sustainability areas as life-
cycle analysis, agriculture, ecology, natural resource management, 
economics, and urban planning.
 Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Roles and Opportunities for 
Information Technology in Meeting 
Sustainability Challenges
Innovation in computing, information, and communications tech-nology is at the heart of nearly every large-scale socioeconomic system. 
Computing underlies and enables systems that affect our lives every 
dayŠfrom ˜nancial and health systems to manufacturing, transportation, 
and energy infrastructures. One important consequence is that advances 
in computing are critical enablers of change for addressing the grow
-ing sustainability challenges facing the United States and the world. A 
key ˜nding of this report is that information
 technology (IT)
1 will play 
a vital role in achieving a more sustainable future and that research and 
innovation in computing, information, and communications technologies 
are consequently critical to addressing the broad range of sustainability 
challenges (Box 1.1). 
The critical global challenges in sustainability are deep, and solutions 
will require input from many disciplines. Fortunately, there are numerous 
opportunities to apply IT innovations in ways that will have a profound 
in˚uence on sustainability efforts across many areas, including the eco
-logical and environmental sciences, numerous engineering ˜elds, public 
policy and administration, and many other areas. The National Research 
Council™s (NRC™s) Committee on Computing Research for Environmental 
and Societal Sustainability is aware that there is signi˜cant effort aimed at 
making IT itself ﬁgreenerﬂ and recognizes that these efforts are important.
 1The committee uses the familiar acronym ﬁITﬂ (information technology) to encompass 
computing, information, and communications technologies broadly.
13
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
The greening of IT, through efforts such as reducing data-center energy 
consumption and electronic waste, should be and is an important goal 
of the computing community and IT industry.
2 However, the focus of 
this report is on what could be termed ﬁgreening through IT,ﬂ the use of 
2The 2010 OECD report ﬁGreener and Smarter: ICTs, the Environment and Climate 
Changeﬂ (in OECD, 
OECD Information Technology Outlook 2010, 
OECD Publishing)
 notes 
that impacts from ICT life cycles (including not just use but also production and end of 
life) need to be considered in order to understand complete impacts. A recent 
McKinsey 
Quarterly
 article, ﬁClouds, Big Data, and Smart Assets: Ten Tech-Enabled Business Trends 
to Watch,ﬂ by Jacques Bughin, Michael Chui, and James Manyika, offered some cause for 
optimism regarding green IT: ﬁElectricity produced to power the world™s data centers gener
-ates greenhouse gases on the scale of countries such as Argentina or the Netherlands, and 
these emissions could increase fourfold by 2020. McKinsey research has shown, however, 
that the use of IT in areas such as smart power grids, ef˜cient buildings, and better logistics 
planning could eliminate ˜ve times the carbon emissions that the IT industry produces.ﬂ 
McKinsey Quarterly
 5(3):1-14.
BOX 1.1
 A Note on the Definition of 
 ﬁSustainabilityﬂ and the Focus of the Committee
An often-cited de˜nition of ﬁsustainabilityﬂ comes from the Brundtland Com
-mission of the United Nations (UN): ﬁ[S]ustainable development is development 
that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.ﬂ
1 The UN expanded this de˜nition at the 
2005 world summit to incorporate three pillars of sustainability: its social, envi
-ronmental, and economic aspects.
2 This report takes a similarly broad view of 
the term. Although much focus in sustainability has been on mitigating climate 
change, with efforts aimed at managing the carbon dioxide cycle and increasing 
sustainable energy sources, the committee recognizes that there are numerous 
additional sustainability challenges that could be assisted by advances in comput
-ing and information technology and computing
3 research. The committee™s focus 
is on addressing medium- and long-term challenges in a way that has signi˜cant 
and ideally, measurable, impact. 
1United Nations General Assembly (March 20, 1987). 
Report of the World Commission on 
Environment and Development: Our Common Future;
 transmitted to the General Assembly as 
an Annex to document A/42/427
ŠDevelopment and International Co-operation: Environment; 
Our Common Future, Chapter 2: Towards Sustainable Development; Paragraph 1
. United 
Nations General Assembly. 
Available at 
http://www.un-documents.net/ocf-02.htm.
2United Nations General Assembly, 2005 World Summit Outcome, Resolution A/60/1, 
 adopted by the General Assembly on September 15, 2005.
3The term ﬁcomputingﬂ is used generally in this report and is meant to encompass informa
-tion and communications technologies (ICTs). Thus ﬁcomputingﬂ and ﬁICTsﬂ are used inter
-changeably throughout the report.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 15computing and IT across disciplines to promote sustainability in areas and 
systems in which advances in information and communications technol
-ogy (ICT) could have signi˜cant positive impact.
3 The committee believes that some of the most profound fundamen
-tals within the ˜eld itself are suggestive of the unique contributions that 
computer science (CS) and ICTs can make to sustainability. For instance, 
the very notion of automated ﬁquery-ableﬂ structured data is at the heart 
of much of computer science. The scope and scale of the sustainability 
challenge are coupled with vast amounts of relevant data, which makes 
deep insights into the challenges of collecting, structuring, and under
-standing those data essential. Computational thinking is critical to solv
-ing almost any large problem. The committee™s focus is on problems that 
are intellectually challenging, grounded in IT and CS, and important for 
sustainabilityŠthat is, a kind of ﬁPasteur™s octant.ﬂ See Figure 1.1. 
Despite the profound technical challenges presented by sustainabil
-ity and the huge potential role for IT and CS, the committee recognizes 
that sustainability is not, at its root, a technical problem, nor will merely 
technical solutions be suf˜cient. Instead, solutions ultimately will require 
deep economic, political, and cultural adjustments, as well as major, long-
term commitment in each sphere in order to put technical advancements 
and enablers in operation at scale. Nevertheless, technological advances 
and enablers can be developed and shaped to support such change, while 
continuing to support enduring human values in the process. Information 
technology can serve as a bridge between technical and social solutions 
3The community has already begun addressing this challenge. Bill Tomlinson™s book  
Greening Through IT: Information Technology for Environmental Sustainability
 (Cambridge, 
Mass.: MIT Press, 2010) explores how IT can address sustainability challenges at scale. A 
2009 article by Carla Gomes, ﬁComputation Sustainability: Computational Methods for a 
Sustainable Environment, Economy, and Societyﬂ in 
The Bridge 39(4):5-13, provides examples 
of computational research being applied to domain ˜elds (biodiversity and renewable en
-ergy sources). Gomes™s work is an important component of computational sustainability; the 
present report explores the broader potential for research and innovation in CS and IT to 
have an impact on sustainability. Additionally, the National Science Foundation™s Directorate 
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering and the Computing Community 
Consortium (CCC) jointly sponsored a workshop on the Role of Information Sciences and 
Engineering in Sustainability. The full report of the workshop, 
Science, Engineering, and 
Education of Sustainability: The Role of Information Sciences and Engineering
, which discusses 
research directions for IT as it relates to sustainability, is available at http://cra.org/ccc/
docs/RISES_Workshop_Final_Report-5-10-2011.pdf. This report is well aligned, in terms 
of research areas, with the CCC report. Additionally, the committee concurs with the CCC 
report Section 4, titled ﬁThe Power of Use-Inspired (Collaborative) Fundamental Research.ﬂ 
The present report expands on this theme in Chapter 3, especially in regard to the strength 
of computer science as a discipline and what it can contribute to sustainability objectives.
 Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
by enabling improved communication and transparency for fostering the 
necessary economic, political, and cultural adjustments.
4 Furthermore, sustainability problems are typically heterogeneous in 
natureŠthere is almost never just one variable contributing to the chal
-lenge or one avenue to a solution. Inputs, solutions, and technologies that 
can be brought to bear on any given problem vary themselves a great deal. 
Most sustainability challenges emerge in part due to interconnectionŠa 
result of multiple interlocking pieces of a system all having effects (some 
expected, some not) on other pieces of the system. Solutions to sustain
-ability challenges typically involve ˜nding near-optimal trade-offs among 
competing goals, typically under high degrees of uncertainty in both the 
systems and the goals.
In addition to noting the crosscutting nature of many sustainability 
challenges, it is important to recognize the emergent qualities that typify 
the sorts of systems being discussed here. Some projections of what might 
4E. Ostrom. A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social-ecological systems, 
Science
 325:419-422 (2009). 
FIGURE 1.1 The committee™s focus is on problems at the intersection of sig
-ni˜cant intellectual merit, relevance to computer science (CS), and importance to 
sustainability.
˜Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 17be accomplished with the savvy application of known technologies or 
near-term research are straightforward, even in systems and domains as 
complex as these. However, in such complex systems and domains there 
are likely to be emergent behaviors and properties as wellŠboth toward 
and away from desired outcomes. IT practitioners have proven remark
-ably adept at innovating ˚exibly when previously unanticipated systems 
behaviors have demanded responses. The complexity and unpredictability 
of the results of unsustainable human activities require an innovative and 
˚exible approach to solving or mitigating sustainability problems and 
their impacts, and IT researchers and practitioners are skilled at innovat
-ing and developing ˚exible solutions in dynamic environments. The com
-mittee believes that computing researchers and research approaches will 
be essential to grappling with current and future systems challenges in 
sustainability. 
This report has three chapters. Chapter 1 elaborates on domains of 
potential impact in order to illustrate the role and the available oppor
-tunities of IT on the broader path toward sustainability. It address the 
question, In what ways and where can computing research have measur
-able, signi˜cant impact? Chapter 2 describes methods and approaches 
in discussing the questions, How do fundamental research questions 
and approaches in computing intersect with sustainability challenges, 
and how can problem solving and research methodologies in computing 
research and IT innovation be brought to bear on sustainability? In par
-ticular, the committee views one important goal of computer science in 
sustainability as informing, supporting, facilitating, and sometimes auto
-mating decision makingŠdecision making that leads to actions that will 
have signi˜cant impacts on achieving sustainability objectives. Aimed 
primarily at computer science researchers, Chapter 3 articulates why the 
interplay between addressing sustainability challenges and computer 
science research merits attention, and how that interplay offers deep and 
compelling opportunities for progress in multiple dimensions. Appen
-dix A summarizes presentations and discussions at the Workshop on 
Innovation in Computing and Information Technology for Sustainability, 
organized by the committee. Biographies of the committee members are 
presented in Appendix B.
OPPORTUNITIES TO ACHIEVE 
 SIGNIFICANT SUSTAINABILITY OBJECTIVES
Forward-looking IT innovations and sustained research can have 
signi˜cant positive impact for sustainability across many areas. For the 
purposes of this report, the areas are clustered as follows: built infra
-structure and systems, ecosystems services and the environment, and 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
sociotechnical systems.
5 Each of these is described brie˚y below. There 
are obvious multiple intersection points in these three distinct areas of 
opportunity. For example, eco-feedback devices (tools that provide instant 
information on environmental impact) within the home, a sociotechni
-cal system,
6 interact with the larger smart grid system, part of the built 
infrastructure; personal mobile devices, relying on built infrastructure 
and deployed in a sociotechnical context, provide data that feed into more 
robust modeling, a crosscutting methodology, and so on. In all of these 
domains, as potential solutions are deployed, careful attention will need 
to be paid to iterate over and evaluate solutions to ensure that progress 
made in one dimension of a given sustainability problem is not later off
-set by an unanticipated outcome or side effect in another dimension. The 
next major section, ﬁIllustrative Examples in Information Technology and 
Sustainability,ﬂ provides crosscutting examples of domains in which IT 
can support and strengthen sustainability efforts. 
 Built Infrastructure and Systems
Built infrastructure and systems include buildings (residential and 
commercial), transportation systems (personal, public, and commercial), 
and consumed goods (commodities, utilities, and foodstuffs). The Climate 
Group™s 
SMART 2020
 report examined the use of information and com
-munication technology in built infrastructure in several key areas, includ
-ing smart buildings, smart logistics, and smart electric grids. According 
to that report, these three areas alone provide a potential reduction in 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of 15 percent of global ﬁbusiness as 
usualﬂ emissions in 2020.
7Buildings account for up to 40 percent of energy use in industrialized 
countries and 40 percent of GHG emissions; in the United States they con
-sume more than 70 percent of the electricity produced.
8 Smart buildings 
use IT systems to make better use of energy while maintaining indoor 
health and comfort. The embedded IT monitors and controls environ
-5Other clusterings are of course possible. The choice of these three was inspired in part 
by Global e-Sustainability Initiative, 
SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the 
Information Age
 (2008). Available at http://www.smart2020.org/publications/.
6ﬁSociotechnical systemsﬂ encompass society, organizations, and individuals, and their 
behavior as well as the technological infrastructure that they use. 
7Global e-Sustainability Initiative, 
SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the 
Information Age
 (2008). Available at http://www.smart2020.org/publications/.
8World Business Council for Sustainable Development,
 Energy Ef˜ciency in Buildings: Facts 
and TrendsŠFull Report 
(2008). Available at http://www.wbcsd.org/pages/edocument/
edocumentdetails.aspx?id=13559&nosearchcontextkey=true. See also http://www.eesi.org/
buildings. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 19mental and electrical systems in the building by means of computerized, 
intelligent networks of sensors and electronic devices.
9 According to the 
SMART 2020 
report
, smart buildings could reduce carbon dioxide emis
-sions by an estimated 15 percent in 2020.
10 The sustainability of structures 
generally goes well beyond energy, and involves the reuse and recycling 
of materials, sustainable construction processes, improved indoor air 
quality, effective water use, and so on.
11 Smart logistics use IT for more effective supply chains (those deal
-ing with journey and load planning and with personal transportation), 
both in daily operational use and in long-term planning. Examples of IT 
contributions include better geographic information systems and design 
software to promote more effective transport networks, collaborative 
multi-
 
institutional planning tools to lower the logistical demands asso
-ciated with desired lifestyles, and better inventory-management tools. 
Computing innovation can also lead to better management of consumed 
resources. Smart electric grids use IT tools throughout the power networks 
to enable optimization. (Potential smart grid applications are described 
in greater detail in the section ﬁToward a Smarter Electric Grid,ﬂ below.) 
In addition to reductions that can be achieved in energy consumption, 
smarter water- and sewage-management systems in the built infrastruc
-ture can decrease water consumption and waste. Furthermore, large-scale 
agriculture necessitates water and supply-chain management; advanced 
IT can enhance precision agriculture, including the incorporation of tech
-nologies to predict crop yields more accurately.
12
 (See the section ﬁSus
-tainable Food Systems,ﬂ below, for more on food systems broadly.)
Transportation and city and regional planning also provide impor
-tant opportunities for more sustainable development; computation and 
IT will be needed to enable signi˜cantly more complex planning for the 
optimizing of investment in new infrastructure. And, changes to manu
-facturing itself (which incorporates logistics, sensing, transportation, and 
manipulation) can help with sustainability goals by reducing environ
-mental impacts, conserving energy and resources, and improving safety 
9National Research Council, 
Achieving High-Performance Federal Facilities: Strategies and Ap-proaches for Transformational Change,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2011).
10
Global e-Sustainability Initiative, 
SMART 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon Economy in the 
Information Age
 (2008). Available at http://www.smart2020.org/publications/.
11For an introduction to some of the issues related to achieving high-performance ﬁgreenﬂ 
buildings, see National Research Council, 
Achieving High-Performance Federal Facilities: Strate-gies and Approaches for Transformational Change,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press (2011).
12
National Research Council, 
Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
for the individuals and communities affected by it. IT has a central role 
in these efforts. 
Ecosystems and the Environment 
Assessing, understanding, and positively affecting (or not affecting) 
the environment and particular ecosystems are crosscutting challenges 
for many sustainability efforts.
13 The scale and scope of such efforts range 
from local and regional activities examining species habitats, to watershed 
management, to efforts to increase understanding of the impacts of global 
climate change. The range of challenges itself poses a problem: how best 
to assess the relative importance of various sustainability activities with 
an eye toward signi˜cant impact. Nonetheless, in virtually every activity 
related to meeting sustainability challenges, a critical role is required of 
data, information, and computation. 
Climate science, for example, has been able to take huge leaps forward 
due to advances in computing research.
14
 Computational modeling and 
simulation of Earth, the atmosphere, oceans, and biota and of their many 
interactions have long been at the heart of understanding how changes in 
carbon cycles and hydrological cycles give rise to global climate change 
and the estimating of future impacts. Sensing, data management, and 
model formation connect these computational analyses to a vast body of 
empirical observation and to one another. Such tools allow for the contin
-ual improvement of ˜delity and can help improve the basic understand
-ing of ˚ows of carbon, nitrogen, and other emissions of interest. These 
tools also improve the understanding of water and resource usage, of 
species distributions and biodiversity, and of ways in which human activ
-ity perturbs these. Analyses of environmental and ecosystem responses 
to disturbances (those from GHGs, ˜re, invasive species, disease) are 
important to meeting a range of sustainability objectives. Modeling also 
plays a crucial role in guiding decision makers, by connecting ecological 
science and research to ongoing ecosystem policy and management. For 
13
A recent National Research Council report ﬁcapture[s] some of the current excitement 
and recent progress in scienti˜c understanding of ecosystems, from the microbial to the 
global level, while also highlighting how improved understanding can be applied to im
-portant policy issues that have broad biodiversity and ecosystem effect.ﬂ National Research 
Council, 
Twenty-First Century Ecosystems: Managing the Living World Two Centuries after Dar
-win
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2011), p. ix.
14
D.A. Randall, R.A. Wood, S. Bony, R. Colman, R. Fichefet, J. Fyfe, V. Kattsov, A. Pittman, 
J. Shukla, J. Srinivasan, R.J. Stouffer, A. Sumi, and K.E. Taylor. 
The Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change, S. Solomon D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.Tignor 
and H.L. Miller (eds.), Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press (2007). 
Available at http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch1s1-5-3.html. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 21example, models that jointly capture the interrelationships of multiple 
variables and their joint uncertainty can support improved understanding 
and more robust decision making.
Sociotechnical Systems
Large and long-lived impacts on sustainability will require enabling, 
encouraging, and sustaining desired human behaviorŠthat of indi
 viduals, 
organizations, municipalities, and nation-statesŠover the long term. Socio
-technical systems designed to aid in behavioral assistance and reinforce
-ment and to provide information about progress are a critical element for 
global sustainability efforts. Such systems and associated tools are needed 
at every scale and can be applied to a range of problems, from enabling 
effective response in times of acute crisis management, to urban planning, 
to promoting the understanding of behavioral impacts (sometimes referred 
to as footprint analysis) on carbon, water, and biodiversity. 
 Institutional behaviors will need to shift in order to realize continu
-ous, long-term environmental changes. Marketing and public education 
initiatives are important and can contribute to individual and institutional 
knowledge on best practices. However, real-time information and tools 
can better equip individuals and organization to make daily, ongoing, 
and signi˜cant changes in response to a constantly evolving set of cir
-cumstances. Information dashboards accessible to key decision makers 
are an example of how IT can be used to collect, analyze, curate, and 
informatively present critical information quickly to those who need it 
most. For example, if the ˜nancial incentives for energy utilities shift 
from an emphasis on delivering more power more cheaply to an empha
-sis on improving the GHG emissions ef˜ciency of a given level of ser
-vice, new information will be needed. Gathering such information will 
require greater visibility and understanding of the dynamics of customer 
demand, grid capacity, and supply availability. In addition, each of the 
stakeholders will need more effective means of communicating needs 
and trade-offs. Similarly, in order for urban planning to promote, say, 
the reduction of liquid fuel consumption for personal transportation, the 
processes of street design, zoning, planting, business development, water 
and waste management, and public transportation need to be coordinated 
across multiple governing bodies and constituencies.
 Personal devices, most notably sensor-rich smartphones, not only 
provide information and services to their users, but also can provide 
scientists and researchers with information that may have been missed 
by traditional operational networks. Furthermore, citizen scientists are 
increasingly engaged in scienti˜c problem solving, for example by docu
-Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
menting species locations, air quality, and other indicators.
15
 In addition, 
environmental challengesŠthose caused by damage to the environment 
from rising ocean water levels and temperatures or those created by the 
search for and extraction of materialsŠcan be monitored, assessed, and 
tracked. Information about environmental challenges can also be dissemi
-nated using smarter IT. Further advances in the ability to analyze data 
collected by a wide array of sources will facilitate a better understanding 
of how environmental crises begin and how to avoid them in the future. 
ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES IN 
 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND SUSTAINABILITY
This section contains three illustrative examples of sustainability-
related domains in which IT can have signi˜cant impact and in which 
there is both some current activity as well as prospects for signi˜cant 
progress and impact in the future. This set of examples is not meant 
to be comprehensive and does not re˚ect a prioritization. Rather, these 
examples were chosen to illustrate how ITŠboth currently understood 
technologies as well as new onesŠcould be brought to bear on sustain
-ability challenges and also to show the range and variability of what is 
meant by sustainability. Each example area listed below cuts across the 
three broad areas outlined above. 

The smart grid
. In this ˜rst example, the grid is clearly part of built 
infrastructure, but it also has the potential to affect regional ecosystems 
dramatically as new sources of renewable energy are brought online (for 
example, solar facilities deployed in deserts will affect the desert ecosys
-tem). Managing the smart grid, from both the supply and the consump
-tion side (which may not be as easily separable in any event) will require 
sociotechnical systems, such as data management, for humans and human 
organizations. 

Food systems
. This second example also encompasses built envi
-ronments (including the transportation system), the environment, and 
ecosystems (in various aspects from macro effects on watersheds to strate
-gies for precision agriculture), and, like the smart grid, it requires sophis
-ticated tools and data management to be most effective. 

The development of sustainable and resilient infrastructures
. This third 
example poses crosscutting sustainability challenges, especially when 
considering a broad view of sustainability that encompasses economic 
15
W. Willett, P. Aoki, N. Kumar, S. Subramanian, and A. Woodruff, Common sense com
-munity: Scaffolding mobile sensing and analysis for novice users, pp. 301-318 in
 Proceedings 
of the 8th International Conference on Pervasive Computing (Pervasive ‚10)
 (May 2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 23and social issues. These challenges include planning and modeling infra
-structure and anticipating and responding to increasingly frequent natu
-ral and human-made disasters.
Toward a Smarter Electric Grid 
Being able to meet the planet™s energy needs in a sustainable fash
-ion is fundamentally interwoven with foundational transformations in 
the design, deployment, and operation of the world™s electric grids. The 
problem is large and complicated, and the committee™s framing in this 
discussion is for descriptive purposes, and is not meant to be complete, to 
be prescriptive, or to con˚ict deliberately with other approaches to char
-acterizing the problem.
16
 With regard to the electric grid, most analyses 
of potential paths to stabilizing GHG concentrations involve three interre
-lated advances: deep ef˜ciency gains, electrifying the demand, and decar-bonizing the supply.
17
 As a prime example, the United States currently 
consumes roughly 100 quadrillion British thermal units (Btu) (about 100 
exajoules) of energy per year, with ˚ows from supply to demand as illus
-trated graphically in Figure 1.2. Roughly half of the energy supply goes 
into the production of electricity. Of that, the largest share is provided 
by coal, which has the worst GHG intensity of the supplies and is the 
cheapest and fastest way to increase supply in developing economies. 
By contrast, essentially all of the renewable and zero-emission supplies 
also go into electricity production, but these account for a tiny fraction 
of the energy mix. Their share must increase substantially in order to 
16
For instance, a survey paper developed by IBM Research on the computational chal
-lenges of the evolving smart grid is oriented around the challenges of data, grid simulation, 
and economic dispatch: J. Xiong, E. Acar, B. Agrawal, A. Conn, G. Ditlow, P. Feldmann, U. 
Finkler, B. Gaucher, A. Gupta, F-L. Heng, J. Kalagnanam, A. Koc, D. Kung, D. Phan, A. Sing
-hee, and B. Smith, 
Framework for Large-Scale Modeling and Simulation of Electricity Systems for 
Planning, Monitoring, and Secure Operations of Next Generation Electricity Grids,
 Special Report 
in Response to Request for Information: Computation Needs for the Next-Generation Elec
-tric Grid, DOE/LBNL Prime Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231, Subcontract No. 6940385 
(2011); M. Ilic, Dynamic monitoring and decision systems for enabling sustainable energy 
services, 
Proceedings of the IEEE
 99:58-79 (2011), notes the fundamental role of a man-made 
power transmission grid and its IT in enabling sustainable socioecological energy systems. 
J. Kassakian, R. Schmalensee, K. Afridi, A. Farid, J. Grochow, W. Hogan, H. Jacoby, J. Kirtley, 
H. Michaels, I. Pérez-Arriaga, D. Perreault, N. Rose, and G. Wilson, 
The Future of the Elec
-tric Grid: An Interdisciplinary MIT Study, 
available at http://web.mit.edu/mitei/research/
studies/the-electric-grid-2011.shtml#report, aims to provide an objective description of the 
grid today and makes recommendations for policy, research, and data for guiding the evo
-lution of the grid. 
17
California Council on Science and Technology, 
California™s Energy Future: A View to 2050,
 Sacramento (2011). Available at http://www.ccst.us/publications/2011/2011energy.pdf.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
reduce the GHG intensity of the delivered electricity. Doing so will dra
-matically change the nature of the supply, however, since the availability 
of these resources varies with natural factors, such as wind and sun, 
rather than being dispatched as needed to meet demand. Furthermore, 
the geographic placement of these supplies is governed by natural fac
-tors, and so the points at which they attach to the grid, and therefore the 
pattern of ˚ow from supply to demand and hence the power lines, sta
-tions, and devices used to convey these ˚ows of electricity, may be quite 
different from the ˚ows associated with traditional power plants. This 
has implications for IT, since the information-management problem for 
distributed energy production is fundamentally different from that for 
more centralized production. Managing electricity produced by a half 
million windmills requires advanced ITŠdata management, algorithms, 
and analyticsŠwhereas managing a few hundred coal-˜red power plants 
is a much simpler proposition from an IT perspective. 
Already a signi˜cant fraction of the supply in the U.S. national energy 
˚ow is wasted in the generation, transportation, and conversion of this 
electrical energy, and of that delivered into residential and commercial 
buildings and industrial processes, much is wasted through inef˜cient or 
ineffective usage. Moreover, reducing the GHG emissions associated with 
transportation and industrial processes, which are currently dominated 
FIGURE 1.2
 Current U.S. national energy ˚ow. Roughly half of the 100 quads 
(10
15
 Btu) is lost, most coal goes to electricity, electricity goes almost equally to 
residential buildings, commercial buildings, and industrial processes. SOURCE: 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (2010). Data are based on DOE/EIA-
0384 (2009). Available at https://˚owcharts.llnl.gov/.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 25by liquid fossil fuels, will involve electri˜cation (e.g., plug-in hybrid or 
electric vehicles) and hence will further increase demand. Major ef˜ciency 
gains, the accommodation of variable supplies, and electri˜cation are all 
likely to involve change in the patterns and practices of the institutions 
and individuals that represent the demand, which in large part rests on 
access to actionable information. Innovation in IT and its use underlie all 
aspects of such a transformation, as described below.
Electric grids can be characterized by their key components: genera
-tion, transmission, distribution, and load. Typically, each of these compo
-nents has been addressed in isolation. Although multiple approaches to 
transforming electric grids ˜t within the term ﬁsmart grid,ﬂ the fundamen
-tal change in the future will likely be to treat the key components together, 
as an interrelated system. Whereas other disciplines will contribute pri
-marily to the advance of the physical components comprising the elements 
of the energy supply chain, IT is expected to govern how these elements 
behave and how the complex system as a whole functionsŠthat is, what 
properties it exhibits. The section below ˜rst describes several challenges 
presented by smart grids and then outlines approaches to addressing these 
challenges, especially from an IT perspective. Finally, a discussion of the 
speci˜c role of computer science research and innovation in IT is offered. 
Challenges for the Modern Electric Grid
Four main challenges for the modern electric grid are discussed below: 
 


grid; 










dispatched on the basis of real-time power demand, with coarse predic
-tive analytics deployed to ensure that enough will be available; 








demand is managed to better match the available supply; and






Increased Consumption Increased productivity and improved standards 
of living correlate closely with increased energy consumption. Even in the 
United States, where the energy-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratio 
has been steadily improving through technological improvements and 
ef˜ciency measures, especially since the oil crisis in 1973, overall energy 
consumption continues to increase. This is an especially serious problem 
in recently industrialized nations, such as China. Continuing increases in 
consumption pose multiple challenges.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
In terms of generation, rapid increase in electricity production tends 
to skew the supply blend toward carbon- and particulate-heavy sources 
such as coal, because such supplies are currently easier to bring online 
quickly when needed. This trend further compounds the GHG emission 
problem. Lower-carbon options, such as nuclear power, present other haz
-ards, and renewable sources cannot typically be dispatched on demand, 
impose other environmental impacts, or are remote from areas of dense 
consumption. Wasteful production and manufacturing practices, espe
-cially in newly industrialized or rapidly growing economies, further com
-pound the climate impact. IT cannot provide generation, but it can enable 
more effective use of generation facilities to meet increased demand, 
facilitate the shift toward more desirable supplies, and help manage the 
increasing demand. 
In addition to providing adequate supply to meet growing demandŠ
which clearly cannot continue inde˜nitelyŠit must be possible to deliver 
the generated energy through the transmission grid and distribution tree 
reliably and safely. Each power line and each piece of electrical equipment 
has limited capacity and lifetime.
18
 Steering actions or switches do not 
determine the amount of power transferred along each line explicitly, as 
is done in networks involving transportation, communications, or even 
water distribution. Instead, the amount of power is determined implic
-itly, by the underlying physics associated with a distributed collection 
of loads, connected to a differently distributed collection of generators, 
through a particular interconnection of wires and transformers. Individual 
consumers decide independently how much to draw at each load point, 
and a centralized system operator orchestrates the production at each of 
the generators in order to match the supply to the demand in real time 
within the capacity limits of each line and transformer, and within emis
-sions limits set for each generator. This constrained optimization problem 
is relatively tractable if the transmission and distribution infrastructure is 
suf˜ciently overprovisioned. But, as more of its capacity is demanded, the 
problem becomes substantially more dif˜cult. A network of communicat
-ing sensors is overlaid onto the grid to monitor its distributed state, and 
sophisticated algorithms are used to predict demand, model the ˚ows, 
schedule generation, and adjust the limited set of control points that are 
present. Thus, the ability to meet increased demand through the physical 
18
For example, as more power is transferred along a line, more heat is generated, causing 
the line to stretch, become thinner, and sag. This increases the resistance of the line, caus
-ing it to heat further, and increases parasitic losses due to capacitance to the ground, which 
increases demand. All of these factors contribute to failures, which eliminate portions of the 
transmission or distribution infrastructure and thereby place potentially excessive demand 
on remaining portions. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 27infrastructure that exists at any particular time is almost entirely through 
advances in IT.
These challenges are further complicated by the changing nature of 
the load and the broader introduction of distributed generation. Unlike 
purely resistive loads, such as heating elements and incandescent bulbs, 
complex loads effectively cause a portion of the delivered power (called 
reactive power) to be returned through the grid to the generator. Histori
-cally, such ﬁnon-unit power factorﬂ loads were predominantly induction 
motors, which introduce a fairly simple phase shift in the alternating 
current (AC) waveform. But switching power supplies, such as those 
used in computers, ˚uorescent bulbs, battery chargers, and electronics 
direct current (DC) adapters, introduce complex distortions on the AC 
waveforms. Residential grid-tie solar installations reverse the ˚ow of 
electricity within portions of the local distribution tree. And the introduc
-tion of electric vehicles potentially introduces high point loads during 
recharging. Many of these new complex loads already possess communi
-cations and computations capabilities, and so they could potentially be a 
vanguard of using IT to condition demand in order to be ﬁgood citizensﬂ 
of the grid.
Compounding all of these issues still further are the economic struc
-tures that impinge on all aspects of generation, delivery, and demand 
at a range of timescales. On an operational basis, collections of sup
-pliers, consumers, and brokers typically participate in highly volatile 
wholesale energy markets at various granularities and timescalesŠa day 
ahead, an hour ahead, a minute ahead. Meanwhile, consumers typically 
experience relatively stable retail pricing. Compounding all of these 
issues further, utilities and the utility supply industry are still largely 
incentivized to produce and deliver more energy, not less. Economic or 
other incentives to curb growth are lacking in most parts of the world. 
A notable exception to this is net-meteringŠmechanisms that allow 
electricity consumers to offset their usage of electricity provided by the 
grid, and thus to lower their cost, by generating their own electricity on-
site, typically through rooftop solar photovoltaic installation. Basically, 
this can be thought of as the meter spinning backward when local gen
-eration exceeds local demand. Although net-metering is comparatively 
common, its penetration is modest enough that it can be incorporated 
as offsetting demand in the neighborhood distribution tree, without 
appreciable impact on transmission needs. Broader, less-tangible incen
-tives include the personal satisfaction of obtaining a zero-net lifestyle, 
potentially opening paths toward the decoupling of quality of life from 
energy usage. IT has an important role in doing the complex accounting 
and providing visibility into the consumption and production of other
-wise invisible resources.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Current Model of Load-Following Supply Grid operation predomi
-nantly involves orchestrating a portfolio of dispatchable supplies, 
including baseline (nuclear, coal, and hydroelectric power), intermit
-tent (combined-cycle gas turbine), and peaker (simple-cycle natural gas) 
power plants to supply precisely the real-time power demand across 
normal variations, spikes, and infrequent peaks in the load. Of course, 
the demand is not speci˜ed explicitly, but implicitly in the use of electric
-ity. Typically, independent service operators perform day-ahead demand 
prediction for their entire grid, with hour-ahead and even minutes-ahead 
adjustments, to drive scheduling and market mechanisms while provid
-ing adequate generation capacity at all speci˜c points in the transmission 
grid over time. A certain fraction of online capacity is retained as ﬁspin
-ning reserveﬂ and is used to match short-term changes in demand. An 
imperfect matching of supply to demand manifests in degraded power 
quality (such as voltage sags or surges, and frequency variation). Chal
-lenges include the following: 

High cost of peak demand.
 Since generation and transmission capabil
-ities must be built out to meet the peak demand, this peak drives overall 
investment. However, because there is signi˜cant variation in demand, 
a substantial portion of this investment experiences very low utiliza-tion. Fundamentally, load following relies on statistical multiplexing of 
independent loads; even though the individual loads are very bursty, 
the aggregate of many such loads is relatively smooth and predictable. 
However, correlations in the loads, such as air conditioning on hot sum
-mer afternoons or refrigerator compressor cycles at breaks in Superbowl 
action, generate very large aggregate peak demand. Means of power 
generation with short ramp-up times tend to have low ef˜ciency and high GHG emissions and operating costs. 

Prediction accuracy and market volatility.
 A mismatch of predicted 
and actual demand leads to large and rapid ˚uctuations in wholesale 
energy prices. Each new broad-based usage change (for example, the 
increased uptake of plasma television sets, compact ˚uorescent lamps, 
electric vehicles, and so on) raises concerns of prediction accuracy. Para
-doxically, by eliminating waste, energy-ef˜ciency measures can lead to 
larger peak-to-average ratios and potentially lower prediction accuracy, 
making the grid harder to manage.

Storage limitations. Grid-level storage exists in the form of pumped-storage hydroelectricity, compressed air, thermal energy storage, batter
-ies, and a few other possibilities, but storage capacities remain limited. 
Storage is typically expensive, and turnaround ef˜ciencies (the energy 
extracted from storage relative to the amount stored) tend to be low. 
Small-scale battery storage is prevalent but expensive, and the number of 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 29recharge cycles, and hence battery lifetime, is limited. When the effects of 
manufacturing and the disposal of batteries are taken into account, such 
storage may have a net negative environmental impact. Midscale storage 
(say, 1 to 100 kilowatt-hours) is almost non-existent, although ˚ow bat
-teries and electrolysis/fuel cell options remain in development.
19
 
Non-dispatchable supplies.
 Most renewable sources of energy, such 
as wind, solar, and wave, are non-dispatchable. That is, they are available 
only at certain times and in magnitudes determined by various environ
-mental factors; they cannot be summoned on demand. Gross features, 
such as the incident solar radiation over the course of the day or the 
seasonal patterns in wind,
 are much more predictable than ˜ne features, 
such as occlusion due to passing clouds or gusts and lulls, and the latter 
can cause very rapid changes in supply. 
Much of the growth of power generation in highly industrialized 
nations in recent years is in renewable supplies. But the penetration of 
those sources is fundamentally limited in a load-following regime (i.e., 
one in which power output is adjusted to demand). 
Many smart grid proposals focus on increasing the capacity and 
sophistication of the transmission system to reduce constraints imposed 
by transmission in matching supply to demand. These include long-
distance lines, in many cases using high-voltage DC, in order to access 
remote renewable supplies both for increased availability and to obtain 
geographic decorrelation. Within a grid, especially with distributed 
renewable resources, there may be suf˜cient supply to serve the load 
but inadequate capacity to route the power from points of generation to 
points of use. Better prediction, monitoring, and scheduling seek to pre
-vent such bottlenecks. ﬁSmart meters,ﬂ which are currently being rolled 
out in many regions, provide 15-minute-interval readings, rather than 
monthly accounting. Their use enables more accurate prediction and more 
effective scheduling as well as introducing incentives, such as time-of-use 
pricing or critical peak pricing, to nudge the demand toward a more grid-
friendly form. These efforts introduce a degree of observability into this 
complex system and thus open the way to decision making and action. 
As the IT in the grid evolves to embody monitoring, communication, 
embedded processing, and intelligence at various levels of the grid, it can 
provide a foundation for an interactive relationship between supply and 
demand that increases the penetration limit for renewable sources.
19
For instance, Sandia National Laboratories just announced the development of a new 
family of liquid salt electrolytes that could lead to devices that could better incorporate 
renewable sources of energy on the grid. See, for instance, http://www.sciencecodex.com/
sandia_national_laboratories_researchers_˜nd_energy_storage_solutions_in_metils-86320.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Implementing a Supply-Following Model
 The dynamics and economics 
of grid operation can be fundamentally altered if the demand can be shaped 
to match available supply and supply-chain constraints, such as congestion 
or outages. This approach is referred to as supply following, in contrast to 
load following. Load following has developed over the past century with 
a great body of typically centralized, utility-side intelligence to permit con
-sumers to use energy whenever and however they desire; however, supply 
following typically requires distributed, customer-side intelligence in order 
to manage energy demands while delivering desired services.
 ﬁDemand managementﬂ is typically taken to mean an explicit modu-lation of customer demand (for example, thermostat set-point adjustment, 
lighting adjustment, production curtailment) by the utility, according to 
prior arrangement, to ˚atten the duration curve. Numerous such mea
-sures have been employed for peak shaving and shifting load into valleys, 
but adoption tends to be low. Prevalent utility-driven measures involve 
automated voluntary adjustment to thermostat set points, especially 
for cooling during hot summer days. Many industry-driven proposals 
emphasize smart appliances, including dishwashers, dryers, and ice mak
-ers that can defer operation until less costly times of use. Plug-in hybrid 
or fully electric vehicles are seen as presenting a prime opportunity for 
the programming of demand. While naïve charging could be potentially 
destabilizing to the grid or even cause local, aging distribution equipment to fail (for example, if multiple electric vehicles charge on the same block), 
well-timed charging could provide increased stability while relieving 
petroleum demand.
20
 Dynamic variable pricing (as opposed to set schedules) introduces 
˜nancial incentives for end users to shift demand so that the overall 
demand is more easily met. Typically, residential demand is shifted into 
nights and weekends away from industrial demand. Often the schedules 
are complex and dif˜cult for individual users to keep track of. Charging 
for power according to more sophisticated pricing schedules requires 
more sophisticated metering, along with usable and understandable 
20
There are also many proposals for utilizing electric vehicle batteries as grid storage, 
providing power back into the grid when demand is high. While certainly attractive in con
-cept, such usage modes present pragmatic challenges. Batteries for vehicles are optimized 
to be extremely light, dense, and collision-resistant, with high power density. The number of 
recharge cycles of the battery that could occur before a costly battery replacement is a fun
-damental constraint. Utilizing this precious resource to improve the management of utility 
capital investment and potentially having driving range unexpectedly curtailed represents 
adoption challenges, whereas scheduling overnight charging ˚attens the duration curve 
without such impediments. Stationary bulk energy storage need not obtain the very high 
level of energy density and power density demanded for the mobile case; it can potentially 
be designed instead for large recharge capacity and high turnaround ef˜ciency.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 31controls. The modern advanced metering infrastructure rollout aims to 
achieve some of these possibilities.
21
Peak pricing extends dynamic variable pricing to include aspects of 
a particular consumer™s demand and to take into account how hard it is 
to meet that demand. In many regions, major industrial customers are on 
time-of-use, peak-based pricing schedules, in which the product of usage 
and peak demand determines the cost over a past interval. This creates an 
incentive for individual users to limit their peak as well as their overall 
demand. 
Finally, an approach known as demand response typically involves 
load shedding in response to a critical peak-pricing noti˜cation event 
from the utility. Manual demand response has been used in many non-res
-idential markets for many years. Automatic demand response couples an 
Internet noti˜cation event to a preprogrammed set of demand-mitigation 
responses and thus involves considerably greater IT. Signi˜cant informa
-tion processing, modeling, and control issues need to be addressed to 
carry out demand-response issues in large commercial buildings. Signi˜
-cant human-computer interaction issues need to be addressed to realize 
fully the potential of this infrastructure, particularly for residential use. 
For example, if new electric water heaters are equipped with an automatic 
demand-response facility but the default setting is to ignore noti˜ca
-tions, then without a good interfaceŠand consumer educationŠthe likely 
result is that the default setting will not be touched and there will be no 
bene˜t. However, if the default setting is to respond to a noti˜cation by 
waiting until late at night to turn the heater on, when electricity demand 
is lower, one can anticipate large numbers of consumers wondering why 
their hot water systems seem to run out of hot water at unexpected times.
Peak energy reduction is extremely important for reducing the capital 
investment in generation and transmission assets and in reducing risk in 
wholesale markets. Also, peak energy has the greatest GHG emissions 
per unit of electric power because it is generated by less-ef˜cient plants 
with shorter ramp-up times. However, reducing peak energy has limited 
impact on reducing the overall energy demand or impact on climate, 
which are dominated by non-peak demand. Reducing overall demand 
and reducing the impact on climate require much broader ef˜ciency and 
reduction measures. In some cases, low-carbon renewable generationŠ
for example, summer solar productionŠaligns well with peak demand; 
in other cases, such as relying on the prevalence of nighttime wind, it 
does not.
21
For more information on the deployment of advanced metering technologies, see Na
-tional Energy Technology Laboratory, 
Advanced Metering Infrastructure: NETL Modern Grid 
Strategy
 (2008). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Accounting for Externalized Costs Another challenge to developing 
sustainable electric grids has to do with economic incentives and exter
-nalities. Various approaches have been articulated, including a carbon 
tax, fee and dividend models, and so-called cap-and-trade mechanisms 
(placing a cap on emissions but providing ˚exibility with mechanisms 
such as tradable permits). To truly represent the cost of externalities, any 
of these would require dramatically more precise accounting for environ
-mental costs throughout the energy supply chain. In principle these offer 
a common metric around which optimization measures at all tiers can be 
integrated. Today, under a utility-centric approach, crude weightings of 
the energy blend appear to suf˜ce. If a smarter grid were deployed, the 
task of accounting for all aspects of life-cycle costs would introduce tre
-mendous IT challenges. The same would be true if, for instance, end users 
were to access information about the real-time mix in the blend to enable 
them to make more informed decisions about when to consume energy 
(assuming the presence of signi˜cant penetration of non-carbon supply). 
Consideration of computer security should be integral to work on 
the smart grid. As just one example of the security risks, an attack that 
injected malicious code into smart electrical energy control systems in mil
-lions of homes might be used to manipulate demand and prices, or just to 
create chaos by turning on or shutting down large numbers of appliances 
unnecessarily. There are also legitimate potential privacy concerns with 
such control systems that will need to be addressed in ways that are both 
usable and technically sound.
Approaches to a More Sustainable Electric Grid
A forward-looking sustainable grid scenario presents a fundamen
-tally more cooperative interaction between demand and supply and fun
-damentally greater transparency
22
 throughout the energy supply chain, 
with the goal of achieving deep reduction in demand and deep penetra
-tion of renewables in the supply blend.
23
 22
For this particular goal, transparency is required for technical reasons: that is, to support 
a more cooperative interaction between demand and supply. However, transparency is also 
essential for reasons of trust, accountability, and fairness, to avoid the potential for Enron-
style market manipulations to be multiplied many times with the new grid technologies.
23
Today, major industrial customers with substantial in-house generation are able to take 
advantage of the volatility of the wholesale market by running in-house generation when 
prices are high, tailoring its use to meet business goals, and shutting it down completely 
when prices ﬁgo negativeﬂŠwhich they do at times in the U.S. Midwest grid, in the Euro
-pean Union, and elsewhereŠthereby getting paid to consume power.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 33The introduction of storage aims to decouple generation and con
-sumption, enabling either to take place at times that are most effective. (But 
even with hypothetical vast storage capacities, inef˜ciencies in storing and 
generating electricity mean that complete decoupling will not be possible.) 
Equally important is the ability to coordinate loads, often through the 
utilization of non-electrical forms of energy storage such as thermal, but 
also often exploiting ˚exibility in the actual task. In short, opportunities to 
improve the sustainability of the electric grid can be clustered as follows: 
(1) sculpt demand to match the supply of renewable power more closely; 
when abundant renewable power is available, use it for shiftable power 
needs (such as ice makers, hot water, dishwashers, electric car charging); 
(2) sculpt demand to smooth out spikes so that less high-speed dispatch
-able supply is needed; (3) reduce total demand by improved ef˜ciency 
in transmission and use; and (4) apply instrumentation and modeling to 
measure carbon emissions as part of carbon pricing and capping policies.
Electricity is currently the most invisible of utility-supplied resources. 
To make progress on the opportunities available will require new forms 
of visibility, including visibility with respect to price and GHG emis
-sions, consumption, and performance. IT can contribute in key ways: for 
example, pervasive instrumentation, monitoring, and analysis enable vis
-ibility into electric power consumption and resulting load performance. 
Increased visibility is an important component of developing inte
-grated home or building energy-management systems that can make wise 
decisions about how to shift energy use. These systems need ˚exible user 
interfaces and sensing systems so that they can receive information about 
when it is appropriate to, say, delay electric car charging, heating up a 
building, and so on. For example, such systems could be integrated with 
users™ calendars as well as connected to pricing and other generation-
side signals (e.g., sun and wind forecasts). Research is needed on user 
interfaces, predictive models of user and appliance behavior, and perhaps 
auction and pricing mechanisms.
Integrated energy-management systems could also address spiking, 
by heating and cooling buildings more gradually or by making offsetting 
power-consumption choices. Making the effects of such choices visible 
to the user (e.g., by clarifying when the building will achieve the desired 
temperature, when it will be possible to turn on a particular machine, etc.) 
will be critical for user acceptance. Price mechanisms (e.g., charging more 
for sudden changes) could be explored as well.
IT research is needed for developing methods for sensing, modeling, 
and intelligent control of buildings. Most of˜ce buildings, for instance, 
exhibit chronic poor performance (some parts of the building are too 
hot, others too cold; some parts are poorly ventilated, others too breezy). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Improved modeling at design time and during operations has promise of 
reducing such problems and saving energy.
24
 There is a signi˜cant role 
for IT to play in making opportunities for waste reduction manifest and 
in automating its reduction in buildings and also throughout the grid as 
a whole. 
The Role of Information Technology and Computer Science
 in Achieving the Smart Electric Grid
Information and data management are essential to making progress 
toward a smarter, more sustainable electric grid, as discussed above. Com
-puter science research and methodological approaches will be needed at 
all levels to address the broad systems challenges presented by the smart 
grid. Initial forays into both research and applications ﬁwinsﬂ in this area 
include energy ef˜ciency and smart mini-grid and distributed energy 
management,
25
 energy-ef˜ciency planning and building management,
26
 and the integration of smart grids and smart electric vehicle planning and 
operation.
27
 In many of these areas, savings of one-third to one-half in 
terms of overall energy consumption, with improved service and signi˜
-cant environmental gains, are possible. In many of these areas, a critical 
step is that of envisioning how the energy system could function if greater 
information and real-time data analysis were possible as embedded com
-ponents of the system. This would require greater attention to integration 
of sensor technology with energy, transport, and building systems; to sen
-sor data management; and to the role of distributed computing in process
-ing far greater ˚ows of information (and of forecasted performance and 
outcomes) than is typically the case today.
User interfaces are needed that make it straightforward for people 
to express preferences regarding aspects such as prices, comfort, tim
-ing, and ﬁgreennessﬂ of their power mix. These preferences could be 
very complex and dif˜cult to capture, requiring visualization techniques, 
24National Research Council, 
Achieving High-Performance Federal Facilities: Strategies and Ap
-proaches for Transformational Change
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2011).
25
C. Casillas and D.M. Kammen, The energy-poverty-climate nexus, 
Science
 330:1181-1182 
(2010).
26
G. Crabtree L. Glicksman, D. Goldstein, D. Goldston, D. Greene, D.M. Kammen, M. 
Levine, M. Lubell, B. Richter, M. Savitz, and D. Sperling, 
Energy Future: Think Ef˜ciencyŠ
How America Can Look Within to Achieve Energy Security and Reduce Global Warming, Report 
of the American Physical Society on the Potential for Energy Ef˜ciency in a Low-Carbon Society, 
American Physical Society
 (2008).
27
L. Schewel and D.M. Kammen, Smart Transportation: Synergizing Electri˜ed Vehicles 
and Mobile Information Systems, 
Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainability
 52(5): 
24-35 (2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 35increased understanding of human behavior with regard to energy, per
-vasive interfaces, and so on. Information technologies may prove useful 
in encouraging energy consumers to shift their consumption patterns to 
off-peak hours, when consumption is generally more stable and comes 
from more sustainable sources of energy generation. In order to iden
-tify speci˜c customers (with shiftable consumption patterns) to target 
with time-of-use rates, utilities could use more sophisticated predictive 
analysis through statistics. Information dispersal, social networking, and 
marketing through the Internet are other avenues that utilities are looking 
into, and with which computer science may be able to help. Additionally, 
with time-of-use rates, consumption data are increased signi˜cantly for 
each customer, and the complexity of tariffs and calculations with mul
-tiple tiers becomes an issue with which better analytical software could 
help.
28
 Improved statistical models and database management would be 
invaluable additions to the capabilities of utilities all over the country.
Improved modeling and analytical tools would help with demand 
forecasting that takes into account the adaptive nature of the demands 
(e.g., to answer questions such as: How far will people be willing to 
time-shift demand this Thursday?). With the help of predictive analy
-sis
 and weather data, utilities could use estimated capacity to improve 
their consumption forecasts, which would signi˜cantly improve their 
cost structure.
More generally, economic mechanism design tools for designing pric
-ing within a controlled system will be needed. Sophisticated statistical 
models could help validate the models through hypothesis testing. A 
goal might be to bring factories with energy-production capacity into the 
supply chain to supplement peak-hour supply, assuming that the GHG 
output was not made worse. This goal would also require creating an 
economic situation that is agreeable to both the utilities and the owners 
of cogeneration plants. Calculating the cost and bene˜t from both the 
utilities™ perspective and the cogenerators™ perspective, optimizing
 the 
best rate scheme to encourage sell-back, and factoring in transmission 
losses and ef˜ciency present a complicated and interesting optimization 
problem that could be greatly aided with the use of sophisticated decision 
analysis tools and statistical models. 
Looking further ahead, if appropriate CS research is undertaken, the 
ability to mitigate the intermittency of renewables through computational 
approaches will be greatly enhanced. These resources could be made 
more dispatchable without the need for 1:1 matching of renewables and 
28
Shwetak Patel, University of Washington, described a technology to monitor in-home 
electricity consumption at the committee™s Workshop on Innovation in Computing and In
-formation Technology for Sustainability. See Appendix A for a summary of the workshop. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
traditional sources or storage backup and optimized infrastructure invest
-ment. The success of the smart grid will, in part, be about the ability of 
the industry to shift from its current static operational, management, and 
planning models to a model that is increasingly dynamicŠa scenario that 
CS research and IT are well poised to address. Whole new situational 
awareness tools are required to observe, monitor, and control the smart 
grid. The computational burden of doing this is signi˜cant, and the indus
-try relies almost exclusively on vendors to supply solutionsŠvendors 
who typically do not invest a great deal in research and development. 
Switching from static balanced optimal power ˚ow to dynamic transient 
analysis that can be solved in real time and at scale is not achievable 
today, but this ability will be a requirement for managing the future bidi
-rectional, rapidly changing nature of the smart grid. 
IT and CS approaches will have a fundamental role in aligning the 
temporal and spatial characteristics of resources and users and in reduc
-ing the need for the close alignment between supply and demand. Dif
-ferent methods and approaches will be needed for sustainable energy 
systems in small developing countries, for the micro-grid in developed 
countries, and for a continental-scale energy system. Major CS research is 
required to address these and related challenges. 
Sustainable Food Systems
Agriculture in the United States and other parts of the world over the 
past century has been characterized by a dramatic increase in productivity, 
resulting in relatively affordable and available food. Some of the driving 
factors for this increase include the relatively inexpensive availability of 
fossil fuels and abundant fertilizer and water; concentration and special
-ization in farm production, including the increased use of automation and 
robotics in meat processing; the increased mechanization of farming and 
the availability of new technologies; advances in plant breeding; govern
-ment programs and subsidies; and the expansion and commercialization 
of markets. These developments have allowed for food to be produced 
at unprecedented volumes and have supported signi˜cant population 
growth.
29
 The increase in output from agriculture, unlike that in many 
other industries, has not been associated with a similar increase in inputs. 
For example, the acreage of cropland used in 2005 was comparable to 
29
Indeed, a recent issue of 
The Economist
 carried a ﬁdebateﬂ about whether computing 
was the most signi˜cant technological advance of the 20th century, and the ﬁantiﬂ side, 
articulated by Vaclev Smil, argued that the transformation of agriculture enabled by the 
production of suf˜cient nitrogen for fertilizer with the Haber-Bosch process of nitrogen ˜xa
-tion was much more signi˜cant. See http://www.economist.com/debate/days/view/598. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 37the acreage used in 1910. Thus, there has been a tremendous increase in 
productivity in U.S. agriculture, with more food being produced with 
signi˜cantly less capital, land, labor, and materials.
30
However, current agricultural practices pose challenges to the sus
-tainability of the food system, as well as to the broader social, economic, 
and environmental systems within which they are embedded. Much of 
the focus of agriculture has been on maximizing production to satisfy 
human food, feed, and ˜ber needs while secondarily considering envi
-ronmental and societal impacts. There is a growing concern regarding 
the negative consequences of current trends in agricultural productivity 
and a concern that these trends cannot continue inde˜nitely. Increases in 
agricultural productivity have spawned hypoxia in coastal and inland 
waters around the world because of increased concentrations of nitrogen 
and phosphorus, altering the planet™s biogeochemistry. A sustainable food 
system will be key to ensuring that the world™s population receives nec
-essary nutrition without contributing additional damage to the environ
-ment and society. As with the electric grid, the opportunities for IT seem 
most salient in the systems issues in sustainable agriculture. 
The recent report of the National Research Council on sustain
-able agriculture de˜nes a ﬁsustainable agriculture systemﬂ as one that 
 (1) satis˜es human food, feed, and ˜ber needs and contributes to biofuel; 
(2) enhances environmental quality and the resource base; (3) sustains the 
economic viability of agriculture; and (4) enhances the quality of life of 
farmers, farmworkers, and society as a whole.
31
 The ˜rst point naturally 
requires both suf˜cient food production and a population sized appro
-priately for the food that can be produced. The American Public Health 
Association, in its policy statement on sustainable food systems, builds 
on these ideas, de˜ning a sustainable food system as one that ﬁprovides 
healthy food to meet current food needs while maintaining healthy eco
-systems that can also provide food for generations to come with minimal 
negative impact to the environment.ﬂ
32
 A sustainable food system will need to address simultaneously all 
four of the objectives listed above rather than optimizing over any indi
-vidual dimension. A 2012 NRC report of two workshops provides a broad 
exploration of food security, agriculture, and related sustainability chal
-30
National Research Council, 
Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010). 
31
National Research Council, 
Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010).
32American Public Health Association, ﬁToward a Healthy, Sustainable Food Systemﬂ 
(2007). Available at http://www.apha.org/advocacy/policy/policysearch/default.
htm?id=1361. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
lenges. It notes that ﬁneither the modern food systems nor the traditional 
systems assure long term food security for allﬂ and examines availability, 
access, and utilization as well as barriers to expanding production (with
-out damaging future capacity) and policy, technology, and governance 
interventions that could help.
33
 This section brie˚y explores the challenges facing the creation of 
a sustainable food system that promotes public health and identi˜es 
potential areas in which IT and research in computer science can have 
an impact.
Challenges to Developing a Sustainable Food System
A few of the many challenges to creating a sustainable global food 
system are highlighted below. They include increasing demand, environ
-mental impacts, and public health impacts. 
Increasing Demand
 The U.S. population increased by approximately 9 
percent from 2000 to 2009, and total consumption of food has increased in 
parallel. In addition to the increase in the total amount of food consumed, 
the composition of the nation™s diet has shifted toward an increased 
consumption of meat beyond levels recommended by federal guidelines. 
Since 1960, there has been an increase in the use of grains for livestock 
feed, and so a shift toward meat consumption produces a greater strain 
on the agricultural system.
34
 Rising incomes in emerging markets such as 
Mexico and China have produced greater demands on U.S. agricultural 
exports, and such demand is likely to increase in the future. The emerg
-ing biofuels and bioenergy ˜elds have also placed further demands on 
agriculture to provide materials for alternative energy production. In 
2007 and 2008, 23 percent of the U.S. corn harvest and 17 percent of the 
soybean harvest were used to produce ethanol and biodiesel. The various 
demands on agriculture today increasingly strain the natural resources of 
land and water that are required to satisfy global food needs.
Environmental Impacts
 Agriculture is a contributor to greenhouse gas 
(primarily methane and nitrous oxide) emissions through various soil-
management activities and livestock operations. Through biomass burn
-ing and windblown dust, farms also serve as sources of air pollutants, 
such as particulate matter. Conventional industrial agriculture applies 
33
National Research Council, 
A Sustainability Challenge: Food Security for All: Report of Two 
Workshops, 
Washington D.C.: The
 National Academies Press (2012), p. 2.
34
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation, ﬁLivestock™s Long Shadowﬂ 
(2006). Available at http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a0701e/a0701e00.htm.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 39large amounts of nitrogen-based fertilizers in order to replenish nutrients 
in the soil and substantial quantities of herbicides and pesticides to con
-trol both plant and insect pests. The increased use of such fertilizers and 
pesticides leads to runoff during ˚oods or heavy rains, which pollutes riv
-ers, streams, and bays. Tilling of the soil contributes to land degradation, 
and farming in dry regions consumes water resources for irrigation. It is 
estimated that in the United States, 80 percent of available potable water is 
used for agricultural irrigation, and overdrafting of underground aquifers 
(when the rate of extraction exceeds the rate of natural recharge) threatens 
agricultural activity in a large swath of the U.S. Midwest.
35
 Public Health Impacts In addition to the environmental impacts of mod
-ern agriculture, there are public health impacts from current agricultural 
practices. Air and water pollution from farms damages not just the envi
-ronment but also the health of the individuals living and working in or 
near the damaged environment. Factory farming of food animals has 
also increased the risk of foodborne pathogens, in part due to the close 
quarters of animals kept in con˜ned animal feeding operations (CAFOs). 
The interplay between supply and demand of highly processed foods 
has health implications as well, even as debate continues about the spe
-ci˜c mechanisms and contributors to diseases such as diabetes and heart 
disease. 
Approaches to Developing Sustainable Food Systems
Creating a more sustainable global food system will not be easy. This 
section outlines several approaches, none of which is suf˜cient alone, 
although each contributes to increased sustainability and could bene
-˜t from the contributions of computer science and IT. The approaches 
include taking a systems view; developing methods for measuring the 
costs, bene˜ts, and impacts of different agricultural systems; the use of 
precision agriculture; information for informed consumption; and the 
development of social networks for local food sourcing. 
Taking a Systems View
 Overall, there is a need to take a systems view of 
agriculture (much like taking a systems view in other areas of sustainabil
-ity, such as the smart grid, described previously) in order to understand 
and analyze the total impact of agriculture on the environment, economy, 
and society. A systems perspective is relevant at all points in the sys
-35
National Research Council, 
Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010). Also see http://ga.water.usgs.
gov/edu/wuir.html.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
tem. At the farm itself, individual farms can combine crop and livestock 
production so as to reduce the need for synthetic fertilizers. Traditional 
agriculture has focused on controlling the farm ecosystem by simplifying 
it (e.g., through monoculture) and applying external inputs (e.g., water, 
fertilizer, pesticides, and herbicides). The systems view seeks to reduce 
or eliminate those external inputs (and their associated carbon and pollu
-tion emissions) by, for instance, designing and managing a more complex 
ecosystem involving a larger variety of species.
36
 A systems view can 
provide guidance on how to develop ways to make the system as a whole 
more sustainable. For instance, rather than viewing a farm (or farms) in 
isolation and having inputs and outputs, one could view the entire cycle 
of food production and consumption as providing natural resources for 
growing food that is consumed by people. This cycle includes land, water, 
and other farm inputs, crops, transportation, processing, retailing, con
-sumption, and recycling or waste. At each stage, there are effects on the 
environment and society; thus it is important to consider the connections 
between farms, the ecosystem, and communities (local, regional, and 
global). An important role for IT is to enable farmers to manage these 
more complex systems through mechanisms such as sensing, predictive 
modeling, and precision machinery.
Methodology for Measuring Costs, Bene˜ts, and Impacts
 There is a 
substantial need for the development of methods and tools to measure 
the total costs, bene˜ts, and impacts of different agricultural systems. 
For example, comparative studies of GHG emissions from different 
˜eld-management practices for animal wastes would allow for better 
quanti˜cation of the environmental impacts of agricultural systems and, 
just as with the smart grid scenario, allow for prices to re˚ect costs 
and value better. In general, evaluating different farming systems will 
require assessing how each system balances productivity and ef˜ciency 
with environmental and societal impacts and will require analyzing the 
behavior of complex high-dimensional and highly interactive systems. In 
addition to the technical challenges of developing such measures, there 
are also signi˜cant challenges in helping them to be seen as accurate 
and legitimate by both producers and consumers. Novel visualization 
techniques, explanation facilities, interactive simulations, and other tech-niques may help here.
36
The control of pests provides an example of moving from a traditional view to a sys
-tems view. The traditional way of controlling pests is to apply pesticides, which requires 
little knowledge of the pests. A more sustainable approach may be to use benign control 
measures, which require an understanding of the pest™s life cycle and its interaction with 
other parts of the farm ecosystem.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 41Precision Agriculture
 The use of information and computing technol
-ogy in agriculture has greatly increased in the past 50 years. It has 
allowed farmers to assess variation within ˜elds and to generally 
maintain or increase yields while reducing inputs (particularly water, 
nutrient, and pesticide application). Technologies used here include the 
Global Positioning System, real-time kinematics, and geographic infor
-mation systems, especially satellites. IT already plays a substantial role 
in this area and will continue to play a critical role in the future. There 
is also a connection with methodologies for measuring costs and ben
-e˜ts: if the cost of water for agricultural use re˚ects its true cost, there 
may be much more incentive to use precision agriculture to reduce the 
consumption of water.
Information for Informed Consumption Increasing the information 
available to individuals regarding the nature of the food that they buy 
and how it was produced can assist them in making sustainable choices 
about food. Already there is an emerging market for foods that have been 
produced in a sustainable manner.
37 An important method by which such 
information is currently conveyed is through the development of stan
-dards, certi˜cations, or other eco-label programs. Each of these programs 
outlines a set of criteria for food producers and distributors in an effort to 
address various environmental, sustainability, or health goals.
38
 Perhaps 
the most well-established food standard in the United States is the organic 
agriculture certi˜cation, which focuses primarily on health and environ
-mental goals and does not address the broader goals of sustainable agri
-culture. Food-labeling requirements in the United States provide some 
information, for example, on the country of origin of meats and fruits, 
but general information about sustainability and food transport (which 
has implications for fossil fuel usage) is not available. Current standards 
and certi˜cations are typically communicated using logos or other print 
labeling on food packaging. However, potential exists for providing much 
richer information regarding sustainability and information to help con
-sumers sort through the proliferation of eco-labels in the market. The 
wider adoption of smartphones may allow for easier dissemination of 
this information, as users could search for sustainability information at 
the point of purchase. One example of empowering individuals with 
information is the Monterey Bay Aquarium™s Seafood Watch guide
39
 that 
37
National Research Council, 
Toward Sustainable Agricultural Systems in the 21st Century
, Washington, D.C: The National Academies Press (2010). Chapter 6.
38
Ecolabel Index. Available at http://www.ecolabelindex.com/.
39The Monterey Bay Aquarium™s Seafood Watch guide is available at http://
www.montereybayaquarium.org/cr/seafoodwatch.aspx. The guide provides a list 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
provides detailed and up-to-date information about what types of seafood 
are caught or farmed in a sustainable manner. In addition to a web site, 
the guide also is available as a smartphone application so that consumers 
can have portable access to its vast database. 
Social Networks for Local Food Sourcing
 IT could be used to increase 
networking among individuals and organizations, encouraging locally 
and regionally sourced food consumption. Community-supported agri
-culture (CSA) already bene˜ts from the organizing power of online net
-works to distribute relevant information, create markets for local farm 
producers, make it easier to place orders, and help connect consumers 
with local food. Generally, IT could be used to help make a more effective 
market for local foods.
40
 Beyond ef˜ciency, there is little argument that 
humans have emotional connections to food; techniques to strengthen 
the farmer/consumer connection could also be valuable. IT could also be 
useful for gathering information on regional surpluses or de˜cits, allow
-ing fresh foods to be allocated to areas where they are most needed and 
diminishing reliance on processed foods with longer shelf lives.
The Role of Information Technology and Computer 
 Science in Achieving a Sustainable Food System
As with the smart electric grid, information and data management are 
essential to making progress toward a smarter, more sustainable, global 
food system. Computer science research and methodological approaches 
will be needed at all levels to address the broad systems challengesŠ
encompassing the environment and ecosystems, social and economic 
factors, and personal and organizational behaviorsŠaffecting food pro
-duction, distribution, and consumption. Three critical areas are described 
brie˚y below: information integration; education and reform; and systems 
modeling, prediction, and optimization. 
Information Integration Information integration can help individuals and 
organizations on both the demand and the supply side of the food system 
of sustainable choices and the least sustainable choice of ˜sh to consume. Legal Sea 
Foods has questioned the value of the guide. See http://www.nrn.com/article/
legal-sea-foods-de˜es-aquarium%E2%80%99s-watch-list.
40
As one example of an effort in this area, see http://www.urbaninformatics.net/projects/
food/ regarding a project exploring ﬁubiquitous technology for sustainable food culture 
in the city.ﬂ Another example is LocallyGrown.net, which seeks to provide an online in
-frastructure and organizational capacity for local farmers™ markets and CSAs, particularly 
small-scale growers with few or no employees. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 43make sustainable choices regarding the production and consumption of 
food. Providing consumers with information about the sustainability of 
food production, in addition to other aspects of sustainable food sys
-tems such as health and environmental impacts, will require the sharing 
and integration of information across producer and consumer platforms. 
Developing and optimizing the infrastructure and architecture for such 
information integration will be an important contribution of IT. More gen
-erally, areas in which IT could be of substantial help include the creation 
of databases of information and the maintenance of the currency of that 
information as well as connecting farmers and consumers through social 
networks and the Internet. The development of analytical software for 
optimizing sustainable food purchasing choices for both consumers and 
large-scale purchasers (such as supermarkets) is another rich area of IT 
contributions.
Education and Reform Tools are needed to help both consumers and pol
-icy makers understand the trade-offs posed by the global food system and 
to navigate those trade-offs toward increased sustainability. The role of IT 
here is not just in providing information on availability and techniques, 
but also in allowing access to communities of individuals with simi-lar interests. There are numerous opportunities to effect change through 
demand-side modi˜cation of food consumption.
41
 Efforts to encourage 
the preparation and even the growing of food at home could have a sig
-ni˜cant impact on overall distribution needs. Increasing the availability of 
fresh, healthful foods in certain communities (e.g. low-income communi
-ties) would also help. Additional challenges exist in predicting the infor
-mation that purchasers and individuals will need, displaying information 
that will encourage more sustainable consumption habits, educating con
-sumers about sustainable choices without overwhelming them, and so on. 
Systems Modeling, Prediction, and Optimization Improving the ef˜
-ciency of the food system in general will require modeling a complex and 
interactive system and methods for predicting food shortages and sur
-pluses in order to help ensure that food is available in different regions at 
41
Andrea Grimes, Martin Bednar, Jay David Bolter, and Rebecca E. Grinter, EatWell: 
Sharing nutrition-related memories in a low-income community, 
Proceedings of the 2008 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
 (2008); Andrea Grimes and Rich
-ard Harper, Celebratory technology: New directions for food research, 
Proceedings of the 
Twenty-Sixth Annual SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
 (2008); and 
T. Aleahmad, A. Balakrishnan, J. Wong, S. Fussel, and S. Kiesler, Fishing for sustainability: 
The effects of indirect and direct persuasion, 
Extended Abstracts from Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems
 (2008).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
reasonable costs. In addition, the transportation of food to various markets 
could be optimized according to sustainability cost functions if a compre
-hensive model of the food system were available. Given a model of the food 
system, one could also assess the costs and bene˜ts of various agricultural 
and farming strategies, the design of food sheds, and distribution systems.
Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructures
The resilience of the nation™s societal and physical infrastructures 
poses deep and crosscutting sustainability challenges, especially when 
one takes a broad view of sustainability that encompasses economic and 
social issues. For example, although transportation is a major source of 
GHG emissions and urban sprawl consumes open space and farmland, 
competing incentives in the realm of societal sustainability include the 
need for workers to commute to jobs, for people to have access to whole 
foods, and for available space that allow businesses to change and adapt 
over time. Contributing to the challenges of resilience of societal and 
physical infrastructures is the increasing risk of natural and human-made 
disasters. Sustainability concerns related to climate change, resource con
-sumption, and land use are closely linked to natural and human-made 
disasters.
42
 There will inevitably be more disasters, and enhancing soci
-ety™s resilience and ability to cope with them will contribute to sustain
-ability. Even apart from climate and resource consumption, the sheer 
magnitude of the world™s population means that crises, when they hap
-pen, will be at larger scale. This section examines the sustainability chal
-lenges around planning and modeling infrastructure and anticipating and 
responding to increasing disasters and the ways in which information 
technology can assist with developing sustainable and resilient infrastruc
-tures. The section focuses on cities as centers of large human populations, 
but many of the issues discussed apply generally. 
Challenges to Developing More Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructures
Cities are highly complex, evolving systems, involving the interaction 
of numerous people and processes, as well as natural and built infrastruc
-ture, legal and regulatory frameworks, and much else. The diversity of use 
within the systems adds another level of complexity. Each building™s use 
and design are unique within a particular city; each city™s infrastructure 
has distinctive characteristics. The heterogeneity of structures within any 
42
National Research Council, 
Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change
, Washington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press (2010). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 45given city poses challengesŠand because cities are often quite different 
from one another, the extrapolation of lessons learned is also challenging. 
Just as cities are increasingly complicated, the challenges of coping 
with disasters are compounded by their heterogeneity. There are acute 
natural disasters (such as hurricanes, earthquakes, and ˚oods), acute 
engineering and other human-made disasters (such as the 2010 Deepwa
-ter Horizon Gulf oil spill), as well as ﬁslowﬂ or chronic disasters (such as 
droughts, refugee crises, and rising sea levels). In addition, whether acute 
or chronic, there are the ongoing processes of cleanup and recovery from 
disasters. Many situations are best described as combinations of natural 
and human-made disasters with both acute and chronic time frames.
43
 The problems associated with the resilience of societal and physical 
infrastructures have complicated time lines. For instance, urban, sub
-urban, and rural areas are developed over long periods of time and are 
almost constantly being shifted into new uses. These long time lines create 
legacy systems that may not be compatible with newer systems or that 
could be costly to update. Planning becomes increasingly complicated as 
new infrastructure, often costly and time-consuming to implement, must 
anticipate the future needs of a particular area. 
Similarly, the time needed and the ability to prepare an area for poten
-tial emergencies vary and depend not just on characteristics of the area, 
but also on the anticipated types of disasters and crises. Some disasters, 
like hurricanes, come with at least some advance warning, and others, 
like earthquakes, strike at unpredictable times. Some events cause intense 
damage only in limited areas, while others affect enormous geographical 
regions. An additional challenge is that the frequency of disastrous events 
is such that recovery after one event (itself a major sustainability challenge) 
may well not be complete before the next major disaster strikesŠeither in 
the same region, as happened with Hurricane Katrina and the Deepwater 
Horizon oil spill, or different regions competing for resources and attention, 
as in the earthquake in Haiti in 2010 that was followed by severe ˚ooding 
in Pakistan. 
The Role of Information Technology in 
 Developing Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructures
Information and communications technologies offer a range of meth
-odologies, approaches, applications, and tools that will be integral to the 
43
Author Bruce Sterling coined the term ﬁWexelblat Disasterﬂ to refer to disasters caused 
by the interaction of natural disasters and failures of human-engineered technology. The 
2011 earthquake and tsunami that destroyed a nuclear power plant in Japan leading to core 
meltdowns is an example. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
development of sustainable and resilient infrastructure and to coping 
with disasters when they occur. Several such technologies are highlighted 
below.
Modeling and Simulation
 Urban regions can be modeled with varying 
degrees of spatial detail and behavioral realism. For a highly disaggre
-gate, behaviorally realistic model,
44
 the process of modeling a new region 
is time-consuming, often requiring person-years of effort. A major factor 
is dif˜culties in collecting and readying the needed data. Further, prob
-lems of missing dataŠcommon in U.S. metropolitan regions and even 
more so in developing countriesŠmake the task much more challenging. 
Modeling the development of cities over periods of 20 or more years, 
under different alternatives, can provide important information to inform 
public deliberation and debate about alternate plans and possible futures. 
Transportation modeling, and more comprehensively integrated model
-ing of urban land use, transportation, and environmental impacts, have a 
substantial history and are in operational use in many regions. Neverthe
-less, there are major limitations in current knowledge, and new research 
is needed to address the coming challenges adequately. In addition to the 
scienti˜c challenges of the modeling itself, it is important to consider how 
the modeling work ˜ts into the larger political and organizational process 
of making major decisions (often a contentious process), and to shape the 
technology to respond to these contextual challenges. 
Turning from simulations of long-term development to immediate 
support for coping with disasters: during a disaster copious amounts of 
information can be collected; however, more does not always mean bet
-ter or more helpful information.
45
 Sorting out how to manage and use IT 
capabilities at hand most effectively and, perhaps even more importantly, 
the vast amounts of data that can be made available by those capabilities, 
is a non-trivial exercise.
46,47
 44
For example, UrbanSim (http://www.urbansim.org), currently the most widely em
-ployed land use model in the United States.
45
Bruce Lindsay, 
Social Media and Disasters: Current Uses, Future Options, and Policy Consid
-erations
, Congressional Research Service (2010). Available at http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/
homesec/R41987.pdf.
46
See ﬁDisaster Relief 2.0: The Future of Information Sharing in Humanitarian Emergen
-cies,ﬂ available at http://www.unocha.org/top-stories/all-stories/disaster-relief-20-future-
information-sharing-humanitarian-emergencies, for an early assessment of crowdsourcing 
information and data ˚ows in a humanitarian crisis. In this case the Haiti earthquake of 
2010 was a primary example. 
47
Dan Reed, vice president of Microsoft Research, discussed some of the computational chal
-lenges posed by the 2010 Gulf oil spill, noting that the disaster stemmed from a ﬁcomplex 
multidisciplinary system with emergent behaviors across a wide range of temporal and spatial 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 47In addition to modeling the effects of current disasters, IT offers 
opportunities for in-depth simulation of potential disasters and for indi
-viduals to exercise and manage a given organization™s response to a crisis 
to hone and re˜ne their skills and approach. 
Communication IT provides the communications capabilities before, 
during, and after a crisis for coordinating activities and for delivering 
alerts and warnings to affected populations. IT provides critical capabili
-ties for the other phases of crisis response as well, such as modeling and 
simulation to predict likely consequences or to contribute to the under
-standing of the effectiveness of particular mitigation measures. As dis
-cussed in a 2007 NRC report, IT provides capabilities that can help people 
make better sense of information, grasp the dynamic realities of a disaster 
more clearly, and help them formulate better decisions more quickly. 
IT provides the tools to capture knowledge and share it with disaster-
 management professionals and the public. IT can help keep better track 
of the myriad details involved in all phases of disaster management.
48
The Role of Information Technology and Computer Science Research in 
Developing Sustainable Infrastructure and Fostering Resilience
Advances will be needed in IT and computer science research and 
methodological approaches to enable better simulations and better under
-standing of the uncertainties
 associated with achieving more sustainable 
development that is also more resilient in the face of disaster.
 Advances 
are also needed in the areas of encouraging citizen participation, devel
-oping indicators of resilience and future outcomes, and improving IT 
infrastructures themselves. 
Performance
 Running a simulation for a high-end, behaviorally realistic 
model for a major metropolitan region is a slow process,
 currently often 
requiring days, even on today™s fast computers. Similarly, the process of 
constructing a new scenario (i.e., a package of infrastructure improve
-ments, zoning changes, tax incentives, and perhaps such things as tolling 
scales.ﬂ He described some of the challenges in modeling such a system: ﬁwe lack the software 
engineering and programming methodologies to assemble, test and verify an integrated solution 
. . . the computational demands of an integrated, fully multidisciplinary, parametric simulation 
study of the oil spill and its effects would make accurate climate modeling seem like child™s play 
on an abacus by comparison.ﬂ Dan Reed, Lessons from the Gulf of Mexico (2010), available at 
http://www.hpcdan.org/reeds_ruminations/2010/08/lessons-from-the-gulf-of-mexico.html.
48
National Research Council, 
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, 
Preparedness, Response, and Recovery
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2007).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
or congestion pricing) can require months of work by experts in trans
-portation, land use modeling, and other disciplines. Creating far more 
ef˜cient algorithms for modeling systems that are increasingly complex 
presents an important challenge. One natural approach is parallelizing the 
algorithms. In a number of cases this is quite feasible: for example, when 
modeling residential location choice (where will people decide to live, 
given characteristics both of the household and the possible dwellings), 
one can use massive parallelism, with each household making its decisions 
independently. One must then undo some assignments if two households 
attempt to move into the same place simultaneously (perhaps mirroring 
what happens in real life with several people all trying to rent or buy the 
same dwelling). However, new or improved algorithms are likely a richer 
source of performance gain, which will be important because many of the 
applications envisioned require huge performance increases (for example, 
using a simulation in real time in a meeting, or running a simulation many, 
many times to compute information about uncertainty). The precomputing 
of key scenarios and interpolating among the results (when the changes are 
smooth rather than abrupt), rather than computing the results from each 
scenario from scratch, should also be investigated. In terms of algorithms, 
one class of new algorithms that should be investigated is multiscale mod
-els, in which the simulation is ˜rst run at a relatively coarse grain (e.g., a 
zonal level), and the results from this are fed to further simulation runs 
within each zone, and so forth. (See Chapter 2 for more on modeling.) In 
this case the reason for using a multiscale model is performance. Hetero
-geneous models are also relevant for urban simulationŠfor example, cou
-pling UrbanSim (a regional-scale model) with statewide freight mobility 
models. This could be further optimized by simulating only within zones 
that have changed signi˜cantly from the prior simulation period or that are 
of particular policy interest, and otherwise remaining at the coarser level. 
Managing Uncertainties
 Urban modeling is rich with uncertainties on 
many levels, including future population, global economic conditions, 
the price of energy, the impact of climate change, and many others. There 
have been some successes in propagating uncertainty through the model
-ing process and capturing it in the indicators that the system produced,
49
 but much more needs to be done in terms of both statistical techniques 
and effective presentation of the results.
49
Hana −evcíková, A. Raftery, and P. Waddell, Assessing uncertainty in urban simulations 
using Bayesian melding, 
Transportation Research Part B: Methodology
 4:652-659 (2007).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLES AND OPPORTUNITIES FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 49Citizen Participation To date, citizen science (or citizen information 
gathering) is being used for such activities as open mapping projects, 
but much of this type of activity has not been integrated with modeling 
work. Harnessing the energies and interests of citizen scientists has strong 
potential, both as a source of additional data and as an avenue for public 
participation and the legitimation of the modeling activity. Leveraging 
existing technology (such as mobile applications, cloud services, mapping 
and location services, microcommunications platforms, social media, and 
so on) offers numerous opportunities to improve approaches to emer
-gency and disaster management.
50
 Some organizations are experimenting with gathering situational 
awareness from citizens, and in particular citizen use of social media.
51
 At the same time, there are signi˜cant challenges with regard to data qual
-ity, coverage, and institutional acceptance, among other things. Technical 
approaches here may include reputation systems that let staff at institu
-tions build up con˜dence in particular observers, and ways to correlate 
data from multiple observers and to detect outliers.
During disasters, more attention should be paid to the information 
and resources held by the public because members of the public col
-lectively have a richer view of a disaster situation, may possess increas
-ingly sophisticated technology to capture and communicate information, 
and are an important source of volunteers, supplies, and equipment. 
Again, the information provided by the public will not always be correct; 
further, making full use of it may require considerable changes to exist
-ing practices. It is likely that the development of new, automated, and 
mixed-initiative techniques to manage and process the potential ˚ood of 
information will be needed. Another important factor is how to engage 
the entire population, given the existence of groups with cultural and 
language differences and other special needs.
Indicators of Future Outcomes
 Simulations already produce indicators 
of such outcomes as GHG emissions, consumption of open space, and 
comparative measures of compact versus low-density development, all 
for multiple years and under different scenarios. However, as discussed 
above, it is also necessary to anticipate disruptions and potentially even 
disasters, due to climate change, mass movement of refugees, and other 
50
National Research Council, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Sum
-mary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (2011).
51
Sarah Vieweg, Amanda Hughes, Kate Starbird, and Leysia Palen, Microblogging during 
two natural hazards events: What Twitter may contribute to situational awareness, 
Proceed
-ings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Human Interaction
, pp. 1079-1088.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
factors. A research challenge is to develop indicators of community resil
-ience in the face of such events.
52
 These might include the percentage of 
electrical energy generated locally (or that could be generated locally if 
need be), the redundancy of the transportation system and the food sup
-ply chain and their ability to cope with a sharp increase in fuel prices 
or even rationing, the ability to cope with sea-level rise (if relevant), the 
ability to walk to the most signi˜cant destinations if need be, the avail
-ability of food produced nearby, and so forth. These indicators need to 
be accepted by decision makers and the community to be useful in the 
political process. More abstract and much more dif˜cult, if not impossible, 
to incorporate into a predictive model (but nevertheless important) are 
the civic capital and connectedness of the community.
IT Infrastructure Improvements Large disasters upset physical infra
-structure, such as the electric grid, transportation, and health careŠas 
well as IT systems. IT infrastructures themselves need to be more resilient; 
IT can also improve the survivability and can speed the recovery of other 
infrastructure by providing better information about the status of systems 
and advance warning of impending failures. Finally, IT can facilitate the 
continuity of disrupted societal functions by providing new tools for 
reconnecting families, friends, organizations, and communities.
CONCLUSION
IT and computer science could have a major impact in a wide diver
-sity of sustainability challenges. The examples above illustrate some of the 
efforts that are needed. Individual problems are highly multidimensional, 
requiring innovation in different areas of computing as well as deep 
domain knowledge. 
FINDING: Although sustainability covers a broad range of domains, 
most sustainability issues share challenges of architecture, scale, 
heterogeneity, interconnection, optimization, and human interac
-tion with systems, each of which is also a problem central to CS 
research. 
The next chapter explores more speci˜cally the potential for comput
-ing and IT research and innovation to help address these challenges. 
52
An example of this is the Climate Change Habitability Index. For a description, see Yue 
Pan, Chit Meng Cheong, and Eli Blevis, The Climate Change Habitability Index, 
Interactions
 17(6):29-33 (2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Elements of a Computer Science 
Research Agenda for Sustainability
The discussion of sustainability challenges in Chapter 1 shows that 
there are numerous opportunities for information technology (IT) to have 
an impact on these global challenges. A chief goal of computer science 
(CS) in sustainability can be viewed as that of informing, supporting, 
facilitating, and sometimes automating decision makingŠdecision mak
-ing which leads to actions that will have signi˜cant impacts on achieving 
sustainability objectives. The committee uses the term ﬁdecision makingﬂ 
in a broad senseŠencompassing individual behaviors, organizational 
activities, and policy making. Informed decisions and their associated 
actions are at the root of all of these activities. 
A key to enabling information-driven decision making is to estab
-lish models and feed them with measurement data. Various algorithmic 
approaches, such as optimization or triggers, can be used to support 
and automate decisions and to drive action. SensingŠthat is, taking 
and collecting measurementsŠis a core component of this approach. In 
many cases, models are established on the basis of previous work in the 
various natural sciences. However, in many cases such models have yet 
to be developed, or existing models are insuf˜cient to support decision 
making and need to be re˜ned. To discover models, multiple dimensions 
of data need to be analyzed, either for the testing of a hypothesis or the 
establishing of a hypothesis through the identi˜cation of relationships 
among various dimensions of measured data. Data-analysis and data-
mining toolsŠsome existing and some to be developedŠcan assist with 
this task.
51
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Once a model is established, ﬁwhat-ifﬂ scenarios can be simulated, 
evaluated, and used as input for decision making. Modeling and simula
-tion tools vary widely, from spreadsheets to highly sophisticated model
-ing environments. When a model reaches a certain maturity and trust 
level, algorithms, such as optimizations or triggers, can be deployed to 
automate the decision making if automation is appropriate (for example, 
in terms of actuation). Alternatively, information can be distilled and 
presented in visual, interactive, or otherwise usable ways so that other 
agentsŠindividuals, organizations and businesses, and policy mak
-ers and governmentsŠcan deliberate, coordinate, and ultimately make 
appropriate, better-optimized choices and, ultimately, actions. 
All of the steps described above must be done in an iterative fashion. 
Given that most sustainability challenges involve complex, interacting 
systems of systems undergoing constant change, all aspects of sens
-ing, modeling, and action need to be re˜ned, revised, or transformed 
as new information and deeper understandings are gained. A strong 
approach is to deploy technology in the ˜eld using reasonably well 
understood techniques to explore the space and to map where there are 
gaps needing work. Existing data and models then help provide context 
for developing qualitatively new techniques and technologies for even 
better solutions. 
FINDING: Enabling and informing actions and decision making by 
both machines and humans are key components of what CS and IT 
contribute to sustainability objectives, and they demand advances 
in a number of topics related to human-computer interaction. Such 
topics include the presentation of complex and uncertain informa
-tion in useful, actionable ways; the improvement of interfaces for 
interacting with very complex systems; and ongoing advances in 
understanding how such systems interact with individuals, orga
-nizations, and existing practices. 
Many aspects of computer science and computer science research 
are relevant to these challenges. In this chapter, the committee describes 
four broad research areas, listed below, that can be viewed as organizing 
themes for research programs and that have the potential for signi˜cant 
positive impact on sustainability. The list is not prioritized. Efforts in all 
of the areas will be needed, often in tandem. 

Measurement and instrumentation; 

Information-intensive systems; 

Analysis, modeling, simulation, and optimization; and 

Human-centered systems. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 53For each area, examples of research problems focused on sustain
-ability opportunities are given. The discussions do not provide a com
-prehensive list of problems to be solved, but do provide exemplars of the 
type of work that both advances computer science and has the potential 
to advance sustainability objectives signi˜cantly. In examining oppor
-tunities for research in CS and sustainability, questions that one should 
attempt to answer include these:
 What is the potential impact for sustain
-ability? What is the level of CS innovation needed to make meaningful 
progress? 
As discussed in Chapter 1, complete solutions to global sustainability 
challenges will require deep economic, political, and cultural changes. 
With regard to those changes, the potential role for CS and IT research 
discussed in this chapter is often indirect, but it is still important. For 
example, CS research could focus on innovative ways for citizens to delib
-erate over and to engage with government and with one another about 
these issues, with the deliberations closely grounded in data and scienti˜c 
theory. For some critical sustainability challenges, such as the anticipated 
effects of global population growth, the potential CS research contribution 
is almost entirely of this indirect character. For instance, there is potential 
for using the results of modeling and visualization research toward the 
aim of improved education and better understanding of population and 
related issues. In addition, advances in IT in the areas of remote sensing, 
network connectivity services, adaptive architectures, and approaches for 
enhanced health diagnosis and care deliveryŠespecially in rural areasŠ
also have a bearing on population concerns. Other contributions from CS 
and IT research toward meeting such challenges could be aimed at devel
-oping tools to support thoughtful deliberation, with particular emphasis 
on encompassing widely differing views and perspectives.
The research areas described in this chapter correspond well with 
the broader topics of measurement, data mining, modeling, control, 
and human-computer interaction, which are, of course, well-established 
research areas in computer science. This overlap with established research 
areas has positive implicationsŠin particular, the fact that research 
communities are already established making it unnecessary to develop 
entirely new areas of investigation. At the same time, the committee 
believes that there is real opportunity in these areas for signi˜cant impacts 
on global sustainability challenges. Finding a way to achieve such impacts 
effectively may require new approaches to these problems and almost 
certainly new ways of conducting research.
In terms of a broad research program, an important question is how 
to structure a portfolio that spans a range of fundamental questions, pilot 
efforts, and deployed technologies while maintaining focus on sustain
-ability objectives. For any given research area in the sustainability space, 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
efforts can have an impact in a spectrum of ways. First, one can explore 
the immediate applicability of known techniques: What things do we 
know how to do already with computational techniques and tools, and 
how can we immediately apply them to a given sustainability challenge? 
Second, one can seek opportunities to apply known techniques in inno
-vative ways: Where are the opportunities in which the straight
 
forward 
application of a known technique will not work but where it seems prom
-ising to transform or translate a known technique into the domain of a 
particular sustainability challenge? This process tends to transform the 
techniques themselves into new forms. Finally, one can search for the 
areas in which innovation and the development of fundamentally new 
computer science techniques, tools, and methodologies are needed to 
meet sustainability challenges. While endorsing approaches across this 
spectrum, the committee urges emphasis on solutions that have the poten
-tial for signi˜cant impacts and urges the avoidance of simply developing 
or improving technology for its own sake. 
The advancing of sustainability objectives is central to the research 
agenda outlined in this report. As in any solution-oriented research space, 
there is a tension between solving a substantive domain problem, perhaps 
creating tools, techniques, and methods that are particularly germane 
to the domain, and tackling generalized problems, perhaps motivated 
by the domain, for which solutions advance the broader ˜eld. (Chap
-ter 3 discusses this challenge in more detail and provides the commit
-tee™s recommendations on structuring research programs and developing 
research communities in ways that constructively address these issues.) 
When focusing on the challenges presented in a particular domain, it is 
often essential that the details are right in order for the work to have mean
-ingful impact. For the work to have broader impact, it must be possible 
to transcend the details of a particular problem and setting. Much of the 
power in computer science derives from the development of appropriate 
abstractions that capture essential characteristics, hide unnecessary detail, 
and permit solutions to subproblems to be composed into solutions to 
larger problems. A focus on getting the abstraction right for large impact, 
appropriability, and generalizability is important. Simultaneously, it is 
important to characterize aspects of the solution that are not generalizable. 
FINDING: Although current technologies can and should be put 
to immediate use, CS research and IT innovation will be critical to 
meeting sustainability challenges. Effectively realizing the poten
-tial of CS to address sustainability challenges will require sus-tained and appropriately structured and tailored investments in 
CS research. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 55PRINCIPLE: A CS research agenda to address sustainability should 
incorporate sustained effort in measurement and instrumentation; 
information-intensive systems; analysis, modeling, simulation, and 
optimization; and human-centered systems. 
MEASUREMENT AND INSTRUMENTATION
Historically, sensors, meters, gauges, and instruments have been 
deployed and used within the vertically integrated context of a single 
task or system. For example, a zone thermostat triggers the in˚ow of cold 
or hot air into speci˜c rooms when the measured air temperature devi
-ates from the target set point by an amount in excess of the guard band; 
the manifold pressure sensor in a car dictates the engine ignition timing 
adjustment; the household electric meter is the basis for the monthly 
utility bill; water temperature, salinity, and turbidity sensors are placed 
at particular junctures in a river to determine the effects of mixing and 
runoff; and so on. Examples of speci˜c scenarios are innumerable and 
incredibly diverse, but they have in common the following: the selection 
of the measurement device, its placement and role in the encompassing 
system or process, and the interpretation of the readings it produces are 
all determined a
 priori, at design time, and the resulting system is essen
-tially closedŠsensor readings are not used outside the system.
1This situation has changed dramatically over the past couple of 
decades owing to the following key factors:

Embedded computing. Until the 1990s, the electronics associated with 
the analog-to-digital conversion, the rescaling to engineering units, and 
the associated storage and the data processing dwarfed the size and cost 
of the transducer used to convert the physical phenomenon to an electri
-cal signal. Consequently, these electronics were shared resources wired to 
remote sensors. Over the past 20 years, digital electronics have shrunk to a 
small fraction of their former size and cost, have been integrated directly 
into the sensor or actuator, and have expanded in function to include 
quite general processing, storage, and communication capabilities. The 
1In settings in which the transducer is physically and logically distinct from the enclos
-ing system, typi˜ed by the Highway Addressable Remote Transducer (HART) for process 
control and Building Automation and Control Networks (BACnet) for building automation, 
readings are obtained over a standardized protocol, but their interpretation remains entirely 
determined by the context, placement, and role of the device in the larger process. The use 
of the information produced by the physical measurement, and hence its semantics, are 
contained within the enclosing system.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
con˜gurable, self-contained nature of modern instrumentation reduces 
the costs of deployment and enables broader use.

Information-rich operation
. The primary control loop of opera
-tional processes (typically represented in manufacturing as plant-sensor-
 controller-actuator-plant) is usually augmented with substantial second
-ary instrumentation to permit optimization. For example, in re˜nery 
process control, such additional instrumentation streams help to tune 
controllers to increase yield or reduce harmful by-products. In semicon
-ductor manufacturing, they are employed in conjunction with small-
scale process perturbation and large-scale statistical analysis in order to 
shorten the learning curve and reach a ˜nal con˜guration more quickly. 
In environmental conditioning for buildings, multiple sensing points are 
aggregated into zone controllers. Automotive instruments are fused to 
present real-time mileage information to the driver.

Cross-system integration
. Measurements designed for one sys
-tem are increasingly being exploited to improve the quality or perfor
-mance of others. For example, light and motion sensors are installed to 
modulate the amount of arti˜cially supplied lighting in many ﬁgreen 
buildings.ﬂ But those motion detectors are then also available to serve 
as occupancy indicators in sophisticated heating, ventilation, and air 
conditioning (HVAC) controls. Rather than simply isolating indoor cli
-mate from external factors, modern design practice may seek to exploit 
passive ventilation, heating, and cooling; to do so requires the instru
-mentation of building con˜guration (such as open and closed window 
and door states) and of external and internal environmental proper
-ties (temperature, humidity, wind speed, etc.). All of these sources of 
information may also be exploited for longitudinal analysis, to drive 
recommissioning, retro˜tting, and re˜ning operations. Interval util
-ity meter readings are used not just for time-of-use pricing but also to 
guide energy-ef˜ciency measures. Traf˜c measurements and content-
condition instrumentation are applied to optimize logistics operations.
 The factors described above have changed the role of instrumentation 
and measurement from a subsidiary element of the system design process 
to an integrative, largely independent process of design and provision
-ing of physical information services. For many sustainability challenges, 
methodologies are needed that can start with an initial model that is based 
on modest amounts of data collected during the design process; those 
methodologies would then include the development of an incremental 
plan for deploying sensors that progressively improves the model and 
exploits the improvements to achieve the goals of the system. In many 
sustainability applications, such as climate modeling and building mod
-eling, the most effective approach may involve combining mechanistic 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 57modeling with data-driven modeling. In these applications, mechanistic 
models can capture (approximately) the main behaviors of the system, 
which can then be re˜ned by data-driven modeling. Classically, models 
may be developed from ˜rst principles based on the behavior laws of the 
system of interest, given suf˜ciently complete knowledge of the design 
and implementation of the system. Such approaches are re˚ected not just 
in the instrumentation plan, but in simulation tools and analysis tech
-niques. However, for most aspects of sustainability, the system may not be 
rigorously de˜ned or carefully engineered to operate under a narrow set 
of well-de˜ned behaviors. Examples include watersheds, forests, ˜sher
-ies, transportation networks, power networks, and cities. New technical 
opportunities for addressing the challenges presented by such systems as 
well as opportunities in instrumentation and measurement are emerging, 
several of which are discussed below.
Coping with Self-De˜ning Physical Information
 Rather than simply drawing its semantics and interpretation from 
its embedding in a particular system, each physical information service 
could be used for a variety of purposes outside the context of a particu
-lar system and hence should have an unambiguous meaning. The most 
basic part of this problem is the conversion from readings to physical 
units and the associated calibration coef˜cients and correction function.
2 The much more signi˜cant part of the problem is capturing the context of 
the observation that determines its meaning.
3 For example, in a building 
environment, supply air, return air, chilled water supply, chilled water 
return, outside air, mixing valve inputs, economizer points, zone set point, 
guard band, compressor oil, and refrigerated measurement all have physi
-cal units of temperature, but these measurements all have completely 
2These aspects have been examined and partially solved over the years with electronic 
data sheets, such as the IEEE [Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers] P1451 family, 
ISA [Instrumentation Systems and Automation Society] 104 Electronic Device Description 
Language, or Open Geospatial Consortium Sensor Model Language (SensorML).
 However, 
many variations exist within distinct industrial segments and scienti˜c disciplines; the stan
-dards tend to be very complex, and adoption is far from universal.
3One example of this problem is a stream-water temperature sensor that is normally sub
-merged but under low-water conditions becomes an air-temperature sensor instead. How 
should this contextual change in semantics be captured? One possibility might be a subse
-quent data-cleaning step that determines in what ﬁmodeﬂ the sensor-context combination 
was (in this case, perhaps by using a stream-˚ow sensor or by correlating with a nearby air-
temperature sensor). Another example is a soil-moisture sensor whose accuracy can increase 
with time when more is known about the soil compositionŠthe parameterized equations 
used by the sensors can be tuned to the soil-type details.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
different meanings. The same applies to the collection of measurements 
across many scienti˜c experiments. Typically, contextual factors are cap
-tured on an ad hoc basis in naming conventions for the sense points, the 
presentation screens for operations consoles, or the labels in data-analysis 
reports. 
The straightforward application of known techniques can be employed 
to collect the diverse instrumentation sources and deposit readings into a 
database for a speci˜c setting or experiment. Similarly, electronic records 
can be made of the contextual information to permit an analysis of the 
data. The collection, storage, and query-processing infrastructure can be 
made to scale arbitrarily; processes can be run to validate data integrity 
and to ensure availability; and visualization tools can be introduced to 
guide various stakeholders.
To provide these capabilities in general rather than as a result of a 
design and engineering process for each speci˜c domain or setting, how
-ever, requires either signi˜cant innovation in the techniques deployed 
or the development of new techniques. There are, for instance, well-
 developed techniques for de˜ning the meaning, context, and interpre
-tation of information directly affected by human actions, where these 
aspects are inherently related to the generation process.
4 To cope with 
many large-scale sustainability challenges, similar capabilities need to be 
developed for physical or non-human-generated information. 
Closely related to this de˜nitional problem is the family of problems 
related to registration, lookup, classi˜cation, and taxonomy, much as for 
human-generated information, as one moves from physical documents to 
interconnected electronic representations. When an application or system 
is to be constructed on the basis of a certain body of physical information, 
how is the set of information services discovered? How are they named? 
If such information is to be stored and retrieved, how should it be classi
-˜ed? If physical information is to be accessed through means outside such 
classi˜cations, how is it to be searched? Keyword search can potentially 
apply to the metadata that capture context, type, and role, but what about 
features of the data stream itself? 
Today one addresses these problems by implicitly relying on the 
enclosing system for which the instrumentation is collected. As physi
-cal information is applied more generally, it becomes necessary to rep
-resent the model of the enclosing system explicitly if it is to be used to 
4For example, the inventory of products in a retail outlet is quite diverse, but schemas are 
in place to capture the taxonomy of possible items, locations in the supply chain or in the 
store, prices, suppliers, and other information. Actions of ordering, shipping, stocking, sell
-ing, and so on cause speci˜c changes to be made in the inventory database. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 59give meaning to the physical instrumentation. However, general model 
description languages and the like are still in their infancy.
The Design and Capacity Planning of Physical Information Services 
Once the physical deployment of the instrumentation capability is 
decoupled from the design and implementation of the enclosing system, 
many new research questions arise. Each consumer of physical informa
-tion may require that information at different timescales and levels of 
resolution. Furthermore, the necessary level of resolution can change 
dynamically depending on the purpose of the measurements. In prin
-ciple, one could measure everything at the ˜nest possible resolution, but 
this is rarely practical because of limitations in power consumption, local 
memory, processing capacity, and network bandwidth. What is needed for 
many sustainability-related challenges is a distributed system by which 
information needs can be routed to relevant sensorsŠfor the purposes of 
this discussion, comparatively high bandwidth sensors are meantŠand 
those sensors can then modulate their sampling rates and resolution as 
necessary.
5 Recent advances in compressed sensing (to help conserve bandwidth 
and power) and network coding (to take advantage of network topolo
-gies for increasing throughput) add to the complexity of such a distrib
-uted system. One can imagine tools that take as input a collection of 
information consumers, a set of available sensors, and an understood 
network topology and produce as output a set of sensing and routing 
procedures that incorporate compressed sensing and network coding. 
However, this perspective assumes that the locations of the sensors and 
the network topology are already known. In virtually all practical situ
-ations, determining the number, location, and capabilities of individual 
sensors is an important design step. To support these design decisions, 
algorithms are needed for sensor placement and sizing. These algorithms 
require models of the phenomena being measured and of the information 
needs of each consumer. How will such models be provided and in what 
representation?
As mentioned above, system architecture has traditionally been orga
-nized as a cycle: plant-sensor-controller-actuator-plant. In this model, sen
-sor readings are centralized and aggregated to produce an estimate of the 
5Consider, for example, a thermometer in a freshwater stream. For purposes of hydro
-logical analysis, it might suf˜ce to measure only the daily maximum and minimum tem
-peratures and report them once per week. But suppose that one seeks to detect sudden 
temperature changes that might indicate the dumping of industrial wastewater. Then the 
thermometer may need to measure and report temperatures at 15-second intervals.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
state of the plant. The controller then determines the appropriate control 
decisions, which are transmitted to the actuators. However, as the ﬁplantﬂ 
becomes a large, spatially distributed system (e.g., a city, a power grid, an 
ecosystem) and the volume of data becomes overwhelming, it is no longer 
feasible to integrate centrally the state estimation and decision making. 
A recent International Data Corporation study
6 suggests that there will 
be more than 35 zettabytes of data stored in 2020. Distributed algorithms 
are needed that can push as much computation and decision making 
as possible out to the sensors and actuators so that a smaller amount of 
data needs to be moved and stored. At the same time, these algorithms 
will need to avoid losing the advantages of data integration (reduction of 
uncertainty and improved forecasting and decision making). 
Finally, tools are needed to support the planning and design process. 
These tools need to provide the designer with feedback on such things as 
the marginal bene˜t of additional sensing and additional network links, 
the robustness of the design to future information needs, and so forth. In 
summary, all aspects of capacity planning present in highly engineered 
systems, such as data centers and massive Internet services, arise in the 
context of the physical information service infrastructure. 
Software Stacks for Physical Infrastructures 
Potential solutions to the problems delineated above suggest that 
sophisticated model-driven predictive control and integrated cross-system 
optimization will become commonplace rather than rare. As discussed in 
Chapter 1, on the electric grid today, the independent service operator 
attempts to predict future demand and to schedule supply and transmis
-sion resources to meet it, with possibly coarse-grained time-of-use rates 
or, in rare cases, critical peak noti˜cation to in˚uence the demand shape. 
In the future, environmental control systems for buildings may be able 
to adapt to the availability of non-dispatchable renewable supplies on 
the grid, using the thermal storage inherent in a building to ﬁgreenﬂ the 
electricity blend and ease the demand pro˜le. Distributed generation and 
storage may become more common in such a cooperative grid. Various 
analysis, forecasting, and planning algorithms may operate over the phys
-ical information and human-generated information associated with the 
grid, the building, the retail facility, the manufacturing plant. It becomes 
important to ask what the execution environment is for such control algo
-rithms and analytical applications. What are the convenient abstractions 
6International Data Corporation, ﬁThe 2011 Digital Universe Study: Extracting Value from 
Chaosﬂ (June 2011), available at http://www.emc.com/collateral/demos/microsites/emc-
digital-universe-2011/index.htm.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 61of physical resources that ease the development of such algorithms, and 
how is access to shared-resource protected and managed? In effect, what 
is the operating system of the building, of the grid, of the plant, of the 
˚eet, of the watershed? Today these operating systems are rudimentary 
and consist of ad hoc ensembles of mostly proprietary enterprise resource 
planning systems, building management systems, databases, communica-tion structures, operations manuals, and manual procedures. An impor
-tant challenge for computer science research is to develop the systems and 
design tools that can support effective and ˚exible management of these 
complex systems.
INFORMATION-INTENSIVE SYSTEMS
Sustainability problems raise many research questions for informa
-tion-intensive systems because of the nature of the data sources and 
the sheer amount of data that will be generated.
7 Computer science has 
applied itself broadly to problems related to discrete forms of human-
 generated information, including transaction processing, communica
-tions, design simulation, scheduling, logistics tracking and optimization, 
document analysis, ˜nancial modeling, and social network structure. 
Many of these processes result in vast bodies of information, not just from 
explicit data entry but through implicit information collection as goods 
and services move through various aspects of the supply chain or as a 
result of analyses performed on such underlying data. The proliferation 
of mobile computing devices adds not just new quantities of data, but 
new kinds of data as well. Some data-intensive processes are extremely 
high bandwidth event streams, such as clickstreams from millions of web 
users. In addition, computer science is widely applied to discretized forms 
of continuous processes, including computational science simulation and 
modeling, multimedia, and human-computer interfaces. In both regimes, 
substantial data mining, inference, and machine learning are employed 
to extract speci˜c insights from a vast body of often low-grade, partially 
related information. 
All of the techniques described above can and must be applied to 
problems associated with sustainability. Nonetheless, several aspects of 
sustainability, even in addition to the vast quantities of data that will 
7Given the vast amounts of data expected to be generated in the near future, traditional ap
-proaches to managing such amounts of data will not themselves be sustainable. Bandwidth 
will become a signi˜cant barrier, meaning that approaches to computation (such as moving 
computational resources to the data, or computing on data in real time and then discarding 
them, or other new techniques), different from simply storing the data and computing on 
them when necessary, will need to become more widespread. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
have to be managed, demand greater innovation, or even wholly new 
techniques, particularly as ever more unstructured data are generated. 
To a large extent, these challenges arise from the need to understand and 
manage complex systems as they exist rather than to engineer systems for 
a particular behavior. 
Big Data
Notions regarding the coming wave of ﬁbig dataﬂŠthe vast amounts 
of structured and unstructured data created every day, growing larger 
than traditional tools can cope withŠand how science in general must 
cope with it were articulated in 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Sci
-enti˜c Discovery
,8 which posits an emerging scienti˜c approach, driven 
by data-intensive problems, as the evolutionary step beyond empiricism, 
analyses, and simulation. Useful data sets of large size or complicated 
structure exceed today™s capacity to search, validate, analyze, visual
-ize, synthesize, store, and curate the information. The complexity of the 
transformations that must be applied to render some kinds of observa
-tions useful to the scientist or decision maker makes better infrastructure 
imperative. It is necessary so that one can build on the work of others 
and so that the population of those with useful insight can expand as 
data products of successively higher levels of integration and synthesis 
are constructed. 
Unfortunately, there is a growing disparity between available soft
-ware tools and the ability to leverage those on the scale referred to above. 
Solutions to many complex systems do not parallelize well, and new tools, 
algorithms, and likely hybrid systems will be needed. Computer science 
research is needed to go beyond the embarrassingly parallel problems 
and to ˜nd new approaches, methods, and algorithms for solving these 
problems. More parallel programming tools, methods, and algorithms are 
needed to leverage these large-scale systems.
9 Progress in CS is needed 
in order to move from descriptive views of data (reporting on ﬂWhat 
happened, where, how many?ﬂ) to more predictive views (ﬁWhat could 
happen, what will happen next if . . .?ﬂ), and ˜nally to more prescriptive 
8Tony Hey, S. Tansley, and K. Tolle (eds.), 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scienti˜c 
Discovery
, Seattle, Wash.: Microsoft Research (2009).
9A 2011 report from the National Research Council elaborates on the challenge of and 
increasingly urgent need for signi˜cant advances in parallel programming methods that are 
coupled with advances up and down the traditional computing stackŠfrom architecture to 
applications: National Research Council, 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or 
Next Level?
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2011).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 63approaches (ﬁHow can the best outcomes be achieved in the face of vari
-ability and uncertainty?ﬂ). 
In order to handle big data, new approaches or improvements will be 
required in data mining, including clustering, neural networks, anomaly 
detection, and so on. For example, the smart grid will grow in terms of 
complexity and uncertainty, especially as renewables are made a more sig
-ni˜cant element of the energy mix. This increasing complexity will create 
an increasingly complex system of equations that will need to be solved 
on a shrinking timescale in order to create secure and dispatchable energy 
over larger geographies. This challenge implies a need for improvements 
in computational capabilities to cope with problems ranging from rela
-tively simple N ˛ 1 contingency analysis, to N ˛ x, to an ability to parallel-ize the solution to very large systems of sparsely populated matrices and 
equations that run on high-performance computing systems. In addition, 
appropriate semantic layers will be needed to bridge the various data 
sources with a common vocabulary and language, in such a way as to 
make them more universally applicable. 
Heterogeneity of Data
Because sustainability problems involve complex systems, the data 
relevant to those systems are typically very heterogeneous. Challenges 
lie not just with huge quantities of data, but stem also from the heteroge
-neity of their structure and the number of data sets often needed to study 
a topic. In the management of ecosystems (˜sheries, forests, freshwater 
systems), relevant data sources range from detailed ground-based mea
-surements (catch-and-release surveys, tree core data), to transactional 
data (˜sh harvest, timber sales), to hyperspectral and lidar data collected 
by aircraft and satellites. As discussed above, data for smart buildings 
include not only energy-consumption and outdoor-weather data, but 
also data on room occupancy, the state of doors and windows (open or 
closed), thermostat settings, air˚ows, HVAC operational parameters, 
building structure and materials, and so on. Dealing with such diverse 
forms of information arises, to a lesser degree, in multimodal multiphys
-ics simulations, which typically stitch together multiple major simula
-tion capabilities using specialized adapters and a deep understanding of 
the algorithms employed in each subsystem. Similar situations arise in 
data fusion problems and large-scale logistics, such as air-traf˜c control. 
But such management of vastly heterogeneous information and process
-ing is typically done on a domain-speci˜c basis. New techniques will be 
required to do so systematicallyŠsay, with transformation and coordi
-nation languages to orchestrate the process, or automatic transformation 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
and coordination derived from declarative description of the constituent 
data and processes. 
In some cases, ﬁcitizen scienceﬂ dataŠsuch as those provided by 
bird-watchers (project eBird
10
), gardeners (project BudBurst
11), and indi
-viduals who participate in sport ˜shing and huntingŠmay be the only 
available data about particular regions or events. Heterogeneity extends 
as well to the provenance, ownership, and control of the data. These data 
are typically not under the control of a single organization. Access (either 
one-time-only or ongoing) must be negotiated, and there are important 
security, privacy, and proprietary data issues. Such authorization and 
access are generally not transitive, and so new techniques must be devel
-oped to manage information ˚ow as information services are composed 
out of other services.
Coping with the Need for Data Proxies
A persistent challenge in sustainability is the meaningful translation 
of physical, biological, or social variables into an electric signal. More 
generally, the data of use with respect to sustainability often do not 
directly measure the quantities of interest, but instead are surrogates. 
For example, occupancy in a building may be derived from motion 
detection, infrared signatures, appliance usage, acoustics, imaging, 
vibration, disruptions, or other factors, but to varying degrees these 
may provide only a noisy indication of room occupancy. Ecology focuses 
on the interactions among organisms (e.g., mating, hatching, predation, 
infection, defense), but these interactions are virtually never observed 
directly. An animal (or a disease) may be present in an ecosystem and 
yet fail to be detected by observations or instruments. Weather radar can 
detect the movement of birds but not the species or the full direction of 
motion. Over-the-counter drug sales and web queries can be proxies 
for the prevalence of ˚u. As another example, measuring snow-water 
equivalent is normally estimated by sensor pressure at the snow-soil 
interface. However, snow is not a ˚uid and thus may bridge over a 
sensor. Other challenges arise from the sensors, which themselves may 
affect the thing needing to be measured. This may not be chie˚y an IT 
problem, but it creates barriers to useful data creation.
Supervised and unsupervised machine learning techniques, as well 
as those used for gesture recognition, intrusion detection, and prefer
-ence characterization, may be applied to infer quantities of interest from 
10
See http://ebird.org/content/ebird/.
11See 
http://neoninc.org/budburst/
. Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 65available surrogates, but the scale and ˜delity needed to make sub
-stantial headway on sustainability problems require signi˜cant trans
-formations of these techniques. Moreover, as these quantities would 
feed into an extensive process of modeling and automated decision 
making rather than providing a one-time suggested action, it would 
be necessary to propagate the uncertainty quanti˜cation along with 
such derived metrics (see below the section ﬁDecision Making Under 
Uncertaintyﬂ).
Coping with Biased, Noisy Data
Many data sources are biased (in a statistical sense) and noisy. For 
example, weather and radar data are collected at special locations (e.g., 
airports) that were likely chosen to re˚ect the primary purpose of the 
data, which may be far from ideal for assessing other topics of interest
-ing, such as climate effects. Carbon-˚ux towers are usually deployed 
in ˚at areas where the models that guide instrument interpretation are 
well understood, but not necessarily representative of important topog
-raphy. Many citizen scientists make their observations near their place of 
residence, rather than by following a carefully designed spatiotemporal 
sampling plan. 
Data from sensors can be very noisy. Indeed, the sensor network revo
-lution aims to transition from deploying a small number of expensive, 
highly accurate sensors to much larger numbers of inexpensive (and less 
reliable) ones. Moreover, sustainability problems often involve the analy
-sis of longitudinal data (e.g., historical weather records, historical power 
consumption, historical carbon dioxide concentrations) that have been 
produced by multiple technical generations of sensors and data-collection 
protocols. Hence, the data are not of uniform quality. Each new generation 
of sensor and each change in the protocol may affect the biases and noise 
properties of the data.
As one signi˜cant example, many aspects of climate change center on 
the increase in global surface temperature. Although there is now broad 
scienti˜c consensus that human activity is a signi˜cant contributor to 
global climate change, there is much continuing debate about the exact 
nature of the phenomenon and (more importantly) about the prognosis 
for the future. Regarding the global surface temperature in particular, 
Earth™s temperature is a very complex phenomenon that varies widely 
over the surface at any point in time and varies in complex ways over 
time. There has been assembled over the past hundred years a data set 
of over 1.6 billion temperature readings at various points over land and 
seas, using various instruments, by various methodologies, at over 39,000 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
unique stations.
12 Signi˜cant algorithmic work must take place in order to 
allow the development of a meaningful temperature reconstruction from 
this complex, noisy, incomplete data set.
Most existing machine learning and data-mining tools make assump
-tions that are not valid for these kinds of data. They assume that the data are 
collected at a single temporal and spatial resolution; methods are needed 
that can work with heterogeneous data. Existing machine learning and 
predictive data-mining tools typically were designed under the assump
-tion that the data directly measure the desired input-output relationship 
rather than measuring surrogates. Finally, existing methods assume that 
the data can be cleaned and rationalized so as to remove noise, impute 
missing values, and convert multigeneration and multisource data into a 
common format. However, this process tends to be manual and carried out 
relative to a particular study of interest by individuals highly trained in the 
area of study. Even so, it tends to result in a least-common-denominator 
data set in which numerical, spatial, and temporal resolution are all set to 
the coarsest level observed in the data. This process may fail to address 
the different sampling biases and error properties of different data sources, 
and hence it has the potential to introduce errors into the data. 
A fundamental computer science challenge is to automate this clean
-ing and rationalization process as much as possible and to make it sys
-tematic, able to scale to vast streams of continuous data, and able to retain 
the full information content. A related challenge is to provide tools that 
support the visual detection of data anomalies and, once an anomaly is 
found, fast methods for ˜nding and repairing all similar anomalies. An 
analyst would like to ask, ﬁAre there other data that look like this plot?ﬂ 
and obtain useful answers despite variations in underlying sampling rate, ˜delity, and format. 
Coping with Multisource Data Streams
Most early machine learning and predictive data-mining tools were 
designed for the analysis of a single data set under the assumption that the 
data directly measure the desired input-output relationship; the goal was 
to learn a mapping from inputs to outputs. Increasingly these techniques 
12
The Goddard Institute for Space Studies (GISS) maintains a record of global surface 
temperatures as well as information on their analysis and on GISS publications, which 
is available at http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/. See also National Research Council, 
Surface Temperature Reconstructions for the Last 2,000 Years
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (2006), according to which historical temperature measurements go back 
to about 1850, and proxy temperature measurements go back millions of years but are most 
prevalent for the past two millennia. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 67are applied in real-time settings, such as in massive Internet services both 
for the adaptive optimization of the complex distributed system provid
-ing the service and in adapting the service to optimize the user experi
-ence, the pro˜t derived, and so on. One path for CS research in dealing 
with the reality of noisy, multigeneration, multisource data streams is 
to develop machine learning and data-mining algorithms that explicitly 
model the measurement process, including its biases, noise, resolution, 
and so on, in order to capture the true phenomenon of interest, which 
is not directly observed. Such methods should treat the data in their 
original, raw form so that they can capture and take account of different 
properties of each generation of instrumentation. In some cases, it is pos
-sible to focus on empirical model development by applying unsupervised learning methods to extract relationships between inputs and outputs 
without establishing a speci˜c physical interpretation of the input values. 
This way of proceeding can sometimes provide insight without the need 
to isolate the bias, eliminate noise, and calibrate readings.
The ˜eld of statistics has studied latent variable models, such as that 
described in Box 2.1, in which the phenomenon of interest is modeled by 
one or more latent (hidden) variables (e.g., 
Zs). However, existing statis
-tical methods rely on making strong parametric assumptions about the 
probability distributions governing the latent variables. An important 
research challenge is to transform these statistical methods into the kinds 
of ˚exible, non-parametric methods that have been developed in com
-puter science (support vector machines, ensembles of tree models, and so 
on).
13
 Such a transformation should also result in methodologies that are 
easy to apply by non-statisticians and non-computer-scientists.
The use of these techniques may in some circumstances sharpen the 
tension between information quality and privacy. If the raw data have 
been obfuscated to enhance privacy, the latent variable model will seek to 
undo this and infer the un-obfuscated form. When is it appropriate to do 
this? Are there effective and broadly applicable ways to preserve privacy 
and proprietary rights while still applying these methods?
A further challenge raised by these problems is how to validate hid
-den-variable models. Traditional statistical methods rely on goodness 
of ˜t of a highly restricted parametric model; modern machine learning 
methods rely on having separate holdout data to test the model. Neither 
of these approaches will work hereŠat least not in their standard form. 
One promising direction is to develop simulation methodologies to evalu
-ate the identi˜ability of the model; another is to develop methods for 
13
R.A. Hutchinson, L.P. Liu, and T.G. Dietterich, Incorporating boosted regression trees 
into ecological latent variable models, 
Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Arti˜cial Intelligence, 
pp. 1343-1348 (2011).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
BOX 2.1 
 Understanding the Gap Between Observation and Truth
The reality of noisy, multigeneration, multisource data streams requires new 
machine learning and data-mining algorithms that explicitly model the measure
-ment process, including its biases, noise, and resolution, and so on, in order to 
capture the true phenomenon of interest, which is not directly observed.
1 Such methods should treat the data in their original, raw form so that they can capture 
and take account of different properties of each generation of instrumentation.
In general, there is a gap between observation and underlying truth. In 
a basic sense, this gap exists whenever a transducer is used to measure a 
phenomenonŠin addition to the mapping from input stimulus to output reading, 
there is a question of how the transducer is coupled to the underlying phenom
-enon generating the stimulus. How is the accelerometer bonded to the vibrating 
beam? How does the soil-moisture sensor disturb the hydrological behavior of the 
surrounding soil? A phenomenological gap may exist regardless of the precision 
of the sensor.
For example, consider the case of an observer conducting a biodiversity sur
-vey. The observer visits a site and ˜lls out a checklist of all of the species observed. 
The resulting data provide a record of 
detections rather than a record of the true 
presence or absence of the species. The latter can be captured by an occupancy/
detection model,2 as shown in Figure 2.1.1.
FIGURE 2.1.1 Probabilistic graphical model representation of the occupancy/detection model. 
Observed variables are shaded; 
S is the number of sites; 
J is the number of visits to each site. 
An observer visits site 
s at time j and reports 
Ysj = 1 if the species is detected and 0 if not. 
The hidden variable 
Zs = 1 if the species is present at site s and 0 otherwise. 
Xs is a vector of 
attributes of the site, and the 
X˜Z relationship predicts whether, based on these attributes, 
the species will be present. This is the 
occupancy model
 that is of primary interest. 
Wsj is a 
vector of attributes that in˚uence detectability (e.g., the level of expertise of the observer, the 
density of the foliage, the weather, how much time the observer spent, etc.). The 
Z˜Y˚W relationship represents the 
detection model
, which predicts the probability that the species will 
be detected given that it is actually present (and the probability that it will be falsely reported, 
given that it is actually absent).
1S.K. Thompson and G.A.F. Seber, 
Adaptive Sampling, 
Washington, D.C.:  Wiley Inter
-science (1996) offers researchers in ˜elds ranging from biology to ecology to public health an 
introduction to adaptive sampling.
2D.I. MacKenzie, J.D. Nichols, J.A. Royle, K.H. Pollock, J.E. Hines, and L.L. Bailey, 
Occu-pancy Estimation and Modeling: Inferring Patterns and Dynamics of Species Occurrence
, San Diego, Calif.: Elsevier (2005).
˜

Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 69visualization that permit the inspection and manipulation of the various 
components of the model.
Although hidden-variable models can address the challenges of mul
-tiple generations of sensors and heterogeneous data sources, they do not 
solve the problem of biases in sampling. There is a need for new methods 
that can explicitly capture the differences between the spatiotemporal 
distribution of the sampling process and the desired spatiotemporal dis
-tribution of the model.
14
 An additional challenge is to make all of these methods fast enough 
for interactive use. Current practice in machine learning modeling harkens 
back to the days of batch processing. Each iteration of model development 
and evaluation takes several days, because the data are so voluminous 
that the management tools, algorithms, and visualization methods require 
several hours to run. Data volumes will continue to explode as the num
-ber of deployed sensors multiplies. Can CS researchers develop integrated 
data-mining and visualization systems that can support interactive model iteration? Such systems would produce a qualitative change in the sophis
-tication of the models that can be applied and the thoroughness with 
which they can be evaluated.
15
14
One promising direction is to build on recent advances in covariate shift methods. See 
J. Quiñonero-Candela, M. Sugiyama, A. Schwaighofer, and N.D. Lawrence (eds
.),
 Data Shift 
in Machine Learning
, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press (2009). There is also a growing literature 
in handling preferential sampling for modeling geostatistical processes: see, for example, 
P.J. Diggle, R. Menezes, and T. Su, Geostatistical inference under preferential sampling, 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series C
, 59(2)
 (March 2010).
15
Such integrated data-mining and interactive model iteration will be critical to trans
-forming the electric grid. M. Ilic, Dynamic monitoring and decision systems for enabling 
sustainable energy services, 
Proceedings of the IEEE
, Vol. 99, pp. 58-79 (2011), offers a possible 
framework in which distributed models evolve as more information becomes available and 
BOX 2.1
 continued
In settings in which the observation process can be designed in advance, 
optimal methods exist for determining the spatial layout of sites and the number 
of visits to each site.
3 When the data are collected by an uncontrolled observa
-tion process (e.g., by citizen scientists) or when the underlying process is poorly 
understood, more ˚exible machine learning methods are needed.
3S.K. Thompson and G.A.F. Seber, 
Adaptive Sampling,
 Washington, D.C.:  Wiley Inter
-science (1996).Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
ANALYSIS, MODELING, SIMULATION, AND OPTIMIZATION 
One key role of computer science in sustainability is to provide tech
-nology for model development. Models permit the extraction of meaning-ful information from context-dependent, potentially noisy measurements 
and observations of complex, at best partially engineered, systems in the 
physical world. Models allow the many interrelated aspects to be decom
-posed into facets so that progress can be made in a somewhat incremental 
fashion. Models provide a frame of reference for the many distinct but 
interrelated streams of information. Computational resources and CS 
techniques can be brought to bear in several ways: to re˜ne the grid size 
and time step, to improve the model™s representation of processes (mak
-ing it more complex), and to run the model over multiple scenarios (vary
-ing the time period, input values, and so on). This section discusses three 
interrelated topics: multiscale models, the combining of mechanistic and 
statistical models, and optimization under uncertainty.
Developing and Using Multiscale Models
 Multiscale models, the ˜rst of the three interrelated topics, represent 
processes at multiple temporal and spatial scales. For example, a bio
-logical population model might include the agent-level modeling of each 
organism within a landscape, coupled with the ˚ock-level modeling of 
group behavior at a regional scale, and population-level modeling at a 
continental scale. Forest ˜re models could include models of individual 
tree growth and burning, coupled with the stand-level and landscape-
level modeling of fuel load, coupled with regional models of ˜re ignition 
and weather. Global multiscale weather models can operate at low reso
-lution over the entire planet but with higher resolution over regions of 
interest (e.g., for forecasting hurricanes). In a sense, most sustainability 
problems arise because behavior at one scale (e.g., energy use in auto
-mobiles, land use along migration ˚yways) affects phenomena at very 
different scales (e.g., global climate change, species extinctions), and those 
larger-scale phenomena then enter a feedback cycle affecting activities at 
lesser scales. Multiscale models are important for understanding these 
sorts of problems.
the complexity of the interactions among layers is minimized. The complexity of decision 
making is internalized to the (groups of) system users instead of burdening the system 
operator with overwhelming complexity. Iterative learning through binding technical and/
or economic information exchange is implemented for learning the interdependencies and 
aligning them with the objectives of the system as a whole. Signi˜cant effort is needed to 
make such frameworks and system designs more concrete.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 71One standard approach seeks to capture all phenomena by modeling 
only at the ˜nest scale in space and time. However, there are both com
-putational and information-theoretic reasons why this approach often 
fails. Computationally, ˜ne-scale models are extremely expensive to run; 
multiscale methods allow computational savings while still providing 
˜ne-scale predictions. From the perspective of information, large-scale 
emergent phenomena may not be well modeled by aggregating ˜ne-scale 
models. Small errors at the ˜ne scale may lead to large errors at larger 
scales. With limited data available to calibrate ˜ne-scale models (clouds, 
land surface, human dimensions, etc.), it may not be possible to get a 
good ˜t to larger-scale phenomena (global or regional climate change). 
Hence, it is often preferable, both for computational and representational 
reasons, to model systems at multiple scales while coupling the models 
so that they in˚uence one another.
Homogeneous multiscale models, such as models based on Fourier or 
wavelet analysis and models that employ adaptive grid sizes (e.g., mul
-tiscale meteorology models), are reasonably well understood. However, 
heterogeneous multiscale models, in which models at different scales 
employ very different representation and modeling methods, are not 
as well studied. Methods of upscaling, that is, summarizing ˜ne-scale 
information at coarser scale (e.g., ﬁparameterizationsﬂ in climate models), 
and methods of downscaling, that is, extending coarse-scale models with 
˜ne-scale information, have only recently been developed and still require 
much additional research. Among the questions to be addressed are these: 
What is the design space of upscaling and downscaling methods? Are 
there best practices? Can these be encapsulated in general-purpose mod
-eling packages (e.g., as middleware services)? To the extent that upscaling 
is primarily performed for computational reasons, can it be automated? 
How do upscaling and downscaling interact with parallel implementa
-tions of the models? In addition, how should mismatches in scale (e.g., 
mismatches in temporal scale in areas such as coupled ocean-atmospheric 
models) best be handled? 
Combining Statistical and Mechanistic Models
The second of three interrelated modeling challenges is that of com
-bining statistical and mechanistic models. (The former are empirical and 
the latter are derived from ˜rst principles.) In many sustainability settings, 
some aspects of the problem can be captured by mechanistic modelsŠfor 
example, of physics, chemistry, and so on. However, often it is not trac
-table to construct models with suf˜cient ˜delity to capture the aspects of 
the phenomena of interest. For example, consider managing the heating, 
ventilation, and air conditioning of an of˜ce building. Mechanistic models 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
of air˚ow and heat transport can provide a good ˜rst approximation of 
how a building will behave under different HVAC con˜gurations. How
-ever, in actual operation, the outdoor environmental conditions, status 
of doors and windows (open or closed), position of furnishings, instal
-lation of other equipment (e.g., space heaters, digital projectors, vending 
machines), and number and behavior of occupants can produce very 
different operational behaviors. Introducing all of these secondary and 
tertiary factors into a mechanistic model may be very demanding; these 
factors are typically in ˚ux. Alternatively, as more sensors are incor
-porated into building environments there may be enough data to ˜t a 
statistical model of building behaviorŠthat is, to develop an empirical 
model. However, such statistical models must in effect rediscover aspects 
of the physics in the mechanistic models, and this can require an immense 
amount of data. An attractive alternative is to integrate one or more data-
driven modeling components with the mechanistic model. A mechanistic 
model would be modi˜ed by inserting statistically trained components 
with the goal of these components being to transform the inputs (initial 
state and forcings), dynamics, and outputs so that the model produces 
more accurate predictions. 
Virtually all existing work on the integrating of statistical models 
into mechanistic models has taken place outside of computer science. A 
key challenge is to bring these methods into computer science and gen
-eralize and analyze them. Among the research questions are the follow
-ing: What general-purpose algorithms work well for ˜tting the statistical 
components of an integrated model? How can over˜tting be detected 
and prevented (i.e., what are appropriate regularization penalties for 
such integrated models)? What are good methodologies for evaluating 
the predictive accuracy of such models? Many algorithms for evaluating 
mechanistic models employ adaptive meshes; how can statistical methods 
be integrated with mesh adaptation? The ˜tting of statistical models typi
-cally requires evaluating the mechanistic model hundreds or thousands 
of times. Running global climate models even once at full resolution can 
require many days of time on the world™s largest supercomputers. Can 
experimental designs that make ef˜cient use of and minimize expen-sive model runs be implemented? Can the statistical models be ˜tted on 
upscaled versions of the mechanistic models and then downscaled for 
full-resolution runs? Under what conditions would this work?
Decision Making Under Uncertainty 
Actually addressing sustainability problems requires that one move 
beyond observation and analysis to action. But there is inherent uncer
-tainty every step of the wayŠin the decision making informed by mod
-Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 73eling and simulation, in the measurements, in the modeling and simula
-tion itself, and possibly in the basic characterizations of the factors that 
comprise the system. In terms of science-based decision making, a central 
challenge is thus the making of (optimal or at least good) decisions under 
uncertainty. There are many sources of uncertainty that must be taken into 
account. First, the scienti˜c understanding of many systems is far from 
complete, and so many aspects of these systems are unknown. Second, 
even for those aspects for which good mechanistic models exist, the data 
needed to specify the boundary conditions with suf˜cient accuracy are 
often lacking, especially when human decisions and activity need to be 
included. Third, the lack of data and the computational cost of running 
the models often require a coarsening of the scale and the introduction of 
other approximations. Finally, today™s sustainability risks are time-critical, 
and so just waiting for additional scienti˜c and engineering research in 
order to address these uncertainties is not an option. Action must be taken 
even as research continues. Therefore, the choice of actions should also 
take into account the fact that scienti˜c understanding (and computing 
power) is expected to improve over time, and future decisions can be 
made with a better scienti˜c basis. 
In effect, uncertainty must be treated as a quantity that persists and 
is accounted for at every stage. It is a product of measurement, data col
-lection, and modeling, along with the data themselves. It is both an input 
and an output of the analysis, modeling, and simulation efforts. And 
˜nally, decisions must be made based not just on expected outcomes, 
but also on the uncertainty associated with the various alternatives.
16
 There are three areas that pose interesting research challenges for com
-puter science with respect to uncertainty: assessment, representation, and 
propagation of uncertainty; robust-optimization methods; and models of 
sequential decision making.
Assessment, Representation, and Propagation of Uncertainty 
Many models employed in global climate change, natural resource 
management, and ecological science are deterministic mechanistic mod
-16
Regarding the challenge of the propagation of uncertainties and, nevertheless, how best 
to use models to help decision making, a paired set of papers on the climate sensitivity 
problem appeared in 2007 in 
Science
: one was a research article and the other a perspective 
(G.H. Roe and M.B. Baker, Why is climate sensitivity so unpredictable? 
Science 318(5850):629-632 [2007]; M.R. Allen and D.J. Frame, Call off the quest, 
Science
 318(5850):582-583 [2007]). 
Their main point, in the general context, is that decision making based on models of future 
scenarios must be adaptive. Another point is that estimating the distribution function of 
model uncertainty requires knowledge of the distributions of the input data.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
els that provide no measures of uncertainty. Recently, there has been 
substantial interest in assessing the uncertainty in these models. The 
primary method is to perform Monte Carlo runs in which the model 
parameters and inputs are varied in order to re˚ect uncertainty in their 
values, and the propagation characteristic of the uncertainty is re˚ected 
in the degree of variation in the outputs. Although valuable, this does not 
assess uncertainty due to model-formulation decisions and computational 
approximations. Research questions include the following: How can one 
minimize the cost of Monte Carlo uncertainty assessment? For example, 
can program-analysis methods determine that uncertainty in some sets 
of parameters interact in well-behaved ways (independently, additively, 
multiplicatively)? Can convenient and ef˜cient tools be provided for 
authoring, debugging, and testing alternative modeling choices so that 
the uncertainty engendered by these choices can be assessed? Can existing 
tools for automated software diversityŠwhich were developed for soft
-ware testing and security
17
Šbe extended to generate model diversity?
Models are often part of a sensor-to-decision-making pipeline in 
which sensor measurements are cleaned and rationalized, then fed to 
a set of models that simulate the effects of different policy choices and 
assess their outcomes. However, it is often the case that uncertainty in 
one stage (e.g., data cleaning) is not retained and propagated to subse
-quent stages. Existing scienti˜c work˚ow tools (e.g., Kepler
18
) do not 
provide explicit representations of uncertainty or standard ways of propa
-gating uncertainty along such pipelines. Additional work is needed to 
develop such representations and to provide support for automating the 
end-to-end assessment of uncertainty. For example, it should be possible 
to automate end-to-end Monte Carlo uncertainty assessment. One can 
also imagine extending methods of belief propagation from probabilistic 
graphical modeling in order to propagate uncertainty along data-analysis 
pipelines automatically. Coupled with modules for representing policy 
alternatives and modules for computing objective functions, such work
-˚ow tools could provide important support for decision making under 
uncertainty.
Robust-Optimization Methods 
The assessment of explicit uncertainty aims to address the ﬁknown 
unknowns.ﬂ Classical models of decision making typically involve select-ing the actions that maximize the expected utility of the outcomes accord
-17For a review, see A. Gherbi, R. Charpentier, and M. Couture, Software diversity for future 
systems security, 
CrossTalk: The Journal of Defense Software Engineering
 25(5):10-13 (2011).
18
For more information on Kepler, see https://kepler-project.org/. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 75ing to some underlying statistical model. Unfortunately, experience with 
ecological modeling and environmental policy suggests that there are 
many ﬁunknown unknownsﬂŠphenomena that are unknown to the 
modelers and decision makers and therefore not accounted for in the 
models.
19
 One possible safeguard is robust optimization.
20
 Rather than 
treating model parameters as known, this approach assumes instead that 
the parameters lie within some uncertainty set and optimizes against 
the worst-case realization within these sets. The size of these uncertainty 
sets can be varied to measure the loss in the objective function that must 
be sustained in order to achieve a given degree of robustness. Robust-
optimization approaches can greatly improve the ability to sustain signi˜
-cant departures from conditions in the nominal model. Existing robust-
optimization methods generally assume that the decision model can be 
expressed as an optimization problem with a convex structure (e.g., linear 
or quadratic programs). Robust optimization is sometimes considered 
overly conservative. Convex constraints over multiple uncertainty sets 
can be introduced to rule out simultaneous extreme events and reduce 
the over-conservatism of ˜rst-generation robust-optimization methods.
21
 An open theoretical question is that of determining the best ways to use 
data in optimization problems. In some problems in which there are insuf
-˜cient data, the question becomes one of how to properly incorporate 
subjective opinion about the data and what the best way is to characterize 
uncertainty. Another research challenge is to develop robust-optimization 
methods that are applicable to the kinds of complex nonlinear models that 
arise in sustainability applications.
Optimal Sequential Decision Making 
Most sustainability challenges will not be addressed by a decision 
made at a single point in time. Instead, decisions must be made iteratively over a long time horizon since a system is not sustainable unless it can be 
operated inde˜nitely into the future. For example, in problems involving 
natural resource management, every year provides a decision-making 
opportunity. In ˜sheries, the annual allowable catch for each species must 
be determined. In forests, the location and method for tree harvesting 
19
D.F. Doak et al., Understanding and predicting ecological dynamics: Are major surprises 
inevitable? 
Ecology 
89(4):952-961 (2008).
20
A. Ben-Tal, L. El Ghaoui, and A. Nemirovski, 
Robust Optimization
, Princeton, N.J.: Princ
-eton University Press (2009).
21
D. Bertsimas and A. Thiele, Robust and data-driven optimization: Modern decision-
making under uncertainty, 
INFORMS Tutorials in Operations Research: Models, Methods, and 
Applications for Innovative Decision Making
, pp. 1-39 (2006). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
must be speci˜ed, as well as other actions such as mechanical thinning to 
reduce ˜re risk. In energy generation and distribution, the location of new 
generation facilities and transmission lines must be chosen. In managing 
global climate change, the amount of required reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions each year must be determined. The state of the art for solv
-ing sequential decision problems is to formalize them as Markov deci
-sion problems and solve them by means of stochastic dynamic program
-ming. However, an exact solution through these methods is only feasible 
for processes whose state space is relatively small (tens of thousands of 
states). Recently, approximate dynamic programming methods have been 
developed in the ˜elds of machine learning and operations research.
22
 These methods typically employ linear function approximation methods 
to provide a compact representation of the quantities required for stochas
-tic dynamic programming.
An important aspect of sustainability problems is that they often 
involve optimization over time and space. For example, consider the 
problem of designing biological reserves to protect threatened and endan
-gered species and ecosystems. Many con˚icting factors operate in this 
problem. Large, contiguous reserves tend to protect many species and 
preserve biodiversity. However, such reserves are also more vulnerable 
to spatially autocorrelated threats such as ˜re, disease, invasive species, 
and climate change. The optimal design may thus involve a collection of 
smaller reserves that lie along environmental gradients (elevation, pre
-cipitation, etc.). The purchase or preservation of land for reserves costs 
money, and so a good design should also minimize cost. Another factor 
is that reserves typically cannot be designed and purchased in a single 
year. Instead, money becomes available (through government budgets 
and private donations) and parcels are offered for sale over a period of 
many years. Finally, the scienti˜c understanding and the effectiveness of 
previous land purchase decisions can be reassessed each year, and that 
should be taken into account when making decisions. 
The solution of large spatiotemporal sequential decision problems 
such as those described above is far beyond the state of the art. Striking 
the right balance between complexity and accuracy, especially in the con
-text of complex networked systems, is critical. New research is needed to 
develop methods that can capture the spatial structure of the state each 
year and the spatial transitions (e.g., ˜re, disease) that occur. There are 
sustainability problems in which all three of these factorsŠuncertainty, 
robustness, and sequential decision makingŠcombine. For example, in 
22
W. Powell, 
Approximate Dynamic Programming: Solving the Curses of Dimensionality
 (2nd 
Ed.), New York, N.Y.: Wiley (2011).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 77reserve design, models of suitable habitat for threatened and endan
-gered species are required. These are typically constructed by means 
of machine learning methods and hence are inherently uncertain. This 
uncertainty needs to be captured and incorporated into the sequential 
decision-making process. Finally, existing stochastic dynamic program
-ming methods are designed to maximize expected utility. These methods 
need to be extended in order to apply robust-optimization methods. A 
research opportunity is to integrate the training of the machine learning 
modelsŠwhich can itself be formulated as a robust-optimization prob
-lemŠwith the robust optimization of the sequential decision problem. 
This integration would allow the machine learning methods to tailor their 
predictive accuracy to those regions of time and space that are of greatest 
importance to the optimization process and could lead to large improve
-ments in the quality of the resulting decisions.
Formulating problems in terms of sequential decision making can 
sometimes make the problems more tractable. For example, Roe and 
Baker
23
 show that structure inherent in the sensitivity of the climate sys
-tem makes it extremely dif˜cult to reduce the uncertainties in the esti
-mates of global warming. However, by formulating the problem as a 
sequential decision-making problem, Allen and Frame
24
 show that it is 
possible to control global warming adaptively without ever precisely 
determining the level of climate sensitivity.
HUMAN-CENTERED SYSTEMS
It is critical, for real-world applicability, to situate technology inno
-vation and practice within the context-speci˜c needs of the people ben
-e˜ting from or otherwise affected by that technology. For example, in 
the context of introducing intelligence into the electric grid in order to 
increase sustainability, the essential measures and relevant information 
are very different when considered from the differing perspectives of the 
utility, supplier, and customer. The utility may be interested in introduc
-ing payment schedules that in˚uence customer behavior in a manner that 
reduces the need to build plants that run for only a tiny fraction of the 
time (to serve just the diminishing tail of the demand curve). Avoiding 
such construction does reduce overall GHG emissions, but the primary 
goal is to avoid capital investment. Trimming the peak does little to reduce 
overall energy use, but it reduces the use of the most costly supplies. A 
consumer-centric perspective is likely to focus on overall energy savings 
23G.H. Roe and M.B. Baker, Why is climate sensitivity so unpredictable? 
Science 318 (5850):629-632 (2007)
24
M.R. Allen and D.J. Frame, Call off the quest,ﬂ 
Science
 318(5850):582-583 (2007). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
and ef˜ciency measures, not just on critical-peak usage. Thus, greater 
emphasis may be placed on visualizing usage, understanding demand, 
reducing waste, curbing energy consumption and less important usage, 
and (if there is dynamic variable pricing) helping to move easily resched
-uled uses (e.g., water heating) to off-peak times. A grid-centric perspec
-tive, by contrast, may focus on the matching of supply and demand, as 
well as on the utilization of the key bottlenecks in the transmission and 
distribution infrastructure. All of these stakeholders need to be consid
-ered, and ideally involved, to substantially increase the penetration limit 
of non-dispatchable renewable supplies, because of the need to match 
consumption to supply. And, all stakeholders have substantial needs 
for monitoring usage data, determining causal relationships between 
activities and usage, and managing those activities to optimize usage. In 
addition to the needs and values of these direct stakeholders in the tech
-nology, the indirect stakeholders should also be consideredŠthat is, those 
who are affected by the technology but do not use it. In the smart grid 
example, the set of indirect stakeholders is broad indeed, since everyone 
is (for example) affected by climate change. The ability to understand 
such needs and to guide the development of technology on that basis 
constitutes a natural application of techniques developed in the area of 
human-computer interaction (HCI).
More generally, a human-centered approach can and should be inte
-grated with each of the topics discussed above. Issues such as human-in-
the-loop training of machine learning systems, the interpretability of model 
results, and the possible use (or abuse) of large volumes of sensed data 
become particularly salient with a human-centered viewpoint. Indeed, 
with the vast quantities of data to be generated and used as described 
earlier, privacy becomes a ˜rst-order concern. The role of computer sci
-ence in sustainability is predicated on the ability to capture and analyze 
data at a scale without precedent. The understanding and mitigating of 
privacy implications constitute an area in which fundamental CS research 
can play a roleŠin both formalizing the questions in an appropriate way 
(and indeed this is research well underway) and potentially in providing 
solutions that can help mitigate the loss of privacy that is, to some extent, 
inherent in taking full advantage of the power of information-gathering 
at a global scale with high resolution. It is essential that a human-centered 
approach be integrated with more traditional security approaches: not 
only should the techniques for preserving privacy be technically sound, 
but they should also be accessible, understandable, and convincing to the 
users of these systems. 
Historically, much of the research on sustainability in HCI has focused 
on individual change. Perhaps one of the best-recognized examples is eco-
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 79feedback technology, which leverages persuasive interface techniques
25
 and focuses primarily on residential settings. Reduced individual use 
can socialize people to the issues at hand, and can, at scale, have a direct 
if limited effect on overall energy use.
26
 However, population growth 
alone may outstrip the gains realized by such approaches. In response, 
the committee notes the importance of signi˜cantly increased attention to 
social, institutional, governmental, and policy issues in addition to issues 
of individual change. A challenging public policy question, for example, 
is how to verify compliance with GHG emissions requirements. Reliably 
validated carbon reductions, for instance, are important not just to global 
progress; they would be also invaluable for guiding sustainability efforts 
at a macro level.
27
 This report emphasizes opportunities for research, in addition to the 
data and privacy challenges mentioned earlier, on human-centered sys
-tems both at the individual level and beyond (at the organizational and 
societal levels). Examples of such research areas include visualization and 
user-interaction design for comprehensibility, transparency, legitimation, 
deliberation, and participation; devices and dashboards for individu
-als and institutions; expanding the understanding of human behaviors, 
empowering people to measure, argue for, and change what is happening; 
and education. Following are brief discussions of each of these.
Supporting Deliberation, Civic Engagement, 
 Education, and Community Action 
As noted in Chapter 1, moving toward a more sustainable society will 
require massive cultural, social, political, and economic changesŠand 
today™s technologies are deeply intertwined with many of these changes. 
Technology can help to support an informed and engaged citizenry. Cur
-rently, civic engagement is uneven at best, and thoughtful public delibera
-tion about major issues is often challenging to accomplish. However, the 
ease of information access, the existence of community-based knowledge 
25
For example, see J. Froehlich, L. Findlater, and J. Landay, The design of eco-feedback 
technology, in 
Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems
, New York, N.Y.: Association for Computing Machinery, pp. 1998-2008 (2010).
26
For a provocative essay on this issue, see P. Dourish, 
Print This Paper, Kill a Tree: Environ
-mental Sustainability as a Research Topic for HCI
, LUCI-2009-004, Laboratory for Ubiquitous 
Computing and Interaction, University of California, Irvine (2009), and a related article: P. 
Dourish, HCI and environmental sustainability: The politics of design and the design of 
politics, in 
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems
, Aarhus, 
Denmark, pp. 1-10 (2010).
27
See National Research Council, 
Verifying Greenhouse Gas Emissions: Methods to Support 
International Climate Agreements
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
repositories, and the search and social networking capabilities online 
are transforming the manner in which humans learn, make decisions, 
and interact. These techniques can be adapted for a research program on 
designing, deploying, and testing innovative ways for citizens to deliber
-ate and to engage with government and one another, particularly with 
those who may hold very different views in the context of sustainability. 
These deliberations should be closely coupled to data (gathered both by 
professional scientists and citizen-scientists) and simulation resultsŠaffor
-dances should be provided to help ground the discussion in the scienti˜c 
evidence. Similarly, online curricula for students in kindergarten through 
grade 12 and for adults can explore, for instance, ongoing scienti˜c and 
policy discussions related to sustainability; and educational initiatives can 
contribute to societal changes needed to meet sustainability goals. 
In addition to opportunities with respect to tools for engaged citizens 
generally, there are also promising areas of research in helping scientists 
provide more effective input into these broader discussions and debates 
on sustainability and potential initiatives. The intellectual merit of this 
research would center on the issues of how to facilitate large-scale online 
deliberation about contentious issues; the broader impacts would be in 
making the results of scienti˜c inquiry more widely seen and discussed. 
As an example, suppose that there was a network supporting online 
deliberation among scientists concerned with sustainability for develop
-ing key points, areas of strong consensus, areas of disagreement, and 
supporting evidence. Those deliberations would produce a sustainability 
action agenda that could be introduced to the public by means of interest
-ing interactive environments designed to appeal to those of all ages. These 
sites could feed information by means of different media outlets (both 
traditional and emerging) as well as providing interactive scenarios that 
people could use to answer questions and debate solutions. One highlight of this system would be a series of consensus news stories, perhaps on 
a weekly basis. These stories could be based on agenda items created by 
scientists and rated by public interest.
A core component of such a public education system could be a 
forum for discussing scienti˜c data, for voicing views on which stories 
to present and when, and for suggesting how to frame them (delibera
-tive forums for the science community for building consensus positions). 
A key research issue here is the development of technologies that help 
organize the discussion, both for long-standing participants and for 
people who are interested in entering into a long-running discussion but 
could use help in understanding it and in making useful contributions. 
The forum should include affordances that make it easy and natural to 
classify suggestions, pro and con arguments, and so on, to keep this 
type of exchange from degenerating into just a free-form discussion 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 81board. Another important kind of affordance would be hooks for giving 
sources for assertions (tools to encourage grounding arguments in the 
scienti˜c data).
Another project might be a highly visible forum for exchanges between 
groups with quite divergent views in a deliberative setting. Again, the 
system should include affordances that make it easy and natural to clas
-sify arguments and perspectives and tools that encourage the grounding 
of arguments in the scienti˜c data.
Basic research in educational technology is also crucial to increasing 
the relevance and effectiveness of tools for a culturally and economi
-cally diverse population. Arguably, better support for deliberation and 
engagement will not be enough. Supporting community action is also 
essential. In recent years technology has become more and more salient 
as an enabler of successful social change.
28
 In another example, on a local 
scale, citizen sensing of environmental indicators (e.g., pollutants) has 
in˚uenced the ability of individuals to advocate for change. As the cost 
of sophisticated sensors comes down, one can expect to see more and 
more of them employed by end users. A citizenry that engages with and 
helps to track this information is important to progress on the issues at 
stake, and this engagement leads to increased education and engagement 
in addition to increasing the amount of information available in crucial 
areas. However, this raises fundamental research problems ranging from 
the creation of these sensors to our ability to use the data effectively 
despite the inherent uncertainties that arise from its production.
Design for Sustainability 
Techniques developed to design for manufacturing, design for mass 
customization, and user-centric design can expand on the understanding 
of what it means to design for sustainability. Techniques such as ENERGY 
STAR ratings for appliances and Leadership in Energy and Environmental 
Design (LEED) ratings for buildings have had some success in reorienting 
industry providers and consumers alike toward more sustainable prac
-tices. These efforts can be substantially informed by the measurement, 
information-collection, and model-development techniques described 
earlier, but can also use HCI techniques for appropriation, reuse, and end-
to-end design for technology products. This research can be expanded 
to shed light on process, distribution, middleware, and other aspects of 
the production and distribution of products. Technological advances can 
28
T. Hirsch and J. Henry, TXTmob: Text messaging for protest swarms, in 
Extended Ab
-stracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
 New York, N.Y.: Association for Computing 
Machinery, pp. 1455-1458 (2005). DOI: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1056808.1056940.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
also contribute to the tracking, monitoring, and analysis of the source 
materials, production processes, distribution, and eventual disposal of 
products. This information in turn can help to inform purchase decisions, 
provide better accounting, and otherwise improve the sustainability of the 
consumer economy.
Human Understanding of Sensing, Modeling, and Simulation
As the availability of sophisticated sensors, information collection, 
modeling, and dissemination increase, techniques need to be developed 
to provide in meaningful forms rich, highly disaggregate information to 
households, small groups, and organizations regarding resource usage 
(e.g., for electricity or water consumption). In addition to supporting 
improved decision making about energy use at the organizational and 
individual levels, this information could provide civil and environmen
-tal engineers with a picture at a new level of detail about how and why 
these resources are being consumed, allowing their science and practice 
to advance. At the same time, this possibility raises challenging research 
questions regarding appropriate amounts of information, how to deal 
with the inherent uncertainties in the data, techniques for evaluating 
such systems, coupling with other systems on the supply side (e.g., the 
smart grid), and important value questions regarding fairness, represen
-tativeness, security, and privacy. Better data can also drive modeling and 
simulation, which can help with such activities as predicting important 
trends, assessing how well proposed policies would meet objectives, 
and optimizing resource use. Modeling climate change is an obvious 
example, but there are many others, including a simulation of the evolu
-tion of urban areas, freight transport, and natural environments such as 
forests or rivers. However, to be effective and relevant to policy making 
and decision making, such modeling work must include careful consid
-eration of how it integrates with deliberation and the political process. 
This raises issues of design for transparency, legitimation, appropriability, 
and participation.
 Tools to Help Organizations and 
 Individuals Engage in More Sustainable Behaviors 
Another area for research concerns tools that make it easier and per
-haps even enjoyable for people to engage in more sustainable behaviors. 
Some of the many examples in this area are the providing of real-time pub
-lic transit arrival and route information (particularly on mobile devices), 
online ride-share matching, geowikis for bicycling, Zipcar, Freecycle, and 
the like. Another class of tools provides eco-feedback: targeted informa
-Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 83tion about resource consumption (perhaps in real time), integrated with 
suitable visualization techniques and appropriate persuasive technol
-ogy, for example to show progress toward personal or group goals. This 
area is also related to the previous opportunity regarding the use of 
information from resource-usage sensing. It is important to recognize 
the limits of these technologies: better transit information is great if a 
good underlying transit system exists, but it is not so useful without 
that. Similarly, eco-feedback regarding energy use can be helpful, but it 
does not address the more fundamental, underlying energy challenges in 
some situationsŠsuch as low-income households in which comparatively 
expensive upgrades would be a ˜nancial hardship, or homes that contain 
inef˜cient appliances or poor insulation. For such challenges, alternative 
solutions would be needed. 
Many of the techniques described here are relevant to organizations as 
well. For example, a large organization might similarly provide targeted 
information about resource consumption, in real time, to show progress 
toward goals for different branches of the organization.
Mitigation, Adaptation, and Disaster Response 
Even under optimistic climate change scenarios, weather disasters 
are likely to increase in number and severity, resulting in both the need 
for immediate disaster relief and likely the need to assist large numbers 
of refugees (e.g., from low-lying regions).
29
 Also, unfortunately, human 
actions are likely to continue to contribute directly to environmental 
disasters such as oil spills. There are research challenges with respect to 
developing plans that can be revised rapidly under conditions of great 
uncertainty, making use of vast numbers of citizen observations (such as 
micro-content posted from disaster areas by individuals), coordinating 
supply efforts, and others. One challenge for this line of work is recog
-nizing that there are huge uncertainties about the future and thus also 
in developing tools and infrastructure that are ˚exible, adaptable, and 
appropriate. 
Using Information from Resource-Usage Sensing
Recent work has opened the possibility of providing rich, highly 
disaggregate information to households, small groups, and organizations 
regarding resource usage. For example, immediate feedback can now be 
29
National Research Council, 
Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change
, Washington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press (2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
provided on electrical energy use at the appliance or individual lighting 
circuit level. A number of possibilities arise as a result, including detailed 
eco-feedback about usage and tighter coupling with smart grid technol
-ogy on the supply side. Similar feedback is possible for other resources 
such as water and natural gas.
This possibility does, however, raise a number of challenging research 
questions. For example, what is the appropriate amount of information to 
provide to households? Clearly there is the possibility of overwhelming 
them with information. How are the inherent uncertainties in the data to 
be dealt with? How are such systems to be evaluated? The traditional HCI 
evaluation techniques of laboratory studies and small-scale deployments 
are inadequate, but massive deployments over long periods are slow and 
expensive, implying that one can only try a small number of alternatives 
(in tension with the need for rapid prototyping and iteration). How can 
these systems be coupled with smart grid technology on the supply side? 
For example, the grid could signal to the household that the system was 
close to capacity and that lowering energy use for the next hour would be 
very helpful (or perhaps would result in a lower bill); or, conversely, the 
household could be signaled that this would be an opportunity for some 
non-time-critical activity. This arrangement would be a combination of 
automated actions, with the scripts under the household™s control, and 
explicit actions. 
Another set of issues concerns fairness and representativeness. For 
example, the majority of households in the United States are low-income 
and many households rent, although most work in this area focuses on 
relatively af˚uent homeowners. Can systems and policies be designed 
that do not unfairly disadvantage some households, particularly ones 
that can least afford additional charges? Another set of challenges con
-cerns security and privacy. Such systems offer the potential for reducing 
resource consumption and making better use of resources, but there are 
clear security and privacy risks if the system is compromised. Related 
to that issue are questions of responsibility and power around available 
infrastructure that must be addressed. Not everyone owns a home or pays 
for energy use, and the relationships between landlords, residents, laws 
(incentives, disincentives, and so on), available services (green contrac
-tors), and other factors in˚uence energy use outcomes and may bear on 
the design of technology (for example, in terms of authenticating who has 
access to what data). 
It is dif˜cult to get good information about the ˜ne-grained use of 
energy right now. Buildings are not generally instrumented to produce 
these data, yet a true understanding of the forces driving energy use is 
impossible without better data. Better information about which appliances 
are in use and when they are in use can help in developing a more complete 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ELEMENTS OF A COMPUTER SCIENCE RESEARCH AGENDA 
 85understanding of human behavior, and perhaps in identi˜ng interven
-tions that can have an impact on energy use. Even a modest advance such 
as analysis based on the segmentation of a building™s energy use among 
HVAC, lighting, and plug load could yield useful results. Although this 
may seem like a pure sensing problem, the process of deploying sensors, 
labeling data, and interpreting the results involves people, and computer 
science researchers are at the forefront of some of the innovations in this 
area.
30
 Despite these advances, the problem of labeling data and interpret
-ing the results is one that requires more attention. 
CONCLUSION
This chapter provides examples of important technical research areas 
and outlines a broad research agenda for computer science and sus
-tainability. Although there are numerous opportunities to apply well-
understood technologies and techniques to sustainability, there are also 
hard problemsŠsuch as mitigating climate changeŠfor which current 
methods offer at-best partial solutions, and rapid innovation is essential 
in light of the pressing nature of the challenges. The areas highlighted in 
this chapterŠmeasurement and instrumentation; information-intensive 
systems; analysis, modeling, and simulation; optimization; and human-
centered systemsŠare counterparts to well-established research areas in 
computer science. This overlap has clear positive implications. However, 
˜nding a way to have a signi˜cant impact may require new approaches 
to these problems and almost certainly new ways of conducting and 
managing research. Chapter 3 explores ways of conducting and manag
-ing research so that computer science research can have an even greater 
impact on sustainability challenges.
30
For example, Patel and others have developed comparatively lightweight methods to 
acquire reasonably ˜ne-grained data in homes; see J. Froehlich, E. Larson, S. Gupta, G. Cohn, 
M. Reynolds, and S.N. Patel, Disaggregated end-use energy sensing for the smart grid, 
IEEE 
Pervasive Computing, Special Issue on Smart Energy Systems
, January-March (2011).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Programmatic and Institutional 
Opportunities to Enhance Computer 
Science Research for Sustainability 
The challenges of achieving a sustainable society are truly global, 
with complex interdependencies that affect risk assessments, technical 
and social opportunities for solutions, and economic and political feasi
-bility. No one ˜eld or discipline on its own could possibly be expected to 
ﬁsolveﬂ even one aspect of this problem. However, information is central 
to making progress on many fronts. Thus computer science (CS)Šwhich 
couples information and innovationŠis vital to sustainability. For com
-puter science to play its part in meeting global sustainability challenges, 
priority should be given to research that addresses one or more important 
sustainability challenges (examples were described in Chapter 1) and that 
offers signi˜cant impact. This impact may be direct, or it may be through 
game-changing contributions that offer signi˜cant leveraging opportuni
-ties for other domains. In either case, priority should be placed on oppor
-tunities to address the sustainability challenge to a tangible degree. 
This chapter explores some of the potential impediments within the 
˜eld of computer science to making signi˜cant progress on issues per
-tinent to sustainability. It considers how to bridge the gap between the 
traditional research quest for universality
1 and the imperative to have 
a speci˜c impact on sustainability challenges. The chapter is aimed pri
-1The committee uses the term ﬁuniversalityﬂ to encompass the related notions of general
-izability (solutions that are amenable to relatively straightforward abstractions in order to 
address more general versions of a given problem) and breadth (solutions that can be revised 
to be applicable to broad problem domains and spaces). The quest for universality captures 
the traditional CS research goals of abstractability and broad applicability. 
86
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 87marily at the CS research communityŠincluding both researchers and 
funders. First, it discusses some of the fundamental aspects of CS research 
and computational thinking and how these aspects are also critical to the 
sustainability problem space. Then it explores the challenge of universal
-ity and emphasizes that a bottom-up approach is not only necessary in 
the sustainability space but also has precedent in many other areas of 
deep computer science. It describes the connection between universality, 
bottom-up approaches, and sustainability. It then offers suggestions on 
how to structure research to promote meaningful impact on sustainability. 
Finally, the chapter identi˜es methodological opportunities for optimiz
-ing research outcomes and impacts. 
COMPUTER SCIENCE APPROACHES 
 FOR ADDRESSING SUSTAINABILITY 
Chapter 2 highlighted the centrality of data and information to sus
-tainability. Given this centrality,
 computer science and information tech
-nology (IT) are essential to meeting sustainability challenges. The chal
-lenge for IT experts and CS researchers is in ensuring that technologies 
and approaches represent usable, appropriate solutions; that they are 
highly effective; and that they take advantage of the deepest and most 
powerful insights that can be brought to bear. IT has been and continues 
to be a critical enabler of progress in vast arenas of society. Sustainability 
is no exception: IT offers a powerful tool to assist in addressing sustain
-ability challenges. 
Moreover, fundamentals of the computer science ˜eld itself offer 
unique and important contributions to sustainability. To name just a few 
such fundamentals, consider abstraction design, algorithms, operating 
systems and layering, real-time systems, machine learning, human com
-puter interaction (HCI), and databases.
 For instance, the very notion of 
queryable structured data is at the heart of much of computer science; at 
the same time strides are being made to cope with the vast amounts of 
unstructured data now available. Given the scope and scale of sustainabil
-ity challenges along with the vast amounts of relevant data, the structur
-ing and understanding of these data present many challenges. The lens of 
computational thinking is essential to solving many complex problems,
2 and there are key opportunities within computer science that are clearly 
2See National Research Council, 
Report of a Workshop on the Scope and Nature of Compu
-tational Thinking
, Washington, D.C.:
 The National Academies Press (2010); and National 
Research Council, 
Report of a Workshop on the Pedagogical Aspects of Computational Thinking,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2011).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
applicable, even beyond those highlighted in Chapter 2. A sampling of 
these areas is outlined in Box 3.1. 
As one example, many sustainability challenges, particularly those 
related to infrastructure, make salient the importance of architecture. 
Architecture encompasses not just structural connections among subsys
-tems, but expectations regarding what a system will do, how its perfor
-BOX 3.1
  Additional Areas of Promising Computer Science 
 and Related Research for Sustainability
In addition to the research areas discussed in Chapter 2 of this report, fol
-lowing is a list presenting a sampling of topics and areas that arise in computer 
science and information technology more generally that are likely opportunities for 
making progress in sustainability. 



 This is a likely area of opportu
-nity especially as it applies to self-regulating processes, biodiversity, and metrics 
of adaptability.







 (for instance, designing for average-use cases 
and building in techniques for degradation, as opposed to designing for peaks with 
safety margin).



 This is a likely area of opportunity for many levels of programming, at many stages of 
the life cycle.


 One cannot understand how technol
-ogy will affect sustainability without understanding what people will do with it. The 
emphasis in computer science on extensibility in system design takes into account 
the fact that technology as used matters, not just as designed.
 
 This area is involved with the invention of things that people 
will use and engage with, which is crosscutting for multiple domains.



-


 What is the equivalent of search in the physical world? 
How do we deal with unstructured search, taxonomy, structured query process
-ingŠsearch for data relevant to scienti˜c discovery? 

 This ˜eld offers likely opportunity as a modality for search
-ing and understanding the physical world.
 



 This is an area of opportunity in 
terms of representation of the physical world and of sustainability problems.
 
 This area of opportunity relates to information support and 
sharing, building community, structured argumentation, sensing, modeling, and 
observation.




 This is an area 
of opportunity that includes the development of capabilities to cope with challenges 
where there is functional decompositionComputing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 89mance will scale, what behaviors are within bounds, and how subsystems 
(or external actors) should interact with the system as a whole. This type 
of challenge can be seen perhaps most clearly in the smart grid example 
discussed in Chapter 1. However, the other illustrative examples in Chap
-ter 1Šfood systems and the development of sustainable and resilient 
infrastructureŠalso make clear that early architectural choices (such as 
the expected role and behavior of individual farms in the global food 
system, or the anticipated communications capabilities of ˜rst responders 
in a crisis) can have long-lasting repercussions. 
A system™s architecture instantiates early design decisions and has 
a signi˜cant effect on the uses, behaviors, and effects of the system long 
past the time when those decisions were made. Moreover, requirements 
inevitably change over time, necessitating ˚exible or evolvable designs. 
Because of this large effect of a system™s architecture on almost all aspects 
of the system over its life cycle, the architecture of larger-scale systems 
of necessity merits signi˜cant attention and resources. As systems have 
become global in scale, the disciplines of computer science and software 
engineering have grappled with the challenges of architecture as they 
pertain to large-scale systems working over large geographic areas, with 
countless inputs and millions of users. Lessons from architecting hard
-ware, software, network, and information systems thus have broader 
applicability to the processes of structuring, designing, maintaining, 
updating, and evolving of infrastructure in pursuit of sustainability.
3One question not yet addressed in this report is how well the CS 
research community is poised to play its part in meeting global sustain
-3For an in-depth examination of the importance of architecture in software-intensive sys
-tems, see Chapter 3 of the following report: National Research Council, 
Critical Code: Software 
Producibility for Defense
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2010). It describes 
the importance of architecture as follows (pp. 68-69): ﬁArchitecture represents the earliest 
and often most important design decisionsŠthose that are the hardest to change and the 
most critical to get right. Architecture makes it possible to structure require
 
ments based on 
an understanding of what is actually possible from an engineering standpointŠand what 
is infeasible in the present state of technology. It provides a mechanism for communications 
among the stakeholders, including the infrastructure providers, and managers of other sys
-tems with require
 
ments for interoperation. It is also the ˜rst design artifact that addresses 
the so-called non-functional attributes, such as performance, modi˜ability, reliability, and 
security that in turn drive the ultimate quality and capability of the system. Architecture 
is an important enabler of reuse and the key to system evolution, enabling management 
of future uncertainty. In this regard, architecture is the primary determiner of modularity 
and thus the nature and degree to which multiple design decisions can be decoupled from 
each other. Thus, when there are areas of likely or potential change, whether it be in system 
functionality, performance, infrastructure, or other areas, architecture decisions can be made 
to encapsulate them and so increase the extent to which the overall engineering activity is 
insulated from the uncertainties associated with these localized changes.ﬂ 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
ability challenges. In the committee™s view, one perceived barrier to its 
doing so is the sense that aiming research toward sustainability challenges 
may con˚ict with ultimate scienti˜c aims of universality.
4 This question is 
explored below in more detail. 
The most powerful and important computer science innovations to 
date share the characteristic of universality. Indeed, it is their utility across 
a wide range of domains that makes their aggregate impact so great. See 
Box 3.2 for a short list of just some of computer science™s most signi˜
-cant achievements. Universities, research laboratories, departments, and 
funding agencies increasingly recognize the value of multidisciplinary 
research. However, as the ˜eld has matured, there has been comparatively 
less emphasis on domain-driven approaches to innovation in favor of 
research that attempts to go directly to universalityŠthat is, abstractabil
-ity and breadth. Nevertheless, it is a strength of computer science that 
the ˜eld can, and does, ground its advances in real-world problems. As 
described in Chapters 1 and 2, CS can contribute signi˜cantly and criti
-cally to sustainability. In this section it is argued that to have the biggest 
impact on the pressing challenges facing the world today, CS research 
must be informed with deep knowledge, input, and context from domain 
experts. 
In some areas of computer science, universality is built into the prob
-lem de˜nition. Much of theoretical computer science, of course, begins 
by representing the target problem in abstract, symbolic language. Other 
examples of research with universality as the focus from the start include 
the von Neumann computer model itself, programming languages such 
as Fortran and ALGOL, and early human-factors research (such as that 
of Doug Englebart and Alan Kay) that created new modes of human-
 computer interaction. In other equally consequential areas, however, 
broad applicability has only emerged years or even decades later, as 
researchers began with domain-speci˜c problems and developed solu
-tions and then later were able to generalize and understand deeper truths 
from this panoply of speci˜c contributions. Examples of important con
-tributions that began as highly speci˜c projects include the World Wide 
Web (originally conceived as a means to share research papers and scien
-ti˜c information) and object-oriented programming (early object-oriented 
languages were developed to address speci˜c problems such as discrete 
event simulation or graphical interaction). 
In this chapter it is argued that CS research on sustainability is best 
approached from the bottom up: that is, by developing well-structured 
4The integration of computer science with domain sciences was a central tenet of a 1992 
National Research Council report: National Research Council, 
Computing the Future: A 
Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering
, Juris Hartmanis and Herbert Lin (eds.), 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press (1992). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 91BOX 3.2
 Universality and Computer Science™s Greatest Achievements
The list below offers one view of some of computer science™s most signi˜cant 
achievements over the years. ﬁComputer scienceﬂ is construed broadly here, to 
encompass information and communications technologies.
1 Most of the achieve
-ments listed below were accomplished by focusing on developing domain-speci˜c 
solutions with an eye toward eventual abstraction and universality.

ersalityŠthe Turing machine





































tion, computer-aided engineering (design, simulate, build, test, measure, use)






























-tems production





ture of graphs
1There are, of course, other takes on this question. The Computer Science and Telecom
-munications Board™s (CSTB™s) well-known ﬁtire tracksﬂ diagram (as seen in National Research 
Council, 


, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press [2003]) explores innovations in computer science and information technology from the 
perspective of spawning billion-dollar industries. That list includes time-sharing, client/server 
computing, entertainment, Internet, local area networks, workstations, graphical user inter
-faces, very-large-scale integration design, and reduced instruction set computing processors. 
A CSTB report published in 2004 articulated the essential character of computer science, and  
focused on seven key themes: computer science (1) involves symbols and their manipulation, 
(2) involves the creation and manipulation of abstractions, (3) creates and studies algorithms, 
(4) creates arti˜cial constructs, (5) exploits and addresses exponential growth, (6) seeks the 
fundamental limits on what can be computed, and (7) focuses on the complex, analytic, rational 
action that is associated with human intelligence. (National Research Council, 
Computer Sci-ence: Re˜ections on the Field, Re˜ections from the Field
, Washington, D.C.: The National Acad
-emies Press [2004].) The differences in these lists are less important than noting the power of 
focused problem solving in a ˜eld whose core strengths include abstraction and adaptability.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
solutions to particular, critical problems in sustainability and later seek
-ing to generalize these solutions, as opposed to striving for universality 
from the start. Many advances will require CS research for progress, as 
described earlier, but those advances may not be immediately evident as 
universal approaches. The committee believes that demanding evidence 
of clear universality from the start is likely to inhibit close interdisciplin
-ary collaboration and, ultimately, major advances. Moreover, many sus
-tainability challenges need to be addressed sooner rather than later, even 
if imperfectly. At the same time, the fact that the problems associated 
with sustainability are complex, multifaceted, and in some cases poorly 
de˜ned means that close attention to experimental robustness and under
-lying mathematical rigor will be essential. 
Previous chapters illustrate this overall approach. For example, the 
hypothesized research on the smart grid takes an approach to the problem 
that is fundamentally a computer networks perspective (inspired by the 
success of the Internet), but it is not initially intended to make universal 
contributions to the theory of networks. Rather, by focusing on the prob
-lem at handŠthat of integrated control of power generation, distribution, 
and useŠthere is the potential for breakthrough advances on this critical 
issue at the same time that new computational techniques are being devel
-oped. There are clearly general lessons to be learned about these issues. 
The committee suggests that the best way to learn them is to start with 
the particular sustainability challenge at hand, make progress on that, and 
later seek to generalize.
This approach does not mean, however, that any application of com
-putation or IT to problems in sustainability should automatically be seen 
as computer science 
research
 for sustainability. Rather, to be judged as a 
signi˜cant contribution within the intersection of CS research and sus
-tainability, the contribution ˜rst must have the potential to make a real 
difference in moving toward a more sustainable future. Second, the contri
-bution must have the potential, if it is successful, to add to generalizable 
knowledge about sustainability, and the contribution or proposed solu
-tion should, at the same time, require new computational techniques or 
thinking beyond the current state of the art in computing. 
The speci˜c criteria for judging research success should of course 
evolve over time, with members of the community themselves proposing 
and debating what constitutes the most worthy research. The committee 
emphasizes, however, the criterion of having the potential to make a real 
difference. An open research question in its own right is how best to assess 
and evaluate impacts and how to isolate the effects of any particular sets 
of interventions, given the scales and time frames of many sustainability 
challenges. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 93PRINCIPLE: Encourage research at and across disciplinary boundar-ies, well informed by speci˜cs and well structured to handle scale, 
data, integration, architecture, simulation, optimization, iteration, 
and human and systems aspects. CS research in sustainability should 
be an interdisciplinary effort, with experts in the various ˜elds of 
sustainability being equal partners in the research.
TOWARD UNIVERSALITY
Although the committee emphasizes that a premature focus on uni
-versality would be detrimental to the kind of high-impact sustainabil
-ity solutions so desperately needed, universality should not be ignored. 
Indeed, domain-speci˜c research can lead toward universality. A chal
-lenge, though, is how to pursue the universality that contributes so much 
to the power of computer science. In this section, it is argued that the 
purposes of domain speci˜city and contextualization are not at odds with 
ultimately producing universality in results, and that universality is not 
achieved directly in most cases in any event. Consider the development 
of important advances in CS and IT. Achieving universality typically 
involves developing well-structured innovative solutions, applying them 
to the problem at hand, evaluating their ef˜cacy, and using this evalua
-tion to guide further improvement, enhancement, and new directions. 
Successful approaches are then re˜ned and applied in other areas, per
-haps similar to the original problem domain, perhaps more remote. As 
the iterations of application proceed, the universality of the approach is 
discovered and re˜ned. 
Why has this approach worked so well in computer science? Despite 
the fact that computer science has information at its heart, tools and meth-ods are ultimately instantiated in software. Software is malleable and well 
disposed to iteration. Software technology is developed, deployed, used, 
and modi˜ed in continuous iterative cycles. Developing modern software 
is not done through implementing a perfect software system once, at the 
start. Instead, the state of the art in software engineering urges iteration 
and architectural ˚exibility. Software is designed to be updated on a fre
-quent basis over its entire life cycle. 
This approach to the creation of software systems has developed for 
many reasons. For one reason, the work required to discover all or even 
most of the bugs before release in non-critical systems far exceeds the 
value of that approach. Similarly, feature sets are expanded through use. 
The range and number of possible features of any particular target system 
are larger than what is implementedŠif that were not the case, the systems 
would be even more complex and dif˜cult to use and would take even 
longer to roll out. Thus systems are rolled out with a modest feature set, 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
and new features are then added over time. This approach allows prod
-ucts to get to market sooner and helps to avoid or reduce the development 
of features that are not really needed, as well as revealing what actually 
works in practice. In short, after initial deployment, reality (instead of 
anticipated or modeled reality) guides the evolution of the feature set. 
The understanding of the human systems into which all computing sys
-tems are deployed is highly limited (not least because the understanding 
and modeling of humans and organizations are highly incomplete and 
˚awed at best). Thus one cannot generally anticipate and simulate all 
uses. The world of computer systems has grown to evolve features that 
are adapted to what the users of those systems demand. A virtuous cycle 
has resultedŠusers have come to expect ˚exibility and malleability, thus 
ensuring that feedback loops occur. Systems have versions that are rolled 
out as available and as features are demanded. Change management is 
a basic fabric of these systems, which are designed for ongoing change. 
These systems have innovation and expectations of innovation literally 
encoded within them. 
Another way to think about the inherent adaptability of computer sci
-ence is to consider an ﬁend to endﬂ argument for the inclusion of authentic 
applications in systems research. The original end-to-end argument put 
forward by Saltzer, Reed, and Clark was as follows: 
[F]unctions placed at low levels of a system may be redundant or of little 
value when compared with the cost of providing them at that low level. 
. . . The argument appeals to application requirements, and provides a 
rationale for moving function upward in a layered system, closer to the 
application that uses the function.
5 This same logic has implications for systems research and innovation. 
Authentic applications should be included as part of systems research 
exploration at as high a level as possible in order to keep functional and 
performance requirements on a purposeful track. For the purposes of this 
report, notions of authenticity must encompass high-impact applicability 
to sustainability challenges. 
These fundamentals in computer science are relevant to the way 
that CS research is done and the way in which research and develop
-ment investment is approached. This ﬁbuilt for changeﬂ characteristic 
also facilitates the transition from one application to another. Algorithms 
and their instantiations can be adaptive, iteratively modi˜ed to ˜t a new 
5J.H. Saltzer, D.P. Reed, and D.D. Clark, ﬁEnd-to-End Arguments in System Design,ﬂ 
Pro
-ceedings of the Second International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems
, Paris, France, 
April 8-10, 1981. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 95context. More importantly, such iterations are not a signi˜cant departure 
from what occurred in their initial creation; the expectation of iteration 
is part of the core of the technology. Building for change is done through 
modularity, through system designs resulting from hard thinking about 
where to place functionality, through the isolation of errors and details. 
Change to software happens as the software is developed, and as it is 
deployed, debugged, and iteratively improved; and it happens as it is 
applied to a new problem. As a given technique is applied to a new 
problem, and yet another new problem, and so on, the universality of 
the technique emerges. For each new application, the characteristics of 
generality are exposed, and the possibility for further abstraction and 
broad applicability grows. In the best case, an ﬁexponentialﬂ process 
emerges in which techniques that are broadly applicable are exposed as 
each successful reapplication enables multiple new adaptations to come 
to light. Not all potential new applications are developed, of course, but 
those that are ˜nd their ultimate universality through bottom-up cycles 
of change and through the iterative process of design which promotes 
that process. Past successful examples of this approach include language 
translation, Internet protocols, machine learning, object-oriented lan
-guages, and databases. 
The approaches discussed in Chapter 2 were not described in their 
most general terms. The committee does not suggest that they be pursued 
generally. But universality is often seen as the ultimate win of computer 
science techniques. Although universality is important and must be the 
goal because some big wins are needed in order to attack the unprec
-edented challenges of sustainability, the challenges should be approached 
through the concrete. There are opportunities for CS research to take on 
the key challenges in sustainability, learn about them, and design focused 
solutions that work. The design of those solutions should embed the best 
of CS design and systems learningsŠmodularity, isolation, simplicity, 
and so on. Then CS researchers and practitioners should experiment with, 
apply, and pilot solutions to speci˜c problems; look for the successes and 
reapply and adapt them to other applications; and develop universal
-ity while seeking to increase applicability and impact. If the concrete is 
embraced across the range of infrastructure, ecosystems, and human sys
-tems, reality will help hone and ˜lter possible approaches, and multiple 
and adapted applications will emerge.
FINDING: Fast-moving iterative, incrementally evolving ap
 proaches 
to problem solving in computer science, which were critical to build
-ing the Internet and web search engines, will be useful in solving 
sustainability challenges.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
EDUCATION AND PROGRAMMATICS
The vision described above implies a broadening of what it means 
to be a computer scientist. A signi˜cant opportunity for change is in the 
area of education. This change should include educating computer science 
students to achieve impact with computing, computational methods, and 
systems approaches in important domain-speci˜c areas. Such a shift in 
culture would encourage these students to develop domain expertise and 
to collaborate directly with domain experts while in graduate school or 
in preparing for graduate work
6 and to address such topics as modeling 
and predicting energy use and designing for reuse.
Making such a shift successfully will also require a culture of experi
-mentation and innovation in the application of computer science. Further, 
it will require a research infrastructure in order to make progress. That 
infrastructure should include the following: (1) available standard data 
sets, models, and challenge problems to the community in order to assist 
in developing a common discourse and target for innovation, analogous 
to Grand Challenges in robotics, speech, vision, and so on; and (2) the 
building of shared infrastructure through open architectures and test
-beds that allow for grounded iterative experimentation in the context 
of real components, both human and technical. Such architectures could 
go a long way to increasing the feasibility and impact of experimental 
research in academia and to creating an ecosystem that supports iterative 
innovation.
Education and training within the target domains constitute an 
equally important goal. One challenge is in the translation of problems 
from one domain or ˜eld to anotherŠfor instance, describing the power 
and electric grid systems as a dynamical system and control problemŠ
and then translating sometimes newly exposed assumptions back to the 
problem domain. Information and data are critical to understanding the 
challenges, formulating solutions, deploying solutions, communicating 
results, and facilitating learning and new behaviors that are based on 
results of the work. Thus a signi˜cant component of meeting virtually all 
sustainability challenges is to infuse computational thinking and com
-puter science- and information-rich approaches into the deploying indus
-try and the research and mission agencies.
PRINCIPLE: Undergraduate and graduate education in computer 
science should provide experience in working across disciplinary 
boundaries. Graduate training grants and postdoctoral fellowships 
should support training in multiple disciplines. Undergraduate and 
6These shifts are already underway in various ˜eldsŠfor example, biocomputing. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 97graduate programs should include tracks that offer introductory 
and intermediate course work in such sustainability areas as life-
cycle analysis, agriculture, ecology, natural resource management, 
economics, and urban planning.
Research institutionsŠboth universities and the funding organiza
-tionsŠcould better address the needs of authentic multidisciplinary 
research, in terms of publication venues, funding, criteria for promotion, 
research infrastructures that help enable sustained collaboration, and 
cross-training. The latter include the cross-training of students in multiple 
˜elds to enable them to bring a computer science perspective into other 
arenas. Authentic multidisciplinary work is challenging.
7 Work will need 
to be done across disciplinary boundaries and incorporating experts from 
many disciplines, as well as individuals with deep expertise themselves 
in more than one discipline. Examples of opportunities to enhance multi
-disciplinary approaches are described below: 

The creation of certi˜cate programs, extension programs, and 
online programs for professionals in the target industries and agencies 
through professional societies and lifelong learning and training; 

Scholarships and fellowships both for computer science graduate 
students and for early-career professors that provide ˜nancial support 
for taking the time to develop expertise in a complementary discipline;

The development of cross-agency initiatives (such as the collabo
-ration of the National Science Foundation [NSF] with the Environmental 
Protection Agency
8) that encourage interdisciplinary collaboration in rel
-evant ˜elds;

Support for the development of new, cross-discipline structures 
(perhaps departments or institutes) between computer science and other 
˜elds that can create a new generation of students who are agile both in 
computer science and in ˜elds relevant to sustainability;
7For a discussion of some of the challenges, see Sean Eddy™s essay on ﬁantedisciplinaryﬂ sci-ence (
Public Library of Science, Computational Biology 
1(1), doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.0010006), 
in which he notes: ﬁFocusing on interdisciplinary teams instead of interdisciplinary people 
reinforces standard disciplinary boundaries rather than breaking them down. An interdis
-ciplinary team is a committee in which members identify themselves as an expert in some
-thing else besides the actual scienti˜c problem at hand, and abdicate responsibility for the 
majority of the work because it™s not their ˜eld.ﬂ
8An example is the joint National Science Foundation/Environmental Protection Agency 
establishment of two centers to study the environmental implications of nanotechnol
-ogy, described in a 2008 press release: see http://www.nsf.gov/news/news_summ.
jsp?cntn_id=112234.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY

Institutional structures that support multidisciplinary and interdis
-ciplinary teams focused on a problem or set of problems over an appro
-priately long period of time;
9 
Internships and career paths and placement programs that encour
-age computer science students and postdoctoral researchers to work in 
relevant government agencies, non-governmental organizations, and 
industries;

Coordination between academic research in computer science and 
non-traditional industrial partnersŠthat is, beyond the large IT compa
-niesŠto scope problems, help train students, and cross-fertilize ideas; and 

Regular, high-level summits involving computer science and 
sustainability expertsŠpractitioners and researchersŠto inform shared 
research design, assess progress, and identify gaps and opportunities. 
The conceptualization of the bottom-up emergence of universality is 
relevant to researchers, university systems, and funding agencies in the 
following respects:

ResearchersŠemphasizing a bottom-up approach affects how research
-ers select and approach their problems and how they approach the training of 
their students. 
Cross-training, learning other languages and vocabularies, 
immersion, and intensive and sustained collaboration are all important 
aspects of how research will need to be done. Although it may be essential 
to making real progress with respect to sustainability challenges, long-
term commitment to a speci˜c domain area is typically inherently risky 
for a CS researcher, because speci˜c problems in sustainability may be 
addressed successfully but universal ideas or techniques may not neces
-sarily materialize. 

University systemsŠa focus on bottom-up approaches affects how uni
-versities incentivize and create the infrastructure for faculty to pursue sustained 
multidisciplinary efforts.
 The computer science community has made prog
-ress in tenure and in the promotion of individuals who straddle disciplin
-ary boundaries. Is such boundary crossing suf˜ciently encouraged and 
explicitly incentivized? Publication rates and pressures are higher than 
ever. Publication is essential to a successful R&D ecosystem, but does an 
emphasis on frequent publication have a negative effect on the pursuit 
of R&D which tackles dif˜cult application domains that have not previ
-ously been processed and translated into computer science problems? 
9One successful example of such an effort was the collaboration between computer sci
-entist James Gray and astrophysicist Alexander Shalay on the multiyear effort (which, of 
course, involved many others) to develop the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (http://www.sdss.
org/). 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 99Moreover, much truly multidisciplinary work will require large teams 
and collaborations; is there appropriate recognition of CS contributions 
to large, multiauthor publications? Also, an evaluation of the productiv
-ity of junior faculty may need to extend to evaluating the impact of the 
researcher in the realm of sustainability in addition to the ˜eld of com
-puter science. Related to promotion is the question of appointmentsŠ
in what departments are multidisciplinary researchers appointed, and 
how can such appointments be handled so that the multidisciplinary 
nature of the researchers™ work does not count against them in their home 
departments?

Funding agenciesŠemphasizing bottom-up approaches may affect how 
agencies structure multidisciplinary programs.
 The National Science Foun
-dation is a primary funder of research in computer science in the United 
States. The former Information Technology Research Programs at NSF and 
its current Cyber-enabled Discovery and Innovation Program have dem
-onstrated the feasibility of programs with signi˜cant multidisciplinary 
aspects and the impacts that can result. But such programs provide for 
a minority of CS research, and in the committee™s view, the sense of the 
community, as seen in review panels, program structures, review criteria, 
and so on, is not generally favorable toward funding domain-speci˜c 
projects. One challenge is that typical reviewers of prospective research 
in computer science tend to want to see universality from the start, which 
presents a fundamental problem for the CS research community; funding 
agencies such as NSF can do little about this matter if the community 
does not adapt. 
The committee is encouraged by the establishment of Science, Engi
-neering, and Education for Sustainability (SEES) as an NSF-wide area of 
investment. SEES aims for a systems-based approach to ﬁpromote the 
research and education needed to address the challenges of creating a 
sustainable human futureﬂ and places an emphasis on interdisciplinary 
efforts. With its emphasis on interdisciplinarity and the involvement of 
NSF™s Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineer
-ing, the SEES program offers an opportunity to demonstrate the depth of 
IT and CS innovation that the core discipline can offer and the rich and 
globally important problem space of sustainability. 
There are ongoing opportunities for NSF to take advantage of the sig
-ni˜cant domain expertise in other agencies in order to pursue a strategy 
broader than programs that are crosscutting with other research director
-ates within NSF. Such a broadened strategy would involve programs that 
connect researchers with domain experts, practitioners, and projects in 
relevant mission agencies (such as the Department of Energy, Department 
of Transportation, Department of the Interior, and Department of Health 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
and Human Services).
10
 Furthermore, it is critical to ensure that funding 
structures support data sharing, encourage citability, and so on, but at the 
same time, an emphasis on sharing should be balanced with the need for 
researchers actually to collect data and to begin solving problems.
Another role that funding agencies can play is to fund longer-term 
projects and to be tolerant of risk, particularly in these multidisciplinary 
and cross-disciplinary, potentially high-impact research areas. It may be 
useful to target special funds that encourage the switching of focus to 
sustainability challenges and to incentivize grounded, domain-speci˜c 
collaboration and training.
11 PRINCIPLE: Re˜ne funding and programmatic options to reinforce 
and provide incentives for the necessary boundary crossing and 
integration in CS research to address sustainability challenges. In 
particular, funding, promotion, and review and assessment (peer 
review) models should emphasize in-depth integration with data 
and deployments from the constituent domains. 
PRINCIPLE: There should be strong incentives at all stages of 
research for focusing on solving real problems whose solution can 
make a substantial contribution to sustainability challenges, along 
with in-depth metrics and evaluative criteria to assess progress.
Another critical issue for structuring research is to build in evaluation 
tools for prioritizing efforts and evaluating meaningful impact. The com
-mittee offers an evaluative framework below. 
EVALUATION, VIABILITY, AND IMPACT ANALYSIS
One of the greatest challenges in multidisciplinary research is to estab
-lish evaluation metrics that are both actionable and meaningful across the 
constituent disciplines. This chapter concludes by identifying method
-ological opportunities for optimizing research outcomes and impacts. 
Each of the recommended areas for evaluation necessarily incorporates 
10
An example of such a program is NSF™s Industry/University Cooperative Research 
Centers Program.
11An illustrative example is the National Institutes of Health Mentored Quantitative Re
-search Development Award (K25), which serves to fund quantitatively trained researchers so 
that they can learn about an area of biomedical science (see http://grants.nih.gov/grants/
guide/pa-˜les/PA-06-087.html). These awards require the identi˜cation of a mentor in the 
substantive area and a plan for training; they provide funding for a commitment of at least 
75 percent time.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 101interdisciplinary team members to assess accurately and to guide the 
potential for positive and signi˜cant impact. 
One set of validation metrics would ensure that sustainability-
oriented efforts related directly to key components of sustainability and 
were making signi˜cant progress on one or more of the legs of social, 
economic, and environmental impacts.
12
 Speci˜c metrics might include 
the following: metrics for analysis of environmental impact (life cycle, 
energy needed to create and execute a solution, as well as energy saved, 
and so on); metrics for analysis of economic impact (cost of implementa
-tion, resources used to create intervention, externalities); and metrics for 
equity and engagement across different stakeholder groups, taking into 
account their interests, values, and concerns, during both design and 
execution processes. 
Many of these metrics involve humans, and so the assessment of 
research using such metrics will often involve techniques from the social 
sciences.
13
 They also involve techniques drawn from other ˜elds, such as 
life-cycle analysis from civil and environmental engineering. Any solu
-tion that claims to engage with and increase sustainability should be able 
to make an argument that addresses possible ways in which it may also 
negatively impact sustainability in any of its three overarching compo
-nents (social, environmental, and economic). Moreover, proposals for 
projects that aim to make an impact should include a life-cycle analysis, 
and such analyses should be accounted for in the projects™ budgets, as 
such analyses are a non-trivial effort to do well.
Scale analysis is critical to most information technology designs; it 
includes spatial scaling, temporal scaling, location scaling, and compu
-tational scaling. As demonstrated by the classic computer science talk 
12
As an example, although the challenges of sustainability are much broader than those 
related to climate change alone, in that domain a measurable impact is the goal of decreasing 
emissions so that carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are at or below a certain threshold. 
Being as speci˜c as possible in terms of the anticipated impact on sustainability is critical. 
More broadly, one might consider the areas addressed in life-cycle analysis: global warming, 
stratospheric ozone depletion, acidi˜cation, eutrophication, smog, terrestrial toxicity, aquatic 
toxicity, human health, resource depletion, and land use. See U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency, ﬁLife Cycle Assessment: Principles and Practice,ﬂ available at http://www.epa.
gov/nrmrl/lcaccess/lca101.html.
13
This is a characteristic of much of the evaluation done in human-computer interaction 
research and practice. Also very relevant here are design methodologies and approaches 
that seek to account for human values: for example, Value Sensitive Design, as discussed 
in B. Friedman, P.H. Kahn, Jr., and A. Borning, ﬁValue Sensitive Design and Information 
Systems,ﬂ in P. Zhang and D. Galletta (eds.)
, Human-Computer Interaction in Management 
Information Systems: Foundations
, Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe (2006), pp. 348-372, reprinted 
in K.E. Himma and H.T. Tavani (eds.), 
The Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics
, Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley (2008), pp. 69-101. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
question ﬁBut does it scale?,ﬂ an early measure of the potential for the 
impact of a solution or system relates to scale. As sensors become more 
powerful (being able to measure many parameters at high frequency) 
and cheaper, a massive increase in the amount of data is expected. Each 
step or component of a proposed solution should be designed to work at 
scale. However, scale has new connotations with respect to sustainability 
that must be considered. In particular, many of the most problematic 
phenomena involved in sustainability challenges play out over timescales that are dif˜cult for humans to comprehend, and many of the solutions 
make sense only when applied at scale. Here are some of the scalability 
questions that should be considered when evaluating a project:

Spatial scaling
 requires articulating the minimal scale that can have 
impact (for example, touch points or density, geographic coverage, and 
so on).

Temporal scaling
 incorporates real-time, human-time, and planning-
time considerations; duration; timescale of relevance (onset, persistence, 
resilience); and the very challenging issue of addressing multiple-human 
lifespan timescales.
14

Location scaling
 addresses the applicability of the approach across 
a range of location-related contexts.

Computational scaling
 refers to the tractability of the problem in 
terms of data generated and in terms of the anticipated footprint of the 
approach with respect to energy and dollars expended.
For each of these dimensions, the impact of a targeted innovation 
may well be dif˜cult to quantify precisely. But it is the responsibility of 
the researcher at least to estimate and justify the anticipated, ˜rst-order 
measurable savings and ef˜ciency improvements, or mitigated damages, 
from its realization. Is the proposed approach fundamental infrastruc
-ture? A game changer?
 The introduction of new computing technologies 
and concepts should be coupled with impact assessment (positive and 
negative) and follow-up study/assessment along with plans to integrate 
and iterate learning. Quantifying sustainability results as contributed by 
computational methods is a daunting challenge, especially given the cur
-rent lack of data for real-world systems. Focused efforts toward creating 
publicly available data repositories that could be used to compare the 
effect of methods on the performance metrics chosen may prove useful 
in some domains. Without such data, there is little common ground for 
14
B. Friedman and L.P. Nathan, Multi-lifespan information system design: A research 
initiative for the HCI community, 
Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems
, New York: ACM Press (2010), pp. 2234-2246.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PROGRAMMATIC AND INSTITUTIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
 103systematically comparing different methods and their potential bene˜ts. It 
is particularly important for researchers to estimate outcomes and for the 
community to develop ways to assess impact, as these steps may have a 
dramatic impact on whether or not an approach can be appropriated and 
applied in other contexts. 
CONCLUSION
Meeting the challenges of sustainability, as noted in Chapter 1, will 
require more than information technology, applications of clever technol
-ogy, and computer science research. Indeed, at the heart of many global 
sustainability challenges are questions of resource consumption and stan
-dards of living. (See Box 3.3.) Nevertheless, the committee believes that 
BOX 3.3
 Toward an Information-Rich, Sustainable Future
Numerous analyses make clear that resource consumption is at the heart of 
many global sustainability challenges. At the same time, populations around the 
world are striving to improve their standard of livingŠand despite the ef˜ciency 
improvements that also accompany development, that has inevitably meant in
-creased resource consumption. 
Efforts to improve ef˜ciencies and substitute more sustainable for less sus
-tainable materials and methods are what underlie much of the discussion in this 
report. However, there may be a broader sense in which information technologies 
and computational approaches can alleviate or mitigate the problem. Efforts to shift 
standard-of-living metrics from resource-intensive to information-intensive have 
the potential to be a signi˜cant lever in addressing global sustainability, although 
such shifts will increase the need for ever-ﬁgreenerﬂ information technology solu
-tions themselves. In an increasingly information-rich and carbon-restricted world, 
˜nding ways to use information so that it both enhances perceptions and realities 
of standard of living and reduces resource consumption will be critical. 
Examples of shifting to information-rich, less resource-intensive lifestyles 
include adjustments to transportation practices such as: information infrastructures 
that transform the convenience and trust of shared and alternative transportation 
modalities instead of private automobiles; improved technology in vehicles; trans
-portation displacement such as telecommuting, social media, and e-commerce; 
and so on.Although such examples emphasize opportunities to shift what counts as 
improvements in the standard of living for individuals, ultimately it is the policy 
choices and decisions, at local, regional, and federal levels, that will determine how 
many, if any, of these shifts are possible. Thus, organizational and governmental 
actions and decisions will have signi˜cant impact on whether a shift to information-
intensive choices can happen in order to produce a shift in the way that society 
operates, to engender more sustainable outcomes. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
CS and IT research has deep and fundamental contributions to make to 
these challenges. This chapter has argued for a bottom-up approach to 
research that values application-driven results while also supporting the 
iterative process that eventually leads to more universally useful contri
-butions. The committee has argued for a series of validation metrics that 
explicitly explore the true impact of a piece of work in the arena of sus
-tainability. Such validation metrics should include those that deal directly 
with humans, economics, and ecosystems and those metrics that engage 
with the concept of scale (a good ˜rst-order proxy for the universality that 
may not yet be present).
Information technology is at the heart of nearly every large-scale 
socioeconomic systemŠ˜nancial systems, manufacturing systems, energy 
systems, and so on. One important consequence, which has been the focus 
of this report, is that advances in IT have become critical enablers of 
change in these systems. The goal of this report has been to shine a spot
-light on areas where information technology innovation and computer 
science research can help, and to urge the computer research community 
to bring its approaches and methodologies to bear on these pressing 
global challenges.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ASummary of a Workshop 
 on Innovation in Computing 
 and Information Technology 
 for Sustainability 
INTRODUCTION 
On May 26, 2010, the Committee on Computing Research for Envi
-ronmental and Societal Sustainability held the Workshop on Innovation in 
Computing and Information Technology for Sustainability in Washington, 
D.C. The goal of the workshop was to survey sustainability challenges, 
current research initiatives, and results from previously held topical work
-shops and related industry and government development efforts in these 
areas. The workshop featured invited presentations and discussions that 
explored research themes and speci˜c research opportunities that could 
advance sustainability objectives and also could result in advances in 
computer science (CS). Participants were also asked to consider research 
modalities, with a focus on applicable computational techniques and 
long-term research that might be supported by the National Science Foun
-dation (NSF), with an emphasis on problem- or user-driven research. 
This appendix summarizes the discussion of the workshop panel
-ists and the attendees. The summaries of the four workshop sessions 
provided in this appendix are a digest both of the presentations and of 
the subsequent discussion, which included remarks offered by others in 
attendance. Although this summary was prepared by the committee on 
the basis of workshop presentations and discussions, it does not, in keep
-ing with the guidelines of the National Research Council on the develop
-ment of workshop summaries, necessarily re˚ect a consensus view of the 
committee. 
107
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
The sessions at the workshop were entitled: 

Session 1: Expanding Science and Engineering with Novel CS/IT 
Methods: ﬁThe Need to Turn Numbers into Knowledgeﬂ; 

Session 2: Understanding, Tracking, and Managing Uncertainty 
Throughout the Science-to-Policy Pipeline;

Session 3: Creating Institutional and Personal Change with Humans 
in the Loop; 

Session 4: Overcoming Obstacles to Scienti˜c Discovery and Trans
-lating Science to Practice. 
The workshop agenda is provided at the end of Appendix A. 
SESSION 1: EXPANDING SCIENCE AND 
 ENGINEERING WITH NOVEL CS/IT METHODS: 
 ﬁTHE NEED TO TURN NUMBERS INTO KNOWLEDGEﬂ 
Discussions during the ˜rst session of the workshop focused on the 
role of computer science in helping solve sustainability challenges. A broad 
de˜nition of sustainability was employed. Vijay Modi, Columbia Univer
-sity, provided examples of sustainability areas where computer science 
could help address some challenges; Robert Pfahl, International Electron
-ics Manufacturing Initiative, discussed changes in electronic systems and 
products to improve sustainability; Neo Martinez, Paci˜c 
 Ecoinformatics 
and Computational Ecology Lab, explored the role of computer science 
in improving ecological sustainability; Adjo Amekudzi, Georgia Insti
-tute of Technology, examined planning and management issues around 
infrastructure; and Thomas Harmon, University of 
 California, Merced, 
discussed water challenges.
Following are examples given of the ways in which computer science 
can play a role in addressing sustainability challenges:

Urban electricity consumption.
 Gathering ˜ne-grained accurate mea
-surements and statistics on energy usage of individual buildings can be 
dif˜cult, due in part to the variety and diversity of building types. With 
better measurements, one could develop a useful model of energy usage 
over the course of a day and ˜nd opportunities, for instance, to store extra 
energy throughout the day for use at peak times. 

Infrastructure planning.
 The planning and development of effective 
infrastructure are very dif˜cult to do at scale for the time span required. 
Compounding these challenges is a dearth of data on how and where 
people actually live and what their movements are throughout the day. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 109This limited knowledge of the movement of people and the limited 
understanding of where infrastructure needs exist make it dif˜cult to 
plan infrastructure accordingly. Advances in remote sensing, to improve 
understanding of the use of current infrastructure, can help cities and 
utilities to formulate better infrastructure planning. 

Clean water.
 Access to clean water is an ongoing and increasingly 
challenging problem worldwide. One of the more dif˜cult components 
of this challenge is detecting water below the surface of Earth. Although 
detection of water at and just below the surface is well understood, tech
-nology for ˜nding water at deeper levels is limited. Better sensing tech
-nologies are needed to help differentiate between sand, wet sand, water 
that is ˚ooding the sand, and so on. 
The examples above are a just a few of the areas in which computer 
science has contributions to make to sustainability. Workshop participants 
examined a wide array of sustainability challenges in which speci˜c CS/
information technology (IT) advances could contribute to resolving these 
challenges. In many cases, it is a matter of developing new approaches for 
turning raw data (numbers) into knowledge and, ultimately, prompting 
action that results in more sustainable outcomes. Research opportunities 
cited by workshop participants in the areas of ecological sustainability 
(that is, relating to diverse and productive biological systems), transpor
-tation, and water resources are described below, along with associated 
computer science challenges. The ˜rst session concluded with a brief 
examination of the policy challenges of interdisciplinary work and of 
turning knowledge into actionable items. 
Electronic Systems and Products and Sustainability
The International Electronics Manufacturing Initiative (iNEMI) is a 
consortium of electronics manufacturers and af˜liates focused on envi
-ronmental issues in electronics.
1 Every 2 years, iNEMI creates a roadmap 
that charts future opportunities for and challenges to electronics manufac
-turing for reaching sustainability objectives.
2 The iNEMI efforts began by 
focusing on hazardous materials. The early goals of the consortium were 
aimed at eliminating chloro˚uorocarbons from the cleaning of electron
-ics, removing lead from electronics, and reducing the use of halogenated 
˚ame retardants and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) materials. More recently, 
the focus has been on the complete energy use of products, as discussed 
1A list of iNEMI members is available at http://www.inemi.org/news/council-members.  
2The 2011 iNEMI roadmap is available at http://www.inemi.org/2011-inemi-roadmap. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110
 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
below. Sound scienti˜c methodologies are needed to take into account 
total trade-offs among con˚icting device requirements and to model long-
term reliability and life of these devices.
Products that are recyclable, use non-hazardous materials, or mini
-mize the use of energy and matter tend to be less harmful for the envi
-ronment. Often there are trade-offs among these concerns. For example, 
using fewer hazardous materials may increase the resources needed to 
manufacture a certain type of equipment. When considering the size 
of items, there is often a trade-off of size for function. For example, cel
-lular telephones have grown larger in recent years as functionality has 
increased. This matters especially with regard to calculating potential 
waste over a product™s entire life cycle, although in the case of cell phones, 
the increased functionality may mean that other, even larger devices are 
no longer needed. Digitization is another example in which the function
-ality of electronics has decreased the amount of hardware needed. As 
digital music players have become more ubiquitous, compact disc play
-ersŠand discsŠare becoming less and less necessary. 
Life-cycle analysis is key to understanding the complete energy use of 
products, including the energy used in mining raw materials, producing 
semiconductors and other components, assembly, transportation, and, 
ultimately, consumer use of the product. Computing research can assist 
in the tracking and understanding of all of these inputs throughout the 
life cycle of products. 
ﬁGreen computingﬂŠmaking computers themselves more environ
-mentally friendlyŠplays a role in the reduction of energy consumption. 
For example, basic assumptions about computers™ operating environ
-ments can be rethought, to yield signi˜cant energy savings. The 2011 
iNEMI roadmap recommends that server farms and machines be rede
-signed so that the temperatures of server rooms can be increased in order 
to reduce the amount of energy required for cooling.
Participants noted that a holistic approach to technology is needed 
to contribute further to sustainability in electronics. Continued work in 
the following areas is needed: in digital semiconductor technology, work 
is needed in order to increase density and reduce cost; in the incorpora
-tion of sensor networks, work is needed to provide detailed energy-use 
data; in electronic packaging technology; and in innovation in CS and IT 
algorithms and applications. Additionally, participants suggested that 
standards may play an important role here.
Ecological Sustainability
Threats to ecological sustainability include loss of biodiversity, spe
-cies extinction and invasion, and the exploitation of ecosystems. Each of 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 111these threats has consequences for the robustness, resilience, and stability 
of the respective ecosystems. Computer science can play an important 
role in enhancing the understanding of the consequences to ecosystems of 
particular courses of action by assisting in measuring the current impacts 
of actions and predicting future impacts on these ecosystems. 
Databases play a crucial role in the understanding of ecosystems. For 
example, the Global Ex-vessel Fish Price Database of the Fisheries Eco
-nomics Research Unit is a valuable, large data set.
3 The database provides 
information on hundreds of types of ˜sh and their market prices over an 
extended period, thus enabling a better understanding of conditions in 
the oceans and of the potential effects of ˜shing. 
Computing will also play a vital role in helping researchers and deci
-sion makers understand collected data, which come from a variety of 
sources. Hardware and software will be needed to help analyze large sets 
of heterogeneous data. Advances in modeling and simulation will also 
contribute to the understanding of the information collected. Ecological 
networks are complex, high-dimensional, non-linear systems. Therefore, 
simpler mathematical representations are not adequate. Ecological sys
-tems need to be simulated over time. Participants noted that currently, the 
various time series and relevant data for the simulation of an ecological 
system can only be summarized. More accessible data including quan
-titative information from simulations is needed so that others can use 
the data and contribute to the work. Some of the challenges created by 
large, heterogeneous data sets and researchers™ resource limitations have 
been resolved with remote-computing capabilities (currently referred to 
as cloud computing). The shared resource of cloud computing can allow 
for simulations to be run much faster. Additional advances are needed so 
that data simulations can be stored easier and computing power can be 
more easily shared. 
Interdisciplinary research on networks has led to a greater under
-standing of food webs and other ecological systems. For example, pale
-ontological food web analysis has provided a better understanding of the 
network structures of current food webs.
4 Gaining an understanding of 
food chains on the globe over vast timescales can help provide research
-ers with a sense of how some kinds of ecosystems evolved. If economic 
3The Global Ex-vessel Fish Price Database and its various uses are described in U. Rashid 
Sumaila, Dale Marsden, Reg Watson, and Daniel Pauly, 
Global Ex-Vessel Fish Price Database: 
Construction, Spatial and Temporal Applications, 
Fisheries Centre Working Paper #2005-01, 
Vancouver, B.C., Canada: University of British Columbia (2005).
4The Paci˜c Ecoinformatics and Computational Ecology Lab has done much of the work 
related to paleontological food web analysis. A list of its publications is available at http://
www.foodwebs.org/.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112
 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
information to account for things such as price and biomass can be incor
-porated into models based on the understanding of modern food webs, 
the effect of economic exploitation on ecological systems can be better 
understood. For example, in a simple three-species food chain (such as 
large ˜sh eating small ˜sh eating plants), adding economic information 
to the model also allows for a separation of the effects of exploitation by 
humans for economic reasons from the effects of human exploitation for 
the purpose of subsistence. Participants discussed how network-based 
analyses might be useful in other areas of sustainability. Rules derived 
about ecological networks, for instance, may also apply to energy and 
economic networks. Can useful comparison be made between economic 
and food networks? Does food function like money in any sort of action
-able way? 
Computing-enabled ﬁcitizen scienceﬂ provides ways for volunteers 
to collect and report information from their own environments and to 
contribute to the sustainability of those environments. Citizen science 
programs have existed since the early 1900s, beginning with the Audu
-bon Society™s Christmas Bird Count.
5 Now, new mobile technologies and 
social networking tools make collecting and reporting much easier. Volun
-teers can easily collect data, for example, on a particular invasive species 
and send the information to experts to examine. 
Transportation and Social Sustainability
Participants discussed the connections between traditional measures 
of sustainability, which may typically be functions of space and time, and 
measures of social sustainability. With social sustainability, as shown in 
Figure A.1, the sustainability footprint becomes the rate of change of qual
-ity of life as a function of one™s impact on the environment. Participants 
argued that social sustainability can be and needs to be more rigorously 
accounted for in discussions about other forms of sustainability. 
Social sustainability can be considered when looking at transportation 
sustainability, for instance. De˜nitions of ﬁtransportation sustainabilityﬂ 
typically focus on moving items (people, goods, and information) in 
ways that reduce the impact on the environment, economy, and society. 
Transportation plans have been required in all major metropolitan areas 
since the 1960s. Although customer satisfaction has been included in 
transportation planning for some time, assumptions regarding customer 
needs are often incorrect. Traditionally satisfaction has been seen as a 
5For information on and a history of the Audubon Christmas Bird Count, see http://birds.
audubon.org/christmas-bird-count.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 113
linear function of performance: for example, if a road is twice as smooth, 
customers are supposedly twice as happy. Research in this space has 
found, however, that this curve does not apply to all performance attri
-butes. Gains in positive performance often have less of an impact on 
satisfaction, whereas reductions in negative performance are often more 
important to customers. 
In this case, to build transportation plans that are sustainable both in 
the traditional sense and socially, customer satisfaction data, both subjec
-tive and objective, need to collected and woven into these plans. Data 
need to be collected on a wide range of attributes (safety, quality of life, 
smoothness), on the relative importance of the different factors, and on 
how customers rate the different attributes. Such information allows plan
-ners to distinguish between performance improvements that have posi
-tive and negative effects on quality of life and to negotiate the trade-offs 
between the two. 
FIGURE A.1 Achieving quality of life within the means of nature. SOURCE: 
Jamie Montague Fisher and Adjo Amekudzi, Quality of life, sustainable civil in
-frastructure, and sustainable development: Strategically expanding choice,
 Journal of Urban Planning and Development
 137(1):39-78 (2011). Reprinted with permission 
from the American Society of Engineers.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114
 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Computer science can contribute to such efforts by developing effec
-tive systems for collecting data from the public and providing better data-
analysis tools to help, for instance, in the assessment of different choices 
regarding routes and other planning decisions. Real-time data processing 
and tools for planning and forecasting transportation needs can help 
urban planners and decision makers balance economic and policy chal
-lenges in planning future infrastructure. 
Sustainable Sources of Water
Computer science research can help with the complicated problems of 
˜nding, tracking, and monitoring the sources of, need for, and sustain
 able use of water. Better sensors for measuring, better models for analyses, and 
better algorithms for optimization are all areas in which CS research can 
contribute. For example, more hydrological data and better models could 
help scientists to create a virtual watershed that would allow for quick 
studies of impacts and could potentially enable forecasts of the amount 
and quality of water available, much like weather forecasts.
In addition to creating virtual watersheds for analysis, areas in which 
improvements in CS and IT are needed in order to add to the understand
-ing of water resources include the following:

Remote sensing.
 Because it is not feasible to have sensors every
-where, models will continue to be important. Research is still needed on 
model-oriented science. Sensors, however, can be used to calibrate and 
˜ne-tune these models. A multiscale observation network can combine 
coarse-grained collection with more densely nested sensors deployed at 
a smaller scale. 

Hyperspectral signal processing.
 A wealth of information can be 
garnered from the re˚ected visible and non-visible energy from plants 
and water. Although much has already been learned from analyzing this 
information, more can be learned through a better understanding of the 
re˚ective spectrum patterns. 

Spatial analyses.
 Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and spatial 
analysis could be used for novel recognition and classi˜cation techniques 
and to identify the characteristics of an ecosystem. GIS imagery could also 
be used to detect shifts in an ecosystem.

Heterogeneous data integration.
 Data combined from embedded sen
-sors in rivers and from satellite images could provide a valuable picture 
of resources. 

Work˚ows.
 Tools are needed that are adept at scraping data from a 
variety of sources and combining them with spatial data repositories. The 
software tools could create input ˜les and capture the history of simula
-Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 115
tions so that researchers need not start from scratch. See the discussion in 
the section entitled ﬁScienti˜c Work˚ows,ﬂ below.

Computation. 
Non-trivial optimization tools are needed in order to 
search for solutions to sustainability problems and to manage trade-offs. 
Powerful computing is needed to facilitate the scaling up of systems and 
to couple these with other contributing factors (economics, subsistence, 
and so on).
Policy Shifts
Although the solving of computing challenges will be one bridge to 
reaching further sustainability goals, challenges in interdisciplinary part
-nerships and in turning research into action and policy will need to be 
addressed as well. Participants noted that the traditional ways of building 
models tend to be incredibly time-consuming and isolating. Steps include 
the following: collecting the data, archiving the data, and selecting an 
individual (typically a doctoral student) to learn the model and then to 
deploy the model. A result of such an endeavor tends to be that several 
years later, only one person knows how to use the model effectively. 
Some progress might be achieved in this way, but to have a larger impact, 
computing support involving large data sets and complicated work˚ows 
will be needed. But such progress can only take place as far as unique 
partnerships across disciplines will push it. Participants noted that there 
tends to be a limited connection between the CS researchers and domain 
practitioners. More and better communication between the ˜eld and the 
laboratory could inform more useful research.
Better partnerships with computing and software experts could move 
research toward higher-impact results more quickly. As noted throughout 
the workshop, science and engineering are becoming increasingly depen
-dent on software development. Fostering close collaboration between 
software experts and domain scientists is likely to be more effective than 
forcing domain scientists to learn advanced software engineering. 
In addition to the computing research opportunities discussed above, 
participants urged that shifts be made in how research is translated into 
policy and action. More bridges need to be built between computer sci
-entists and other disciplines, between researchers and practitioners, and 
between the academic and the industrial and the consumer settings. 
Technology from academic laboratories needs to move more quickly to 
the industrial and consumer world. This change would require collabo
-ration and coordination at the research and development (R&D) level 
and the intervention of the research supply chain. With fewer and fewer 
 
industry-managed research labs, participants suggested that there has 
been a reduction in the integration of research and consumer products 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116
 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
(of the sort that used to exist at Bell Labs) and that collaboration tends 
not to happen as smoothly. This lack of collaboration may prevent new 
technologies that would improve sustainability from reaching consumers.
Furthermore, planning and design are frequently done by economists, 
urban planners, and other decision makers, not by domain scientists or 
sustainability experts. Participants noted that these domain scientists 
need to be part of the process in order to provide feedback and more 
timely data, and they urged that academics more actively engage with 
policy makers.
SESSION 2: UNDERSTANDING, TRACKING, 
 AND MANAGING UNCERTAINTY THROUGHOUT 
 THE SCIENCE-TO-POLICY PIPELINE
When scienti˜c information is provided to decision makers by the 
scienti˜c community, explicit representation of uncertainty is rare. The 
loss of uncertainty information along the science-to-policy pipeline begins 
with the initial measurements, which may be recorded into databases 
just as numbers and without any additional information on how the data 
were captured or intercepted. From such a data set one might produce a 
predictive map, and any uncertainty that was captured may then be lost 
by means of an optimization process. Workshop participants noted that 
outputs from predictive and simulation models are often treated as exact 
or overly precise and accurate during policy making. In the end, without 
careful consideration of uncertainty, policy and decision mechanisms can
-not be expected to achieve results. 
The goal of the second session of the workshop was to explore some 
of the computational methods available to address loss of information 
about uncertainty, to consider what additional methods are needed, and 
to outline a potential research agenda. Panelists were asked to examine 
the following questions in relation to sustainability challenges during 
their talks: 

What are the sources of uncertainty that should be explicitly 
captured?

What methods are suitable for explicitly representing uncertainty?

Is the technological state of the art suf˜cient to model the many 
different ˚avors of uncertainty present in large-scale sustainability prob
-lems? If not, what characterizes the types of uncertainty that are insuf
-˜ciently modeled? 

What methods are suitable for assessing uncertainty in each stage 
of the pipeline? What shortcomings need to be addressed?
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 117

Is the state of the art in human factors, interfaces, and computer-
supported cooperative work suf˜cient to support the large-scale systems, 
models, and data sets that are necessary to tackle large-scale sustainability 
problems? If not, what needs are unmet? 

What are the appropriate techniques for working with uncertain 
data in data fusion, data assimilation, predictive modeling, simulation 
modeling, and policy optimization?

How can explicit uncertainty representations be integrated into 
scienti˜c work˚ow tools?

Are there alternatives to explicit uncertainty representations that 
can improve the robustness of management policies to all of these sources 
of uncertainty?
Chris Forest, Pennsylvania State University, provided information 
on the sources of uncertainty and the tracking of uncertainty in climate 
models; Peter Bajcsy, National Institute of Standards and Technology, dis
-cussed the development of scienti˜c work˚ows for tracking uncertainty 
through the science process; David Brown, Duke University, highlighted 
new methods for optimization problems under uncertainty; and John 
Doyle, California Institute of Technology, explored theories for analyzing 
ﬁrobust-yet-fragileﬂ systems.
Assessing Uncertainty in Climate Models
Assessment and understanding of climate change and its impacts 
are critical to meeting many sustainability challenges. Scientists use a 
variety of techniques, including a variety of climate models, to assess and 
understand climate change. The potentially high impact of climate change 
means that policy makers are faced with hard choices, including but not 
limited to the reduction of emissions, adaption to climate change, and/
or geoengineering that might help mitigate the effects of climate change.
6 Participants discussed the role of uncertainty in the development 
and understanding of climate models. Scientists working on the problem 
of climate prediction must also address uncertainty. This could be done 
using a work˚ow plan that captures uncertainty information at each 
stage of the climate-prediction process. Within each stage, there are data, 
a model, predictions, assessment of likely impacts, and decision making. 
At each point there are sources of uncertainty that have to propagate 
6National Research Council, 
America™s Climate Choices,
 Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (2011).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118
 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
through the system, ultimately leading to an estimate of the probability 
of the outcomes. Uncertainty analysis is driven by multiple goals, includ-ing the mitigation of climate change, adaption to changing environmental 
conditions stemming from climate change, and vulnerability assessments. 
Assessing Uncertainty
There are two types of uncertainty in climate models: structural and 
parametric. (The level of uncertainties within each model creates a hier
-archy of climate models, as described in Box A.1. Box A.2 then presents 
data summarized from the highly complex models used by the Intergov
-ernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC].) 
Structural uncertainty
 stems 
from the hierarchy of models and attempts to balance the speed of the 
model with the complexity and components of individual models. Models 
take signi˜cant time to build; their complexity increases as more com
-ponents are added. Modern tools and approaches in software systems, 
such as modularity, are important in creating current models. However, 
several of the models were built in the 1960s and 1970s before these tools 
existed. For example, participants observed that it is not possible to do 
comparisons between several of the older models, such as that of the 
United Kingdom™s Met Of˜ce Hadley Centre and the National Center for 
BOX A.1
 Hierarchy of Climate Models
The ˜rst climate change assessments were done using the global energy 
balance model. Over the past 50 years, a number of additional types of climate 
models have been developed, creating a hierarchy of climate models. Each model 
typically has ˜ve major componentsŠatmosphere, ocean, ice, land, ecosystems, 
and human actionŠand each component can be incorporated at various levels in 
the models, making the models signi˜cantly complex. 
The most basic of the models is the energy balance model, which is very fast 
to run but lacks a lot of detail. In terms of complexity, the next level up includes 
Earth-system models of intermediate complexity (EMICs), which are reasonably 
fast and able to explore feedback and uncertainty. Fifteen years ago, the Mas
-sachusetts Institute of Technology created one of the ˜rst EMICs, which included 
all of the major components listed above. The model is very fast and can explore 
feedbacks between systems, is ˚exible enough to do uncertainty analysis, and can 
propagate uncertainty through the different stages. 
At the next complexity level are the atmosphere-ocean general circulation 
models and Earth-system models, which are used by the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC) (and from which the data for Box A.2 were drawn).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 119
Atmospheric Research™s community climate model, or the Geophysical 
Fluid Dynamics Laboratory climate models, by swapping in different 
components from each model; the software is too in˚exible. 
Parametric uncertainty encompasses the adjustable parameters in a par-ticular model. Model complexity and model expense limit the ability to do 
a full sampling of the parametric uncertainty space. There are numerous 
uncertainties in each modelŠthose in observations, those stemming from 
BOX A.2
  Climate Change Observations and Climate Model Hindcasts
    Figure A.2.1 Figure A.2.2Figure A.2.1 shows a summary of the output from Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC)-class atmosphere-ocean general circulation models that 
were run for the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC. The widest bar repre
-sents the prediction of climate change of the 20th century, with the range of values 
representing 20 different climate models. The lowest bar represents predictions for 
the same models if anthropogenic climate forces are not included. The black line is 
observed temperatures. The comparison of these two lines provides the capability 
to assess the ability of the models to predict history. 
Figure A.2.2 moves the models to the regional or continental level. The wid
-est band, which represents the uncertainty in the predictions, widens. The bands 
still match the observational records, but this comparatively crude set of graphics 
typi˜es the extent to which uncertainty information tends to be portrayed to policy 
makers. 
SOURCE: Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Summary for Policymakers, 
in 
. Contribution of Working Group I to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (S. Solomon, 
D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H.L. Miller [eds.]), Cam
-bridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press (2007).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
natural variability in the climate system, and those in the model compo
-nents themselves. As each of these parameters is added to the model, 
the model becomes less ˚exible. Various techniques have been tried for 
incorporating each of the uncertainties. However, these techniques have 
limited use because building adjunct models is as complicated as building 
a climate model itself.
Example: Integrated Global System Model
The Massachusetts Institute of Technology™s (MIT™s) Integrated Global 
System Model (IGSM) (Figure A.2), a coupling of a human systems model 
and Earth-system model, illustrates how uncertainty analysis is being 
applied to climate models.
7 The model uses several components: human 
activity; atmospheric, ocean, land, and ecosystem interactions; and bio
-geochemical exchanges. The model also runs comparatively fast. The 
following uncertainties are included in the IGSM: emissions uncertainty 
from MIT™s Economic, Emissions, and Policy Cost model; climate system 
response (climate sensitivity,
8 rate of heat uptake by deep ocean, and 
radiative forcing); carbon cycle uncertainty; and trends in precipitation 
frequency. Climate sensitivity and ocean heat uptake, part of climate 
response, are a large source of uncertainty. Observational data can be used 
to calculate a probability distribution for climate sensitivity and the rate of 
ocean heat uptake. This calculation can be included in the MIT IGSM, and 
researchers can examine the resulting probability distribution of global 
average surface-temperature changes. 
Explaining these uncertainties to decision makers is also a challenge 
that computer science may be able to help with. For example, researchers 
have compared the resulting global average surface temperatures with no 
greenhouse gas (GHG) policy intervention, or business-as-usual policies, 
and the resulting global average surface temperatures from implemen
-tation of GHG policy that limits carbon dioxide (CO
2)
 concentration to 
about 550 parts per million. To communicate the resulting difference in 
temperatures and the probability of the prediction, researchers created the 
7A.P. Sokolov, C.A. Schlosser, S. Dutkiewicz, S. Paltsev, D.W. Kicklighter, H.D. Jacoby, R.G. 
Prinn, C.E. Forest, J.M. Reilly, C. Wang, B. Felzer, M.C. Saro˜m, J. Scott, P.H. Stone, J.M. Mel
-illo, and J. Cohen, 
MIT Integrated Global System Model (IGSM) Version 2: Model Description and 
Baseline Evaluation, Joint Program Report Series (July 2005), available at http://
 globalchange.mit.edu/research/publications/696.
8 
ﬁClimate sensitivityﬂ is the measure of how responsive the temperature of the climate 
system is to changes in radiative forcing; it is usually represented as the temperature change 
associated with a doubling of the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 121Greenhouse Gamble roulette wheels (Figure A.3). This ˜gure allows easy 
communication of prediction and uncertainty to decision makers.
Potential Contributions by Computer Scientists
Uncertainty analysis at the global scale is reasonably well understood, 
but increasingly there is a need to understand uncertainty at the regional 
and local scales. A better understanding of regional impacts of climate 
FIGURE A.2
 Massachusetts Institute of Technology™s (MIT™s) Integrated Global 
System Model. NOTE: carbon dioxide (CO
2); methane (CH
4); carbon monoxide 
(CO); nitrous oxide (N
2O); nitrogen oxides (NO
X); sulfur oxides (SO
X); ammonia 
(NH
3); chloro˚uorocarbon (CFCs); hydro˚uorocarbons (HFCs); per˚uorochemi
-cals (PFCs); sulfur hexa˚uoride (SF
6); volatile organic compounds (VOCs); black 
carbon (BC). SOURCE: A.P. Sokolov, C.A. Schlosser, S. Dutkiewicz, S. Paltsev, D.W. 
Kicklighter, H.D. Jacoby, R.G. Prinn, C.E. Forest, J.M. Reilly, C. Wang, B. Felzer, 
M.C. Saro˜m, J. Scott, P.H. Stone, J.M. Melillo, and J. Cohen, 
MIT Integrated Global 
System Model (IGSM) Version 2: Model Description and Baseline Evaluation
, Joint 
Program Report Series (July 2005), available at 
http://globalchange.mit.edu/
research/publications/696
. Reprinted with permission. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
change allows for better management of water resources, ecosystem 
changes, and air quality issues. The climate modeling community does 
not currently have the tools to sample the models for regional uncertainty 
information. Computer scientists are needed, for instance, to help deter
-mine what parameters in the climate system are driving uncertainty at the 
regional level, which are not the same parameters that drive uncertainty 
at the global level.
As noted in the section above entitled ﬁAssessing Uncertainty,ﬂ sev
-eral models are quite old. Simulation code dates back to the 1960s and 
1970s, much of it written in Fortran. This code needs to be redesigned to 
take advantage of advances in computing language, software modules, 
and interoperability. 
Expert decision making is imperative to the climate modeling process. 
Although researchers seek to be as objective as possible in examining data 
and determining probability, the number of systems involved means that 
much calibration is done by hand. Experts must identify and rank uncer
-tainties at each stage of the process, but experts have limited knowledge 
and will focus on what is known, while the edges and boundaries of the 
modeling system may be left unexplored. 
FIGURE A.3
 The greenhouse gamble. Uncertainty can be represented by roulette 
wheels: (
left
) what could happen if no policies are adopted to lower greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions; (
right)
 what might happen if GHG reduction policies are 
enacted. The size of each slice represents the probability that the coordinating 
temperature change will happen. SOURCE: Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, available at 
http://
globalchange.mit.edu/
. Reprinted with permission.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 123Scienti˜c Work˚ows
Participants discussed the typical nature of scienti˜c work˚ows and 
the importance of uncertainty analysis to their effectiveness. Uncertainty 
information about data collected and generated for analysis is often 
unavailable. When it is available, there are no standardized data struc
-tures for sharing and managing this information. Due to the complexity 
of uncertainty modeling, there are very few software tools that can incor
-porate, compute, and propagate uncertainty information. If information 
regarding uncertainty can be propagated somehow, there are still chal
-lenges in visualizing and disseminating the uncertainty information.
One example of the dif˜culty of tracking uncertainty is in the use 
of multiple sensing and data-collection instruments. Often more than 
one type of instrument, such as a camera and a point sensor, is used in 
the same area or space to measure the same phenomenon. A question 
then arises: Which measurement is more accurate, where, and at what 
time? Using multiple instruments introduces several types of uncertainty, 
including that related to the transformation that researchers apply in 
order to display measurements, that related to spatial registration, and 
that related to the temporal synchronization. In order to grapple with 
these uncertainties, a theory of uncertainty is developed on the basis 
of a formalized framework that describes how to compute uncertainty. 
Researchers select a measurement based on the uncertainty level of each 
type of uncertainty. As the uncertainty framework is built and used, the 
error propagation rules and methodology allow one to build work˚ows 
that can be applied to future models and calculation. 
A second example of the dif˜culty of tracking uncertainty is in man
-aging and tracking data. Data often come from a variety of sources and 
are then processed by various computing techniques. As data move from 
analog instrumentation to a visual representation of research ˜ndings, 
uncertainty generally increases. For example, visualization features may 
be derived or elevation and/or slope may be computed. Moreover, there 
may be many users of the collected data, and each one may be using a 
different suite of software tools to process and analyze the data. 
These examples provide some sense of the complexity involved in 
tracking and accounting for uncertainty. Some lessons become appar
-ent. First, uncertainty information is vaguely de˜ned; typically it is 
either a range or a distribution set. Second, the complexity of uncer
-tainty modeling using error propagation is greater than that of the 
underlying phenomenon itself. Third, and most importantly, scienti˜c 
work˚ows are suitable for managing uncertainty modeling; software 
modules could be reused and could track how collected data are being 
manipulated. 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
De˜ning Work˚ows
The traditional objective of scienti˜c work˚ows is to automate a sci
-ence process leading to a science product, usually a data set or a visualiza
-tion. Work˚ows make it easier for scientists to manipulate, communicate, 
and reuse or repurpose data sets. Work˚ows also allow the computation 
to be done locally, or, when managing especially large or complicated data 
sets, scientists can take advantage of remote computational resources. As 
noted earlier, work˚ows can be used to track and manage uncertainty 
propagation and need to become part of the general scienti˜c infrastruc
-ture. Capturing the work˚ow and managing the computation are par
-ticularly useful if all of the calculated information, including uncertainty 
information, can be delivered to third parties and end users. 
Work˚ows can become a communication mechanism for the man
-agement of uncertainty. Using dynamic visualization and the sharing of 
work˚ows, scientists can more readily engage policy makers. Work˚ows 
can be designed with sharing in mind. For example, social media concepts 
such as tagging and networking can be incorporated into the designs of 
work˚ows, making them more accessible.
Research Questions and Challenges
Several open questions regarding the tracking and managing of 
uncertainty will have to be addressed before these uncertainties can be 
effectively calculated and, importantly, communicated using scienti˜c 
work˚ow mechanisms. These include the following:

How can uncertainty and information loss due to data translations 
best be captured? 

How can provenance information about uncertainty methods and 
parameters best be gathered automatically during computations? 

How can uncertainty best be propagated in computation work
-˚ows, or perhaps, how can uncertainty propagation rules best be offered 
for software tools without such rules?

How can uncertainty best be delivered and presented to decision 
makers, who may require a customizable view so as to increase its effec
-tiveness, as well as a universal viewer for other interested parties, who 
may require more widely accessible information?

Can work˚ow services managing the uncertainty be integrated 
with other web services, such as mapping or sharing tools, to deliver 
uncertainty to scientists and policy makers?
Participants argued that a CS research agenda for sustainability needs 
to support research on the representations and propagation of uncer
-tainty. In the past there has been little information on uncertainty. Con
-Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 125tent managers should be encouraged to include uncertainty with data, 
use work˚ows to manage and track uncertainty, and incorporate other 
information-sharing services, ultimately leading to better information on 
which decisions can be made.
Robust Optimization Under Uncertainty
Optimization has progressed rapidly in recent decades due in part to 
the rapid improvement of computer systems generally and to the develop
-ment of increasingly sophisticated algorithms. The solving of large-scale, 
linear problems, with millions of variables, is computationally feasible. 
However, the inclusion of and calculations regarding the uncertainty in 
these optimization problems is still a challenge. For policy decisions, for 
instance, models and calculations are run many times, and changes are 
made during each iteration. Because uncertainty has to be calculated at 
each iteration, running models that include uncertainty is extremely inef
-˜cient. The goal is to make accounting for uncertainty computationally 
tractable so that each model can be run faster and more ef˜ciently. 
Robust optimization is one method for coping with uncertainty in 
optimization problems. Robust optimization provides computational trac
-tability and supports parsimonious modeling demandsŠone does not 
have to worry about the speci˜cs of probability distribution. Robustness is 
an inherent and essential feature of many important methods across many 
disciplines, including machine learning and decision theory.
Robust optimization is different from sensitivity analysis. Although 
robust optimization and sensitivity analysis are motivated by similar fac
-tors, sensitivity analysis is a post-optimization tool; if robustness is ensured 
beforehand, solutions will not be overly sensitive. Robust optimization is 
also sometimes considered too conservative. The conservativeness relates 
to the uncertainty set that is used and on how large it is. An improved data-
driven theory of optimization is needed. There are many approaches to 
building uncertainty sets, but there is the open theoretical question regard
-ing the right way to use data in optimization problems. In some problems, 
when there are not enough data, the questions become these: How does 
one properly incorporate subjective opinion about the data? What is the 
right way to describe uncertainty? An additional challenge is that ideal
-ized problems tend to be studied without enough application to real-
world problems. There is also the challenge of ensuring that uncertainty 
is acknowledged and taken into account in any decision-making process. 
Theory and Methodology of Robust-Yet-Fragile Systems Analysis 
Participants noted that fundamental research is needed to improve the 
understanding of the various trade-offs in computational methodologies, 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
such as ef˜ciency versus robustness. Complexities of real systemsŠnot 
the complexity of the mechanisms used to study the systemsŠembody 
these trade-offs. Some theories already exist for examining the trade-offs 
among robustness, fragility, and ef˜ciency. For example, researchers know 
that ef˜ciency has hard limits and is bounded. Robustness and fragility 
have conservation laws as well, and the trade-offs between the two are 
tangible. Theories from other disciplines, including systems engineering, 
control theory, information theory, and computational complexity theory, 
provide complementary approaches and can be integrated into theories 
on robustness, fragility, and ef˜ciency. 
Ef˜ciency and robustness exist in many dimensions, and although 
each in itself is reasonably well understood, a theoretical framework is 
needed for conveying the interactions and examining the inherent trade-
offs. Firm trade-offs exist among the following:

Ef˜cient use of resources (sustainability)
 Š 
Small amounts of resources consumed, small amounts of waste 
produced.
 ŠInexpensive components, small capital investment.
 Š 
Ef˜cient processes: design, manufacture, maintenance, man
  
agement.
Robustness to perturbations
 Š 
Rejection of external disturbance and suppression of internal 
noise.
 ŠTolerance for component failures and uncertainty.
 ŠSecurity against malicious attack and hijacking.
 ŠScalability to large system size.
 ŠEvolvability on long timescales to large changes.
 ŠHuman actors with aligned incentives.

Predictable, veri˜able, understandable
 ŠLimits on unintended consequences.
 ŠEasily reproducible experiments and data.
 ŠModels (simple and analyzable), short theorems, proofs.
 ŠExperience that is a reliable guide to the future.
9One can start building toward a theory with comparisons across dis
-ciplines. Although ef˜ciency limits are understood, it is very dif˜cult, if 
not impossible, to reach 100 percent ef˜ciency rates. By contrast, robust 
fragility is much less understood. Robustness in one part of a system may 
induce fragility in another. Fortunately, evolvability and robustness seem 
9John Doyle, ﬁTheory and Methodology of Robust-Yet-Fragile Systems Analysis
,ﬂ pre
-sentation at the Workshop on Innovation in Computing and Information Technology for 
Sustainability, Washington, D.C., May 26, 2010.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 127to be compatible. Architectures and platforms that enable innovation well 
can also enable robustness well. 
Examples were discussed of how new theories can be developed to 
encompass needed robustness requirements. Network theory might be 
able to help sort out what is an accident of similarity and what is deeply 
structural. However, the fact that reasonably well understood networks 
exist in one domain does not mean that these understandings translate 
well to another domain. There may be useful knowledge to be gained 
by comparing network structures and properties in different domains 
(for example, contrasting and comparing climate history, cell systems, 
and Internet architectures), but this knowledge needs to be validated 
˜rst. Additionally, participants noted that a better understanding of 
what is meant by complexity, non-linearity, modularity, architecture, 
and evolvability in different domains is needed so that scientists can 
communicate more effectively with policy makers and with one another. 
Furthermore, big data and big models mean that many things can be 
demonstrated by means of data or models. As computational capacity 
has increased, in many ways research efforts have moved from coping 
with impoverished data and elegant models that are not well understood 
to coping with massive data sets and sophisticated simulations that are 
not well understood. In this new environment, larger gaps between the 
demonstration and the reality can be unintentionally created, and unan
-ticipated fragilities may become overwhelming.
SESSION 3:  CREATING INSTITUTIONAL AND 
 PERSONAL CHANGE WITH HUMANS IN THE LOOP
Behavioral changes at both the institutional and the individual level 
are needed in order to achieve sustainability objectives. Important ques
-tions in designing and developing smarter systems involve the level of 
information and the interface design that will induce behavior change. 
Human-system interaction (HSI) issues arise both for individuals in 
homes and of˜ces and for administrators of larger systems and facili
-ties. These interactions can occur at different timescales, encompassing 
both day-to-day decisions made by users and operators and planning 
decisions involving longer periods of time. Moreover, although there 
have been many advances in HSI, the literature is replete with failed 
cognitive models, serving as cautionary tales for HSI in sustainability 
applications.
Panelists were asked to examine the following questions in relation 
to sustainability challenges during their talks: 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY

How can data and information be presented at the appropriate 
granularity and time frame to be most effective? What system, appli
-cation, and user factors bear on the human-system interaction design 
choices? 

Describe the potential impacts of the various contexts and trade-off 
decisions that might need to be made, including the following: the impact 
of context (e.g., stakeholders, and so on), the impact of large versus small 
groups versus individuals, the impact of income, the impact of use by or 
for cities versus businesses versus individuals, the role of middleware, 
the supply chain, and so on.

How do human factors affecting sustainability challenges drive 
the use and design of technology? How can this interaction be accounted 
for? When are power, networking, products, and other information and 
communication technologies (ICTs) really needed? Discuss human choice 
and its impact on consumption, disposal, and reuse. 
Bill Tomlinson, University of California, Irvine, examined current use 
and research on computing initiatives that provide information for more 
sustainable decision making; Shwetak Patel, University of Washington, 
explored the challenges of providing utility-use data to consumers; and 
Eli Blevis, Indiana University, examined the possibility of incorporating 
sustainability ideas into the design process. 
Better Information for More Sustainable Decision Making
One way to use information technology to lead to more sustainable 
outcomes is through the provision of information to individuals and 
organizations to assist in decision making. Participants noted that this 
type of assistance can be provided at many levels. They discussed vari
-ous types of tools ranging from those that can help inform comparatively 
simple sorts of personal decision making; to tools that can help people 
understand large, complex challenges and how their individual actions 
and behaviors might help; to tools that can assist in understanding and 
resolving complex challenges that require complex and/or coordinated 
responses. 
Several examples of how IT can be used to perform small-scale sus
-tainability-related tasks more effectively were described. They include 
the following: 
 
Cellular telephone use for coordinating the sale of ˜sh catches.
 During 
the early 1990s, ˜shermen in Kerala, India, would typically have 6 to 8 
percent waste from their catch. The waste was primarily due to lack of 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 129buyers for these ˜sh. Cell phone availability in the late 1990s quickly 
changed this mismatch. As they were coming ashore, ˜shermen could 
more easily locate buyers, and waste was quickly eliminated. Cell phones 
were not developed to tackle environmental issues, but did enable this 
unintended positive outcome. 

The use of various communication tools by non-pro˜t and non-govern
-mental organizations in coordinating activities.
 The Surfrider Foundation
10
 organizes beach cleanups using various IT infrastructures, including text 
messages, e-mail campaigns, and social media tools. 

Consumer tools for a smart grid.
 Researchers are examining ways to 
apply Internet-inspired architectural principles to the energy grid. For 
consumers, questions are being explored regarding smart appliances that 
automatically run when electricity is in less demand or when renewable 
sources are available. 
Another class of tools is designed to help educate the public on their 
choices regarding sustainability. Examples discussed by participants range 
from tools for educating school-age children about ecological interdepen
-dency, to those for helping consumers make more sustainable purchases 
at the market. The Social Code Group, which Bill Tomlinson leads, has 
developed several of these tools. A selection of these tools and projects 
was discussed:

EcoRaft
.11 This application was designed, with contributions from 
ecologists, to help 8- to 12-year-old children learn about ecology in the 
museum environment. A large monitor and several tablets represent vari
-ous ecosystems. The tablets allow interaction and can be used to simulate 
the transplanting of species from one ecosystem to another, encouraging 
children to explore the interdependencies among species and the intercon
-nections between restoration and conservation. A key aspect of EcoRaft is 
a button at the bottom of the main screen that would remove all species 
from the simulation. In science museums, the ˜rst thing that children tend 
to do with interactive displays is to push whatever buttons are available. 
In this case, the button was not labeled, which meant that current users 
had to guard the button or educate newcomers to the game, simulating 
the value of education and activism. 
10
Information about this organization is available at http://www.surfrider.org/.
11
Bill Tomlinson et al., The EcoRaft project: A multi-device interactive graphical exhibit for 
learning about restoration ecology, in CHI™06, 
Extended Abstract on Human Factors in Comput-ing Systems
, New York, N.Y.: Association for Computing Machinery (2006). DOI: 10.1145/
 1125451.1125717.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY

GreenScanner
.12
 This tool was developed to help consumers when 
making purchasing decisions to understand the environmental impact 
from the growing, processing, and transporting of their foodstuffs. The 
vision was that using cell phone cameras and large databases that linked 
universal product codes (UPCs) to environmental data, consumers could 
quickly identify which available foods had the least environmental 
impact. When GreenScanner was ˜rst developed as a web application 
in 2006, suf˜ciently capable hardware was not in wide use to make this 
tool feasible for everyday consumer use. However, as cell phones have 
advanced, a tool similar to GreenScanner has become commercially avail
-able through the company Good Guide.
13

Trackulous
.14
 This tool was designed to help people track their 
activities and the environmental impact of those activities. People may 
be aware that they often travel by airplane or car, but they might not 
understand the cumulative time spent doing these activities in a year or 
the cumulative impact that such travel can have. By tracking their activi
-ties, people can better understand their carbon footprint and where the 
opportunities are for lessening that footprint. 

Better Carbon.15 This web application uses collaborative ˜ltering 
techniques to reduce the amount of information that a user needs to input 
into carbon-footprint calculators. With current carbon-footprint calculators, 
users have to enter a great deal of information before receiving an answer. 
With collaborative ˜ltering, they can enter much less information (which is 
compared to similar information provided by other users) and then be pro
-vided with meaningful defaults for the additional information required.
16
 Participants noted that tools such as these can help individuals bet
-ter understand their contributions to sustainability problems as well as 
to sustainability solutions. However, a complete toolbox for resolving 
large, complex environmental problems does not yet exist. The scale of 
environmental challenges on the planet todayŠincluding global climate 
change, biodiversity loss, sea-level rise, and various kinds of pollutionŠ
is much greater than the scale of other challenges that humans typically 
face. People are generally good at cooperation in small-scale tasks and 
at understanding and resolving smaller challenges, especially those with 
12
The web application, GreenScanner, is available at http://www.greenscanner.net/.
13
The tool is available at http://www.goodguide.com/.
14
The tool is available at http://trackulous.com/.
15
The tool is available at http://www.bettercarbon.com/.
16
Collaborative ˜ltering systems are used in other contexts; for example, Amazon uses 
such tools to recommend products based on past purchases, and Net˚ix uses them to recom
-mend movies that users might like.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 131smaller scales of time, space, and complexity. However, the largest and 
most challenging environmental problems are not at scales that people 
can readily understand. Examples of the complex scales involved in sus
-tainability include the following:

The timescale of a rise in sea level
. Consider the prospect of the sea 
level rising, perhaps 40 centimeters, over the course of 120 years. How can 
the general population understand the risks and consequences? 

The geographical scale of the supply chain
. Another example of a scale 
that is dif˜cult to comprehend is global supply chains. Products pur
-chased in the United States arrive through a supply chain that may begin 
as far away as a palm oil plantation in Sumatra. How does one commu
-nicate to the consumer the potential environmental repercussions of the 
manufacture, transport, and life cycle of products that they purchase? 

Climate change
. The complexity of climate change stems from the 
large number of factorsŠsuch as cloud cover, carbon dioxide emissions, 
rainforest depletionŠand the interaction of these factors that make up the 
global climate system. How can ITŠand the way that sustainability infor-mation is communicated using ITŠassist in developing an understanding 
of the increasing scales of time, space, and complexity that characterize 
climate change?
17
  There may be lessons to learn from general IT and CS approaches 
when it comes to these complex problems. Good architecture design can 
remove extraneous decision-making requirements and afford consumers 
the ability to select sustainable options quickly and easily. When the Inter
-net works well, for example, users do not typically know or need to know 
where the information they are receiving is coming from: e-mails move 
through various wires, routers, and servers around the globe; web pages 
are populated by widgets whose data could be sourced from anywhere. 
One attendee suggested that analogous architectural approaches may be 
applicable to certain sustainability challenges. 
Another big challenge in sustainability issues is the legacy and ˜xed 
nature of our utilities and infrastructure. There is a great deal of leg
-17
There are several challenges in educating the public on climate and sustainability issues, 
one of which involves differentiating between weather and climate. It is too easy to over-
interpret extremely hot or cold days. Interactive design techniques could help communicate 
the difference as well as the subtle scale changes, such as highlighting the shifting state of 
Alaskan glaciers or the sea level. The climate research community also struggles to de˜ne 
what is ﬁnormalﬂ for weather and climate: ﬁnormalﬂ from 1950 to 1980 is different from what 
would be considered normal from 1980 to 2010. Some advocate taking a ˜rst-order linear 
trend of the past 30 years as an estimate of a baseline to use to compare changes.  
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
acy infrastructure in most systems that pose signi˜cant challenges. For 
example, one can certainly contemplate autonomous vehicles, which are 
much more environmentally friendly, but moving from a highway of all 
individually controlled vehicles to a highway of all autonomous vehicles 
is dif˜cult; the upgrade path is bumpy, to say the least. 
Residential Energy Measurement and Disaggregated Data
Participants discussed how better information can assist consumers 
in making effective changes in their use of home resources such as power, 
water, and gas. Current literature suggests that high-granularity or high-
resolution dataŠfor example, information about the usage patterns of 
individual appliancesŠare the most useful. Participants observed that 
literature from the past several decades suggests that if this information 
were provided to consumers, a 15 to 20 percent reduction in consumption 
would be possible.
In the past, the technologies that collected and provided this infor
-mation were typically tedious to install and required installation by 
trained technicians. Such dif˜culties make them impractical for large-
scale deployment. Tools were not successful in the past because too much 
burden was placed on the individuals who were installing them in their 
homes. New technologies, such as embedded systems and sensors, can 
make information gathering and feedback tools much more practical. 
An ongoing research challenge is to determine what information and 
interfaces work best. One cannot start answering more in-depth ques
-tions about the effectiveness of novel, engaging, and persuasive feedback 
applications, however, until there are more information and data from 
end users. Sensing and feedback work hand in hand in creating the most 
effective tools for consumers. 
Challenges of Collecting Usage Data
Consumers, appliance manufacturers, and utility companies can all 
bene˜t from any data collected from in-home deployment of sensors. 
Consumers could use disaggregated data to understand their utility use 
and to make changes in it. By contrast, what is typically available to con
-sumers is only simple end-of-month billing, which provides very little 
actionable information. If consumers knew the consumption of resources 
by individual devices, they might start to tailor their behavior for more 
ef˜cient consumption. Use data could also help manufacturers gain a 
better understanding of the use of their appliances. Manufacturers do not 
have a lot of information on how often their appliances are used. Better 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 133understanding of typical duty cycles could be incorporated into future 
designs. 
To the extent that utilities are motivated to promote energy-conser
-vation activities, they have few ways to assess or validate whether those 
activities are working. Relevant data for utilities would include device use 
over time and any regional difference in use. Currently utilities tend to 
use self-reporting and polling to determine whether or not their initiatives 
in˚uenced consumer activities. Another challenge is that utilities have 
little experience in deploying technologies inside the home. Moreover, 
utilities do not want the added expense of installing monitoring tools in 
the home. Sensors that are easily deployable by end users could provide 
validation and veri˜cation of usage for utilities as well as for consumers. 
Once validation and veri˜cation are widely available, utilities 
would be able to provide better incentives to customers for conserva
-tion. Additionally, the information could allow utilities to create better 
demand-response models. Better usage models could also be developed 
by researchers. One goal would be to create a national energy data corpus, 
which would be very useful to researchers across disciplines as well as 
in helping meet large-scale energy and sustainability information needs.
The research discussed in this session of the workshop focused on the 
creation of technology that (1) provides highly granular, disaggregated 
data on home energy use and (2) is deployable by end users. The tradi
-tional way of collecting such data would be to deploy a network of sen
-sors at each outlet, light, or water ˜xtureŠa method that is cumbersome, 
expensive, and, as past experience shows, something that consumers are 
unlikely to do. This suggests the need to ˜nd an approach that is easier 
from the perspective of the consumer and, ideally, is a device that plugs in 
to a single outlet yet monitors electrical consumption or events that occur 
in the home at the appliance level.18 Below are examples of research being 
done along these lines to collect data on three main resources: power, 
water, and gas.

Research is being done to examine the propagation of electrical 
noise over power lines to infer what devices are being activated. This 
research incorporates work in signal processing, machine learning, and 
embedded systems. These types of devices are better than smart meters, 
which may only provide information every 15 or 20 minutes. In certain 
circumstances, homeowners or researchers may want shorter time inter
-18
Tools built directly in to appliances are not particularly helpful because the timescale for 
replacing many in-home appliances is often measured in decades.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
vals. To provide real-time consumption, a magnetoresistive sensor was 
developed that attaches outside the breaker panel, but can be read inside 
the home. This tool has been ˜eld-tested with some success by utilities to 
determine whether consumers are capable of installing it. 

Measuring and tracking water usage provides similar challenges. 
Obviously, any sensor whose installation requires cutting into pipe will 
not work for consumers. A single-point water-sensing solution, attached 
to a washing-machine hose spigot, could look at the water hammer phe
-nomenon that occurs when a valve is opened and closed, which could 
infer which water ˜xture was being used inside the house. Because the 
hot- and cold-water systems are interconnected, one could even begin 
to discern hot- and cold-water use with a single sensor. In apartment 
complexes, individual units may not have hose spigots. In that case, the 
hot-water heater would be another location for installing a sensor.

Collecting gas data is much more dif˜cult. There is not typically a 
good place to locate a single sensor that determines when an appliance is 
activated, and there are safety concerns about customer-installation of gas 
˜xtures. However, a sensor could be installed by clipping it to the nation
-ally mandated regulator on appliances. The acoustic vibrations of the 
diaphragm are linearly proportionate to ˚ow. By measuring these vibra
-tions, real-time consumption information can be determined. In addition, 
transient events that occur from the opening and closing of gas valves 
manifest themselves through the valve itself. This information can be used 
to determine exactly what appliance is being used. 
Interfaces for Actionable Feedback
Participants noted that interfaces for providing the disaggregated 
sorts of data and feedback discussed above are critical to the successful 
and effective deployment of sensors. The typical ﬁinterfaceﬂ is the simple 
electric bill and meter in homes. The meter was not designed for consum
-ers to read, and the bill, which 
is
 for the consumer, usually provides only 
an end-of-cycle reading. Even the units used in the typical electric bill are 
not very user-friendly: do most consumers understand, for example, what 
a kilowatt-hour means? Water bills are typically even more aggregated; 
most include up to 3 months of water use. If a spike occurred in water 
usage due to, for instance, a leaky valve, the consumer would not have 
any knowledge of it until the end of the billing cycle. Clearly there are 
opportunities for interface design to play a role in communicating bet
-ter and more actionable information. Unfortunately, there are currently 
only limited examples of interfaces that provide disaggregated feedback 
in approximately real time. One obvious example is gas-electric hybrid 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 135automobiles, which display approximate instantaneous mileage while the 
car is running, as well as relative use of engine and battery. Given more 
information about their own driving habits in accessible and understand
-able fashion, consumers can (and do) alter their behavior and conserve 
gas, participants observed. 
Participants described how research that validates the functionality 
of the devices described earlier has started with in-home trials. In order 
to evaluate the installation process, researchers have observed consum
-ers self-installing devices. Once the devices are in place, researchers can 
evaluate the effectiveness of the energy-management systems provided to 
users. Some of the questions being asked by researchers are: Can you elicit 
behavior change, up to 15 to 20 percent reduction in usage, with disag
-gregated feedback, and does the behavior change really hold over time? 
As more data have been collected on how users react to various interfaces, 
researchers have begun to iteratively re˜ne individual interfaces. Some 
of the deployed devices were also being integrated with Microsoft Hohm 
and Google™s PowerMeter projects.
19
 Before devices and systems such as those exempli˜ed here can be 
deployed commercially, large-scale studies are needed. Utilities are open 
to participating in large-scale studies, but when deploying research tech
-nology it can be a challenge to create enough devices to do even small-
scale deployments in 20 or 30 homes; research laboratories are not often 
equipped for production. One solution has been to commercialize the 
technologies being used in research settings so that devices are available 
from retail stores as well as directly from the utilities. For example, Belkin 
International, which sells a wide array of computer peripherals and other 
consumer electronics, recently purchased a demand-side monitoring solu
-tion developed at a university research laboratory.
20
 The timescales and complexity of general sustainability issues are 
dif˜cult to understand. Feedback mechanisms are being developed, and 
there is some evidence that information does change behavior. Additional 
knowledge is still needed on how much this feedback will in˚uence 
behaviors and what the best feedback over what timescale produces the 
most change. 
19
In June 2011, both Microsoft and Google announced the discontinuation of these projects. 
Both cited the slow market adoption of the services as the reason for the termination.
20For additional information, see http://seattletimes.nwsource.com/html/technologybrier
 dudleysblog/2011667981_uw_gets_slice_of_profs_startup.html. Examples of the Belkin 
products can be seen at http://www.belkin.com/conserve/.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainable Interaction Design
Participants also discussed some general high-level principles regard
-ing sustainable interaction designŠthe notion that the design of systems 
should incorporate sustainability considerations. A few design princi
-ples for sustainable interaction design, including the following, were 
discussed:

The connecting of invention and disposal
. Any new design should also 
include information on what will happen to the materials or products that 
it replaces.

Encouragement of renewal and reuse
. Human-computer interaction 
(HCI) research can play a large role by highlighting the future value of 
objects.

Encouragement of quality and equality
. The second and third user of 
any product should receive the same satisfaction as the original owner.
21
A number of projects incorporate at least some aspects of sustainable 
interaction design, and several are described in the previous sections. 
Additional examples include corporate research done by SAP, Inc., and 
academic work done by HCI researchers at Carnegie Mellon University 
(CMU). SAP has developed Sourcemap,
22
 which provides a way to track 
and improve supply chains. Using an open-data platform, users can track 
where each of their foodstuffs comes from. For example, a catering com
-pany can provide a map showing the route by which of all of its products 
were shipped, or individuals can determine how far each of their break
-fast items traveled. Stepgreen,
23
 created by CMU™s HCI researchers, is 
another example that allows users to track the bene˜ts of making sustain-able choices. Users can identify sustainable actions that they are already 
taking, such as turning off lights not being used or walking to locations 
less than a mile away, or they can commit to future sustainable choices. 
Stepgreen tracks the amount of savings in dollars and carbon dioxide 
emissions for each action. 
Interaction design can also be used to encourage dialogues among 
scientists, decision makers, and citizens. Interaction designers can help 
bridge the gap between scienti˜c knowledge and public perception, can 
build support, and can promote discourse leading toward solutions. Par
-21
Eli Blevis, Sustainable interaction design: Invention and disposal, renewal, and reuse, 
in 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
, New York, N.Y.: As
-sociation for Computing Machinery (2007).
22
See http://www.sourcemap.org/.
23
See http://www.stepgreen.org/.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 137ticipants noted that bridging this gap has been a particular challenge in cli-mate science and that there is an opportunity for interaction design to play 
a role. For instance, whereas some of the previously mentioned tools can 
help people make more informed choices about reducing their negative 
impact on the climate, tools are also needed that inform people™s prepa
-ration and responses to climate change as a chronic sustainability chal
-lenge. Interaction systems are also needed to deal with the likely increase 
in the severity of natural disasters and crises due to climate change.
24
 Participants discussed the concept of a ﬁDashboard Earthﬂ that could be 
used to provide information about what is happening and where. Inter
-action design can also be used to develop interactive systems that could 
help with orderly evacuation in a natural disaster, for example, providing 
the information to local, regional, national, and intergovernmental policy 
makers about who can go where and how many people each location can 
absorb. Interaction design can be used to persuade and show people how 
to live with fewer resources, as matters of sustainability and preparation 
and adaptation. The interaction design of tools like social media is needed 
to help persuade people and various levels of organizations to care for 
others in the face of climate change and its effects. Interaction design 
can also assist in the public discourse about and support for certain sorts 
of solutions and in fostering public understanding. Participants argued 
that all of these tools and more need to provide information at the local, 
regional, national, and global level and to help people respond ef˜ciently 
during crises.
SESSION 4: OVERCOMING OBSTACLES TO SCIENTIFIC 
 DISCOVERY AND TRANSLATING SCIENCE TO PRACTICE
Committee member David Culler, University of California, Berke
-ley, and David Douglas, National Ecological Observatory Network, led 
the discussion during the ˜nal session, which highlighted some of the 
impediments to developing and deploying innovative information tech
-nologies for sustainability challenges. Guiding questions for this session 
were as follows:
 
What are the motivations for and impediments to applying inno
-vative information technologies to sustainability challenges and how do 
they differ by domain?
24
National Research Council, 
Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change
, Washington, D.C.: 
The National Academies Press (2010).
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY

How can large-scale science addressing real-world problems be 
made credible, if reproducibility is not possible? 

What lessons can be applied from the transformation of the Inter
-net into a critical infrastructure that must avoid ossi˜cation? 

What is the appropriate mix of empiricism, innovation, and appli
-cation in order for computer science to have an impact in the area of 
environmental sustainability?
The Energy Challenge
Participants suggested considering broad sustainability challenges in 
the context of the energy challenge. The interconnected nature of people™s 
basic resource needs, such as water, energy, and transportation, and the 
economic arrangements among these resources create a very complex 
problem. However, these interactions also mean that the energy challenge 
can serve as a useful proxy for sustainability challenges related to other 
limited resources.
The primary function of the electric grid is to deliver high-quality, 
low-cost power to millions of customers who are geographically distrib
-uted over thousands of miles. The fact that consumers have been able 
to make use of the grid without needing much knowledge about their 
own consumption patterns, or about where the power is coming from, 
has contributed to rapid economic and industrial growth. People have 
been able to use a comparatively inexpensive resourceŠenergy created 
mostly through the burning of fossil fuelsŠessentially indiscriminately to 
expand the production of products that spur the economy. Additionally, 
enabling a usage model in which consumers could remain ignorant of 
their own consumption patterns meant that the grid has been tasked with 
delivering a high-quality commodity at extremely low cost. Moreover, 
the expectation has been that power would be delivered immediately as 
needed. The power grid is expected to meet these goals with minimal 
forecasting or anticipation of that need, except at very coarse granularity, 
and without inventory storage along the energy supply chain. 
The current energy model is increasingly complex, with numerous 
sources of energy, a variety of stakeholders and consumers, and a not 
insigni˜cant fraction lost during transport. A pressing sustainability chal
-lenge revolves around these questions: How can energy use be reduced, 
and can it be done without signi˜cant economic hardship? The following 
question was discussed: Where and how can computer science ˜t into 
this picture? 
Figure A.4 shows the percentage of energy use in the United States 
by type. Each of these types represents an opportunity for reduction in 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 139demand. Commercial light use and residential heating make up the bulk 
of their respective building types, but several other smaller items make 
up the rest of the energy usage. Perhaps reductions in several of these 
ﬁlow-hanging fruitﬂ items can contribute signi˜cantly in reducing total 
energy consumption. 
Impediments to Changing the Energy System
Insuf˜cient Scope and Scale of Research and Development 
 Funding to Fuel IT-Enabled Innovation in the Electricity Sector
Challenged to consider opportunities for IT and CS research to con
-tribute to sustainability, participants re˚ected on the history of IT suc
-cesses and on whether those successes might offer important lessons. The 
enormous payoffs from IT R&D investment have been investigated by 
several studies of the National Research Council™s Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board, including 
Evolving the High Performance Com
-puting and Communications Initiative to Support the Nation™s Infrastructure
 (1995); 
Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research
 (1999); 
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet 
FIGURE A.4
 Energy consumption in the United States, by type of use. SOURCE: 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Society™s Needs
 (2000); and
 Innovation in Information Technology
 (2003)
.25
 These reports have shown how research partnerships between the federal 
government and industry ultimately led to the creation of many well-
known multibillion-dollar industries. These results suggest the potential 
sustainability payoffs from the right investments in IT. 
Many of the advancements presented in the CSTB reports, such as 
those in processors or networking, required signi˜cant ˜nancial invest
-ment from both industry and government. The software industry spends 
approximately 13.5 percent of revenues on R&D, the health care industry 
spends about the same, and the computer hardware industry spends 
about half of that.
26
 By contrast, R&D spending by the electric utility 
sector is about 0.1 percent of revenues, perhaps due to the fact that the 
sector has been very stable, with little innovation or push for innovation, 
a context that seems to be changing rapidly.
27
 Sustainability is a large, broad-ranging problem, and apportioning 
limited research dollars to effective ends is a dif˜cult challenge. One con
-sequence of this low level of support and the resulting small number of 
technical researchers at utility companies is that opportunities for partner
-ship between academic researchers and utility companies are rare.
Government funding is also limited. In 2010, the U.S. Department of 
Energy provided $130 million and created three different energy hubs in 
innovation.
28
 However, a workshop attendee commented that even this 
amount is much smaller than would be needed if a signi˜cant shift were 
to be made toward sustainable energy sources or if total energy consump
-tion were to be decreased. 
Misalignment of Incentives for More Sustainable Generation and Use
The energy-utility market, as described earlier, has evolved to pro
-vide a critical resource, at low price, with supply almost instantaneously 
25
National Research Council, 
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications 
Initiative to Support the Nation™s Infrastructure, 
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press 
(1995); National Research Council, 
Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing 
Research,
 Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press (1999); National Research Council, 
Making IT Better: Expanding Information Technology Research to Meet Society™s Needs,
 Washing
-ton, D.C.: National Academy Press (2000); National Research Council, 
Innovation in Informa
-tion Technology,
 Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press (2003)
.26
Jill Jusko, 
R&D Spending: By the Numbers.
 Industryweek.com. January 2010. Available at 
http://www.industryweek.com/articles/rd_spending_by_the_numbers_17988.aspx.
27 
Jusko, 
R&D Spending
, 2010, available at http://www.industryweek.com/articles/rd_
spending_by_the_numbers_17988.aspx.
28
Department of Energy, ﬁObama Administration Launches $130 Million Building En
-ergy Ef˜ciency Effort,ﬂ February 12, 2010, available at http://energy.gov/articles/obama-
 administration-launches-130-million-building-energy-ef˜ciency-effort.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 141matched to demand. Although historically it required considerable inno
-vation and tremendous capital investment to meet these constraints, there 
are additional market impediments to creating a more sustainable system. 
Perhaps the most obvious is that, generally speaking, utility companies 
have historically charged for usage by the kilowatt-hour, resulting in 
little economic incentive to reduce the number of kilowatt-hours used. 
regulation prevents vertical monopolies, but there is often an interest in 
owning an entire vertical marketŠone organization owning or operating 
both the production and the delivery systemsŠand extracting marginal 
pro˜t mostly by locking customers in to the system. Participants observed 
that horizontal market strati˜cation would help drive ef˜cient markets. 
This limited-competition system means that the utility industry is not 
particularly motivated to shift technologies, which may drive up the cost 
of production in the short term. The question again is where the invest
-ment to drive new technologies is going to come from. 
While the utility companies have little incentive to encourage reduc
-tions in energy use, consumers themselves have undervalued energy. As 
noted earlier, consumers have become accustomed to inexpensive power 
and also have little understanding of how power is produced and of the 
resulting environmental damage. Consumers have even less knowledge 
or easy insight into the energy costs of producing and transporting foods 
and goods. The energy cost, including the accompanying externalities 
such as environmental and social damage, is not easily re˚ected in the 
price of goods. If these costs were re˚ected directly in the price, more 
energy-ef˜cient choices might be made. 
Infrastructural and Organizational Impediments
Impediments to making progress on sustainability in addition to 
those discussed above include infrastructural and organizational realities. 
The scale of the sustainability problem is immense, and the infrastructure 
systems that bear on sustainabilityŠsuch as energy, water, and food 
distributionŠare just as massive. In addition, diversity of use within the 
system adds a level of complexity. The use and design of each building 
site and the water distribution and transportation system of each city have 
unique characteristics that make a one-size-˜ts-most solution impractical. 
Furthermore, the traditional production cycle does not apply; infrastruc
-tures are not projects that are developed, improved, and shipped; they are 
built once. Cities are developed over a span of 100 years or more, with 
re˜nements, changes, and ﬁdebuggingﬂ taking place little by little. Once 
these systems are rolled out, even if they do not function as well as they 
could, they become, in effect, stranded assets. 
The market structure also creates impediments to better technologi
-cal change. The market is highly fragmented; energy sources vary, and 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
energy use is even more dispersed. Each industry that participates in 
the energy market has its own unique needs, regulatory requirements, 
and certi˜cation programs. Individual industries and companies cre
-ate their own technology standards. Unique industry and corporate 
technology standards also make one-size-˜ts-most solutions impracti
-cal. Efforts to deploy, say, monitoring and data-collection tools in these 
sorts of environments are challenged. Equipment used for monitoring 
the use of each resource systemŠenergy, water, foodŠwithin cities 
becomes dif˜cult to build and deploy. Additionally, these monitoring 
devices, if built in to the initial infrastructure, need to be able to col
-lect a wide variety of data and be sturdy enough to function over long 
periods of time. 
Research Impediments
The critical nature of the sustainability problem and energy crisis 
combined with their scale and complexity often means that researchers 
are dedicating entire careers working to address pieces of the problem. 
This scale and complexity mean that choosing avenues of investigation is 
a high-risk proposition. If a path that a researcher follows turns out to be 
incorrect or a dead end, the mistake can be career ending. Furthermore, 
these sustainability and energy problems are inherently multidisciplinary, 
which adds another barrier to academic work often con˜ned to single 
disciplines. 
In many sub˜elds of computer science, the ultimate goals can be 
de˜ned reasonably clearly, even if the description of the goal is as simple 
as: Make computers faster. Well-de˜ned goals also imply a clear de˜nition 
of success. While there are some goals to work toward in addressing the 
sustainability problem, such as decreasing the levels of greenhouse gases 
in the atmosphere, they tend to be less well de˜ned (should the focus be 
on lowering energy use or on the use of more sustainable energy sources?) 
and have less clear benchmarks for success.
 Potential Computer Science Contributions
In the fourth session of the workshop, participants brainstormed 
about potential further contributions of computer science to sustainabil
-ity.
 Computer science is well positioned to provide technical options 
that could help address some sustainability challenges. Additionally, the 
distinctive culture, methodologies, and approaches of computer science 
may shed new light on methodologies, processes, and concepts that could 
be useful in sustainability. Speakers discussed several such cultural attri
-butes, including the following: 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 143
Culture of innovation.
 Computer scientists are used to developing 
and deploying new tools almost constantly and to doing these things 
quickly. Participants argued that this ˚exible, catch-all approach allows 
for broader ideas and more creativity.

Large-scale systems approach.
 Computer scientists have experience 
building big things, such as massive integrated circuits, which have tens 
of millions of design points that need to be correct when built, and soft
-ware artifacts that today measure in the millions of lines of code. Com
-puter scientists also understand system approaches. 

Understanding of open-information systems.
 Computer scientists tend 
to understand the value of open systems and are often forced to engage 
with demands for system-level considerations such as compatibility and 
interoperability. Distributed grid management, ecosystems understand
-ing, crisis and disaster response, and resource tracking and optimization 
can all bene˜t from open, interoperable information systems. With large 
amounts of data being collected, privacy and security become an issue, 
which, again, computer scientists have experience managing.
29

Business transformation, often with ef˜ciency as a goal.
 As new tech
-nologies have become available, the computer science industry has trans
-formed itself several times. For example, participants noted that data 
centers are drastically different now than they were just 2 years ago. This 
change has been driven partly by ef˜ciency concerns. Furthermore, com
-puter science has been fundamental in transforming other industries, for 
example, car ownership, media consumption, and banking, in interest
-ing ways. Advances in smartphones, the Global Positioning System, and 
human-computer interaction have contributed to the success of short-
term car-use services, such as Zipcar; advances in telecommunications 
networks and ˜le compression have made Internet video streaming a 
viable alternative to the video store; and computer and information secu
-rity have encouraged con˜dence in online banking. 

Educating in a dynamic environment.
 Because sustainability efforts 
are complex, multidisciplinary problems, universities will need new ways 
to teach scientists and engineers to resolve these problems. Computer sci
-ence has historically adapted to changes in curriculum and changes in the 
overall technological environment by shifting teaching techniques very 
29
The Internet is an example in which computer science has incorporated open-informa
-tion systems, shared standards, and a complex understanding of intellectual property. Al
-though there have been questions and debates about appropriate infrastructure, standards, 
and intellectual property, especially as more of the Internet has been commercialized, there 
is still copious knowledge that can be gleaned from the computer science community on 
building interdisciplinary, complex systems.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
rapidly. These educational tools, developed within the computer science 
discipline, can help develop the next wave of scientists and engineers. 
Wrap-Up Discussion
This session resulted in a wide-ranging discussion from the partici
-pants at the workshop. Several key points raised are outlined below:

Within the information technology industry, signi˜cant innovation 
has been accomplished at small businesses or start-ups, which then are 
often acquired by large corporations. This suggests that small amounts of 
money could fund highly innovative projects in sustainability, given the 
proper organizational structure and incentive. 

Although sustainability can be viewed in many ways as a techni
-cal problem, it will not be solved through technological solutions alone. 
Some people conjecture that in addition to major scienti˜c and technical 
breakthroughs to meet sustainability challenges, large-scale social change 
will be needed, perhaps even on the scale of the U.S. civil rights move
-ment. Computer scientists can contribute tools that encourage individual 
participation in addressing sustainability challenges.

Small businesses often require specialized information that can 
be hard to acquire. Computational techniques and technologies can help 
by providing ways to collect, aggregate, distribute, and analyze data, as 
well as techniques for communication and coordination as appropriate.
30
 
There are trade-offs in discussing solutions. For example, raising 
temperatures in server rooms may reduce cooling loads but lead to higher 
failure rates. These trade-offs and failure rates have to be fully understood 
so that the best trade-offs can be made.

Domain scientists (such as ecologists, transportation specialists, 
civil and power engineers) need to share information and knowledge with 
people doing innovation, including computer scientists. The ˜rst step for 
computer science might simply be ˜nding a better way to present these 
data, which would help policy makers. Decision makers need to under
-stand the data more clearly before they can form policy. 
30
An example was given of a case in which a number of local coffee shops were interested 
in purchasing biodegradable products. Today, biodegradable cups are more expensive and 
are only affordable if purchased in very large quantities; IT can link companies willing to 
purchase and share large shipments. Also, not all biodegradable cups are biodegradable to 
the same extent, an information gap that could be solved with more usable data. However, 
computer scientists typically have little knowledge about the chemical makeup of products, 
and so there is also a need for coordination across multiple disciplines and industries.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 145WORKSHOP AGENDA
May 26, 2010 
 Washington, D.C.
8:30-8:35 a.m
. Welcome 
 Deborah L. Estrin, University of California, Los 
Angeles
 Chair, Committee on Computing Research for Envi
-ronmental and Societal Sustainability
8:35-10:45 a.m.
  
Session 1: Expanding Science and Engineering
 with Novel CS/IT Methods: ﬁThe Need to 
Turn Numbers into Knowledgeﬂ
  Committee respondent: 
Daniel Kammen, Univer
-sity of California, Berkeley
What are some
 example areas of efforts in sustainability and related 
research where the interface of disciplinary and interdisciplinary research 
with new methods in computer and information science can generate new 
innovations and knowledge? One example is the smart grid, which pro
-vides a physical and information technology medium where new levels 
of ef˜cient and clean energy and information management are possible, 
and where new levels of data security are needed. Discussion topics range 
from grid management to the introduction of smart management and 
charging systems for low-carbon electric vehicles. Another example is 
ecological resilience and ecosystem function, which is the monitoring and 
modeling of ecological change and of the interactions related to ecological 
robustness and requires new tools for temporal and spatial resolution, 
new methods to explore the dynamics of connectivity in ecological sys
-tems, and teasing out the ranges of anthropogenic impacts.
Vijay Modi, Columbia University: ﬁ
Criticality of CS and IT to 
Sustainabilityﬂ
Robert Pfahl, International Electronics Manufacturing Initiative, Inc.: 
ﬁTowards a Sustainable World Through Electronic Systems and ITﬂ
 Neo Martinez, Paci˜c Ecoinformatics and Computational Ecology Lab: 
ﬁNumbers: Where They Come from and What to Do with Them to 
Live More Sustainably on Earthﬂ
 Adjo Amekudzi, Georgia Institute of Technology:
 ﬁUsing Social 
Sustainability Measures as Inputs in Planning and Designﬂ
 Thomas Harmon, University of California, Merced:
 ﬁEnvironmental 
Cyberinfrastructure and Data Acquisitionﬂ
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
11:00 a.m.-1:00 p.m.
 Session 2: Understanding, Tracking, and
 Managing Uncertainty Throughout the
 Science-to-Policy Pipeline
 Committee respondent: 
Thomas Dietterich, 
Oregon State University
Explicit representation of uncertainty is rare in the science-to-policy 
pipeline. Data products resulting from fusing information from multiple 
instruments are often treated as exact when input to models. Outputs 
from predictive and simulation models are often treated as exact when 
input to policy making. Policy optimization for management (e.g., reserve 
design, ˜shing quotas, habitat conservation plans) often is not robust to 
uncertainty in the problem formulation or the objectives. Uncertainty 
about future decision making and imperfect implementation of policies 
injects additional uncertainty into planning for the future.

What are the sources of uncertainty that should be explicitly 
captured?

What methods are suitable for explicitly representing uncertainty?

Is the technological state of the art suf˜cient to model the many 
different ˚avors of uncertainty present in large-scale sustainability prob
-lems? If not, what characterizes the types of uncertainty that are insuf
-˜ciently modeled? 

What methods are suitable for assessing uncertainty in each stage 
of the pipeline? What shortcomings need to be addressed?

Is the state of the art in human factors, interfaces, and CSCW (com-puter-supported cooperative work) suf˜cient to support the large-scale 
systems, models, and data sets that are necessary to tackle large-scale 
sustainability problems? If not, what needs are unmet? 

What are the appropriate techniques for working with uncertain 
data in data fusion, data assimilation, predictive modeling, simulation 
modeling, and policy optimization?

Is a pipeline architecture suf˜cient, or do we need a fully coupled 
architecture in which policy questions can reach all the way back to guide 
data collection and data fusion?

How can explicit uncertainty representations be integrated into 
scienti˜c work˚ow tools?

Are there alternatives to explicit uncertainty representations that 
can improve the robustness of management policies to all of these sources 
of uncertainty?
Peter Bajcsy, National Institute of Standards and Technology:
 ﬁInstruments 
and Scienti˜c Work˚owsﬂ
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 147Chris Forest, Pennsylvania State University:
 ﬁAssessing Uncertainty in 
Climate Modelsﬂ
David Brown, Duke University:
 ﬁRobust Optimization under Uncertaintyﬂ
John Doyle, California Institute of Technology:
 ﬁTheory and Methodology of 
Robust-yet-Fragile Systems Analysisﬂ
1:30-3:00 p.m.
 Session 3: Creating Institutional and Personal 
 Change with Humans in the Loop
 Committee respondent: 
Alan Borning, University 
of Washington
Achieving sustainability objectives demands behavioral changes at the 
institutional and individual levels. In designing and developing smarter 
systems, an important question is how to embed interfaces that work. The human-system interaction literature is replete with counterexamples and 
numerous failed cognitive models, serving as cautionary tales. Compli
-cating matters, human-system interaction issues arise both with regard to 
individuals in homes and of˜ces and for administrators of larger systems 
or facilities. Further, interactions occur at different scalesŠon the one 
hand in a day-to-day time frame for users and on the other in ways that 
allow incorporation of feedback from the system either to the system itself 
or to decision makers thinking about larger-scale resource management 
considerations, for example.

How can data and information be presented at the appropriate 
granularity and timescale to be most effective? What system, application, 
and user factors bear on the human-system interaction design choices? 

Describe the potential impacts of the various contexts and trade-
off decisions that might need to be made, including the impact of context 
(e.g., stakeholders, and so on); the impact of large versus small groups 
versus individuals; the impact of income; the impact of use by or for cities 
versus businesses versus individuals; the role of middleware, the supply 
chain, and so on.

How do human factors affecting energy use drive the use and 
design of technology? How can this be accounted for? When are power, 
networking, products, and so on really needed? Discuss human choice 
and its impact on consumption, disposal, reuse, and so on. 
Bill Tomlinson, University of California, Irvine:
 ﬁGreening Through ITﬂ
Shwetak Patel, University of Washington:
 ﬁResidential Energy 
Measurement and Disaggregated Dataﬂ
 Eli Blevis, Indiana University:
 ﬁSustainable Interaction Designﬂ
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
3:15-4:00 p.m.
 Session 4: Overcoming Obstacles to Scienti˜c
 Discovery and Translating Science to Practice
 Committee respondent: 
David Culler, University 
of California, Berkeley

What are the motivations for and impediments to applying inno
-vative information technologies to sustainability challenges, and how do 
they differ by domain?

How can large-scale science addressing real-world problems be 
made credible, if reproducibility is not possible? 

What lessons can be applied from the transformation of the Inter
-net into a critical infrastructure that must avoid ossi˜cation? 

What is the appropriate mix of empiricism, innovation, and appli
-cation for computer science to have an impact in the area of environmen
-tal sustainability?
 David Douglas, National Ecological Observatory Network:
 ﬁThe Role of CS 
in Open, Sustainability Scienceﬂ
4:00-5:00 p.m.
 Capstone Session and Plenary Discussion
 Deborah L. Estrin, Committee Chair
  Randal Bryant, Carnegie Mellon University 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BBiographies of Committee 
 Members and Staff
Deborah L. Estrin (NAE), 
Chair,
 is a professor of computer science with 
a joint appointment in electrical engineering at the University of Cali
-fornia, Los Angeles; holds the Jon Postel Chair in Computer Networks; 
and is a co-founder of the non-pro˜t, Open mHealth. Professor Estrin 
received her Ph.D. (1985) in computer science from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology and her B.S. (1980) from the University of Cali
-fornia, Berkeley. Her early research (conducted while she was on the 
Computer Science Department faculty at the University of Southern 
California [USC] and the USC Information Sciences Institute) focused 
on the design of network and routing protocols for very large, global 
networks, including multicast routing protocols, self-con˜guring proto
-col mechanisms for scalability and robustness, and tools and methods 
for designing and studying large-scale networks. From 2002 to 2012 she 
founded and directed the multidisciplinary, National Science Founda
-tion (NSF)-funded Science and Technology Center for Embedded Net
-worked Sensing (CENS), which developed environmental monitoring 
technologies and applications (http://cens.ucla.edu). Currently Professor 
Estrin explores participatory sensing and mHealth systems, leveraging 
the programmability, proximity, and pervasiveness of mobile devices; 
deployment contexts include health (http://openmhealth.org), commu
-nity data gathering, and education (http://mobilizingcs.org). Professor 
Estrin has been a co-principal investigator on numerous NSF and Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)-funded projects and has 
been an active participant in several government-sponsored studies. She 
149
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
chaired a 1997-1998 DARPA Information Science and Technology Study 
Group study on sensor networks, and the 2001 National Research Council 
(NRC) study on networked embedded computing, which produced the 
report 
Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of 
Embedded Computers
. She later chaired the Sensors and Sensor Networks 
subcommittee of the NEON (National Ecological Observatory Network) 
Design Committee (www.neoninc.org). Professor Estrin also served on 
the Advisory Committees for the NSF Computer and Information Sci
-ence and Engineering (CISE) and Environmental Research and Educa
-tion (ERE) Directorates, and is a former member of the NRC™s Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board. She was an editor of the 
IEEE/
ACM Transactions on Networking,
 and a program committee member for 
many networking-related conferences, including Sigcomm (Special Inter
-est Group on Data Communication), Infocom (International Conference 
on Computer Communications), MobiCom, and MobiSys. She was the 
steering group chair and general co-chair for the ˜rst Association for 
Computing Machinery (ACM) Conference on Embedded Networked Sen
-sor Systems, Sensys 2003, and served as one of the ˜rst associate editors 
for the 
ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks
. Professor Estrin is a fellow 
of the ACM, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
and the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. She was selected 
as the ˜rst ACM-W Athena Lecturer in 2006, was awarded the Anita Borg 
Institute™s Women of Vision Award for Innovation in 2007, was inducted 
into the Women in Technology International Hall of Fame in 2008, and 
awarded Doctor Honoris Causa from École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne in 2008. Professor Estrin was elected to the American Academy 
of Arts and Sciences in 2007 and into the National Academy of Engineer
-ing in 2009.
Alan Borning
 is a professor in the Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering at the University of Washington, an adjunct faculty member 
in the Information School, and a fellow of the Association for Computing 
Machinery. He received a B.A. in mathematics from Reed College (1971) 
and an M.S. (1974) and a Ph.D. (1979) from Stanford University. His prin
-cipal research interests are in human-computer interaction and designing 
for human values. His current research projects include online tools to 
support civic engagement and participation, mobile tools to aid transit 
riders, and designing systems to support more effective public participa
-tion in land use and transportation deliberations, supported by sophis
-ticated simulation data. Earlier he worked on programming languages 
and UI (user interface) toolkits, including constraint-based languages and 
systems and on object-oriented languages.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 151David Culler (NAE),
 a professor and chair of computer science, associ
-ate chair of electrical engineering and computer sciences, and faculty 
director of i4energy at the University of California, Berkeley, received his 
B.A. from the University of California, Berkeley (1980) and an M.S. and 
a Ph.D. from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1985 and 1989, 
respectively). He joined the Department of Electrical Engineering and 
Computer Science faculty in 1989, where he holds the Howard Friesen 
Chair. He is a member of the National Academy of Engineering, a fellow 
of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), and an Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers fellow; he was selected for ACM™s 
Sigmod Outstanding Achievement Award, and was named in the 
Scienti˜c 
American
 Top 50 Researchers and the Technology Review: 10 Technolo
-gies That Will Change the World. He was awarded the National Science 
Foundation (NSF) Presidential Young Investigator Award in 1990 and the 
NSF Presidential Faculty Fellowship in 1992. He was the principal inves
-tigator (PI) of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency network 
embedded systems technology project that created the open platform for 
wireless sensor networks based on TinyOS, a co-founder and the chief 
technology of˜cer of Arch Rock Corporation, and the founding director 
of Intel Research, Berkeley. He has done seminal work on networks of 
small, embedded wireless devices, planetary-scale internet services, par
-allel computer architecture, parallel programming languages, and high-
performance communication, including TinyOS, PlanetLab, Networks of 
Workstations (NOW), and Active Messages. He has served on technical 
advisory boards for several companies, including People Power, Ink
-tomi, ExpertCity (now Citrix Online), and DoCoMo USA. He is currently 
focused on utilizing information technology to address the energy prob
-lem and is co-PI on the NSF Cyber-Physical Systems projects LoCal and 
ActionWebs.
Thomas Dietterich
, professor at Oregon State University (OSU), focuses 
on interdisciplinary research at the boundary of computer science, ecol
-ogy, and sustainability policy. He is the principal investigator (with Carla 
Gomes of Cornell University) of a 5-year National Science Foundation 
(NSF) Expedition in Computational Sustainability. He is part of the lead
-ership team for OSU™s Ecosystem Informatics programs, including an 
NSF Summer Institute in Ecoinformatics. Dr. Dietterich received his A.B 
from Oberlin College (1977), M.S. from the University of Illinois (1979), 
and Ph.D. from Stanford University (1984). He is professor and director 
of Intelligent Systems in the School of Electrical Engineering and Com
-puter Science at OSU, having joined the faculty there in 1985. In 1987, 
he was named a Presidential Young Investigator for the NSF. In 1990, he 
published, with Dr. Jude Shavlik, the book entitled 
Readings in Machine 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
Learning,
 and he also served as the technical program co-chair of the 
National Conference on Arti˜cial Intelligence (AAAI-90). From 1992 to 
1998 he held the position of executive editor of the journal 
Machine Learn
-ing
. He is a fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Arti˜cial 
Intelligence (1994), the Association for Computing Machinery (2003), and 
the American Association for the Advancement of Science (2007). In 2000, 
he co-founded the free 
Journal of Machine Learning Research
 and he is cur
-rently a member of its editorial board. He served as technical program 
chair of the Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) conference in 
2000 and as general chair in 2001. He is past president of the International 
Machine Learning Society (IMLS) and a member of the IMLS board, and 
he also serves on the advisory board of the NIPS Foundation.
Daniel Kammen is the Class of 1935 Distinguished Professor of Energy at 
the University of California, Berkeley, with parallel appointments in the 
Energy and Resources Group, the Goldman School of Public Policy, and 
the Department of Nuclear Engineering. He serves as an Environment and 
Climate Partnership for the Americas (ECPA) Fellow for Secretary of State 
Hillary Clinton. Dr. Kammen is the founding director of the Renewable 
and Appropriate Energy Laboratory (RAEL), co-director of the Berkeley 
Institute of the Environment, and director of the Transportation Sustain
-ability Research Center. He has founded or is on the board of more than 10 
companies and has served the State of California and the U.S. government 
in expert and advisory capacities. Dr. Kammen was educated in phys
-ics at Cornell University and Harvard University, and held postdoctoral 
positions at the California Institute of Technology and Harvard. He was 
assistant professor and chair of the Science, Technology and Environmen
-tal Policy Program at the Woodrow Wilson School at Princeton University 
before moving to the University of California, Berkeley. Dr. Kammen has 
served as a contributing or coordinating lead author on various reports of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) since 1999. The 
IPCC shared the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize. During 2010-2011, Dr. Kammen 
served as the World Bank Group™s chief technical specialist for renewable 
energy and energy ef˜ciency. In this newly created position to which he 
was appointed in October 2010, he provided strategic leadership on policy, 
technical, and operational fronts. The aim is to enhance the operational 
impact of the World Bank™s renewable energy and energy-ef˜ciency activi
-ties while expanding the institution™s role as an enabler of global dialogue 
on moving energy development to a cleaner and more sustainable path
-way.
  He has authored or co-authored 12 books, written more than 250 
peer-reviewed journal publications, testi˜ed more than 40 times at U.S. 
state and federal congressional brie˜ngs, and has provided various gov
-ernments with more than 50 technical reports. Dr. Kammen also served 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 153for many years on the Technical Review Board of the Global Environment 
Facility. He is a frequent contributor to or commentator in international 
news media, including 
Newsweek
, 
Time
, 
The New York Times
, 
The Guardian
, and 
The Financial Times
. Dr. Kammen has appeared on 
60 Minutes
 (twice), 
Nova
, and 
Frontline
, and he hosted the six-part Discovery Channel series 
Ecopolis
. He is a permanent fellow of the African Academy of Sciences and 
a fellow of the American Physical Society. In the United States he serves 
on a board and a panel of the National Academy of Sciences. 
Jennifer Mankoff
 is an associate professor in the Human-Computer 
Interaction Institute at Carnegie Mellon University. She earned her B.A. 
at Oberlin College and her Ph.D. in computer science at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. Her research embodies a human-centered per
-spective on data-driven applications. Her goal is to combine empirical 
methods with technological innovation to construct middleware (tools 
and processes) that can enable the creation of impactful data-driven 
applications. Examples of such application areas include sensing and 
in˚uencing energy-saving behavior, web interfaces for individuals with 
chronic illness, and assistive technologies for people with disabilities. Dr. 
Mankoff helped found the sustainable-chi group (www.sustainable-chi@
googlegroups.com). Her research has been supported by Google, Inc., the 
Intel Corporation, IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Microsoft Corporation, and the 
National Science Foundation. She was awarded the Sloan Fellowship and 
the IBM Faculty Fellowship.
Roger D. Peng is an associate professor of biostatistics at the Johns 
Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health. He received his Ph.D. in sta
-tistics from the University of California, Los Angeles. He is a prominent 
researcher in the areas of air pollution and health risk assessment and 
statistical methods for spatial and temporal data. Dr. Peng is a national 
leader in the area of methods and standards for reproducible research; he 
is the Reproducible Research editor for the journal 
Biostatistics
. He has 
developed novel approaches to integrating complex national databases 
for assessing population health effects of environmental exposures and 
has developed software for ef˜ciently distributing data over the web 
for disseminating reproducible research. Dr. Peng™s research is highly 
interdisciplinary; his work has been published in major substantive and 
statistical journals, including the 
Journal of the American Medical Asso
-ciation
, 
Journal of the American Statistical Association
, 
Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society
, and 
American Journal of Epidemiology
. Dr. Peng is the 
author of more than a dozen software packages implementing statistical 
methods for environmental studies, methods for reproducible research, 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154 COMPUTING RESEARCH FOR SUSTAINABILITY
and data distribution tools. He has also given workshops, tutorials, and 
short courses in statistical computing and data analysis.
Andreas Vogel
 is vice president in the global business incubator at SAP 
Labs in Palo Alto, California, where he currently works on virtual econo
-mies and recommender systems for online games. Previously he incubated 
a product for analyzing smart meter data and developed the next genera
-tion of sustainability-related software solutions, including those involv
-ing carbon accounting, energy management, and electri˜ed vehicles. He 
also helped to create and implement SAP™s sustainability strategy. Before 
joining SAP, Dr. Andreas held various research, technology, and business 
positions around the worldŠamong them, chief scientist at Borland and 
chief technology of˜cer and co-founder of Mspect, where he developed 
monitoring solutions for mobile data networks. Dr. Andreas holds an 
M.Sc. and a Ph.D. in computer science from Humboldt University, Berlin, 
Germany. He
 co-authored
 four books on Common Object Request Broker 
Architecture (CORBA), Enterprise Java Beans,
 and enterprise resource 
planning (ERP)
 published
 by J. Wiley and Sons.
Staff
Lynette I. Millett
 is a senior program of˜cer and study director at the 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National 
Research Council of the National Academies. She currently directs several 
CSTB projects, including an exploration of foundational science in cyber
-security. She recently completed the project that produced 
Strategies and 
Priorities for Information Technology at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services
. Ms. Millett™s portfolio includes substantial portions of CSTB™s 
recent work on software, identity systems, and privacy. She directed, 
among other projects, those that produced 
The Future of Computing Per
-formance: Game Over or Next Level?,
 an examination of the causes and 
implications of the slowdown in the historically dramatic exponential 
growth in computing performance; 
Software for Dependable Systems: Suf
-˜cient Evidence?,
 an exploration of fundamental approaches to develop
-ing dependable mission-critical systems
; Biometric Recognition: Challenges 
and Opportunities
, a comprehensive assessment of biometric technology
; Who Goes There? Authentication Through the Lens of Privacy,
 a discussion of 
authentication technologies and their privacy implications; and 
IDsŠNot 
That Easy: Questions About Nationwide Identity Systems,
 a post-9/11 analy
-sis of the challenges presented by large-scale identity systems. She has an 
M.Sc. in computer science from Cornell University, where her work was 
supported by graduate fellowships from the National Science Foundation 
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 155and the Intel Corporation; and a B.A. with honors in mathematics and 
computer science from Colby College.
Virginia Bacon Talati
 is an associate program of˜cer at the Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board, National Research Council of the 
National Academies. She formerly served as a program associate with the 
Frontiers of Engineering program at the National Academy of Engineer
-ing. Prior to her work at the Academies, she served as a senior project 
assistant in education technology at the National School Boards Associa
-tion. She has a B.S. in science, technology, and culture from the Georgia 
Institute of Technology and an M.P.P. from George Mason University with 
a focus in science and technology policy.
Shenae Bradley
 is a senior program assistant at the Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board, National Research Council of the National 
Academies. She has provided support for the Committee on Sustaining 
Growth in Computing Performance, the Committee on Wireless Tech
-nology Prospects and Policy Options, and Computational Thinking for 
Everyone: A Workshop Series Planning Committee, to name a few. Previ
-ously, she served as an administrative assistant for the Ironworker Man
-agement Progressive Action Cooperative Trust and managed a number of 
apartment rental communities for Edgewood Management Corporation 
in the Maryland/DC/Delaware metropolitan areas. Ms. Bradley is in 
the process of earning her B.S. in family studies from the University of 
Maryland at College Park.
Computing Research for SustainabilityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.