DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13424Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learningin Health and Health Care: Workshop Summary78 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-25941-5 | DOI 10.17226/13424Claudia Grossmann, Brian Powers, and Julia Sanders, Rapporteurs; Roundtable onValue and Science-Driven Health Care; Institute of MedicineDigital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Claudia Grossmann, Brian Powers, and Julia Sanders, Rapporteurs Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health Care
DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES FOR CONTINUOUS LEARNING IN HEALTH AND HEALTH CAREWorkshop SummaryROUNDTABLE ON VALUE & SCIENCE-DRIVEN HEALTH CARETHE LEARNING HEALTH SYSTEM SERIESDigital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Govern-ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the 
councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineer-ing, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for 
the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for appropri
-ate balance.This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. HHSP23320110009EC between 
the National Academy of Sciences and the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for 
Health Information Technology. The views presented in this publication do not 
necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided support 
for the project.International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-25941-5International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-25941-XAdditional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or 
(202) 334-3313; 
http://www.nap.edu
. Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost 
all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The serpent ad
-opted as a logotype by the Institute of Medicine is a relief carving from ancient 
Greece, now held by the Staatliche Museen in Berlin.
Suggested citation: IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2013. Digital data improvement 
priorities for continuous learning in health and health care: Workshop summary.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁKnowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ ŠGoetheAdvising the Nation. Improving Health.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating society 
of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general welfare. 
Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Acad-emy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scienti˜c 
and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of Sciences.The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter 
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding en-gineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, 
sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the 
federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineer-ing programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and research, 
and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is presi
-dent of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in 
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The Insti-tute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its 
congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own 
initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. 
Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sci
-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. 
Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the 
Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communities. The Coun-cil is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. 
Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of 
the National Research Council.www.national-academies.org
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vPLANNING COMMITTEE ON DIGITAL DATA 
PRIORITIES FOR CONTINUOUS LEARING
1JAMES WALKER 
(Chair), Chief Health Information Of˜cer, Geisinger 
Health SystemJUSTINE CARR, 
Chief Medical Of˜cer, Steward Health Care
WILLIAM DUMOUCHEL, Chief Statistical Scientist, Oracle Health 
SciencesJAMIE HEYWOOD, Chairman, PatientsLikeMeREBECCA KUSH, President and CEO, Clinical Data Standards 
Interchange ConsortiumLISA LEE, 
Chief Science Of˜cer, Of˜ce of Surveillance, Epidemiology, 
and Laboratory Sciences, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
THERESA MULLIN, Director, Of˜ce of Planning and Informatics, 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug 
AdministrationLUCILA OHNO-MACHADO, Founding Chief, Biomedical Informatics, 
University of California, San Diego
RICHARD PLATT, 
Chair, Population Medicine, Harvard University
JIM SCANLON, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation 
(Science and Policy), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
PAUL STANG, 
Senior Director of Epidemeology, Johnson & Johnson
WALTER SUAREZ, 
Director, Health IT Strategy and Policy, Kaiser 
PermanenteIOM StaffCLAUDIA GROSSMANN,
 Senior Program Of˜cerBRIAN POWERS, Senior Program Assistant (through July 2012)
VALERIE ROHRBACH,
 Senior Program Assistant
JULIA SANDERS, Senior Program Assistant
ROBERT SAUNDERS,
 Study DirectorLEIGH STUCKHARDT, 
Program AssociateISABELLE VON KOHORN, Program Of˜cer
BARRET ZIMMERMANN,
 Program Assistant
J. MICHAEL M
CGINNIS, Senior Scholar, Executive Director, Roundtable 
on Value & Science-Driven Health Care
1  Institute of Medicine planning committees are solely responsible for organizing the work-shop, identifying topics, and choosing speakers. The responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiROUNDTABLE ON VALUE & SCIENCE-DRIVEN HEALTH CARE
1MARK B. M
CCLELLAN (Chair), Director, Engelberg Center, The 
Brookings Institution
DAVID BLUMENTHAL,
 President, The Commonwealth FundBRUCE G. BODAKEN, Chairman, President, and CEO, Blue Shield of 
CaliforniaPAUL CHEW, 
Chief Science Of˜cer and Chief Medical Of˜cer, Sano˜ U.S.
CAROLYN M. CLANCY, 
Director, Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality (Ex Of˜cio)FRANCIS COLLINS, 
Director, National Institutes of Health (Ex Of˜cio) 
(designee: Susan Shurin
) HELEN DARLING, President, National Business Group on Health
SUSAN D. DEVORE, 
Chief Executive Of˜cer, Premier, Inc.
RICHARD FANTE, 
Regional VP, Americans, AstraZeneca
JUDITH FAULKNER,
 Founder and CEO, Epic Health Systems
THOMAS R. FRIEDEN, Director,
 Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (Ex Of˜cio) (designee: Gail R. Janes)PATRICIA A. GABOW,
 CEO, Denver HealthATUL GAWANDE,
 General and Endocrine Surgeon, Brigham and 
Women™s Hospital
GARY L. GOTTLIEB, 
President and CEO, Partners HealthCare System
JAMES A. GUEST, 
President, Consumers Union
GEORGE C. HALVORSON, 
Chairman and CEO, Kaiser Permanente
MARGARET A. HAMBURG, Commissioner,
 Food and Drug 
Administration (Ex Of˜cio) (
designee: Peter Lurie) 
JAMES HEYWOOD, Co-Founder and Chairman, PatientsLikeMe
RALPH I. HORWITZ,
 Senior VP, Clinical Evaluation Sciences, 
GlaxoSmithKlineBRENT C. JAMES, Chief Quality Of˜cer and Executive Director, 
Institute for Health Care Delivery Research, Intermountain 
HealthcareMICHAEL M. E. JOHNS, 
Chancellor, Emory University
CRAIG JONES, Director, Vermont Blueprint for Health
GARY KAPLAN
, Chairman and CEO, Virgina Mason Health System
RICHARD C. LARSON
, Mitsui Professor, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology
JAMES L. MADARA, CEO, American Medical Association
1  Institute of Medicine forums and roundtables do not issue, review, or approve individual 
documents. The responsibility for the published workshop summary rests with the workshop 
rapporteurs and the institution.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viiiFARZAD MOSTASHARI, 
National Coordinator, Of˜ce of the National 
Coordinator for Health IT (Ex Of˜cio)MARY D. NAYLOR, 
Professor and Director, Center for Transitions in 
Health, University of Pennsylvania 
WILLIAM D. NOVELLI, Former CEO, AARP; Professor, Georgetown 
UniversitySAM NUSSBAUM, Executive VP, Clinical Health Policy and Chief 
Medical Of˜cer, WellPoint, Inc.
JONATHAN B. PERLIN, 
Chief Medical Of˜cer and President, Clinical & 
Physician Services, Hospital Corporation of America, Inc.
ROBERT A. PETZEL,
 Under Secretary for Health, Department of 
Veterans Affairs (Ex Of˜cio)
RICHARD PLATT, 
Professor and Chair, Population Medicine, Harvard 
Medical School 
JOHN W. ROWE, 
Professor, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
UniversityJOE SELBY, Executive Director, PCORI
MARK D. SMITH, 
President and CEO, California HealthCare FoundationGLENN D. STEELE, President and CEO, Geisinger Health System
MARILYN TAVENNER, 
Administrator, Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (Ex Of˜cio) (
designee: Patrick Conway) REED D. TUCKSON, Executive VP and Chief of Medical Affairs, 
UnitedHealth Group
MARY WAKEFIELD, 
Administrator, Health Resources and Services 
Administration (Ex Of˜cio)DEBRA B. WHITMAN, Executive Vice President, Policy and 
International, AARPJONATHAN WOODSON, 
Assistant Secretary for Health, Department of 
Defense (Ex Of˜cio)
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Institute of Medicine 
 Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health Care
 Charter and Vision Statement
The Institute of Medicine™s Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health 
Care has been convened to help transform the way evidence on clinical 
effectiveness is generated and used to improve health and health care. 
Participants have set a goal that, by the year 2020, 90 percent of clini-cal decisions will be supported by accurate, timely, and up-to-date clini
-cal information, and will re˜ect the best available evidence. Roundtable 
members will work with their colleagues to identify the issues not being 
adequately addressed, the nature of the  barriers and possible solutions, 
and the priorities for action, and will marshal the resources of the sec-tors represented on the Roundtable to work for sustained publicŒprivate 
cooperation for change.
****************************************** Vision:
 Our vision is for the development of a continuously learning 
health system in which science, informatics, incentives, and culture are 
aligned for continuous improvement and innovationŠwith best practices 
seamlessly embedded in the care process and new knowledge captured as 
an integral by-product of the care experience.
 Goal: By the year 2020, 90 percent of clinical decisions will be sup-ported by accurate, timely, and up-to-date clinical information, and will 
re˚ect the best available evidence. We feel that this presents a tangible 
focus for progress toward our vision, that Americans ought to expect at 
least this level of performance, that it should be feasible with existing re
-sources and emerging tools, and that measures can be developed to track 
and stimulate progress. 
 Context: As unprecedented developments in the diagnosis, treatment, 
and long-term management of disease bring Americans closer than ever 
to the promise of personalized health care, we are faced with similarly 
unprecedented challenges to identify and deliver the care most appropriate 
for individual needs and conditions. Care that is important is often not 
delivered. Care that is delivered is often not important. In part, this is due 
to our failure to apply the evidence we have about the medical care that is 
most effectiveŠa failure related to shortfalls in provider knowledge and 
accountability, inadequate care coordination and support, lack of insur
-ance, poorly aligned payment incentives, and misplaced patient expecta-tions. Increasingly, it is also a result of our limited capacity for timely 
generation of evidence on the relative effectiveness, ef˜ciency, and safety 
of available and emerging interventions. Improving the value of the return 
on our healthcare investment is a vital imperative that will require much 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.greater capacity to evaluate high priority clinical interventions, stronger 
links between clinical research and practice, and reorientation of the in
-centives to apply new insights. We must quicken our efforts to position 
evidence development and application as natural outgrowths of clinical 
careŠto foster health care that learns.
 Approach: The IOM Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health 
Care serves as a forum to facilitate the collaborative assessment and action 
around issues central to achieving the vision and goal stated. The chal-lenges are myriad and include issues that must be addressed to improve 
evidence development, evidence application, and the capacity to advance 
progress on both dimensions. To address these challenges, as leaders in 
their ˜elds, Roundtable members work with their colleagues to identify the 
issues not being adequately addressed, the nature of the barriers and possi
-ble solutions, and the priorities for action, and marshal the resources of the 
sectors represented on the Roundtable to work for sustained public-private 
cooperation for change. Activities include collaborative exploration of 
new and expedited approaches to assessing the effectiveness of diagnostic 
and treatment interventions, better use of the patient care experience to 
generate evidence on effectiveness and ef˜ciency of care, identi˜cation of 
assessment priorities, and communication strategies to enhance provider 
and patient understanding and support for interventions proven to work 
best and deliver value in health care.
 Core concepts and principles: For the purpose of the Roundtable 
activities, we de˜ne science-driven health care broadly to mean that, to the 
greatest extent possible, the decisions that shape the health and health care 
of AmericansŠby patients, providers, payers and policymakers alikeŠwill 
be grounded on a reliable evidence base, will account appropriately for 
individual variation in patient needs, and will support the generation of 
new insights on clinical effectiveness. Evidence is generally considered to 
be information from clinical experience that has met some established 
test of validity, and the appropriate standard is determined according to 
the requirements of the intervention and clinical circumstance. Processes 
that involve the development and use of evidence should be accessible and 
transparent to all stakeholders. 
 A common commitment to certain principles and priorities guides the 
activities of the Roundtable and its members, including the commitment 
to: the right health care for each person; putting the best evidence into 
practice; establishing the effectiveness, ef˜ciency and safety of medical care 
delivered; building constant measurement into our healthcare investments; 
the establishment of healthcare data as a public good; shared responsibility 
distributed equitably across stakeholders, both public and private; collab-orative stakeholder involvement in priority setting; transparency in the ex
-ecution of activities and reporting of results; and subjugation of individual 
political or stakeholder perspectives in favor of the common good.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiReviewersThis workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by individu-als chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accor-dance with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report 
Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide 
candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published workshop summary as sound as possible and to ensure that the 
workshop summary meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, 
and responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft 
manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the process. We 
wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this workshop 
summary:Alfred DeMaria, Massachusetts Department of Public Health 
Shaun Grannis,
 Regenstrief Institute, Inc.
Erin Holve, AcademyHealth Jonathan Silverstein,
 NorthShore University Health System
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they did not see the ˜nal draft of the work
-shop summary before its release. The review of this workshop summary 
was overseen by Joy Keeler Tobin,
 MITRE. Appointed by the Institute 
of Medicine, she was responsible for making certain that an independent 
examination of this workshop summary was carried out in accordance 
with institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this workshop summary 
rests entirely with the authors and the institution.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiiiPrefaceIn light of the challenges and opportunities associated with the increas-ing amount of digital health and health-related information being generated and collected in modern society, the Institute of Medicine™s Roundtable 
on Value & Science-Driven Health Care, with the support of the Of˜ce of 
the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, convened 
a workshop on Digital Data Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health 
and Health Care, which is summarized in this publication. Experts from a 
wide range of disciplinesŠincluding medicine, public health, informatics, 
health information technology, health care services research, health care 
quality reporting, biomedical research, clinical research, statistics, medical 
product manufacturing, health care payment and ˜nancing, and patient 
advocacyŠmet to explore the data quality issues and strategies central to 
the increasing capture and use of digital health data for knowledge develop-ment. This publication summarizes discussions to clarify understanding of, 
and accelerate progress around, data improvement priorities for the digital 
health data utility.
The vision of the Roundtable is for a health system in which learn-ing is continuous, with medical evidence generated by capturing the care 
experience and applied to ensure and improve best care practices. Since its 
inception in 2006, the Roundtable has set out to help realize this vision 
through the involvement and support of senior leadership from key health 
care stakeholders. In engaging the nation™s leaders in workshops and other 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv
 PREFACE
activities, Roundtable members and colleagues provide guidance on issues 
important to advancing the development and use of a digital health data 
utility for knowledge generation and continuous improvement. 
Building on this groundwork, the objectives of this workshop were to 
identify and characterize the current de˜ciencies in the reliability, availabil
-ity, and usability of digital health data and consider strategies, priorities, 
and responsibilities to address such de˜ciencies. Content was structured to 
explore the data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health 
system associated with population and care process management, clinical 
research, translational informatics, and public health support at the na-tional and state level. Workshop discussion also explored the potential 
for learning from large-scale health datasets, focusing on innovative ap-proaches to overcoming the challenges of distributed data, data harmoniza
-tion, and identity resolution.
Multiple individuals donated valuable time toward the development of 
this publication. We would like to acknowledge and offer strong apprecia
-tion for the contributors to this volume for their presence at the workshop 
and their efforts to further develop their presentations into the summaries 
contained in this publication. We are especially indebted to those who 
provided counsel by serving on the planning committee for this workshop, 
including Justine Carr (Steward Health Care), William DuMouchel (Oracle 
Health Sciences), Jamie Heywood (PatientsLikeMe), Rebecca Kush (Clinical 
Data Standards Interchange Consortium), Lisa Lee (CDC, Of˜ce of Sur
-veillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services), Theresa Mullin (FDA, 
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research), Lucila Ohno-Machado (Uni-versity of California, San Diego), Richard Platt (Harvard University), Jim 
Scanlon (Department of Health and Human Services), Paul Stang (Johnson 
& Johnson), and Walter Suarez (Kaiser Permanente).
Under the leadership of senior program of˜cer Claudia Grossmann, a 
number of Roundtable staff played instrumental roles in coordinating the 
workshop and translating the workshop proceedings into this summary, 
including Brian Powers, Valerie Rohrbach, Julia Sanders, Robert Saunders, 
Leigh Stuckhardt, and Isabelle Von Kohorn. We would also like to thank 
Daniel Bethea, Laura Harbold DeStefano, Christine Stencel, and Sarah 
Ziegenhorn for helping to coordinate various aspects of review, production, 
and publication. 
Reliable digital health data represent the foundational elements of a 
continuously learning health system. The discussions summarized in this 
workshop explore the potential and challenges for utilizing these data for 
learning and outline potential strategies and actions to catalyze progress. 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xvWe believe 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in 
Health and Health Care will be a valuable resource as efforts to build and 
leverage the digital health data utility continue to move forward.
James Walker, 
ChairPlanning Committee on 
 Digital Data Priorities for Continuous Learning 
Chief Health Information Of˚cer
Geisinger Health SystemJ. Michael McGinnis 
Senior ScholarExecutive Director 
 Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health Care
Institute of Medicine Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviiContents1 Introduction 1 Data Sources in the Digital Health Utility, 3
 Moving to a Continuously Learning Health System, 4
 Workshop Scope and Objectives, 5
 Organization of the Summary, 6
2  
Data Quality Challenges and Opportunities in a Learning Health 
System 9 Introduction, 10 Challenges for Data Collection and Aggregation, 10
 Patient-Reported Data and Maximizing Patient Value in the 
   
Learning Health System, 12
3 Digital Health Data Uses: Leveraging Data for Better Health
 15 Introduction, 17 Practice Management, 17
 Clinical Research, 19
 Translational Informatics, 21
 Supporting Public Health and Surveillance at the National Level, 23
 Supporting Public Health and Surveillance at the Local Level, 24  Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviii
 CONTENTS
4  
Issues and Opportunities in the Emergence of Large 
 Health-Related Datasets
 27 
 Introduction, 28 The Challenge of Bias in Large Health-Related Datasets, 28
 Moving from Analytics to Insights, 30  5 Innovations Emerging in the Clinical Data Utility 33 Introduction, 34 Distributed Queries, 34
 Data Harmonization and Normalization, 36 Data Linkage, 38 6 Strategies Going Forward 41 Current Data Sources: Better Awareness and Assessment, 41
 Data Input: Improve Patient Orientation, Quality, and Utility, 42
 Data Analysis: Improve Access, Tools, and Capacity, 42
 Public and Patient Engagement: Ramp Up Involvement, 43
 Building a Clinical Data Learning Utility, 44
 Clarity on Governance, 45
Appendixes 
A Speaker Biographies 47B Workshop Agenda
 57Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11IntroductionDigital health data are the lifeblood of a continuous learning health 
system. A steady ˚ow of reliable data is necessary to coordinate and moni-tor patient care, analyze and improve systems of care, conduct research to 
develop new products and approaches, assess the effectiveness of medical 
interventions, and advance population health. The totality of available 
health data is a crucial resource that should be considered an invaluable 
public asset in the pursuit of better care, improved health, and lower health 
care costs (IOM, 2012). This publication summarizes discussions at the 
March 2012 Institute of Medicine (IOM) workshop to identify and char-acterize the current de˜ciencies in the reliability, availability, and usability 
of digital health data and consider strategies, priorities, and responsibilities 
to address such de˜ciencies.1 The ability to collect, share, and use digital health data is rapidly evolv
-ing. Increasing adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) is being driven 
by the implementation of the Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health
 (HITECH) Act, which pays hospitals and individuals 
incentives if they can demonstrate that they use EHRs in a meaningful way. 
However, although more than half of of˜ce-based physicians were using 
basic EHRs in 2011, only a third had access to the basic features necessary 
1  The planning committee™s role was limited to planning the workshop, and the workshop 
summary has been prepared by the workshop rapporteurs as a factual summary of what 
occurred at the workshop. Statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those 
of individual presenters and participants, and are not necessarily endorsed or veri˜ed by the 
Institute of Medicine, and they should not be construed as re˚ecting any group consensus.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
to leverage this information for improvement, such as the ability to view 
laboratory results, maintain problem lists, or manage prescription ordering, (Decker et al., 2012).
In addition to increased data collection, more organizations are sharing 
digital health data. Data collected to meet federal reporting requirements 
or for administrative purposes are becoming more accessible. Efforts such 
as Health.Data.gov provide access to government datasets for the devel-opment of insights and software applications with the goal of improving 
health. Within the private sector, at least one pharmaceutical company is 
actively exploring release of some of its clinical trial data for research by 
others.2 Data sharing partnerships are also opening up across organiza
-tions. The Care Connectivity Consortium, a group of ˜ve health systems at 
the leading edge of using EHRs (Kaiser Permanente, Geisinger Health Sys-tem, Mayo Clinic, Intermoutain Healthcare, and Group Health Coopera-tive), have agreed to securely exchange clinical data for care coordination. 
Sharing is also happening across industries. In the case of AstraZeneca and 
WellPoint, a payer and a product manufacturer have initiated a study on the 
clinical and cost effectiveness of treatments for some chronic and common 
diseases. Finally, efforts to increase patient access to their own data, such 
as the Blue Button initiative which allows patients to download their health 
information with the click of a button, have been adopted by organizations 
such as the Veterans Health Administration and UnitedHealthcare, and 
included in the criteria for Meaningful Use.
The increased collection and sharing of health data is quickly moving 
health care into the era of ﬁbig data.ﬂ This term refers to the huge volume 
and diversity of data collected in increasingly connected digital technolo-gies. The scale of ﬁbig dataﬂ has implications for analysis and learning in 
a way that has been leveraged by other industries, such as intelligence, but 
is only beginning in health care.
Increasing collection, sharing, and aggregation of data are being 
matched by advances in methods for learning from these data. Clinical 
and administrative data can be used for studies to assess the effectiveness 
of health care interventions; identify product safety issues; detect emerging 
epidemics; and measure health care utilization and value. Observational 
methods that use data collected in the course of providing patient care are 
increasingly appreciated as valuable contributors to generating and testing 
hypotheses. The rapidly rising costs and extended duration of traditional 
randomized control trials (RCTs) have contributed to the interests of inves
-tigators and funders, among whom there is a growing appreciation of the 
need to harness big data for innovative streamlined approaches to testing 
new interventions.2  Personal communication, Joel Beetsch, Sano˜.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 3Crucial to all of these efforts is the appropriate alignment of data 
sources with their intended use. Different uses have different requirements 
of data, and therefore different priorities in terms of the evolving clinical 
data utility. This challenge is magni˜ed by the lack of lessons and best 
practices for how to approach data quality assurances needed to support 
the multiple facets of a learning health system. To address these issues and 
gain a better understanding of the types, sources, applications, limitations, 
appropriate uses, and quality improvement needs for digital health data, 
the IOM™s Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health Care convened 
a meeting on March 23, 2012, titled Digital Data Priorities for Continu-ous Learning in Health and Health Care. This meeting followed a series 
of related discussions summarized in the IOM publication titled Digital 
Infrastructure for the Learning Health System (2011), and built on a body 
of work done by the Roundtable on the centrality of a clinical data utility 
to support continuous learning and improvement in health and health care 
(IOM, 2010, 2011a,b,c).DATA SOURCES IN THE DIGITAL HEALTH UTILITY
Digital health data are produced in a variety of different environments, 
which impact greatly the characteristics of the data. Who collects the data, 
how it is collected, why it is collected, and what is collected are some of 
the ways that digital health data differ depending on their source and have 
implications for the use of that data. Understanding these characteristics is 
necessary to match data users with appropriate sources, and to understand 
limitations and barriers in data analysis.
The increased adoption of EHRs has given data from routine care 
increasing prominence as a potential component of the data utility. Data 
collected in the course of delivering patient care come from a variety of 
sources such as clinician of˜ces, ambulatory procedure centers, hospitals, 
and nursing and extended care facilities. The types of data vary by care 
setting, but generally include both clinical and administrative elements. 
Clinical elements include structured ˜elds and free text notes, laboratory 
results, images, and diagnostic test results. Administrative information in-cludes process performance metrics, and details needed for billing, such as 
International Classi˜cation of Diseases (ICD) codes.Also growing in importance is data originating directly from patients. 
These data can be captured through the use of personal health records or 
patient portals, in clinical records as recorded by healthcare personnel, 
or in records external to the health system. They can include personal re-ports of current health status and wellness, family history, and remote site 
laboratory readings, as well as health-related data such as socioeconomic, 
environmental, and lifestyle factors. There is increasing interest in including 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
patient-generated data in data sources such as the use of patient-reported 
outcomes in research studies.Ongoing and completed clinical trial data offer yet another major 
source of new data insightsŠeven beyond the immediate study focus. Trials 
funded by public or private sponsors are largely carried out either at aca-demic institutions or in community settings. Clinical trial data are typically 
collected in addition to those already collected in routine care, usually fol-low a standardized protocol, and are recorded in a case report form. When 
the trial is performed for the approval or assessment of a regulated medical 
product such as a new drug or device, the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) closely regulates how and what data are collected. In addition to 
traditional clinical trials, registries for quality activities, research, or post-marketing surveillance are a parallel source of enriched clinical data.
Employers, as the purchasers of health insurance for much of the 
population, often possess data on employees™ health care utilization, basic 
health status, and associated expenses which can be used for knowledge 
development. In addition, these data can have greater longitudinal richness 
than records from clinical care providers.
A ˜nal source of health data is population health data routinely col-lected through the public health system and its surveys and surveillance 
activities. These data provide information on overall health trends, such 
as births and deaths, disease prevalence, community health, environmental 
health, and access to care, as well as disease incidence and threat data. The 
collection and reporting of this information is increasingly digital, either 
through freestanding systems and portals or as integrated parts of EHR 
systems. Given the many levels at which public health worksŠlocal, county, 
state, and federalŠdifferent data collection approaches and requirements 
exist at the different levels. Other health-related community level data are 
routinely collected by various organizations, departments, and agencies. 
This includes community socioeconomic status pro˜le data; community 
physical pro˜le data, such as density, design, and use; civic engagement 
pro˜les; and community employer pro˜le. Additionally, organizations col
-lect data on individuals through their commercial and social activities, such 
as through supermarket rewards programs and Web-sur˜ng patterns. These 
data are used not only on their own, for insights into the community, but 
in concert with other health data to yield a more complete understanding 
of population health.MOVING TO A CONTINUOUSLY LEARNING HEALTH SYSTEM 
Although the collection of large amounts of health and health-related 
data holds promise for both the scale and types of learning possible, data 
alone are not suf˜cient for learning. Sharing, aggregation, analysis, and the 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 5continuous management and improvement of these data are necessary to 
enable the transition to a continuously learning health system.
The applications of digital health data in a learning system are multiple, 
including care coordination; management of patient populations; associated 
care and business processes; outcome, quality, and value assessments; gen
-eration of clinical evidence, including clinical trials, clinical effectiveness, 
and genomic studies; surveillance and trend detection, including medical 
products safety, syndromic and actionable surveillance, and hypothesis 
generation; and public health program management. These differing uses 
vary in their requirements for data quality and characteristics, but all share 
common challenges related to data access, liquidity, interoperability, and 
the development of innovative methods for analysis. These issues formed 
the foundation for the presentations and discussions at the IOM public 
workshop on Digital Data Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health 
and Health Care.WORKSHOP SCOPE AND OBJECTIVESWorkshop participants included experts from across medicine, public 
health, informatics, health information technology, health care services 
research, health care quality reporting, biomedical research, clinical re-search, statistics, medical product manufacturing, health care payment 
and ˜nancing, and patient advocacy. Content was structured to explore 
the data quality challenges and opportunities in a learning health system, 
highlighting the opportunities and priorities beyond care coordination such 
as population and care process management, clinical research, translational 
informatics, and public health support at the national and state level. The 
workshop also explored the potential for learning from large-scale health 
datasets, focusing on innovative approaches to overcoming the challenges 
of distributed data, data harmonization, and identity resolution.
The workshop statement of task can be found in Box 1-1, and the ele-ments are re˚ected in the stated meeting objectives:
1. Discuss the current quality status of digital health data.
2.
 Explore challenges, and identify key questions related to data qual
-ity in the use of EHRs, patient registries, administrative data, and 
public health sources for learningŠcontinuous and episodicŠand 
for system operational and improvement purposes.
3. Engage individuals and organizations leading the way in improv-ing the reliability, availability, and usability of digital health data 
for real-time knowledge generation and health improvement in a 
continuously learning health system. 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
4.
 Identify and characterize the current de˜ciencies and consider strat-egies, priorities, and responsibilities to address the de˜ciencies. 
5. Initiate the development of a strategic framework for integrated 
and networked stewardship of efforts to continuously increase 
digital data utility. 
Through a series of expert presentations and discussions, workshop 
participants addressed issues of matching data quality to use, how these 
needs align with current data sources, and what the potential and chal-lenges are for leveraging digital health data for learningŠboth the short 
and long term. The ˜nal workshop session included a moderated discussion 
geared toward describing ways forward on the issues highlighted earlier in 
the workshop.ORGANIZATION OF THE SUMMARY
This publication summarizes the proceedings of the workshop on Digi-tal Data Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care, the 
12th in the Learning Health System Series of publications by the Roundtable 
BOX 1-1
 Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will plan and conduct a public workshop to explore 
the data quality issues and strategies central to the increasing capture and 
use of digital clinical and patient-reported data for knowledge development. The 
workshop will engage leading experts in reviewing the challenges, de˜ning key 
questions, and exploring a strategic framework for progress on the issue of health 
data quality in a learning health system. Questions/topics of consideration could 
include What are the data quality requirements to support the various knowledge 
generation processes required by the learning health system (quality monitoring, 
sentinel event detection, disease surveillance, clinical research)? What is known 
about the current state of digital health data quality? What implications does this 
have for short term uses? What analytical methods are available to assess data 
quality? What novel analytical methods will need to be developed in order to meet 
learning health system data-use needs? What are the essential components of 
a strategy to achieve the necessary data quality levels? What lessons have been 
learned by those organizations already undertaking learning health systemŒtype 
efforts? What foundational work has been done that can be built on/leveraged to 
better meet learning health system data quality needs?
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION
 7on Value & Science-Driven Health Care. Chapters 2 through 5 summarize 
the expert presentations at the workshop, and are organized by thematic 
focus on the presentations, while Chapter 6 covers the concluding discus-sion. Chapter 2 addresses data quality challenges and opportunities in a 
learning health system, including explorations of data heterogeneity and the 
importance of focusing on data of value to the patient. Chapter 3 focuses 
on the many uses of the digital health data utility, covering the management 
of patient populations, clinical research, translational informatics, and both national and local public health efforts. Chapter 4 looks at emerging issues 
and opportunities in the use of large datasets, including a discussion of the 
challenge of data bias, and recent advances in mathematics that promise 
to move research toward generating real time insights. Chapter 5 explores 
emerging innovations in the use of digital health data including distributed 
queries, data normalization, and data linkages. Chapter 6 summarizes the 
concluding discussion in which many workshop participants suggested 
potential strategies and actions to catalyze progress.
REFERENCESDecker, S. L., E. W. Jamoom, and J. E. Sisk. 2012. Physicians in nonprimary care and small 
practices and those age 55 and older lag in adopting electronic health record systems. 
Health Affairs 31(5):1-7.IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2010. Redesigning the clinical effectiveness research paradigm: 
Innovation and practice-based approaches. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press._______. 2011a. Clinical data as the basic staple for health learning: Creating and protecting 
a public good. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______. 2011b. 
Digital infrastructure for the learning health system: The road to continuous 
improvement in health and health care. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
_______. 2011c. Learning what works: Infrastructure required for comparative effectiveness 
research. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92Data Quality Challenges 
and Opportunities in a 
Learning Health System
KEY SPEAKER THEMESOverhage
across datasets. 

its intended purpose.
burden of collection with its usefulness. 
Heywood
consider valuable.
-portant to patients.
-search and clinical care on a common platform constantly 
oriented around patient value.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
INTRODUCTION A learning health system relies on collecting and aggregating a variety 
of clinical data sources at the patient, practice, and population level. Realiz-ing this goal requires addressing concerns over data quality and harnessing 
new opportunities and sources of clinically relevant data. Marc Overhage, 
Chief Medical Informatics Of˜cer at Siemens Healthcare, focused his pre-sentation on the challenges for data collections and the limitations inher-ent in aggregating data across sources. Jamie Heywood, Co-Founder and 
Chairman of PatientsLikeMe, examined the issue of data quality as it relates 
to patient-reported data, and how patient value must be a central strategy 
in building a learning health system.
CHALLENGES FOR DATA COLLECTION AND AGGREGATION
Marc Overhage focused on several of the challenges posed by collecting and aggregating data to help derive meaningful conclusions and improve 
care. At each possible source of data collection, he noted, there are limita-tions to the quality of data obtained. With patient reported data, the way 
a patient understands or reports an event may not be understood in the 
same way by clinicians or researchers. Clinician-recorded data is limited 
in scope and quality by the time it takes to input structured data into an 
EHR. Finally, while external sources of dataŠlabs, imaging, pharmacy, 
etc.Šare not subject to the same human biases, they still carry other biases 
and limitations such as lack of standardization across products.
Overhage focused on structured data collection from the clinician per-spective, which he posed as a balance between the burden and cost associ-ated with its collection (impact on usability) and its value (usefulness of 
data) (see Figure 2-1). More structured data is generally more useful. How-ever, the level of structure dramatically impacts the burden of collection, 
and therefore the usability of the collection system; rigidly structured data 
is usually time- and resource-intensive to collect. There should be a focus on 
maximizing both usability and usefulnessŠthat is, ˜nding optimum value. 
Structured data collection is only part of the challenge. According to 
Overhage, although more and more efforts are being made to bring data 
together in a ﬁqueryable well,ﬂ most digital health data remains siloed 
within different institutions and organizations. Data aggregation is crucial 
for a learning health system, but brings about new challenges. 
One challenge noted by Overhage is the ability to identify patients 
across sources. When health information exchanges combine data from 
various sources, duplication of data or different views of the same clinical 
event can occur. He brought up the example of identifying which patients 
are on statins. Patients can be identi˜ed either based on medication order 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA QUALITY CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
 11data from an EHR or by claims data. Both are ﬁright,ﬂ as both are facts 
about the patient, but they can yield different results. Some patients have 
both an ordering event and a dispensing event, some have one or the other, 
and some have neither. Successful data aggregation, according to Overhage, 
will need to account for the fact that there are going to be repeated ob-servations and con˚icting evidence, and combine evidence in a meaningful 
way. Fortunately, there are computational advances that can improve this 
process. Overhage pointed to work being done at Siemens on computer al-gorithms that can parse through con˚icting evidence, assess its provenance, 
and begin to draw conclusions that clinicians can use.
Another challenge cited by Overhage was the ability to conduct 
population-level research on interventions and outcomes. He expressed 
caution with using large claims or health system EHR databases to draw 
conclusions. In particular, he focused on the importance of understanding 
the characteristics of datasets, such as the underrepresentation of females 
in the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), especially when making com
-parisons across datasets. He presented data from the Observational Medical 
Outcomes Partnership (OMOP) showing the correlation of Cox-2 inhibitor 
use to an increased incidence of myocardial infarction in a health system 
100%Free Text100%Structured and CodedUsefulnessof DataImpact onUsabilityOptimum MixFIGURE 2-1 The usability-usefulness tradeoff for data collection.
SOURCE: From Ambulatory practice clinical information management: Problems 
and prospects, by B. Middleton, K. Renner, and M. Leavitt. 
Journal of Healthcare 
Information Management 11(4):97-112. Copyright 2012 by the Healthcare Infor-mation and Management Systems Society. Adapted with permission.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
dataset. When this correlation was explored in other health system and 
claims datasets, however, no relationship was found. This type of hetero
-geneity impacts efforts to combine datasets for observational research. Dif-ferences in context and demographics limit comparability between datasets. For example, Medicare has a vastly different age distribution than most 
commercial payers. Similarly, the gender distribution for the VA dataset is 
disproportionately skewed toward males. Heterogeneity is not limited to 
demographics, he stressed, but also includes the context in which the data 
was collectedŠe.g., changes in drug utilization patterns within a given 
health system over time.Overhage concluded his remarks by stressing the need to appreciate 
that data quality lies in the eye of the beholder. The true quality of digi
-tal health data is an assessment of whether they are ˜t for their intended 
purpose. For example, he noted, data quality for population health mea-surement may be able to tolerate more error since researchers are looking 
for trends and changes at the population level. The same may be true 
for quality-measure adherence as well. However, at the individual patient 
encounter, decision support needs to be exactly right, and clinicians must 
have the correct information on the correct patient. Depending on the use, 
criteria for what is ﬁgood-enoughﬂ data will vary tremendously.
PATIENT-REPORTED DATA AND MAXIMIZING PATIENT 
VALUE IN THE LEARNING HEALTH SYSTEM
Heywood began his presentation with a series of quotes from manage-ment expert Peter Drucker: (1) Who is your customer? (2) What does your 
customer consider value? and (3) What are your results with customers? He 
proposed that the fact that health care costs have been increasing while the 
value of care has been decreasing can be traced to an inability to understand 
and answer these questions in the health care system. 
In health care, Heywood stressed, the patient is the customer. This re
-lationship, however, can be obscured in the research setting. According to 
Heywood, the clinician or researcher asking the question, rather than the 
patients, can often become the customer. This has profound implications 
on the utility of research. If the patient is the customer, he noted, research 
should be delivering results that they consider valuable. Currently, this is 
often not the case. Most clinical research focuses on physiologic, molecu-lar, and other markers rather than aspects that matter most to patients: 
well-being and productivity. In order to serve their customers most effec
-tively, Heywood proposed that all of research should be helping to answer 
this question that patients value most: Given my status, what is the best 
outcome I could hope to achieve and how do I get there? Digital health 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA QUALITY CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
 13data that help to answer this question needs to be captured, recorded, and 
analyzed. 
According to Heywood, patient-reported data can help improve the 
relevance of medical research to patients. He provided a brief overview of 
the PatientsLikeMe (PLM) online platform, and how it enables patients 
to share their data and learn from others. Patients create pro˜les on PLM 
which detail personal information, medical history, treatment history, and 
track functional status over time (using accepted patient reported outcome 
measures). This allows other patients on the site to ˜nd individuals similar 
to them, and learn from their experiences.
Despite some concerns over the perceived quality of patient reported 
data, Heywood provided an example of how patient-reported data can an-swer some of the same questions that traditional clinical outcomes research 
methods are used for. Since patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) comprise one of the largest groups on PLM, he detailed the use of 
patient-reported data to assess the ef˜cacy of lithium in slowing the progres-sion of ALS. In 2008, the results of a clinical trial were published showing 
that lithium signi˜cantly slowed the progression of ALS symptoms. Using 
the PLM platform, researchers were able to test this same treatment in the 
PLM population. They used an algorithm to match ALS patients being 
treated with lithium to similar patients who were not undergoing lithium 
treatment. The variety of demographic and physiologic variables recorded 
on PLM pro˜les allowed for each patient to be matched to an individual 
control, rather than pairing groups. No change in the progression of ALS 
symptoms was observed in the population being treated with lithium. The 
same results were later found in four clinical trials stopped early for futility.
The bene˜t of routinely collecting patient-reported data through a 
platform like PLM is that it greatly speeds up the assessment process for 
interventions. Since data are already in place, conducting clinical research 
does not require building new infrastructure nor collecting new data. Ac-cording to Heywood, this allowed the researchers at PLM to conduct their 
study of lithium ef˜cacy in ALS patients in a fraction of the time, and at a 
fraction of the cost, of the follow-up clinical trials to the 2008 study.
After focusing on the ALS case study, Heywood broadened his discus
-sion to consider the transformation necessary to use dataŠregardless of 
sourceŠto improve the health system. He returned to the center question 
patients value most: Given my status, what is the best outcome I could hope to achieve and how do I get there? The path to answering this question, 
he suggested, is building learning mechanisms, such as predictive models, 
into the system to speed discovery, assessment, and implementation. If 
done effectively, this would converge clinical research and clinical care into 
one model on a common platform. Heywood proposed that if this is done 
within the context of what the patient perceives as valuable, and keeps 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
patients part of the process the whole time, the result will be a learning 
health system. Heywood concluded his remarks with a series of paradigm 
shifts necessary to move toward a learning health system (Figure 2-2). 
These 
include moving toward a system characterized by sharing rather than priva-tization, patients as partners rather than subjects in research, accessibility 
rather than security, learning rather than validation, personalization rather 
than aggregation, and openness rather than closedness. 
FIGURE 2-2 Paradigm shifts required for the realization of a learning health 
system. Status quo is presented on the left and requirements of a learning health 
system on the right.SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from James Heywood. 
PrivateSharedSubjectPartnerSecureAccessibleValidatedLearningAggregatedPersonalizedOpenClosedDigital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.153Digital Health Data Uses: 
 Leveraging Data for Better Health
KEY SPEAKER THEMESLeenay
all stakeholders as active constituents in the health care 
conversation.
accurate, timely, and standardized to support actionable 
decisions.
of higher-quality data, with greater completeness and accuracy, 
and the increased liquidity of this data. 
Kush




grade,ﬂ data, which can be obtained from EHRs if certain 
processes are applied and requirements met.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
Levy
response should be aggregated and transformed to computable, 
standardized data for improved and more effective clinical 
decision support.

-tion of multiple sources.
learning cancer systems.
 Buehler
data.









advantage of the data in˚ux resulting from implementation of 
Meaningful Use.
through data will serve to strengthen the population-level ap-proach to surveillance.LaVenture

program needs. 

will increase the prevalence of better-quality data to improve 
care and public health. 

-˜cations, and certi˜cation criteria create obstacles for the use 
of that data for surveillance.

encouraged as a standard of practice. 

requires a shared responsibility for achieving high levels of data 
quality. 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DIGITAL HEALTH DATA USES
 17INTRODUCTIONDifferent data uses have different requirements and priorities. This 
chapter includes presentations and discussions focused on data uses and 
quality requirements from the perspectives of various stakeholders in 
the ˜eld. Mark Leenay, Chief Medical Of˜cer and Senior Vice President 
at OptumHealth Care Solutions, discussed challenges and opportunities 
speci˜c to practice management and the clinical care digital data utility. 
Rebecca Kush, Founder and the current President and CEO of Clinical 
Data Interchange Standards Consortium (CDISC), built on this topic in her 
discussion of data quality requirements, challenges, priorities and enabling 
standards/processes for the clinical research enterprise. Later, Mia Levy, 
Director of Cancer Clinical Informatics for the Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer 
Center, detailed the case example of Vanderbilt™s experience and successes 
in implementing a translational informatics data management system for 
cancer diagnosis, treatment, and care. James Buehler, Director of the Pub
-lic Health Surveillance & Informatics Program Of˜ce at the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), focused on data quality for public 
health surveillance at the national level, while Marty LaVenture, Director of 
the Of˜ce of Health Information Technology and e-Health at the Minnesota 
Department of Health, spoke to the local and state levels.
PRACTICE MANAGEMENTIn his discussion of the digital data utility and its role in clinical practice 
management, Mark Leenay emphasized the requirements necessary to en-able sustainable private health information exchanges while ensuring data 
are connected, intelligent, and aligned. Actionable data at the point of care, 
increased data liquidity, and integration of data across the care continuum, 
as well as across different types of data, are all integral to incorporating 
digital health data into practice management. 
While the quality of health data is important to their use, Leenay said, 
˚ow of data also plays a major role in supporting population management. 
Currently, data platforms are not integrated into routine care, rendering the 
˚ow of digital health information incomplete, and leaving the many differ-ent stakeholders managing care with only a partial view of the situation. 
Without a central repository of digital health information, from which each 
stakeholder is able to extract information to make decisions, this ineffective 
communication stream is dif˜cult to rectify. The current lack of information 
˚uidity, Leenay concluded, warrants continued efforts designed to bring 
data to the point of care for individuals.
In conjunction with the challenge of ˚uidity, identity resolution contin
-ues to be a barrier to providing integrated, longitudinal data. Without na
-Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
tional member IDs, for both patients and providers, effective use of digital 
health data for practice management will continue to be a struggle. As an 
example of this challenge, Leenay cited that out of people using health care 
exchanges, it is predicted that 50 percent will be eligible for Medicaid at 
some point during the year. As these individuals presumably will alternate 
between a private exchange and Medicaid, integrating their data presents 
a challenge. Further complicating the issue, National Provider IDs (NPIs) 
are used inconsistently, which causes dif˜culties for data aggregation across 
provider and hospital groups. 
 Content within data systems, both administrative and clinical, presents additional challenges. Leenay suggested that 85 percent of the informa-tion in EHRs is administrative rather than clinical data. Administrative 
claims data typically are designed for fee-for-service billing as opposed to 
pay-for-performance. Historically, incentives have been designed to reward 
complexity of service; the more complex the service, the more the provider 
will be paid. However, as the system shifts to pay-for-performance, incen
-tives will need to be structured so that physicians are incentivized to enter 
more clinical data in order to be reimbursed appropriately. Additionally, the 
limited link between claims data and clinical data, and provider resistance 
to efforts to forge that link, presents a challenge to supporting the sorts 
of analyses that require insight into both cost or utilization and clinical 
outcomes. Citing an area for potential short-term progress, Lennay men-tioned that from a clinical data perspective, there is minimal use of national 
registries. Such registries could provide a way to look at clinical outcomes 
that are not necessarily as complex as EHRs. As a cautionary note, Lennay 
pointed out that from an administrative dataset perspective, migration from 
ICD-9 to ICD-10 will involve a transition from fewer data points to more, 
a complicated extrapolation that will be an ongoing challenge.
Lastly, Leenay emphasized, the data actually included in EHRs are of
-ten inconsistent and incomplete. However, in light of the changing health 
care environment, primarily the development of accountable care organi-zations (ACOs), data quality requirements are changing. He pointed out 
that ACOs represent an alignment of incentives for the collection of higher 
quality data, with greater completeness and accuracy, and the increased 
liquidity of this data.
In summary, Leenay underscored several priorities to improve integra
-tion of the digital data utility into clinical care moving forward: identity 
resolution, information exchange standards, registries, and attention to 
disparities. Identity resolution will be critical to increase the accuracy of 
digital record use for patient care; strategies to develop and improve cur-rent dataset systems must include a focus on standards and normalization 
to facilitate coordinated information exchange. Organizations and clini-cians should make greater use of national registries. And given the current 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DIGITAL HEALTH DATA USES
 19socioeconomic disparities in health care, it is important for stakeholders in 
the digital movement to guard against worsening such disparities through 
the digital divide. 
CLINICAL RESEARCHIn her discussion of clinical research, Rebecca Kush emphasized that 
different types of analyses require different grades of data quality, likening 
the data quality requirements for clinical decisions and regulated research 
to ﬁsushi-gradeﬂ data, or the highest quality available. As depicted in 
Figure 3-1, Kush laid out these requirements on a sliding scale, dependent 
FIGURE 3-1 Spectrum of data quality requirements based on intended use. 
SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Rebecca Kush.
ﬁSushi-GradeﬂClinical DecisionsRegulated ResearchSignal Validation; Active Safety SurveillanceBasic ResearchSignal or Trend DetectionNonmedical Sales and MarketingﬁAll-You-Can-Eat-Buffet GradeﬂQuality RequirementsType of ProjectDigital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
on the type of activities supported. Pointing to the extremes, she suggested 
that those projects investigating nonmedical sales and marketing have far 
different data quality requirements than those involving regulated research 
and clinical decisions. 
Currently, Kush said, clinical research (especially regulated clinical re
-search) presents a plethora of logistical challenges to clinical investigators. 
The average active study site has 3 or more disparate data entry systems; 
50-60 percent of trials involve paper data collection on 3- or 4-part forms, 
while the remaining 40-50 percent of trials involve electronic data capture 
tools. Data are entered 4-7 times total on average, including 2-3 times by 
the clinicians or study coordinators. Thus, there is plenty of opportunity 
to introduce transcription errors. In addition, reporting an unexpected or 
serious adverse event does not ˜t into normal clinical care work˚ow and 
takes excessive time, so that researchers often refrain from doing so. Given 
these inef˜ciencies and labor-intensive procedures, Kush emphasized, most 
clinicians do one regulated clinical research study and no more. Further ex-acerbating the data quality issue, efforts to ensure that study data are clean 
can involve signi˜cant resources and ˜nancial consequences; depending on 
the point of the research process in which the error is identi˜ed, correction 
of a single error in the database can cost upward of $8,000. 
However, promise lies in the growing industry appreciation of the 
power of standardization. Kush described CDISC™s progress in this ˜eld 
through development of integration pro˜les with the capability to enable 
the extraction of a standardized, clinical research dataset (CDASH, Clini
-cal Data Acquisition Standards Harmonization) from EHRs. The resulting 
interoperability speci˜cation (a set of standards) meets global regulations 
for collection of electronic research data and produces the minimum dataset 
needed on any clinical trial for regulated purposes. This combination of 
work˚ow enablers and standards has been used in safety reporting, regula-tory reporting, and Phase 4 trials; and presents an opportunity to support 
research with EHRs and contribute to the process of research informing 
clinical decisions faster with higher quality information.
Kush then pointed to the Coalition Against Major Diseases (CAMD), 
an effort initiated by the Critical Path Institute (C-Path) to pool Alzheimer™s-
related trial data from multiple sources with the goal of generating better 
information from a larger, aggregated database. By standardizing this data 
into the CDISC format and then pooling it across sources, C-Path was able 
to create a database of more than 6,000 patients and has now made this 
database available to researchers around the world. A standard guide has 
been developed for researchers moving forward, so that they can collect 
Alzheimer™s data in the CDISC format from the start and it can be easily 
compared with the current database. As such, this standardization effort 
has allowed researchers the capability to easily break out different cohorts 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DIGITAL HEALTH DATA USES
 21and better identify trends in their patient populations in order to identify 
personalized treatments or to populations most likely to respond. 
With CAMD as an exemplar of the opportunities available, Kush delin
-eated priorities for clinical research to bring such successes to scale across 
the ˜eld. Data quality should be built into the clinical research system 
from the beginning, and those individuals involved in the research process 
(including site personnel, the project team, reviewers, and auditors) should 
be trained and educated to incorporate data quality measures, including 
standards for data collection, into their work. Data collection should be 
simpli˜ed with well-de˜ned requirements for the necessary data set and 
standardized formats. Data should be handled only the minimum amount 
throughout the process, thereby reducing potential errors due to transcrip-tion or reentry. Additionally, Kush noted, data quality measures should be 
considered and incorporated throughout the postmarketing process. 
In her ˜nal comments, Kush emphasized that greater standardization 
offers considerable promise for clinical research moving forward, particu-larly in leveraging EHRs for research. As exempli˜ed by CAMD and similar 
efforts, standardization facilitates both data sharing and data aggregation, 
presenting the opportunity for groundbreaking research efforts to identify 
new treatments and therapies with larger, standardized datasets. 
TRANSLATIONAL INFORMATICS
In her discussion of translational informatics, Mia Levy focused on her 
experience at the Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, where genome-directed 
cancer treatment is the focus of the Center™s work. Currently, Levy noted, 
genomics is playing an ever more important role in the care of patients 
across the cancer continuum; cancer diagnosis, treatment selection, and care 
are all experiencing an era of genomics. 
Traditionally, cancers have been categorized and treated according to 
the site of their origin and their histology. Now, the molecular subtypes of 
cancers are determining the course of care, and the molecular variance be-ing discovered in these subtypes is vast. Levy noted that for those patients 
with characterized molecular subtypes, their mutations are considered ac-tionable. Either an FDA-approved, standard-of-care therapy is available to 
treat the subtype of their cancer or a medication for their speci˜c muta-tion is in the clinical research pipeline. However, in this genomic era, even 
patients for whom a mutation has not been identi˜ed are also considered 
to be actionable, in that they are spared from receiving ineffective, costly, 
and potentially harmful treatments. These developments hold great promise 
for the ˜eld of cancer treatment, but the process of implementing a system 
capable of processing and managing this information poses an entirely new 
range of challenges to those involved in translational informatics.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
Reporting molecular diagnostic results in an EHR is typically unstruc-tured and unwieldy she stated. Text is entered into a reporting template, 
and that form is then scanned and uploaded into the EHR as an image ˜le, 
rendering it noncomputable. Another challenge associated with this type of 
reporting is the sheer amount of data to be reported. In her example, Levy 
highlighted that variance on 40 different mutations had to be reported at 
the same time. Not only does that require an increase in data points, but the 
complexity associated with this variance information must also be re˚ected 
in the system. Information must be reported in a way that is clinically use
-ful for physicians, in order to help inform them of the ˜ndings™ clinical 
signi˜cance. Levy emphasized that much of this information is actionable 
only through its ability to link a patient™s results to clinical trial eligibility, 
and traditional reporting mechanisms do not possess this ability. 
Levy noted that approaches to addressing these challenges are varied. 
Visualization of test results, complete with color coordination and coding, 
has proved very helpful at Vanderbilt, allowing researchers and clinicians 
to quickly scan information and identify positive ˜ndings. Findings are 
reported in a structured way, so that there is an entity, an attribute, and 
a value behind each piece of data. Moreover, information and results 
recorded in the EHR are linked directly to a database that provides in-formation on the clinical signi˜cance of a patient™s particular mutation 
variant, thereby identifying potential targeted therapies. Further guidance 
is provided through inclusion of relevant, summarized clinical trial litera-ture, which links clinicians to full, PubMed sources should they need to 
see additional information on the signi˜cance of the trial to their patient™s 
care. The data management system also links the EHR to a clinical trials 
database, providing clinicians with the means to identify relevant trial eli-gibility criteria. All of these strategies, Levy emphasized, offer promise for 
the effective and ef˜cient incorporation of complex and varied digital data 
into the process of cancer care. 
Levy ˜nished her discussion by looking to the future, contemplating 
how to make systems like Vanderbilt™s sustainable and scalable with respect 
to content generation as well as content dissemination. Aggregation of insti-tutional data, she suggested, is critical for rendering the data clinically use
-ful. Information from patient diagnosis, treatment, and treatment response 
should be aggregated and transformed to computable, standardized data 
for improved and more effective clinical decision support. Moreover, the 
records incorporated into this type of database should be combined with 
other data, including patient-reported outcomes as well as cost information, 
both of which would be bene˜cial to understanding treatment comparative 
effectiveness. Given the complexity of genome-directed cancer treatment 
and translational informatics on the whole, Levy underscored her experi-ences with the importance of triangulation of data from multiple sources 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DIGITAL HEALTH DATA USES
 23to better approximate the probability of an event and use this as a basis 
for learning processes. EHR data can be useful for learning systems, but 
it must be of high quality and mitigated through triangulation of multiple 
resources.SUPPORTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND 
SURVEILLANCE AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL
In the context of public health surveillance, data quality has varying 
de˜nitions. As James Buehler of the CDC explained in his comments, qual-ity requirements depend on the public health purpose the data are serving. 
For those working to prevent and contain speci˜c diseases or adverse health events, the required data includes information about disease characteristics 
and severity, where and when it is occurring, its antecedents, its evolution 
over time, and its consequences. Moreover, public health professionals 
need data on those who are affected, individuals™ risk factors and whether 
certain groups of people are affected more than others, outcomes, and dis
-ease susceptibility to treatment. All of this information, often generated by 
individuals™ utilization of health care services, provides insight into what 
can be done to craft, target, and direct and redirect public health interven-tions. As such, public health surveillance is not simply about collecting in-formation; it is about analyzing and using that data for a purpose, and that 
purpose can vary from disease surveillance, to situational awareness of a 
community™s status, to local, sometimes individual, interventions. While the 
data-quality requirements vary for each of these different purposes, Buehler 
continued, some apply to the broad range of public health surveillance 
uses. The data should be complete, reliable, timely, and inexpensive, and 
they should provide accurate insights into the local surveillance context. 
In practice, it is often not possible for a surveillance system to achieve all 
of these desirable attributes, requiring balance of desirable and sometimes 
competing attributes to maximize utility and value.
In order to meet these requirements, current public health surveillance 
data sources and systems are becoming progressively more automated. 
Attention is increasingly directed toward integrating EHRs into both the 
reporting and feedback arms of surveillance, so that individuals™ direct in-teractions with the health care system can serve as an additional source of 
electronic public health data. However, the process of moving this automa
-tion and integration forward faces a number of challenges Buehler noted, 
outlining several priorities for addressing those challenges. It is critical that 
public health surveillance systems are prepared to take full advantage of the 
data in˚ux resulting from implementation of meaningful use, he said. The 
public health workforce likewise must be equipped to make the best use of 
this information, as it presents a great opportunity for more effective and 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
ef˜cient public health surveillance. Finally, he noted, linking public health 
and direct health care services research in this way will serve to strengthen 
the population-level approach to surveillance.
SUPPORTING PUBLIC HEALTH AND 
SURVEILLANCE AT THE LOCAL LEVEL
In line with Buehler™s discussion of public health surveillance at the na
-tional level, Martin LaVenture shifted the focus to public health at the state 
and local (city and county) level. LaVenture reinforced the earlier assertion 
that necessary data quality attributes vary and depend on the context of 
the local public health activity. For example, timeliness is of particular im
-portance for newborn screening, acute disease surveillance, and outbreaks, 
while completeness is especially critical for maintenance of immunization 
records. Accuracy is crucial for monitoring cancer clusters, while currency, 
comprehensiveness, and access to the primary data source all are relevant 
for public health surveillance and clinical decision support. 
These quality characteristics all contribute to the usability of public 
health surveillance data today. Currently, surveillance data is collected 
from many sources, and health facilities increasingly are adopting EHRs for patient information management and decision support. However, frequent 
miscoding and mismapping of this information can result in loss of trust in 
both the data and the providers using those data; in which case the value 
of those data suffers. Moreover, the limited EHR standards and speci˜ca
-tions and certi˜cation criteria lead to incomplete and invalid records, which create obstacles to ef˜cient use of that data for clinical and disease surveil-lance purposes. This can lead to additional work by providers and public 
health of˜cials and delay important public health intervention, prevention, 
and policy decisions. 
In the face of these challenges, LaVenture said, the public health digi
-tal environment is changing. Greater EHR use with standards and quality 
checks built in will increase the prevalence of better quality data, thereby 
creating the opportunity for quality information exchange for care and 
public health and improved point-of-care decision support. To facilitate 
this progress, LaVenture proposed a number of priorities. Health infor
-mation systems need to move beyond information management to rapid, 
accurate knowledge creation with support from public health information 
systems such as an immunization information system. The EHR certi˜ca-tion process, he suggested, should include more comprehensive, structured 
content requirements for data quality, including thresholds at the point of 
capture, review, and exchange thus helping ensure higher-quality outputs 
for broader use. Standards for quality checks and improvement are needed 
to ensure updates and corrections can be completed quickly and propaga-Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DIGITAL HEALTH DATA USES
 25tion of errors to other settings can be minimized. LaVenture went on to 
suggest that health care professionals should be educated on the value of 
quality data to encourage further focus on and enthusiasm for high-quality 
data, and incentives should encourage use of this data to increase value 
and quality. Public health agencies need similar incentives and support to 
modernize state and local systems in order to enable bidirectional ˚ow of 
this information. Additionally, LaVenture noted that better use of existing 
standards and adopting new standards for the content and quality of data 
will reduce variability and increase usability for multiple purposes, and 
continuous improvement of data sources will ensure that their output is 
of the highest quality possible. It is also critical that information generated 
from these sources, and the knowledge from its analysis, is brought back 
to the source, to foster continuous improvement at the source level. Finally, 
LaVenture concluded by emphasizing that continued innovation with the 
public health case in mind will lead to better-quality data and better surveil
-lance through improved adoption, use, and exchange of health information. 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.274Issues and Opportunities 
in the Emergence of Large 
Health-Related Datasets
KEY SPEAKER THEMESMadigan
-cians and current ﬁevidence-basedﬂ models. 

-dictive models.
but there are strategies to mitigate its impact.
McCall
understanding of cause and effect.
-ets, have the potential to allow researchers to discover cause-effect relationships rather than correlations.

to come up with causal structure rather than static answers.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
INTRODUCTION The emergence of large health-related datasetsŠfrom sources such as 
large health systems, payers, pharmacy bene˜t managers, etc.Šhave the 
potential to transform the clinical effectiveness research enterprise. Real-izing the potential requires mathematical methods that handle the scale of 
data, as well as an appreciation of the biases and limitations inherent to 
each data source. David Madigan, Professor and Chair of the Department 
of Statistics at Columbia University, discussed the challenge of bias in large 
datasets, and strategies and methods to more appropriately address bias 
in observational clinical outcomes research. Carol McCall, Chief Strategy 
Of˜cer at GNS Healthcare, focused on new mathematical approaches that 
allow nuanced insights to be derived from large datasets.
THE CHALLENGE OF BIAS IN LARGE HEALTH-RELATED DATASETS
David Madigan began his presentation by focusing on the current clini
-cal decision framework, which revolves around evidence-based medicine 
and clinical judgment. He told the story of a cardiologist deciding whether 
or not a patient should receive angioplasty. Using a risk assessment algo
-rithm from the Framingham study, the doctor assigned a 10-year risk of 
developing coronary heart disease using the following variables: age, total 
cholesterol, smoking, high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and blood pressure. 
According to Madigan, this is evidence-based medicine in 2012. A multi-tude of other health related dataŠother lab results, family history, medica
-tion, other health issuesŠis ignored in this analysis. This is where, ideally, 
clinical judgment comes in. The cardiologist should use the evidence-based 
recommendation, coupled with the other variables, to make an appropriate 
decision. Madigan argued that in the face of this much information it is 
infeasible for a human being to do optimal decision making.
With the right statistical techniques, however, large health-related da
-tasets can begin to answer these questions. Madigan cited the work of the 
Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership (OMOP), which has medi-cal records for roughly 200 million individuals. Within this database, he 
speculated, there might be 30,000 individuals like the patient described 
above. This information can be used to make inferences about the course 
of care more precisely than those made by physicians. At its heart, Madigan stated, these are issues of predictive modeling. The way that ﬁbig dataﬂ can 
help improve care is by aiding the development of good predictive models. 
According to Madigan, the data for these types of analyses exist. There 
are several databases with large quantities of patient-level data. The limi-tation is that, currently, there are no satisfactory methodologies to build 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGENCE OF LARGE HEALTH-RELATED DATASETS
 29reliable predictive models. One challenge is the inherent bias of the data be
-ing used. Madigan laid out the various stages in the data collection and re-search process at which bias can be introduced into a data set (Figure 4-1). 
Bias alone is not the problem. In fact, it is unavoidable. The larger 
problem is that current observational research with large datasets does not 
acknowledge the limitations that bias places on results. Madigan noted 
that, generally, the issues of bias and measurement error are only paid lip 
service in the peer-reviewed literature for observational clinical outcomes 
research. Articles will often state potential limitations, but fail to discuss 
the implications. There are profound data quality issues when using large 
observational datasets and, according to Madigan, the current practice for 
observational research does little about it. 
To demonstrate the consequence of bias he presented some data from 
the OMOP database. OMOP researchers ran self-controlled case series 
analysis for a variety of drugs across each of the 10 component OMOP 
databases. The results demonstrated extreme heterogeneity. For 20 of the 
50 drug-event pairs studies, the drug-event relationship went from being 
statistically signi˜cant in the positive direction to statistically signi˜cant in 
the negative direction depending on which database was used. This het-erogeneity has profound implications for the generalizability of published 
outcomes research.Madigan concluded his presentation by focusing on strategies that 
confront these challenges of bias and data quality. One critical strategy is 
sensitivity analysis. He acknowledged that sound statistical methods and 
software for sensitivity analysis currently exist. These methods look at 
sources of biases and run various ﬁwhat-ifﬂ scenarios to give a sense of how robust ˜ndings are. He suggested that sensitivity analysis ought to be an 
absolute requirement for the publication of observational studies.
True Causal RelationshipTrue Values for Actual PopulationObserved SampleObserved DataMeasurement ErrorRandom Sampling Error and Selection Bias ConfoundingFIGURE 4-1 Sources of bias in clinical datasets.
SOURCE: Reprinted with permission from Phillips, 2003.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
The other strategy to improve the quality and utility of retrospective 
outcomes research is to establish operating characteristics of observational 
studies. Madigan argued that currently there is no good understanding of 
the quality and reliability of this type of research. For example, if a study 
arrives at a certain relative risk, how close is that relevant risk to the truth if it were to be reproduced with different data? Similarly, when studies report 
95 percent con˜dence intervals, how close are those to the truth? Madigan 
noted that OMOP researchers have found that across databases, reported 
95 percent con˜dence intervals often have only roughly 50 percent cover-age. There is a need, he stressed, to study this science empirically in order 
to get a handle on how well it actually works and how likely the results 
are to be the truth.MOVING FROM ANALYTICS TO INSIGHTS
Carol McCall posed that the principal challenge in health care today is 
the ability to create a deep and dynamic understanding of what works best 
for whom. She noted that while there are currently many areas of redesign 
and improvement in health careŠaligning business models, transforming 
care models, building infrastructureŠall of these changes implicitly assume 
that there is access to evidence and an understanding of what works for 
whom. The sustainability of all of these efforts demands something new: a 
nuanced understanding of cause and effect in health care.
According to McCall, three developments have made it possible to ana-lyze vast amounts of data to generate actionable medical evidence. The ˜rst 
is Moore™s law, the doubling of computing capacity approximately every 2 
years, which gave rise to big data and big-data technologies. The second is 
that health care data is becoming much more liquid. The third, which she 
noted as the lynchpin, is a revolution in mathematics, led by Judea Pearl, 
which has mathematized causality, opening a paradigm shift in analytics. 
Previously, the problem with big data was that the bigger it got, the more 
correlations were found. McCall stressed that correlation is a truism. Data 
is correlated, always higher or lower, but it always exists, and it is 
not the 
same as causation. This new calculus of causality, however, allows research
-ers to discover cause-effect relationships and generate evidence from big 
data (Pearl, 2009). 
The fundamental difference of this type of approach is that it focuses 
on insights rather than analytics. Through these types of mathematical 
methods, she notes, researchers are left with causal structure rather than 
a static answer. This structure can be interrogated to answer a variety of 
important questions such as what data is needed to resolve existing uncer-tainty, an insight that can guide next data investments and be used to tailor 
research strategies. Furthermore, this type of structure allows researchers to 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EMERGENCE OF LARGE HEALTH-RELATED DATASETS
 31run counterfactuals, interrogate and investigate much more quickly, and go 
beyond situations where they already know the answer. This ability to make 
predictions and quickly assess results is at the core of a learning health 
system. Clinicians and researchers can predict an outcome, observe what 
happens, compare it against experience, and adjust future care protocols in 
response. And this can all happen rapidly.
With the mathematical methods in place, McCall noted, the priorities 
for big data analytics and evidence generation are shifting. Since mathemat-ics can be scaled to any level and performed on any data set, the challenge 
now is ˜nding data sources that are comprehensive and up to date. She 
underscored the need to link and share data from a variety of sources, such 
as pharmaceutical companies, hospitals, pharmaceutical bene˜t managers 
and payers. With data coming from several sources, there is also the need 
to understand context, and metadata take on an added importance.
REFERENCESPearl, J. 2009. Causality: Models, reasoning and inference. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Phillips, C. V. 2003. Quantifying and reporting uncertainty from systematic errors. 
Epidemiol-ogy 14(4):459-466.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.335Innovations Emerging in the 
Clinical Data Utility
KEY SPEAKER THEMESElmore and Platt
-ing health system. 


timeliness, ˚exibility, and sustainability.

in ways that are HIPAA-compliant and maintain local context.
Chute
effective and accurate secondary use.

hybrid approach of new systems standardizing from inception 
and legacy systems transforming over time is most feasible.

-portunity for normalization in a way that maintains the con-text and provenance of the data.

and terminology service; a national repository of value sets is 
one suggested approach to handling this challenge.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
Kheterpal
comprehensive, longitudinal information to support team care.
advantages to better link data between sources while maintain-ing privacy.
INTRODUCTIONIn order to make optimal use of the digital health data utility, novel and 
innovative approaches will have to be developed. These innovations include learning from large sets of data while dealing with the risk associated with 
physical aggregation, coping with incomplete standardization of data, and 
linking data from diverse sources without the use of universal identi˜ers. 
Richard Elmore, Coordinator of Query Health at the Of˜ce of the National 
Coordinator for Health Information Technology, and Richard Platt, Chair 
of Population Medicine at Harvard Medical School and Harvard Pilgrim 
Health Care Institute, discussed the speci˜c case of distributed data queries. 
Christopher Chute, Professor of Medical Informatics at the Mayo Clinic, 
elaborated on challenges and opportunities associated with data harmo-nization and normalization. Vik Kheterpal, Principal at CareEvolution, 
focused on data linkage between sources.
DISTRIBUTED QUERIESIn their discussion of distributed queries, Richard Elmore and Richard 
Platt covered the broad de˜nition and qualities of such queries, and pro-vided speci˜c examples of these queries in action. Distributed queries allow 
querying of data from multiple partners without having to physically ag-gregate data in one central repository; a query is sent to all partners, and 
each participant runs this query internally and returns summary results 
individually. Some example use cases for distributed population queries 
include population measures related to disease outbreaks, postmarket sur-veillance, prevention, quality, and performance. The advantages of this 
model, Elmore emphasized, are myriad. A distributed query approach 
allows data partners to maintain HIPAA-mandated, contractual control 
of their protected health information (PHI), and it facilitates data validity 
by ensuring that results are returned by local content experts, those most 
familiar with and understanding of the data and their interpretation. The 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATIONS EMERGING IN THE CLINICAL DATA UTILITY
 35distributed data environment also supports data accuracy, timeliness, ˚ex
-ibility, and sustainability. 
Despite their many advantages, distributed queries also face a number 
of data quality challenges. Complications in integrating results from sev
-eral data sources due to a lack of standards were cited as an example. But, 
Elmore said, pathbreaking work is under way to address this problem. Dif-˜culty in striking a balance between clinical intuitiveness and computability when expressing a query is another challenge. Moreover, once a query is 
formulated, the lack of semantic equivalency and standards to express clini-cal concepts among data systems must be addressed. Additionally, there is 
no cultivated standard value set, clinicians in the same practice often code 
differently, and each organization has its own established value sets. Fur
-thermore, within those value sets, data are often missing, so completeness 
also presents a challenge to distributed queries.
Despite the obstacles inherent to such queries, several examples, across 
many domains, are ongoing and have achieved great success. Platt described 
Mini-Sentinel, an FDA-sponsored pilot initiative that has created a distrib-uted dataset that includes data on 126 million people at 17 data partners 
to support active safety surveillance of medical products. The FDA now 
routinely uses the system. 
Platt cited an example of a query dealing with drugs for smoking ces-sation, addressing concern that a certain drug increased risk of negative 
cardiac outcomes. Within 3 days of receiving FDA™s intent to query the 
network, Mini-Sentinel returned its ˜rst report on the results, including 
information on 300 million person years of experience. While the speed and 
scope of the query result were impressive, Platt noted that it had several as-sociated limitations. These included that it was intended to be a quick look, 
not a ˜nal answer; that the result did not exclude excess risk; and that re-corded exposures may have been missing or included a misclassi˜ed indica-tion. Moreover, the cohort may have been unrepresentative, outcomes may 
have been misclassi˜ed, and there was a potential for residual confounding 
due to disparate smoking intensities or comorbidities. Nonetheless, with 
the right clari˜cation on the query itself, speci˜cations on the cohort of 
interest, and selection of diagnosis codes, the network was able to rapidly 
query hundreds of millions of people™s worth of data without transferring 
any institution™s PHI. 
Another query focused on a comparison of individuals who had expe-rienced a stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) and previously received 
one of two different types of platelet antagonists. Treatment with one of 
the platelet antagonists was counter-indicated for individuals who had pre
-viously had a stroke or TIA; Mini-Sentinel determined that half as many 
individuals received the counter-indicated drug following stroke or TIA 
compared to those individuals receiving the comparison drug. The limita-Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
tions inherent to this query included that the ICD-9 codes used for TIA and 
stroke were not validated in Mini-Sentinel, and that the longest look back 
for stroke or TIA events was 1 year, so that patients who experienced an 
event earlier than 1 year prior were missed. 
In both of these examples, it was possible to get very quick informa-tion that provided guidance that FDA found to be useful in determining 
how much urgency should be attached to a speci˜c question, while also 
helping to develop next steps. Along these lines, Query Health, an ONC-
sponsored initiative, is working with many partners to develop standards 
for distributed data queries. As Elmore emphasized, the idea is to send 
questions to voluntary, collaborative networks, whose varied data sources 
may range from EHRs, to health information exchanges (HIEs), to other 
clinical records. These queries have the potential to dramatically cut cycle 
time on population questions, from years to days, and thereby, Elmore said, 
are critical to ONC™s strategy to bend the curve toward transformed health, 
and will play a foundational role in the digital infrastructure for a learn-ing health system, focusing on the patient and patient populations, while 
ensuring privacy and trust.
DATA HARMONIZATION AND NORMALIZATION
In his comments on data harmonization and normalization, Christopher 
Chute stressed that data from patient encounters must be comparable and 
consistent in order to provide knowledge and insights to inform future care 
decisions. This normalization is also necessary for big-data approaches 
to queries. However, most clinical data in the United States, even within 
institutions, are heterogeneous, which presents a major challenge for har
-monization efforts. ONC™s initiation of Meaningful Use is mitigating this 
challenge, but more work is needed. 
Data normalization, Chute said, comes in two varieties: clinical data 
normalization of structured information, and processing of unstructured 
natural language. Moreover, three potential approaches to instituting this 
normalization exist. The ˜rst approach is for all generators of data, includ-ing lab systems, departmental systems, physician entry systems, to normal-ize their data at the source. Given the institutional effort necessary to realize 
this approach, it is not realistic in the short term. The second approach 
places all hopes for normalization in transformation and mapping on the 
back end of data systems; this approach sometimes works, but often is as
-sociated with ambiguous meanings and other transformation dif˜culties. 
Lastly, the third and most promising method is a hybrid approach, in which 
new systems begin by normalizing their data at the source, while established 
systems implement standard normalization protocols like meaningful use 
and data from legacy systems are transformed. 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATIONS EMERGING IN THE CLINICAL DATA UTILITY
 37In discussing these approaches, Chute emphasized, it is important to 
comprehend fully the de˜nition of normalization, as it has both syntactic 
and semantic meanings. Syntactic normalization is highly mechanical and 
involves correction of malformed messages. An example of such work is 
the Health Open Source Software pipeline created by Regenstrief Institute, 
which is capable of this type of syntactic normalization. On the other hand, 
semantic normalization typically involves vocabulary and concept mapping.Both types of normalization assume that there is a normal form to 
target, yet extant national and international standards do not fully specify 
that target. Many standards exist, but, Chute said, they do not specify what 
is needed. The current standards and speci˜cations of HIE and messaging 
are narrow, and do not look at the full representational problems of clini
-cal data, so that efforts to meet the standards fall short on those fronts. 
Additionally, while there is tension on this point, machine readable, rather 
than human readable, standard representation is necessary for large-scale 
inferencing and secondary use. 
Having elaborated on the de˜nition and current characteristics of 
normalization, Chute turned to describing current efforts undertaken by 
ONC™s Strategic Health IT Advanced Research Projects (SHARP) Program, 
speci˜cally SHARPn, whose major focus is on normalizing and standard-izing data. SHARPn is approaching data normalization through clinical 
element model (CEM) structures, which are a basis for retaining consis-tent meaning for data when they are exchanged between heterogeneous 
computer systems or when clinical data are referenced in decision support 
logic or other modalities of secondary use. CEMs include the context and 
provenance of data, for example a patient™s position and body location will 
be recorded alongside his or her blood pressure reading. 
This promising model has generated an international consortium, the 
Clinical Information Model Initiative (CIMI), which brings together a 
variety of efforts focused on CEMs. When comparing the resulting CEMs 
between different participating partners, it becomes clear that different sec
-ondary uses require different metadata, which raises the question of what 
structured information should be incorporated into these models. By bind-ing value sets to CEMs, Chute suggested, it is possible to effectively institute 
semantic normalization. Ideally, all collaborating groups would implement 
the same value sets and they would be drawn from ﬁstandard vocabular-iesﬂ like LOINC and SNOMED. However, it is likely that many value sets 
would have to be bound to these CEMs in order to truly have interoper
-ability and a comparable and consistent representation of clinical data. 
Value-set management, therefore, is a major component of normalization, 
and terminology services and a national repository of value sets managed 
by the National Library of Medicine is one suggested approach to handling 
this challenge. Local codes would have to map to the major value sets, and 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
the process of semantic mapping from local codes to ﬁstandardﬂ codes, 
Chute emphasized, surely would be labor intensive. This underscores the 
critical importance of tagging data at the local level, so that those who best 
understand the data™s signi˜cance are the individuals determining its codes.
DATA LINKAGE
Vik Kheterpal began by emphasizing chronic disease as the dominant 
problem in health care as a way to highlight the challenges associated 
with data linkage. Chronic diseases are the principal cause of disability 
and health services utilization, and account for 78 percent of health care 
expenditures. Care for these conditions necessitates teamwork and coor-dination between multiple caregivers, and this team-based care requires 
data exchange, interoperability, and management over a patient™s extended 
care timeline. The data must be longitudinal and its management must be 
coordinated in order to ensure that clinicians are able to view the patient™s 
condition across time before making clinical decisions. This level of coordi-nation, Kheterpal suggested, offers the opportunity to reduce costs, improve 
outcomes, and reduce care fragmentation.
In working toward this more interoperable vision of data exchange, 
it is important that the current focus on EHRs be broadened, Kheterpal 
suggested. He emphasized the need to focus not on the technology, but 
what can be done with it. For example, EHRs are necessary to facilitate 
exchange, but they are not suf˜cient to accrue transformational systemic 
value. Rather than simply digitizing the data contained in paper records, 
emphasis should be placed on improving data visualization, and leverag-ing the power of large datasets for extrapolation. The strategy also must 
address health care speci˜c challenges, including false positives, lack of 
uniform identi˜ers, privacy regulations, dirty data, and the multitude of 
data sources.Kheterpal highlighted that data linkage is a major challenge to inte-grating data from different sources and to providing longitudinal data 
on patients in order to assess downstream outcomes and get a complete 
picture. To confront these challenges, Kheterpal said, blindfolded record 
linkage holds much promise. This method of linking data allows for secure, 
one-way hash transformations so that records can be linked without any 
party having to reveal identifying information about any of the subjects. 
Its advantages are numerous in that it maintains patient privacy, is already 
viable and in production, and can process large population sets. Moreover, 
Kheterpal said, current health data efforts can easily be adapted to include 
it. Employing this strategy for linking data can decrease duplicity and 
provide a longitudinal view of the patient™s care history, two of the major 
challenges to optimizing learning from large datasets.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATIONS EMERGING IN THE CLINICAL DATA UTILITY
 39To close, Kheterpal offered several recommendations to move the ˜eld 
forward. Increased utilization of distributed blindfolded linkage pilots will 
provide greater evidence on their ˜tness to address the challenges at hand. 
Research into the scale of overlap and missed signal problems associated 
with systems that do not link records strati˜ed across disease states will 
help to make the case for improved record linkage. Lastly, Kheterpal sug
-gested development of a strati˜cation model that matches a proposed re-search question with necessary data types could improve the accuracy and 
relevance of data linkage efforts.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Strategies Going ForwardDuring the ˜nal session of the workshop individual participants re-˚ected on the day™s presentations and discussions and discussed actions 
they felt were important to progress in the areas discussed. The suggestions 
made by individual participants covered six broad thematic areas: improv-ing awareness and gap assessment of existing data sources; improving the 
quality, patient orientation, and utility of data input; improving the access, 
tools, and capacity for data analysis; ramping up the involvement and en-gagement of the patients and the public for improved clinical data; building 
a clinical data learning utility; and developing clarity on the governance 
needed.CURRENT DATA SOURCES: BETTER 
AWARENESS AND ASSESSMENT
A number of speakers raised the issue of the need for a better under-standing of what data sources exist, their characteristics, their relationships 
to each other, and the implications of these details on the uses of the data 
(see Chapters 2-5). 
Resource mapping. Discussion during the ˜nal session yielded several 
suggestions from individual attendees on how to work toward getting a 
better understanding of digital health data sources. Assembling a taxonomy 
of digital health data sources with descriptors to better understand what 
sources are out there and their speci˜c characteristics was suggested by a 
few participants as a potential ˜rst step toward this goal. 
Utility mapping. It was suggested that the mapping process should also 
41Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
include not just taxonomy and inventory of data sources, but assessment of 
how high-priority questions and issues map to existing sources and meth-ods, including annotation of sources used in research studies. 
DATA INPUT: IMPROVE PATIENT ORIENTATION, 
QUALITY, AND UTILITY
As emphasized in Crossing the Quality Chasm in 2001, patient-centered 
care has been highlighted as a central component of quality health care 
(IOM, 2001). Extending this notion to digital health information was a 
frequent theme in workshop discussions.Information patients care about. Several participants and speakers 
emphasized collecting information that patients care about, and includ-ing information on wellness and productivity, as a ˜rst step toward this 
goal. Similarly, increasing the inclusion of patient-reported information in 
the digital health data utility was highlighted as a priority. Development, 
validation, and encouragement of the use of patient-reported preferences, 
symptoms, care-process measures, and outcomes were called out as poten-tial important components of this strategy.
Usability.
 Improving the usability of health and biomedical informa-tion technology and prioritizing information collection were strategies sug-gested to minimize the burden imposed on data collectors. Identifying and 
eliminating the collection of low-value data, as well as automating data 
collection, whenever appropriate, were suggested as potential approaches.
Contextual tagging. Maintenance of the provenance and context of 
the data was also highlighted as an important issue, particularly when data 
is used for a purpose other than that for which it was collected. The use 
of metadata tagging and strategies to enable access to full original context 
(e.g., on place, time, person/SES) were called out as potential approaches.Core elements. In order to make progress on the goal of improving 
data quality, the development of more standardized digital health data 
de˜nitions and representations was highlighted for attention. In particu-lar, several participants emphasized the need for development of a set 
of core minimum standardized data elements to provide timely essential 
information on cost, quality, and health status and trends, available across 
institutions and geographic areas and designed to harmonize funder data 
set requirements. Some participants felt that inclusion of these core ele-ments as part of the certi˜cation process was an effective way to further 
progress.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRATEGIES GOING FORWARD
 43DATA ANALYSIS: IMPROVE ACCESS, TOOLS, AND CAPACITY
Only through analysis and use of digital health data will its full po-tential be realized (IOM, 2012). Improving the analytic tools and capacity 
necessary for learning were common themes in workshop discussions.Toolsets.
 Speci˜cally, the creation of toolsets that would expand ac
-cess to tools and applications beyond the traditional research community 
and open opportunities for analysis and learning was cited as a potential 
approach with some precedence in other areas of science.
Curation. Strategies and methods to curate data sources in an ongo-ing way were also suggested. The need for better metrics to measure data 
quality and utility, in context-appropriate ways, was also discussed. Some 
participants suggested that these metrics could focus on the impact of 
information collection and input processes on the data; for example, data 
collection in the course of routine care through an EHR versus as part of 
a clinical trial.
Data integration. Several participants asserted that putting patients at 
the center of digital health data also included facilitating the integration of 
their data across the several facets of health, including with public health in-formation and other sources, some of which may be external to health care. 
Strategies for data integration, in particular, including public health data, 
were suggested as a necessary ˜rst step toward this goal. A related concept 
of triangulating several data sources to improve predictive accuracy was also 
mentioned by several speakers as an important advantage to having large 
amounts of diverse data. 
PUBLIC AND PATIENT ENGAGEMENT: RAMP UP INVOLVEMENT 
Many participants stressed that successfully engaging stakeholders is 
crucial for fully realizing the learning and improvement potential of digital 
health data. Whether a data donor, collector, or user, a patient, clinician, 
public health of˜cial, or researcher, all stakeholders have unique, and 
changing, roles to play.
Patient voice. Drawing further from the notion of collecting and in-cluding information patients care about, many participants cited the need 
for a strong strategy for building the capacity for direct patient engagement. 
Speci˜c approaches included the development and re˜nement of portals, 
and the inclusion of patient preferences and other patient-sourced data.
Trust.
 Building trust among stakeholders was a common denominator 
in issues identi˜ed to take advantage of expanding capacity for continu-ously learning health care. Several discussants noted that in order to create 
and nurture this trust, stakeholders must feel that their participation in data Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
collection and use processes are respectful of their efforts, their privacy, and 
responsive to their needs. 
Regulatory reform. Development of mutual understandings of expec-tations for con˜dentiality, privacy, and security were highlighted as key to 
building and maintaining strong stakeholder support in the rapidly evolving 
environment of social media, increased availability of information online, 
and the growing integration of genomics into clinical care and diagnostics.Presentation. Increasing the usefulness of data to patients, and other 
stakeholders, through the use of user-appropriate data presentation 
techniques, including visualization, was suggested by several workshop 
participants.Health literacy.
 A few participants cautioned that efforts to improve 
understanding through raising awareness and targeted strategies at different 
health literacy levels will be necessary to facilitate these discussions. 
Culture of participation.
 Given this changing environment, the sugges
-tion was made to empower potential data donors (notably patients) with 
the option and ability to donate their information for use. Along similar 
lines, the idea of studying the bene˜ts and risks of patient-requested por
-table identi˜ers was suggested as a way to make progress on the issue of 
identity resolution and data linkage, and a ˜rst step toward developing a 
strategy for their development and application.
BUILDING A CLINICAL DATA LEARNING UTILITY
Throughout workshop presentations and discussions, some speakers 
and participants stressed the need to harness the potential for learning from 
the digital health data utility. The challenges and opportunities afforded by 
the increasing scale of data available for learning informed many of these 
discussions.Innovative methods.
 The development of methods using EHRs as a 
data source and performing observational studies on big data were high-lighted as speci˜c needs. In particular, the development, validation, and use 
of predictive models to inform health-data uses, including risk interpreta-tion by individuals, was singled out as holding great promise. Noting that 
most digital health data is in unstructured formats, the potential for learn-ing from this data through natural language processing (e.g., IBM™s Watson) 
was highlighted by several workshop participants. An emphasis on the need for the development and application of reasoning and inference tools was 
highlighted as a potential priority going forward.
Distributed approaches. Given the importance of privacy and security 
in the collection and use of patient health data, presentations and discus-sions frequently touched on the advantages of distributed data approaches 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STRATEGIES GOING FORWARD
 45and the need to further develop and pilot the policies, analytic methods, 
and technologies associated with their use.
Engaging bias. Several challenges and barriers to learning from the 
digital health data utility were cited, including uncertainty about the com-pleteness and reliability of many data sources, as well as the presence of 
multiple forms of bias. The need for detailed expert assessments of the im
-plications of bias on analyses, as well as in the new context of the very large 
datasets now emerging, was suggested by several workshop participants.
Core elements. The identi˜cation and application of a set of minimum 
data elements to provide information on cost, quality, health status, and 
health trends was suggested, by several discussants, as a critical component 
to accelerating progress on learning from the health data utility. Reform 
of regulatory frameworks to encourage structured collection, assessment, 
and use of routinely collected data, in order to facilitate and support this 
learning, was highlighted by some participants as an important ˜rst step. 
CLARITY ON GOVERNANCEGreater clarity on governance, both in terms of what it would look like 
and the issues for engagement, speci˜cally in terms of access and sustain-ability, was a theme echoed in many workshop discussions.
Domains. Some participants pointed to a need to identify key domains 
for which governance structures are necessary to accelerate the evolution of 
the digital data utility, and begin to catalyze their engagement. 
Access and ownership. Suggested approaches to ensuring participation 
included enabling broader access to data sources and ensuring that the ˚ow 
of information is multidirectional. This democratization of roles could fa-cilitate the engagement of the issue of data ownership, broaden sources of 
input, exhibit the potential of information use to meet stakeholder needs, 
and demonstrate the value of the collection and use of the data.
Business model. There is a need for a better understanding of both the 
costs and bene˜ts associated with the uses of digital health data for learning and continuous improvement. Quantitative and qualitative approaches to 
insights on how information might be leveraged to increase health bene˜ts 
and minimize associated costs from the perspectives of the many diverse 
stakeholders were highlighted by some participants as an important ˜rst 
step on this count. Additionally, the application of analytics for patient 
panel management and to support pay for performance payment initiatives 
such as ACOs were cited by individual participants as examples of areas of 
promise for establishing sustainable efforts. 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
REFERENCESIOM (Institute of Medicine). 2001. 
Crossing the quality chasm: A new health system for the 
21st century. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
IOM. 2012. Best care at lower cost: The path to continuously learning health care in America. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix ASpeaker BiographiesJames W. Buehler, MD, 
is the director of the Public Health Surveillance & 
Informatics Program Of˜ce (proposed) at the Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention (CDC). Dr. Buehler has more than 30 years of experi
-ence in the ˜eld of medical epidemiology, serving from 1981 to 2002 as 
a commissioned of˜cer in the U.S. Public Health Service at CDC, where 
he worked in the areas of general ˜eld epidemiology, maternal and child 
health, HIV/AIDS, and, for a brief period in 2001, anthrax. In 2002, 
Dr. Buehler joined the epidemiology department of the Rollins School of 
Public Health at Emory University, where he held the position of research 
professor. In 2009, he returned to CDC to contribute to the surveillance 
of pandemic in˚uenza, and in 2010, he became the founding director of 
CDC™s Public Health Surveillance Program Of˜ce. Dr. Buehler has devoted 
much of his career to the ˜eld of public health surveillance. As a member 
of the Emory faculty, Dr. Buehler™s research interests centered on improv
-ing public health surveillance and emergency preparedness capacities and 
on advancing the relatively new ˜eld of public health systems research. 
While at Emory, he served as a consultant to epidemiology and emergency 
preparedness programs at the Division of Public Health of the Georgia 
Department of Human Resources. In 2006-2008, he served as the public 
health representative on the Georgia Health Information Technology and 
Transparency Advisory Board, where he focused on strengthening link
-ages between public health and health care through advances in health 
information technologies. Dr. Buehler obtained his bachelor™s degree in 
biochemistry from the University of California, Berkeley, and his doctor 
of medicine degree from the University of California, San Francisco. He 
47Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
completed residency training in pediatrics at the University of Oregon 
Health Sciences Center in Portland and in preventive medicine at CDC. He 
is a fellow of the American Academy of Pediatrics and is board-certi˜ed in 
pediatrics and preventive medicine. Christopher G. Chute, MD, DrPH, received his undergraduate and medical 
training at Brown University, completed his internal medicine residency at 
Dartmouth, and completed doctoral training in epidemiology at Harvard. 
He is board-certi˜ed in internal medicine, and is a fellow of the American 
College of Physicians, the American College of Epidemiology, and the 
American College of Medical Informatics. He became founding chair of 
biomedical informatics at Mayo in 1988, stepping down after 20 years 
in that role. He is now professor of medical informatics, and is principal 
investigator (PI) on a large portfolio of research, including the Department 
of Health and Human Services (HHS)/Of˜ce of the National Coordinator 
(ONC) SHARP (Strategic Health IT Advanced Research Projects) on Sec-ondary EHR Data Use; the ONC Beacon Community (Co-PI); the LexGrid 
projects; Mayo™s CTSA Informatics; Mayo™s Cancer Center Informatics, 
including caBIG; and several National Institutes of Health (NIH) grants, 
including one of the eMERGE centers from the National Human Genome 
Research Institute. Dr. Chute serves as vice chair of the Mayo Clinic Data 
Governance for Health Information Technology Standards, and on Mayo™s 
Enterprise IT Oversight Committee. He is presently chair, ISO Health In
-formatics Technical Committee (ISO TC215), and chairs the World Health 
Organization ICD-11 Revision. He also serves on the Health Information 
Technology Standards Committee for the Of˜ce of the National Coordi
-nator in HHS, and the HL7 Advisory Board. His recently held positions 
include chair of the biomedical computing and health informatics study 
section at NIH; chair of the board of the HL7/FDA/NCI/CDISC BRIDG 
project; member of the board of the Clinical Data Interchange Standards 
Consortium; American National Standards Institute Health Information 
Standards Technology Panel (HISTP) board member; chair of the U.S. 
delegation to ISO TC215 for Health Informatics; Convener of Healthcare 
Concept Representation WG3 within the (TC215); co-chair of the HL7 
Vocabulary Committee; chair of the International Medical Informatics 
Association WG6 on Medical Concept Representation; American Medical 
Informatics Association board member, and multiple other NIH biomedical 
informatics study sections as chair or member.
Rich Elmore is the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator™s (ONC™s) leader 
for Query Health, an ONC-sponsored initiative to establish standards and 
services for distributed population queries of electronic health records. He 
is on a leave of absence from health care technology provider Allscripts, 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 49where as vice president, strategic initiatives, he managed exploration and 
execution of acquisitions and strategic partnerships, and prior to that ran 
the Allscripts Provider Analytics business. He had a long career at IDX 
where he ran the Flowcast Hospital business and prior to that was vice 
president of product development for IDX Flowcast. Mr. Elmore was the 
communications workgroup leader for the ONC™s Direct Project. He was 
a charter member of the interoperability workgroup for the Certi˜cation 
Commission for Healthcare Information Technology. Mr. Elmore has de
-grees from Dartmouth College (BA) and New School University (MA, eco
-nomics). He is on the board of directors for Patient Engagement Systems, a 
chronic disease technology company, and serves as vice chair on the board 
of directors for the King Street Center, serving kids in need and their fami
-lies in Burlington, Vermont.
Doug Fridsma, MD, PhD, is the director of the Of˜ce of Standards and 
Interoperability and the acting chief scientist in the Of˜ce of the National 
Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). Prior to arriving 
at ONC, Dr. Fridsma was on the teaching staff in the department of bio
-medical informatics at Arizona State University and had a clinical practice 
at Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale. Dr. Fridsma completed his medical training at 
the University of Michigan in 1990, and his PhD in biomedical informat-ics from Stanford University in 2003. In his role at ONC, Dr. Fridsma is 
responsible for the Nationwide Health Information Network, the Federal 
Health Architecture, the EHR certi˜cation programs, and other initia-tives focused on promoting interoperable health information exchange. He 
served on the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium board of 
directors from 2005 to 2008, and was appointed to the Health IT Standards 
Committee in 2009. He resigned from the HIT Standards Committee after 
he joined ONC, and recently became a board member of HL7.
James Allen Heywood is the co-founder and chairman of PatientsLikeMe. A 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology engineer, Mr. Heywood entered the 
˜eld of translational research and medicine when his brother Stephen was 
diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in 1998 at the age of 
29. With experience in design, information technology, systems modeling, 
neuroscience, and industrial engineering, Mr. Heywood brings a unique 
perspective to drug discovery and medicine. The scienti˜c and business in-novations he developed at the ALS Therapy Development Institute (TDI) 
and PatientsLikeMe have been transforming the intersection of biotechnol-ogy and pharmaceutical development, personalized medicine, and patient 
care. Heywood is the chairman of PatientsLikeMe, where he provides the 
scienti˜c vision and architecture for its patient-centered medical platform. 
He co-founded the company in 2005 with his youngest brother, Benjamin, 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
and his friend Jeff Cole. Named one of ﬁ15 companies that will change the 
worldﬂ by 
CNNMoney
, PatientsLikeMe is a personalized research and peer 
care platform that allows patients to share in-depth information on treat-ments, symptoms, and outcomes. This novel open model allows clinicians, 
providers, and the pharmaceutical industry to better understand diseases 
and the patient experience. Patients improve their care and actively partner 
with industry to accelerate and in˚uence the development of new treat-ments and biomarkers. In 1999, shortly after Stephen was diagnosed, Mr. 
Heywood founded the ALS TDI, the world™s ˜rst nonpro˜t biotechnology 
company, where he served as CEO until 2007. Pioneering an open research 
model and an industrialized therapeutic validation process, Mr. Heywood 
led ALS TDI to become the world™s largest and most comprehensive ALS 
research program. The comprehensive in vivo validation program Mr. 
Heywood developed was unable to replicate any of the published preclini-cal studies of the ˜eld that led to human trials, calling into question the 
standards that allowed many drugs to be tested on patients. In 2009, Mr. 
Heywood and a small group of thought leaders founded HealthDataRights.org, an organization that asserts a new patient™s right to access a copy of 
all of his or her medical data in a computable form. Mr. Heywood is a 
published author, frequent speaker, media pundit, and active investment 
advisor. He speaks at business, government, and academic conferences 
around the world, including TEDMED, the Milken Global Conference, 
Health 2.0, Gov 2.0, Personal Democracy Forum, Institute of Medicine 
workshops, and the National Institutes of Health. Mr. Heywood is a mem
-ber of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention™s National Biosurveil
-lance Advisory Subcommittee, and has testi˜ed on privacy and social policy 
before the Department of Health and Human Services and the Food and 
Drug Administration. Mr. Heywood™s work has been pro˜led in the 
New 
Yorker
, New York Times
 magazine, BusinessWeek
, 60 Minutes, CBS Eve-ning News
, NPR, 
Science
, and 
Nature
. In 2009, he was chosen for 
WIRED
 magazine™s ﬁSmart Listﬂ and 
Fast Company™s ﬁ10 Most Creative People in 
Healthcare.ﬂ Mr. Heywood and his brother Stephen were the subjects of 
Pulitzer PrizeŒwinner Jonathan Wiener™s biography 
His Brother™s Keeper
 and the Sundance AwardŒwinning documentary 
So Much So Fast
.Vik Kheterpal, MD, 
is a principal at CareEvolution, Inc., a leading provider of secure interoperability solutions. The company markets HIEBusŽ, a 
health care interoperability platform to enable edge applications to share 
clinical information in a secure, reliable, and incremental manner. Offering 
core capabilities like a community-wide master patient index, terminology 
standardization, episode grouping, and advanced analytics, HIEBus pow-ers statewide and regional exchanges, regional care coordination networks, 
provider-centric clinical integration initiatives, and multicenter observa
-Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 51tional data studies. Dr. Kheterpal is very
 active in the interoperability and 
health information technology landscape and serves as technical director of 
the South Carolina Health Information Exchange. Previously,
 Dr. Kheterpal 
served as the global general manager and vice president for clinical infor
-mation systems for
 GE Healthcare, where he led GE™s clinical IT initia
-tives. Dr. Kheterpal received his doctorate in medicine
 from the University 
of Michigan at Ann Arbor, where he also earned a bachelor™s degree in 
biomedical sciences. Rebecca Daniels Kush, PhD, 
is a founder and the current president and 
CEO of the Clinical Data Interchange Standards Consortium. Dr. Kush has 
more than 25 years of experience in the area of clinical research. She has 
worked for the National Institutes of Health, academia, a global contract 
research organization, and pharmaceutical companies in the United States 
and Japan. Among numerous publications, Dr. Kush is lead author of the 
book eClinical Trials: Planning and Implementation
. Dr. Kush has given 
invited presentations (including keynotes) and tutorials at industry confer-ences, the Food and Drug Administration, and other venues in the United 
States, Europe, and Japan for more than 20 years. She earned a PhD in 
physiology and pharmacology from the University of California, San Diego, 
School of Medicine in La Jolla, California, and has a BS in chemistry and 
biology from the University of New Mexico.
Marty LaVenture, PhD, MDH, 
is director of the Of˜ce of Health Informa-tion Technology and e-Health at the Minnesota Department of Health. Dr. 
LaVenture is currently leading the statewide Minnesota e-Health Initiative 
and directs the department™s Center for Health Informatics. Current proj
-ects include models for e-health pro˜les, assessment of EHR adoption, and 
work as lead author for the revised chapter on public health informatics in 
upcoming fourth edition of Shortliffe and Cimino™s 
Textbook of Biomedi
-cal Informatics. Dr. LaVenture has a master™s degree in epidemiology and 
a PhD in health informatics from the University of Minnesota. Previously, 
he served as the assistant state epidemiologist for Wisconsin Division of 
Health, and he has also worked for a national private medical software 
corporation. Dr. LaVenture is currently an adjunct member of the health 
informatics faculty at the University of Minnesota. In 2008, he was named 
as one of the top 100 in˚uential health leaders in Minnesota. Nationally, 
Dr. LaVenture serves on the editorial board for the 
Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics. He is a member of the Association of State and Territorial 
Health Of˜cials ehealth policy committee. Dr. LaVenture has authored or 
co-authored many articles and scienti˜c publications, delivered numerous 
presentations to state and national audiences, and received multiple awards 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
for his work and accomplishments. He is an elected fellow of the American 
College of Medical Informatics.
Mark Leenay, MS, MD,
 is one of our nation™s experts on geriatrics and hos
-pice and palliative care and is the chief medical of˜cer and senior vice presi-dent at OptumHealth Care Solutions. As chief medical of˜cer, he oversees 
all clinical programs, ranging from wellness to the most complex medical 
conditions. He leads the clinical performance team, which is accountable 
for clinical care and quality in the company™s wellness, case management, 
and disease management programs, as well as the clinical performance of 
external provider partners. Dr. Leenay™s focus is providing members the 
best care from experienced and knowledgeable providers, leading to shorter hospital stays and improved health. He achieves these goals by champion-ing exceptional performance within OptumHealth™s Centers of Excellence 
and other clinical networks. Previously, Dr. Leenay was chief medical of
-˜cer for the Medicare and retirement business for United Healthcare, with 
accountability for clinical programs, medical payment policy, and network 
relationships. Prior to joining UnitedHealth Group in 2006, Mark directed 
the palliative care division at the University of Minnesota, Fairview. Mark 
received his MD from Thomas Jefferson University and completed his resi-dency at Overlook Hospital, an af˜liate of Columbia University. He earned 
his bachelor™s degree from LeMoyne College and his master™s degree in 
psychology from the University of Pennsylvania. Mark is board-certi˜ed in 
family medicine, geriatrics, and hospice and palliative care. He is a board 
member of the Long Term Quality Alliance and sits on the quality and re
-search committees of the National Hospice and Palliative Care Association. 
He is a former director of the board of the American Academy of Hospice 
and Palliative Medicine. Mia A. Levy, MD, PhD,
 is the director of cancer clinical informatics for the 
Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center and an assistant professor of biomedi
-cal informatics and medicine. Dr. Levy received her undergraduate degree 
in bioengineering from the University of Pennsylvania in 1997 and her 
medical doctorate from Rush University in 2003. She then spent 6 years at 
Stanford University completing postgraduate training in internal medicine 
and medical oncology while completing her PhD in biomedical informatics. 
She joined the faculty at Vanderbilt as an assistant professor in biomedi
-cal informatics and medicine in August 2009. She is a practicing medical 
oncologist specializing in the treatment of breast cancer. Dr. Levy™s research 
interests include biomedical informatics methods to support the continuum 
of cancer care and cancer research. Her current research projects include 
informatics methods for (1) image-based cancer treatment response assess-ment using quantitative imaging, (2) clinical decision support for treatment 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 53prioritization of molecular subtypes of cancer, (3) protocol-based plan 
management, and (4) learning cancer systems.
David Madigan, PhD, is professor and chair of statistics at Columbia Uni-versity in New York City. He received a bachelor™s degree in mathematical 
sciences and a PhD in statistics, both from Trinity College, Dublin. He 
has previously worked for AT&T Inc., Soliloquy Inc., the University of 
Washington, Rutgers University, and SkillSoft, Inc. He has more than 100 
publications in areas such as Bayesian statistics, text mining, Monte Carlo 
methods, pharmacovigilance, and probabilistic graphical models. He is an 
elected fellow of the American Statistical Association and of the Institute 
of Mathematical Statistics. He has just ˜nished a term as editor-in-chief of 
Statistical Science
.Carol J. McCall, FSA, MAAA, is the chief strategy of˜cer for GNS Health-care, a big-data analytics company whose industrialized knowledge discov-ery platform extracts cause-effect relationships directly and at scale from 
observational data. Her personal goal is to leverage these capabilities to 
redesign the entire notion of ﬁevidenceﬂ and ignite a true learning system 
in the health care system. Prior to joining GNS Healthcare, Ms. McCall 
was chief innovation of˜cer for Tenzing Health, a subsidiary of Vanguard 
Health Systems, where she merged creative analytic approaches with hu-man-centered design. Building team-based care models whose approach 
extended into the community, these approaches were shown to materially 
improve health, dramatically reduce costs, and open new opportunities 
in a community™s economic sustainability. At Humana, Ms. McCall led 
R&D efforts in the Innovation Center, where she pioneered sophisticated 
analytics to build a diverse portfolio of prediction, knowledge discovery, 
and simulation models. She also launched Humana™s innovations in person
-alized medicine, led Humana™s Health Services Research Center (HSRC), 
and helped launch Green Ribbon Health, LLC, a Florida-based company 
with innovations in health support services for seniors, later serving on its 
board of directors. In other roles at Humana, Ms. McCall served as chief 
information of˜cer and as vice president, pharmacy management. Outside 
of Humana, she served as executive vice president of managed care busi-ness development for Allscripts Healthcare Solutions and as an actuarial 
consultant for Milliman, where she helped fashion novel risk-sharing ar-rangements and implement risk-adjustment methodologies. In policy and 
advisory roles, Ms. McCall served a 4-year term as member of the nation™s 
National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, served as an advisor to 
the HRP Scienti˜c Program Board, and was a member of the HSRC™s gov
-erning board. She currently sits on the advisory board of Keas, a consumer 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
health company. Ms. McCall is a fellow of the Society of Actuaries and a 
member of the American Academy of Actuaries
.Farzad Mostashari, MD, ScM, serves as national coordinator for health 
information technology
 within the Of˜ce of the National Coordinator for 
Health Information Technology (ONC) at the Department of Health and 
Human Services. Dr. Farzad joined ONC in July 2009. Previously, he served 
at the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene as assis
-tant commissioner for the Primary Care Information Project, where he fa-cilitated the adoption of prevention-oriented health information technology 
by more than 1,500 providers in underserved communities. Dr. Mostashari 
also led the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)-funded 
NYC Center of Excellence in Public Health Informatics and an Agency 
for Healthcare Research and QualityŒfunded project focused on quality 
measurement at the point of care. Prior to this, he established the Bureau 
of Epidemiology Services at the NYC Department of Health, charged with 
providing epidemiologic and statistical expertise and data for decision 
making to the health department. Dr. Mostashari completed his graduate 
training at the Harvard School of Public Health and Yale Medical School 
and his internal medicine residency at Massachusetts General Hospital, and 
completed the CDC™s Epidemic Intelligence Service. He was one of the lead 
investigators in the outbreaks of West Nile Virus and anthrax in New York 
City, and among the ˜rst developers of real-time electronic disease surveil
-lance systems nationwide.J. Marc Overhage, MD, PhD,
 is the chief medical informatics of˜cer for 
Siemens Healthcare. Prior to joining Siemens, he was the founding chief 
executive of˜cer of the Indiana Health Information Exchange, director of 
medical informatics at the Regenstrief Institute, Inc., and a Sam Regenstrief 
Professor of Medical Informatics at the Indiana University School of Medi-cine. He has spent more than 25 years developing and implementing scien-ti˜c and clinical systems and evaluating their value. With his colleagues from 
the Regenstrief Institute, he created a community-wide electronic medical 
record (called the Indiana Network for Patient Care) containing data from 
many sources, including laboratories, pharmacies, and hospitals in central 
Indiana. The system currently connects a majority of acute care hospitals 
in Indiana and includes inpatient and outpatient encounter data, laboratory results, immunization data, and other selected data for 12 million patients. 
In order to create a sustainable ˜nancial model, he helped create the Indiana 
Health Information Exchange, a not-for-pro˜t corporation.
 In addition, Dr. 
Overhage has developed and evaluated clinical decision support, including 
inpatient and outpatient computerized physician order entry and the un-derlying knowledge bases to support them. He practiced general internal 
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A
 55medicine for more than 20 years, including the ambulatory, inpatient, and 
emergency care settings. During the past decade, Dr. Overhage has played 
a signi˜cant regional and national leadership role in advancing the policy, 
standards, ˜nancing, and implementation of health information exchange. 
He serves on the Health Information Technology Standards Committee as 
well as the board of directors of the National Quality Forum, and is en-gaged in a number of national health care initiatives.
Richard Platt, MD, MSc, 
is professor and chair of the department of popu
-lation medicine at Harvard Medical School and the Harvard Pilgrim Health Care Institute. He is principal investigator of the Food and Drug Adminis-tration™s (FDA™s) Mini-Sentinel program, of contracts with FDA™s Center for 
Drugs Evaluation and Research and Center for Biologics Evaluation and 
Research to conduct postmarketing studies of drugs and biologics™ safety 
and effectiveness. He chaired the FDA™s Drug Safety and Risk Management 
Advisory Committee and is a member of the Association of American Medi
-cal Colleges™ Advisory Panel on Research and the Institute of Medicine™s 
Roundtable on Value & Science-Driven Health Care. Dr. Platt was co-chair 
of the board of scienti˜c counselors of the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention™s (CDC™s) Center for Infectious Diseases. Additionally, he has 
chaired the National Institutes of Health epidemiology study section and 
Disease Control 2, and the CDC Of˜ce of Health Care Partnerships steering 
committee. Dr. Platt is also principal investigator of a CDC Center of Ex
-cellence in Public Health Informatics, the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (AHRQ) HMO Research Network Center for Education and 
Research in Therapeutics, the AHRQ HMO Research Network DEcIDE 
Center, and the CDC Eastern Massachusetts Prevention Epicenter.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BWorkshop Agenda
DIGITAL DATA PRIORITIES FOR CONTINUOUS 
LEARNING IN HEALTH AND HEALTH CARE
An Institute of Medicine Workshop 
 Sponsored by the Of˚ce of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology
MARCH
 23, 2012
KEC
K CENTER
500 F
IFTH
 S
TREET
 NW, W
ASHINGTON
 D
C 20001
A L
EARNING
 HEA
LTH
 S
YSTE
M ACTIVITY
IO
M 
ROUN
DTAB
LE ON
 VALUE
 & S
CIENCE
-D
RIVEN
 HEA
LTH
 CARE
Meeting objectives 
1. Discuss the current quality status of digital health data.
2. Explore challenges, and identify key questions related to data 
quality in the use of EHRs, patient registries, administrative 
data, and public health sources for learningŠcontinuous and 
episodicŠand for system operational and improvement purposes.
3. Engage individuals and organizations leading the way in 
improving the reliability, availability, and usability of digital 
health data for real-time knowledge generation and health 
improvement in a continuously learning health system. 
4. Identify and characterize the current de˜ciencies and consider 
strategies, priorities, and responsibilities to address the 
de˜ciencies. 
5. Initiate the development of a strategic framework for integrated 
and networked stewardship of efforts to continuously increase 
digital data utility.
57Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES
Agenda7:30 am Coffee and light breakfast available8:00 am Welcome, introductions, and overview
 Welcome, framing of the meeting and agenda overview
 o J. Michael McGinnis (Institute of Medicine)
 o Farzad Mostashari (Of˜ce of the National Coordinator)
 o James Walker (Planning Committee Chair)
8:15 am Characteristics, challenges, and determinants of data quality 
Session Description: This session includes brief comments 
on the data quality challenges that lie ahead and a longer 
discussion of the characteristics and determinants of digi
-tal health data quality.

Key Topics:
  
o Challenges on the horizon 
   
Doug Fridsma (ONC)
   
o Characteristics and determinants of data quality 
   
Marc Overhage (Siemens)
  OPEN DISCUSSION 
9:00 am Performance assessment
Session Description: This session focuses on the qual
-ity of digital health data needed to evaluate clinical 
care delivery, population management and the business 
and operating processes that make up a learning health 
system.
Key Topics:
  
o Assessing value   
Carol McCall (GNS) 
  
o Managing populations and processes
   
Mark Leenay (OptumHealth)  OPEN DISCUSSION 
10:00 am
 BreakDigital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B
 5910:15 am
 Enabling research
Session Description: This session focuses on the quality 
of digital health data needed to enable research.

Key Topics:
  
o Clinical research 
    
Rebecca Kush (Clinical Data Interchange Standards 
Consortium)  
o Translational informatics 
   
Mia Levy (Vanderbilt) 
 OPEN DISCUSSION11:15 am
 Supporting public health and surveillance
Session Description: This session focuses on the quality 
of digital health data needed to support of public health 
functions, including surveillance.
Key Topics:
  
o Public health surveillance and management 
   
James Buehler (CDC) 
  
o State-level perspective   
Martin LaVenture (Minnesota Department of Health) 
 OPEN DISCUSSION12:15 pm
 Lunch keynote
  Who is your customer?  James Heywood, PatientsLikeMe 1:00 pm  
Approaches to continuous improvement using large-scale 
datasets
Session Description: Session presentations will focus on 
the implications of digital health data quality on the 
potential for learning from large amounts of health data.
Digital Data Improvement Priorities for Continuous Learning in Health and Health Care: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 DIGITAL DATA IMPROVEMENT PRIORITIES

Key Topics:
  o Using distributed data/Query Health
   
Rich Platt (Harvard) and Rich Elmore (ONC)
  
o Data analysis and discovery of signi˜cant patterns   
David Madigan (OMOP/Columbia)
  OPEN DISCUSSION2:00 pm Innovative approaches to addressing data challenges

Session Description: This session will focus on innovative 
approaches to overcoming some prominent challenges 
associated with using health data.

Topics:
  
o Data harmonization   
Chris Chute (Mayo)  
o Linking data across time and sources
   
Vik Kheterpal (CareEvolution Inc.)
 OPEN DISCUSSION3:00 pm Strategies going forward
Session Description: This session will include a rapid-
˜re, moderated discussion to identify the top 10 actions 
necessary for progress discussed during the course of the 
meeting.   
  1.  
Identi˜cation of potential action stepsŠ20 min. (45 
seconds each)
  2. Rapid identi˜cation of pros and consŠ15 min.
  3. Identi˜cation of top ten leading action stepsŠ25 min.
   
 OPEN DISCUSSION4:00 pm Next steps

Session Description: This session will build off of the 10 
action steps identi˜ed in the previous session and outline 
options to move forward.
5:00 pm Adjourn