DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13427Continuing Innovation in Information Technology42 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-25962-0 | DOI 10.17226/13427Committee on Depicting Innovation in Information Technology; Computer Scienceand Telecommunications Board; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences;National Research CouncilContinuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ContinuingInnovationIN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Committee on Depicting Innovation in Information Technology
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesContinuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the National Research 
Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy 

of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen 
for their special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation under sponsor award number IIS-0840364. 
Any opinions expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the 
agencies and organizations that provided support for the project.
Figure 1 designed by Dmitry Krasny, Deka Design. Text layout by Estelle Miller, The National Academies Press.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-25962-0
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-25962-2
Copies of this report are available from

The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360
Washington, DC 20001

800/624-6242

202/334-3313
http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The 
National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars 
engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their 
use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy 
has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. 
Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of 
Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the 
selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal 

government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national 

needs, encourages education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. 

Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to secure the services of 
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the 
public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences by its congressional 
charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, 
research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad 
community of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the 
federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has 
become the principal operating agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of 

Engineering in providing services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. 

The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and 
 Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
COMMITTEE ON DEPICTING INNOVATION 
IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
PETER LEE, Microsoft Research, 
Chair
MARK E. DEAN, IBM Corporation
DEBORAH L. ESTRIN, University of California, Los Angeles
JAMES T. KAJIYA, Microsoft Corporation
PRABHAKAR RAGHAVAN, Google, Inc.
ANDREW J. VITERBI, Viterbi Group, LLC
Staff
JON K. EISENBERG, CSTB Director

EMILY ANN MEYER, Study Director
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Oracle (retired), 
Chair
PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE, Hewlett Packard Company
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University
JACK L. GOLDSMITH III, Harvard Law School
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University
SUSAN LANDAU, Harvard University
PETER LEE, Microsoft Research
DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc.
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc.
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON K. EISENBERG, Director

RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Senior Program Officer
EMILY ANN MEYER, Program Officer
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Officer
ENITA A. WILLIAMS
, Associate Program Officer
SHENAE BRADLEY
, Senior Program Assistant
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
Preface
In 1995, the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board (CSTB) produced the report 
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications 
Initiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure
.1 A graphic in that report, often called the 
ﬁtire tracksﬂ diagram because of its appearance, produced an extraordinary response by clearly 
linking investments in academic and industry research to the ultimate creation of new informa
-tion technology (IT) industries with more than $1 billion in annual revenue.
2 Used in presentations 
to Congress and executive branch decision makers and discussed broadly in the research and 

innovation policy communities, the tire tracks figure dispelled the assumption that the commer
-cially successful IT industry is self-sufficient, underscoring how much industry instead builds on 

government-funded university research, sometimes through long incubation periods of years and 
even decades. It also compellingly illustrates the complex nature of research in the field and the 
interdependencies between various subfields of computing and communications research. 
The figure was updated in the 2002 CSTB report 
Information Technology Research, Innovation, 
and E-Government
 and again in the 2003 CSTB report 
Innovation in Information Technology, 
largely 
through the addition of tracks in important new areas such as entertainment and data mining. The 

2003 report also distilled key lessons from eight prior CSTB studies about the nature of research in 
information technologyŠincluding the unpredictability of and synergy among research results; the 
roles of government, industry, and academia; and the social returns from research. A 2009 report, 
Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in 
an Increasingly Global Environment
, reproduced the 2003 update to the diagram and explored many 
of the related themes.
Computing research and its impacts have continued to evolve and blossom in the years since 
the 2003 version of the tire tracks figure was published. With the support of the National Science 
1  All NRC/CSTB reports referred to in this preface were published by the National Academy Press/The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., in the year indicated.
2  IT advances have of course also had profound impacts on nearly every major industry sector, not just IT industries; these 
indirect effects were not the focus of the present project.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Foundation, CSTB undertook a project to prepare an update. The task of the Committee on Depict
-ing Innovation in Information Technology was threefold (see box): (1) to reconsider important 
research areas and significant billion-dollar-plus IT industries that had emerged since the 2003 
report, (2) to reconsider how best to characterize and depict these investments and impacts, and 
(3) to recap and update the material in the 2003 report that accompanied the tire tracks figure and 
that presents related lessons on the impact of research on innovation in information technology. 
In updating the content of the figure, the committee drew on the earlier CSTB work as well as 
the committee™s own knowledge of key research contributions and results, and also obtained input 
on these from a number of computing researchers whose contributions are acknowledged below. 
The committee conducted meetings by teleconference and collaborated extensively by e-mail to 
develop the present report. In reconsidering the design of the figure, the committee explored several 
design approaches, some quite different from that in the original 1995 figure, and worked with a 
designer to explore alternatives. Ultimately, the committee decided to retain many features of the 
original tire tracks while somewhat changing the overall structure and adding some elements as 

outlined in the first section of this report. 
The new figure is accompanied by a brief text based in large part on prior CSTB reports. Unless 
otherwise indicated in the notes, the primary source is the 2003 report 
Innovation in Information 
Technology. 
Where appropriate, the committee has updated the text to provide more current infor
-mation and recent examples. For readability, direct extracts from earlier CSTB work are not set in 
quotation marks.
The committee thanks the following researchers who provided input on specific technical 
and research questions: Yossi Azar, Victor Bahl, Suman Banerjee, Doug Burger, Surajit Chaudhuri, 
Carlos Guestrin, Hauges Hoppe, Andrew Hopper, Eric Horvitz, Butler Lampson, James Landay, 
Paul Larson, Ed Lazowska, James Lee, David Lomet, Beth Mynatt, David Patterson, Yuval Peres, 
and Mani Srivastava. We also are sincerely appreciative of the services and leadership of Eugene 
Spafford, chair of the committee from September 2009 to January 2011. Finally, the committee 
thanks Dmitry Krasny, Deka Design, for his expert design assistance in realizing the committee™s 
vision for Figure 1.
Peter Lee, 
Chair
Committee on Depicting Innovation in Information Technology
˜˚˛˚˝˙˝ˆ˚ˇ
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˆ˚˙˚


˙˛˚˜˚






Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspec
-tives and technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the National Research 
Council™s Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published report as sound as 
possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 
responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain confidential 
to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for 
their review of this report:
Peter Freeman, Georgia Institute of Technology
Susan Graham, University of California, Berkeley
Laura Haas, IBM Almaden Research Center
David Patterson, University of California, Berkeley
Jennifer Rexford, Princeton University
Robert F. Sproull, Oracle (retired) 
John Stankovic, University of Virginia
Patrick Winston, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Katherine Yelick, University of California, Berkeley, and Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and sug
-gestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did they see 
the final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Joseph 

Traub, Columbia University. Appointed by the National Research Council, he was responsible for 
making certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with 
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Contents
The Impact of Information Technology
 1Universities, Industry, and Government: A Complex Partnership Yielding 
 2 Innovation and Leadership
Key Lessons About the Nature of Research in Information Technology
 9Looking Ahead
 16Notes
 18
Appendix A
 Short Biographies of Committee Members
 24Appendix B
  Transfers of Ideas and People and Other Impacts Since 2003 
 27 Added to Figure 1
 Appendix C
 Examples of Impacts from Algorithms Research
 32Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1The Impact of Information Technology
Information technology (IT) is widely understood to be the enabling technology of the 21st 
century.
1 IT has transformed, and continues to transform, all aspects of our lives: commerce and 
finance, education, employment, energy, health care, manufacturing, government, national security, 
transportation, communications, entertainment, science, and engineering. IT and its impact on the 
U.S. economyŠboth directly (the IT sector itself) and indirectly (other sectors that are powered by 
advances in IT)
2Šcontinue to grow in size and importance. 
In total, according to estimates for 2010 by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the IT-intensive 
ﬁinformation-communications-technology-producingﬂ industries
3 grew by 16.3 percent and con
-tributed nearly 5 percent to the overall U.S. gross domestic product (GDP).
4 A 2011 study by the 
McKinsey Global Institute found that in 2009 Internet-related activities alone contributed an aver
-age of 3.8 percent to the U.S. GDP.
5 (By contrast, the total federal funding in fiscal year 2010 for the 
networking and IT research and development (R&D) program, which includes most federal support 

for IT R&D, was approximately $4.3 billion,
6 just under 0.03 percent of GDP.
7) These substantial 
contributions to the economy reflect only the direct economic benefits of the IT sector and do not 

capture the full benefits realized from the application of IT throughout the economy.
To appreciate the magnitude and breadth of its achievements, imagine spending a day without 
IT. This would be a day without the Internet and all that it enables. A day without diagnostic medi
-cal imaging. A day during which automobiles lacked electronic ignition, antilock brakes, and elec
-tronic stability control. A day without digital mediaŠwithout wireless telephones, high-definition 
televisions, MP3 audio, cable- or Internet-delivered video, computer animation, and video games. 
A day during which aircraft could not fly, travelers had to navigate without benefit of the Global 
Positioning System (GPS), weather forecasters had no models, banks and merchants could not trans
-fer funds electronically, and factory automation ceased to function. It would be a day in which the 

U.S. military lacked precision munitions, did not have the capabilities for network-centric warfare, 
and did not enjoy technological supremacy. It would be, for most people in the United States and 
the rest of the developed world, a ﬁday the Earth stood still.ﬂ
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Universities, Industry, and Government: 
 A Complex Partnership Yielding 
Innovation and Leadership
One measure of the impact of investment in information technology research and development 
is its contribution to the creation of numerous U.S. firms with annual revenues exceeding $1 billion 
and of entire new sectors that contribute billions of dollars to the U.S. economy.
8 Many of these 
firms are household names, and their products and services underpin the digital economyŠand 

indeed the economy more broadly. The combined estimated annual revenue of only the companies 
listed on Figure 1 is nearly $500 billion (Table 1).
Figure 1, an update of the 1995 ﬁtire tracksﬂ figure
9 and the intermediate 2003 version,
10
 illus
-trates, through examples, how fundamental research in IT, conducted in industry and universities, 
has led to the introduction of entirely new product categories that ultimately became billion-dollar 
industries. It reflects a complex research environment in which concurrent advances in multiple 
subfieldsŠin particular within computer science and engineering but extending into other fields, 
too, from electrical engineering to psychologyŠhave been mutually reinforcing, stimulating and 
enabling one another and leading to vibrant, innovative industries exemplified by top-performing 
U.S. firms.
11 Figure 1 is of necessity incomplete and symbolic in nature; it would be impossible to 
chart all of the important cumulative contributions of research and their links to today™s products, 
firms, and industries. For example, Google could be thought of as having benefited from at least 
three research areasŠnetworking, parallel and distributed systems, and databases.
Listed in the bottom row of Figure 1 are areas where major investments in basic research in 
subfields of computing and communications have had the impacts shown in the upper portions 
of the figure. Not depicted but equally important is research on the theoretical and algorithmic 
foundations of computing more broadly (Box 1). The vertical red tracks represent university-based 
(and largely federally funded) research, and the blue tracks represent industry R&D (some of which 
is also government funded). The dashed black lines indicate periods following the introduction 
of significant commercial products resulting from this research, the green lines represent billion-
dollar-plus industries (by annual revenue) stemming from this research, and the thick green lines 
represent achievement of multibillion-dollar markets by some of the industries. The top rows list 
the present-day IT market segments and representative U.S. firms and products whose creation 
was stimulated by the decades-long research represented by the red and blue vertical tracks. 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32010
2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975
1970
1965
2010
2005
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
1970
1965
UniversityIndustry R&DProducts$1 Billion Market$10 Billion MarketAreas of Fundamental Research in IT
IT Sectors With Large Economic Impact
Computer 
Architecture
Software 
Technologies
Networking
Parallel & 
Distributed Systems
Databases
Computer Graphics
AI & Robotics
Digital 
Communications
Internet 
& Web
Cloud
Computing
Entertainment
& Design
Enterprise
Systems
Robotics & Assistive
Technologies
Personal
Computing
Microprocessors
Broadband
& Mobile
Motorola
Qualcomm
iPhone
nVidia
AMD  Intel
Texas Instruments
HPApple
Dell
Symantec
eBay  Akamai
HPJuniper
Cisco
Yahoo!
IBM
Electronic Arts
Facebook  Twitter
Google
Microsoft
VMware
Amazon
Oracle
Adobe  Autodesk
iPod
nVidia   Pixar
XBox
Nuance
Intuitive Surgical
iRobot
FIGURE 1
 Examples of the contributions of federally supported fundamental research to the creation of IT sectors, firms, and products with large 
economic impact. Tracks added since the 2003 update of the figure are described in Appendix B. See also Box 1 and Appendix C.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
TABLE 1
 Annual Revenue Associated with the IT Industry Sector for Key U.S. IT Firms Listed in 
Figure 1
IndustryCompany and Estimated Revenue ($ Billion)aBroadband and Mobile
Qualcomm*11Motorola 
8.2Microprocessors
nVidia 
3.5Intel54AMD5.0Texas Instruments
2.1Personal ComputingDell34HP41Apple89Symantec6.2Internet and Web
Juniper 
4.4Cisco 
43Akamai 
1.2Twitter (estimated)
0.1Facebook3.7eBay12Amazon25Google*22Yahoo!
5.0Cloud ComputingGoogle (non-advertising)*1.1VMware* 
2.9Amazon (non-e-commerce)
1.4Enterprise SystemsOracle*31IBM 
44Microsoft 
39Entertainment and DesignElectronic Arts* 
3.6Pixar 
0.5-1.0Adobe 
4.2Robotics and Assistive Technologies
iRobot*Nuance
Intuitive Surgical*
0.4
1.3
1.8NOTE: Revenues are for FY 2011 except as indicated by an asterisk for firms whose listed revenues are 2010-based.
 aSources for estimated revenue listed are given in the section ﬁNotesﬂ following the main text of this report.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNIVERSITIES, INDUSTRY, AND GOVERNMENT
 5Although the tracks in Figure 1 were chosen to illustrate through prominent examples how 
each selected research area is connected with a closely linked industry area, in reality each research 
area is linked in many ways to one or more industry areas. Research outcomes in one area have 
continued to affect and enable research in other areas. Furthermore, synergies among research areas 
often lead to surprising results and have impacts on industry that were not originally intended or 
envisioned (Table 2). This characteristic of technological innovation is most evident in the broad-
based impact of research on basic questions in computing. Such research often starts as a search for 
fundamental knowledge but time and again produces practical technologies that enable significant 
economic impact, in areas as diverse as optimal resource allocation and scheduling, compact encod
-ings of signals, efficient search algorithms, fair auction and voting mechanisms, and ultralarge-scale 

statistical analyses. (Box 1 provides further discussion.) 
The arrows between the vertical tracks represent some salient examples of the rich interplay 
between academic research, industry research, and products and indicate the cross-fertilization 
resulting from multi-directional flows of ideas, technologies, and people (examples are given in 
Appendix B). Also illustrated in Figure 1 is how products arising from industry can shape academic 
research. (For example, Microsoft™s Kinect sensor is now being used in many research applications, 
and Google™s practical application of MapReduce introduced new ideas about web-scale distributed 
computing to the research community.) Arrows spanning research areas provide a few indications 
of the interdependence of research advances in various areas. 

ˇ
˙˚
˛˘…˚
can˚










˙˚˙ˆˆ˚˛˚

›

˛˚˙˛˚

˙˚

˜ˆˆ˚
˙˛˚

›˜ˆˆ˚

˛˚



Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
TABLE
 2
 Original Goals, Unanticipated Results, Current Results, and Possible Future Directions for 
 Research Topics in Figure 1
Research Topic
Original GoalUnanticipated ResultsToday
aAdvances Expected with Continued Commitment to IT 
Research
a Digital CommunicationsUntethered communication
Wireless local area networking for 
computers, cell phonesWireless and broadband industry. 
Nearly 6 billion 
cell phone subscribers worldwide, including more 

than 320 million subscribers in the United States; 

54% of the U.S. population as active mobile-
broadband subscribers, and more than 87 million 

fixed broadband subscriptions 
 Pervasive/ubiquitous communications and access to data 

and computing resources; mobile sensors for monitoring 

environment and health in real time
Computer Architecture
Tools to manage increasing complexity of 

microprocessor designs; new architectures to 

dramatically increase processing power
Powerful computation in things such 

as cars, televisions, kitchen appliances, 

and mobile devices 
Microprocessor industry.
 8.3 billion microprocessors 
produced annually and used pervasively; $40 billion 

in annual revenue
Increased interplay between hardware and software to achieve 

performance while managing power and providing easy 

programmability 
 Software Technologies
More effective use of computing power for 

specific tasks, and the creation of common 

systems on which to run them
Open-source movement that inspired 

many to gain powerful technical 

skills and become entrepreneurs; the 

ability to create software systems of 

extraordinary scale and complexity
Personal computing industry.
 1.4 billion PCs in 
use worldwide as of 2010; U.S. smartphone sales 

expected to be nearly 100 million in 2011
Parallel software to better use parallel hardware; improved 

tools for processing very large data sets
NetworkingSharing computational resources and data 

among computersNetwork e-mail; widespread sharing of 

software and data; the interconnection 

of billions of computers and other 

devicesInternet and Web industries. 
One-third of the 
world™s population is online, and 45% of those are 

under the age of 25; more than 18 billion searches 

were conducted in October 2011 in the United 

States (across five major search sites); U.S. retail 

e-commerce sales for the third quarter of 2011 were 

$48.2 billion and accounted for 4.6% of total sales; 

worldwide, annual e-commerce sales were almost 

$8 trillion; banking, trading, and other financial 

transactions done by means of the Internet ﬂInternet of thingsﬂ (virtually every device/object 

networked); sensors embedded everywhere, enabling dramatic 

improvements in automation, efficiency, and safety
Parallel and Distributed 
SystemsUsing multiple computers and/or processors 

to solve a complex problem
Emergence of businesses such as Google 

and Amazon that use multiple very 

large data centers to deliver services at 

large scale
Cloud computing industry, 
an emerging and rapidly 
growing industry sector. Health IT alone expected 

to spend more than $1 billion on cloud services by 

2013; enterprise spending on public cloud computing 

services expected to expand 139% from 2010 to 2011
Renewal of efforts in parallelism to sustain growth in 

computing performance; improvements in scalability with 

reductions in operating costs for very large data centers
DatabasesTools for managing, discovering, and 

locating informationSearch engines, digital libraries, and 

data mining and analytics on massive 

data sets; advances in databases 

that have led to the development of 

enormous data repositoriesŠimproving 

knowledge and supporting new forms 

of scientific discovery Enterprise systems industry. 
Widespread use of 
enterprise resource planning software; world™s 

largest civilian database, Walmart™s data warehouse, 

stores more than 583 terabytes of sales and inventory 

data built on a massively parallel systemNatural language searches, data management to promote 

energy-efficient computing, cloud-based data analyses in 

heterogeneous environments, and other large-scale data 

management systemsComputer GraphicsDisplay of real-time graphics and text on an 

external screen
Graphical user interfaces; techniques 

for realistic modeling and simulation 

applied for near-realistic video 

games and movies; support by these 

technologies for applications in training 

and scientific explorationEntertainment industry. 
CGI movie ﬁToy Story 3ﬂ 
the highest-grossing film of 2010; 12 feature-length 

computer-generated-imagery animated films released 

in 2011; modeling and simulation commonplace in 

manufacturing and engineering; video games using 

advanced computer simulation techniques Tying visualization of large data sets to the simulation code, 

increased use of augmented reality, search based on images; 

photography becoming computationalArtificial Intelligence 
 and RoboticsSimulation of human-level intelligence, 

including language understanding, vision, 

learning, and planningRobotic-enabled prosthetics and 

artificial organs; fly-by-wire avionics 

and antilock brakes; cars capable of 

parallel parking themselves;
intelligent ranking of Web search results
Robotics and sensing industries. Automation 
commonplace in manufacturing and in specialties 
such as robot-assisted surgery; use of aerial drones 
for surveillance becoming commonplace; some 
household robots
Artificial intelligence agents capable of abstraction and 

generalization beyond their initial programming; ﬁhouseholdﬂ 

robots for more than vacuuming
 aSources for details listed are given in the section ﬁNotesﬂ following the main text of this report.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.UNIVERSITIES, INDUSTRY, AND GOVERNMENT
 7TABLE
 2
 Original Goals, Unanticipated Results, Current Results, and Possible Future Directions for 
 Research Topics in Figure 1
Research Topic
Original GoalUnanticipated ResultsToday
aAdvances Expected with Continued Commitment to IT 
Research
a Digital CommunicationsUntethered communication
Wireless local area networking for 

computers, cell phonesWireless and broadband industry. 
Nearly 6 billion 
cell phone subscribers worldwide, including more 

than 320 million subscribers in the United States; 

54% of the U.S. population as active mobile-
broadband subscribers, and more than 87 million 

fixed broadband subscriptions 
 Pervasive/ubiquitous communications and access to data 

and computing resources; mobile sensors for monitoring 

environment and health in real time
Computer Architecture
Tools to manage increasing complexity of 

microprocessor designs; new architectures to 

dramatically increase processing power
Powerful computation in things such 

as cars, televisions, kitchen appliances, 

and mobile devices 
Microprocessor industry.
 8.3 billion microprocessors 
produced annually and used pervasively; $40 billion 

in annual revenue
Increased interplay between hardware and software to achieve 

performance while managing power and providing easy 

programmability 
 Software Technologies
More effective use of computing power for 

specific tasks, and the creation of common 

systems on which to run them
Open-source movement that inspired 

many to gain powerful technical 

skills and become entrepreneurs; the 

ability to create software systems of 

extraordinary scale and complexity
Personal computing industry.
 1.4 billion PCs in 
use worldwide as of 2010; U.S. smartphone sales 

expected to be nearly 100 million in 2011
Parallel software to better use parallel hardware; improved 

tools for processing very large data sets
NetworkingSharing computational resources and data 

among computersNetwork e-mail; widespread sharing of 

software and data; the interconnection 

of billions of computers and other 

devicesInternet and Web industries. 
One-third of the 
world™s population is online, and 45% of those are 

under the age of 25; more than 18 billion searches 

were conducted in October 2011 in the United 

States (across five major search sites); U.S. retail 

e-commerce sales for the third quarter of 2011 were 

$48.2 billion and accounted for 4.6% of total sales; 

worldwide, annual e-commerce sales were almost 

$8 trillion; banking, trading, and other financial 

transactions done by means of the Internet ﬂInternet of thingsﬂ (virtually every device/object 
networked); sensors embedded everywhere, enabling dramatic 

improvements in automation, efficiency, and safety
Parallel and Distributed 
SystemsUsing multiple computers and/or processors 

to solve a complex problem
Emergence of businesses such as Google 

and Amazon that use multiple very 

large data centers to deliver services at 

large scale
Cloud computing industry, 
an emerging and rapidly 
growing industry sector. Health IT alone expected 

to spend more than $1 billion on cloud services by 

2013; enterprise spending on public cloud computing 

services expected to expand 139% from 2010 to 2011
Renewal of efforts in parallelism to sustain growth in 

computing performance; improvements in scalability with 

reductions in operating costs for very large data centers
DatabasesTools for managing, discovering, and 

locating informationSearch engines, digital libraries, and 

data mining and analytics on massive 

data sets; advances in databases 

that have led to the development of 

enormous data repositoriesŠimproving 

knowledge and supporting new forms 

of scientific discovery Enterprise systems industry. 
Widespread use of 
enterprise resource planning software; world™s 

largest civilian database, Walmart™s data warehouse, 

stores more than 583 terabytes of sales and inventory 

data built on a massively parallel systemNatural language searches, data management to promote 

energy-efficient computing, cloud-based data analyses in 

heterogeneous environments, and other large-scale data 

management systemsComputer GraphicsDisplay of real-time graphics and text on an 

external screen
Graphical user interfaces; techniques 

for realistic modeling and simulation 

applied for near-realistic video 

games and movies; support by these 

technologies for applications in training 

and scientific explorationEntertainment industry. 
CGI movie ﬁToy Story 3ﬂ 
the highest-grossing film of 2010; 12 feature-length 

computer-generated-imagery animated films released 

in 2011; modeling and simulation commonplace in 

manufacturing and engineering; video games using 

advanced computer simulation techniques Tying visualization of large data sets to the simulation code, 

increased use of augmented reality, search based on images; 

photography becoming computationalArtificial Intelligence 
 and RoboticsSimulation of human-level intelligence, 

including language understanding, vision, 

learning, and planningRobotic-enabled prosthetics and 

artificial organs; fly-by-wire avionics 

and antilock brakes; cars capable of 

parallel parking themselves;
intelligent ranking of Web search results
Robotics and sensing industries. Automation 
commonplace in manufacturing and in specialties 

such as robot-assisted surgery; use of aerial drones 

for surveillance becoming commonplace; some 

household robots
Artificial intelligence agents capable of abstraction and 

generalization beyond their initial programming; ﬁhouseholdﬂ 

robots for more than vacuuming
 aSources for details listed are given in the section ﬁNotesﬂ following the main text of this report.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Consider how research in the leftmost area in Figure 1Šdigital communicationsŠhas propelled 
the communications revolution that continues to unfold today:












and later was used in military communications satellites, was developed and commercialized 
as a new standard for cellular telephony in the 1990s by Qualcomm, a company founded 
by DARPA-funded university researchers. It uses unique mathematical codes to modulate 
transmissions, thus allowing multiple users to efficiently share a radio channel and provid
-ing relative immunity to interference.










closely related university research and followed by research at Bell Laboratories, has been a 

fundamental enabler of today™s wireless communications technologies.













to use complementary metal oxide semiconductor technology for radio-frequency signals, a 
development that made it possible to include WiFi, GPS, and Bluetooth at low cost in small, 

mobile devices. 












local area networks that connect computers within homes and businesses as well as for the 
Internet that links the globe. 










subscriber line (DSL) technology, which made it possible to provide high-speed data net
-working over public telephone network lines.  
A similar list could be constructed for each of the research areas represented in Figure 1. As 
Figure 1 and Table 2 illustrate, investments started more than four decades ago have been criti
-cal enablers of the products and services in use today. They also illustrate how research can yield 
important results not originally contemplated when a first investment was made. Finally, they 
describe some of the open questions that researchers pursue today and suggest some of the potential 
applications that lie ahead provided there is a continued commitment to IT research.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9Key Lessons About the Nature of Research 
in Information Technology
A number of important lessons about the nature of research in information technologyŠinclud
-ing the unpredictability of and synergy among research results; the roles of government, industry, 
and academia; and the economic and social returns from researchŠcan be gleaned from Figure 1 
and can also be distilled from past CSTB reports (for a summary, see Box 2).
THE ESSENTIAL ROLE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
Innovation in IT is made possible by a complex ecosystem encompassing university and 
industrial research enterprises, emerging start-up and more mature technology companies, those 
that finance innovative firms, and the regulatory environment and legal frameworks in which 
innovation takes place.
12
 It was within this ecosystem that the enabling technologies for each of 
the IT industries illustrated in Figure 1 were created. The government role has coevolved with the 
development of IT industries: its programs and investments have focused on capabilities not ready 
for commercialization and on the new needs that emerged as commercial capabilities grew, both of 
which are moving targets.
13
 A 2009 CSTB report, which examined the health of this ecosystem and 
noted the challenges posed to the U.S. position in IT leadership, underscored the critical importance 

of this federal investment (Box 3).
14
Most often, the federal investment that contributed to the development of the industries 
shown at the top of Figure 1 took the form of grants or contracts awarded to university and indus
-try researchers by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and other defense 
research agencies
15
 and/or the National Science Foundation (NSF), with the latter having come 
to play an increasingly important role in supporting academic IT research. A shifting mix of other 
funding agencies has also been involved, reflecting changes in the missions of these agencies and 
their needs for IT.
16
 For example, the Department of Energy (DOE), the National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration (NASA), and the military services have supported high-performance 
computing, networking, human-computer interaction, software engineering, embedded and real-
time systems, and other kinds of research; the National Institutes of Health invests in research in 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY

ˇˇ
‰˚The results of research
„˜ƒ˛˚˚˚˛˚ˆ˚˚˚˘˝˚˙˚˚

˙˛˚˙˛˚
”‚™ﬁ˛˚





‰˚Research as a partnership
˙˚














˙ˆ˛˘˚


‰˚The economic payoff of research

˙˛˚˙˛˚

˛˚



Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem

›
 Innovation in Information Technology

›
biomedical computing; and the Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity invests in such 
areas as data analysis and speech translation.
17
 Today, a wide array of agencies participate in the 
federal Networking and Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD) program,
18
 reflecting their interest in supporting advances in various aspects of computing and communica
-tions to fulfill their missions.
 Why has federal support been so effective in stimulating innovation in computing? As is dis
-cussed below, many factors have been important. 
 1. Federally funded programs have supported long-term research into fundamental aspects of computing, 

whose widespread practical benefits typically take years to realize.
19
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY LESSONS ABOUT THE NATURE OF RESEARCH IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 11One of the most important messages of Figure 1 is the long, unpredictable incubation periodŠ
requiring steady work and fundingŠbetween initial exploration and commercial deployment.
20
 The time from first concept to successful market is often measured in decadesŠa contrast to the 
more incremental innovations that tend to be publicized as evidence of the rapid pace of IT innova
-tion. Starting a new project requires considerable time and often may be risky, but the payoffs can 

be enormous. It is often not clear which aspect of an early-stage research project will ultimately be 
the most important. Fundamental research produces a range of ideas, and those bringing technolo
-gies to market will draw on innovative ideas as needs emerge. Indeed, the utility of ideas may be 

evident only well after they have been generated. For example, early work in coding theory ulti
-mately made possible the modern cell phone and streaming video over the Internet, and today™s 

cloud computing owes much to decades of research in distributed computing.
Because of unanticipated results and synergies, the exact course of fundamental research cannot 
be planned in advance, and its progress cannot be measured precisely in the short term. Even proj
-ects that appear to have failed or whose results do not seem to have immediate utility often make 

significant contributions to later technology development or achieve other objectives not originally 
envisioned. The field of number theory provides a striking example. For hundreds of years a branch 
of pure mathematics without applications, it became a foundation for the public-key cryptography 
that underlies the security of electronic commerce.
21
š
ˇ

˙˚

˙˚




˙˚


˛˝˙ˆˆ˚




˙ˆ˛˘˚

˜˛˚˙˚˙˚

˛˚
˙˚

 Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem

›
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
2. The interplay of government-funded academic research and industry R&D has been an important factor 
in IT commercialization.
22
The examples in Figure 1 show the interplay between government-funded academic research 
and industry research and development. In some cases, such as reduced-instruction-set computing 
(RISC) processors that are widely used today in mobile phones and other low-power applications, 
the initial ideas came from industry, but the research that was essential to advancing these ideas 
came from government funding to universities. RISC was conceived at IBM (International Business 
Machines), but it was not commercialized until DARPA funded additional research at the University 
of California, Berkeley, and at Stanford University as part of its Very Large Scale Integrated Circuit 
(VLSI) program in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
23
 RISC has since become commercially significant 
in a wide range of successful products from supercomputers to mobile phones. Of the 8.3 billion 
microprocessors produced in 2010, 6.1 billion implemented the Advanced RISC Machine (ARM) 
architecture.
24
 The VLSI Design program also supported university research that gave rise to such 
companies as Cadence Design Systems, Synopsys, and Mentor Graphics, which acquired dozens 
of smaller companies that started as spin-offs of DARPA-funded
25
 university research and today 
are part of a multibillion-dollar electronic design automation industry that is an essential enabler 

of other IT industries.
Similarly, although IBM pioneered the concept of relational databases (the System R project), 
it was NSF-sponsored research at the University of California, Berkeley, that brought this technol
-ogy to a point at which it was commercialized by several start-up companies and then by more 

established database companies (including IBM).
26
 Indeed, in none of the examples of products 
and industries shown in Figure 1 did industry alone provide the research necessary for success.
Moreover, these research-enabled commercial developments have expanded the possibilities 
for research, given that commercialization has led to substantial decreases in cost. Lower costs have 

allowed for much wider penetration of technology and have in turn greatly reduced the barrier for 
who gets to innovate, opening the door to a much wider range of both research and researchers, 
and to operation at a much larger scale, than was possible even 15 years ago.
3. There is a complex interweaving of fundamental research and focused development.
27
The purpose of publicly funded research is to advance knowledge and to solve hard problems. 
The exploitation of that knowledge and those solutions in products is fundamentally important, 
but the form it takes is often unpredictable, as is the impact on future research (see the discussion 
of the technological underpinnings of e-commerce in Box 4). In the case of integrated circuit (VLSI) 
design tools, research innovation (at places like Stanford University, the University of California, 
Berkeley, and the University of North Carolina) led to products and then to major industrial mar
-kets. In the case of relational databases, research at the University of California, Berkeley, built on 

earlier work at IBM and led to the first commercialization of the technology. Later, the introduc
-tion of products stimulated new fundamental research questions, leading to a new generation of 

products with capabilities vastly greater than those of their predecessors. Another example is the 
theoretical research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that yielded the algorithms behind 
the technology for Web-content distribution networks, which provide the foundation for successful 
companies such as Akamai Technologies. 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY LESSONS ABOUT THE NATURE OF RESEARCH IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 134. Federal support for research has tended to complement, rather than preempt, industry investments in 
research. 
The IT sector invests an enormous amount each year in R&D. It is critical to understand, how
-ever, that the vast majority of corporate R&D has always been focused on product and process 

development.
28
 This is what shareholders (or other investors) demand. It is harder for corpora
-tions to justify funding long-term, fundamental research. Economists have articulated the concept 
of appropriability to express the extent to which the results of an investment can be captured by 
the investor, as opposed to being available to all players in the market. The results of long-term, 
fundamental research are hard to appropriate for several reasons: they tend to be published openly 
and thus to become generally known; they tend to have broad value; it is difficult to predict in 
advance which will be important; and they become known well ahead of the moment of realization 
—
ˇ
›››
”‚‚ﬁ˛˚˙˚›
˙˚

‰˚˚

‰˚˚
˙ˆ


‰˚˚

‰˚˚



˙˚

‰˚˚
˚

‰˚˚
›˙˚

‰˚˚
›
‰˚˚


‰˚˚
˘˛˚˘˝˙ˇ˛˚˚˝˚˚ˆ˚

‰˚˚


‰˚˚
˚

 Information Technology Research, Innovation, and E-Government

›
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
as a product, and many parties thus have the opportunity to incorporate the results into their 
thinking. Such innovations effectively ﬁraise everyone™s boatﬂ in the same way as do government 
investments in bioscience, health care, and other strategically important scientific disciplines.
29
 In 
contrast, incremental research and product development can be performed in a way that is more 

appropriable. It can be done under wraps, and it can be moved into the marketplace more quickly 
and predictably. 
Although individual industry players may find it hard to justify research that is weakly appro
-priable, it is the proper role of the federal government to support this sort of endeavor.
30
 When 
companies create successful new products using the ideas and workforce that result from federally 
sponsored research, they repay the nation handsomely in jobs, tax revenues, productivity increases, 
and world leadership.
31
 Long-term research often has great benefits for the IT sector as a whole, 
although no particular company can be sure of reaping most of these benefits. Appropriability also 
helps to explain why the companies that have tended to provide the greatest support for funda
-mental research are large companies that enjoy dominant positions in their market.
32
 Start-ups represent the other end of the spectrum. A hallmark of U.S. entrepreneurship, start-
ups and start-up financing have facilitated the development of high-risk products as well as an 
iconoclastic, risk-taking attitude among more traditional companies and managers in the IT busi
-ness. But they do not engage in research.
33
 Thus, start-ups are notable for two reasons: first, although 
start-ups at least temporarily attract some researchers away from university-based research, they 
place them in a position to spearhead innovation, often based on their university work, and second, 
notwithstanding the popular labeling of start-ups as ﬁhigh-tech,ﬂ they apply the fruits of past 
research rather than generating more. In both respects, government funding plays a critical role in 
building the foundations for these innovative commercial investments. 
UNIVERSITY RESEARCH AND BROADER ECONOMIC IMPACTS
Much of the government-funded research in IT has been carried out at universities.
34
 Between 
1976 and 2009 federal support constituted roughly two-thirds of total university research funding 
in computer science and electrical engineering.
35
 Among the important characteristics of universi
-ties that contribute to their success as engines of innovation are the following: 

Universities can focus on long-term research
, a special role of universities that IT companies 
cannot be expected to fill to the same extent.
36
 (Universities™ ability to carry out such research 
depends, of course, on federal and other sources of funding for research with a long time 

horizon.)

Universities provide a neutral ground for collaboration
, encouraging movement and interaction 
among faculty through leave and sabbatical policies that allow professors to visit industry, 

government, and other university departments or laboratories. Universities also provide 
sites at which researchers from competing companies can come together to explore technical 
issues.
37
 
Universities integrate research and education,
 a conjunction that creates very powerful syner
-gies, ensuring that students are involved in projects where knowledge is being discovered, 

not only studied, and providing an educational foundation for the continuous learning that 
is so important in a fast-moving field like IT.
38
 
Universities are inherently multidisciplinary
, and university researchers are well situated to 
draw on experts from a variety of fields.
39
 Despite cultural barriers to cross-disciplinary 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.KEY LESSONS ABOUT THE NATURE OF RESEARCH IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
 15collaboration, physical proximity and collegial values go a long way in enabling collabora
-tion. The multidisciplinary nature of universities is of historic and growing importance to 
computer science, which interfaces with so many other fields.

Universities are ﬁopenﬂ
 both literally and figuratively, a characteristic that can pay enormous 
unanticipated dividends. Chance interactions in an open environment can change the world; 

for example, when Microsoft founders Paul Allen and Bill Gates were students at Seattle™s 
Lakeside School in the early 1970s, they were exposed to computing and computer science 
at the University of Washington and to a university spin-off company, Computer Center 
Corporation.
These characteristics of university research share a common elementŠpeople. U.S. research 
universities are unique in the degree to which they integrate research with educationŠin both 

undergraduate and graduate education. Universities educate the skilled IT workers of the future.
40
 Their graduates are also by far the most effective vehicle for technology transfer, not only from uni
-versities to industry but also between university laboratories and departments, through the hiring 

of postdoctoral researchers and assistant professors.
41
 Faculty and student researchers often move 
into product-development roles as consultants, employees, and entrepreneurs.
42
 Federal support 
for university research drives this process. In Ph.D.-granting computer science programs, more 
than half of all graduate students receive financial support from the federal government, mostly 
in the form of research assistantships.
43
 Another benefit of federally funded academic research that doesn™t show up in Figure 1 is 
research™s contribution to the development of open standards and open-source codes that support 

further innovation. The standards that define the Internet had their origins in academic work, and 
federal support allowed many university researchers to participate in their development and evolu
-tion. The Hyper Text Transfer Protocol (HTTP) Daemon Web server developed with NSF support at 

the University of Illinois by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications powered much 
of the early Web, and its code base was used to develop the open-source Apache Web server that is 
widely used today. Similarly, many of the team members who developed the original Mosaic Web 
browser went on to commercialize the product in the form of Netscape Navigator. Moreover, the 
open-source Mozilla browser code became a foundation for the Firefox browser.
In addition to educating students and creating ideas and companies, universities often bring 
forefront technologies to their regions (e.g., the nationwide expansion of ARPANET in the 1970s and 
of NSFnet in the 1980s, and the continuation of those efforts through the private Internet activities 
in the 1990s and early 2000s), and universities serve as powerful magnets for companies seeking 
to relocate. Indeed, strong research institutions are recognized as being among the most critical 
success factors in high-tech economic development.
44,45
 Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16
Looking Ahead
Today™s research investments are essential to tomorrow™s world leadership in information tech
-nology (IT). Properly managed, publicly funded research in IT will continue to create important 
new technologies and industries, some of them unimagined today. Indeed, the field is young, and 
there is every reason to believe that the best is yet to come. Box 5 provides a few examples of the 
impacts that can be anticipated from advances in IT in the coming decades. Surely, however, some 
of the most important impacts will not have been listed, becauseŠas history shows usŠmany 
of the technological surprises and major economic disruptions just waiting to happen cannot be 
predicted today.
The process of innovation will continue to take many years from the inception of a new idea 
to the creation of a billion-dollar industry. Every step of this process benefits fromŠand often 
requiresŠfederal support. Without ongoing federal investment in fundamental research there 
would still be innovation, but the quantity and the range of new ideas for U.S. industry to draw 
from would be greatly diminishedŠas would the flow of people educated at the technological 
forefront, the most important product of the nation™s research universities.
46
The lessons of history are clear. A complex partnership among government, industry, and uni
-versities made the United States the world leader in IT, and information technology has become 
essential to our national security and economic and social well-being. The federal government™s 
sponsorship of fundamental research in ITŠlargely university-basedŠhas been and will continue 
to be essential. 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.LOOKING AHEAD 17ƒ
ˇˇ
˚˘ˇ
‰˚ Safer, robotics-enhanced automobiles.
ˇ˙˚
˙ˆ˛˘˚
˙˚
‰˚ A more scalable, manageable, secure, and robust Internet.
ˇ
žﬁ˚˛˚˙˛˚


‰˚ Personalized and collaborative educational tools for tutoring and just-in-time learning.
ˇ
˙˚˙ˆˆ˚



‰˚ Personalized health monitoring.
˚


˙˛˚
˙˚˚

‰˚ Augmented cognition to help people cope with information overload



˙ˆ˛˘˚


‰˚ IT-driven advances in all fields of science and engineering.
˚˜˚






Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem

›
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18
Notes
MAIN TEXT 1. Section based on National Research Council (NRC)/Computer Science and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), 
2009, Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem: Retaining Leadership in an 
Increasingly Global Environment,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., with additional data from 
the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Networking and Information Technology Research and Development 
(NITRD) program.
 2. NRC/CSTB, 2009, Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem
. 3. As defined by the Department of Commerce, this industry cluster consists of ﬁcomputer and electronic prod
-ucts within durable-goods manufacturing; publishing industries (includes software) and information and data 
processing services within information; and computer systems design and related services within professional, 
scientific, and technical services.ﬂ  See 
http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/industry/gdpindustry/2011/txt/
gdpind10_rev
.  4. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2011, ﬁ2010 Recovery Widespread Across Industries,ﬂ April 26, 
http://www.bea.
gov/newsreleases
/industry/gdpindustry/2011/pdf/gdpind10_adv_fax.pdf
.  See also ﬁInteractive Access to 
Industry Economic Accounts Data,ﬂ http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable.cfm?ReqID=5&step=1.
 5. Matthieu Pélissié du Rausas, James Manyika, Eric Hazan, Jacques Bughin, Michael Chui, and Rémi Said, 2011, ﬁInternet Matters: The Net™s Sweeping Impact on Growth, Jobs, and Prosperity,ﬂ  McKinsey Global Institute, 

May, http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/Technology_and_Innovation/Internet_matters. The 

authors define ﬁInternet-related activitiesﬂ as the ﬁtotality of Internet activities (e.g., e-commerce) and . . . a por
-tion of the information and communication technologies sector delineated by such activities, technologies, and 

services linked to the Web.ﬂ
 6. This number may overestimate the investment in computing research.  A 2010 PCAST report observes that ﬁ[a] 
large portion of the ‚High End Computing Infrastructure and Applications™ . . . is attributable to computational 

infrastructure used to conduct R&D in other fields.ﬂ See President™s Council of Advisors on Science and Tech
-nology, 2010, 
Report to the President and Congress: Designing a Digital Future: Federally Funded Research and Devel
-opment in Networking and Information Technology,
 Executive Office of the President, http://www.whitehouse.
gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcast-nitrd-report-2010.pdf.
 7.  NITRD, 2009, ﬁFY 2010 Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Supplement to 
the President™s Budget,ﬂ May, http://www.nitrd.gov/pubs/2010supplement/FY10Supp-FINALFormat-Web.

pdf.Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES 19 8.  Section based on NRC/CSTB, 2003, Innovation in Information Technology,
 The National Academies Press, Wash
-ington, D.C., with discussion updated to take into account revisions reflected in Figure 1 of the present report.
 9.  NRC/CSTB, 1995, 
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the Nation™s 
Information Infrastructure,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.
10.  NRC/CSTB, 2003, Innovation in Information Technology.
11. 
 The idea that research in IT not only builds in part on research in physics, mathematics, electrical engineer
-ing, psychology, and other fields but also strongly influences them is consistent with what Donald Stokes has 
characterized in his four-part taxonomy as ﬁPasteur™s Quadrantﬂ research: use- or application-inspired basic 
research that pursues fundamental understanding (such as Louis Pasteur™s research on the biological bases 
of fermentation and disease). See the discussion on pp. 26-29 of NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better,
 National Academy Press, Washington, D.C.; see also Donald E. Stokes, 1997, 
Pasteur™s Quadrant: Basic Science and Techno
-logical Innovation, Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
12.  NRC/CSTB, 2009, Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem
.13.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution: Government Support for Computing Research,
 National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C.
14.  NRC/CSTB, 2009, Assessing the Impacts of Changes in the Information Technology R&D Ecosystem
.15.  Some of the agencies within the Department of Defense that made major contributions include the Office of 
Naval Research, Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Army Research Office, and the Army™s Satellite Com
-munications Agency.
16.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution; 
1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Ini
-tiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure.
 17.  In addition to provision of research funding, complementary activities have been undertaken by other agencies, 
such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology, which often brings together people from universi
-ties and industry on issues relating to standards setting and measurement.
18.  Member agencies include the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; Defense Advanced Research Proj
-ects Agency; Department of Homeland Security; Department of EnergyŠNational Nuclear Security Admin
-istration and DOE Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research; Environmental Protection Agency; De
-partment of Health and Human ServicesŠOffice of the National Coordinator, National Archives and Records 

Administration; National Aeronautics and Space Administration; National Institutes of Health; National In
-stitute of Standards and Technology; National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; National Security 

Agency; National Science Foundation; and Office of the Secretary of Defense and Department of Defense ser
-vice research organizations (Defense Research and Engineering and Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Science 

& Technology).  See http://www.nitrd.gov/Subcommittee/agency-web-sites.aspx.
19.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution.20.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution;
 1995, 
Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Ini
-tiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure.
21.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution.22.  See, for example, previous CSTB reports (all published by the National Academy/Academies Press, Washing
-ton, D.C.), including NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution; 2000, Making IT Better; 1995, Evolving the High Per-
formance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure;
 1992, Comput-ing the Future: A Broader Agenda for Computer Science and Engineering;
 2001, Building a Workforce for the Information 
Economy; 1994, Academic Careers in Experimental Computer Science and Engineering;
 2001, Embedded, Everywhere: 
A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of Embedded Computers;
 and 1997, More Than Screen Deep: Toward Every-
Citizen Interfaces to the Nation™s Information Infrastructure. 
23.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution; 
1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Ini
-tiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure
.24.  Timothy Prickett Morgan, 2011, ﬁARM Holdings Eager for PC and Server Expansion: Record 2010, Looking 
for Killer 2020,ﬂ  The Register Online, February 1,  http://www.theregister.co.uk/2011/02/01/arm_holdings_

q4_2010_numbers/. 25.  In some cases, the Semiconductor Research Corporation provided the funding. For additional information, see 
http://web.archive.org/web/20080103002836/and http://www.src.org/member/about/history.asp. 
26.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution; 
1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Ini
-tiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure
.Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
27.  See, for example, the following previous CSTB reports: NRC/CSTB, 1999, 
Funding a Revolution; 2000, Making IT Better; 1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the Nation™s Infor
-mation Infrastructure
.28.  NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better.29.  NRC/CSTB, 2010, Critical Code: Software Producibility for Defense,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, 
D.C., p. 37.30.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution; 
1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Ini
-tiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure
.31.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution; 
1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Ini
-tiative to Support the Nation™s Information Infrastructure
.32.  NRC/CSTB, 1999, Funding a Revolution.33.  NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better.34.  The concentration of research in universities is particularly true for computer science research; industry played 
an important role in telecommunications research before the breakup of AT&T and the original Bell Labs.  Im
-portant research has also been conducted at Department of Energy and other government laboratories.
35.  NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better. 36.  See, for example the following previous CSTB reports: NRC/CSTB, 1999, 
Funding a Revolution; 2000, Making IT Better; 1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the Nation™s Infor
-
mation Infrastructure
. 37.  NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better; 1994, Academic Careers in Experimental Computer Science and Engineering.
38. NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better; 1992, Computing the Future.
39. NRC/CSTB, 2000, Making IT Better.40.  NRC/CSTB, 2001, Building a Workforce for the Information Economy
.41.  NRC/CSTB, 2001, Building a Workforce for the Information Economy
.42.  To the extent that U.S. research produces people who move to U.S. product development, the U.S. economy 
gains an ﬁappropriableﬂ benefit from funding research.
43.  Computing Research Association (CRA), 2010, Taulbee Survey Report, CRA, Washington, D.C., Table 25, 
http://www.cra.org/resources/taulbee/.
44.  NRC/CSTB, 2001, Building a Workforce for the Information Economy
. 45.  In computing, electronics, telecommunications, and biotechnology, evidence of the correlation aboundsŠin 
Boston (Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology); Research Triangle Park (Duke 

University, the University of North Carolina, and North Carolina State University); New Jersey (Princeton Uni
-versity, Rutgers University, and New York CityŒbased Columbia University); Austin (the University of Texas); 
southern California (the University of California, San Diego, the University of California, Los Angeles, the Cali
-fornia Institute of Technology, and the University of Southern California); northern California (the University 
of California, Berkeley, the University of California, San Francisco, and Stanford University); and Seattle (the 

University of Washington). 
46.  See, for example, previous CSTB reports, including NRC/CSTB, 1999, 
Funding a Revolution; 2000, Making IT Better; 1995, Evolving the High Performance Computing and Communications Initiative to Support the Nation™s In
-formation Infrastructure; 
1992, Computing the Future;
 2001, Building a Workforce for the Information Economy;
 1994, Academic Careers in Experimental Computer Science and Engineering;
 2001, Embedded, Everywhere;
 and 1997, More 
Than Screen Deep.
 TABLE 1  
QualcommŠ-Equipment and services ($6.98 billion); licensing and royalties ($4.01 billion). Qualcomm 2010 
 Annual Report, http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/QCOM/1510480689x0x451979/c5ba4b26-fe1d-4756- 

a735-ed1d972402cb/2010-10-K.pdf.MotorolaŠNet sales, products ($6.1 billion); net sales, services ($2.1 billion). Motorola 2011 Annual Report, http://
files.shareholder.com/downloads/ABEA-2FO3VV/1751114768x0x552627/1344EB61-45BA-4EAD-9EC4-

A99116BE997C/MSI_2011_AR.pdf.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES 21nVidiaŠFY2011 total revenue. nVidia Corporation, 2011 Annual Review, Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy State
-ment and nVidia Form 10-K (U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission; SEC).
IntelŠ2011 revenue based on general accepted accounting principles (GAAP); non-GAAP revenue $54.2 billion. See 
http://www.intc.com/financials.cfm.
AMDŠComputing solutions only (excludes ﬁgraphics,ﬂ ﬁfoundries,ﬂ and ﬁotherﬂ). AMD 2011 Annual Report, 
http://ir.amd.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=74093&p=irol-reportsannual.
Texas InstrumentsŠ2011 revenue from embedded processing segment,   http://files.shareholder.com/downloads/
TXN/1710273597x0x535657/2de80eb4-2af1-4e4e-bd7f-f36811701b17/TXN_News_2012_1_23_Financial.pdf.
DellŠDesktop PCs ($18.97 billion) and mobile and laptop PCs ($14.69 billion) (excludes software, services, and 
enterprise/server sales). Dell 2011 Form 10-K (SEC).  
HPŠRevenue from Personal Systems Group (excludes software, services, and printers). HP 2011 Annual Report, 
http://h30261.www3.hp.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=71087&p=irol-reportsAnnual.
AppleŠIncludes desktop and portable device sales ($21.78 billion), iPhone ($47.0 billion), and iPad ($20.3 billion). 2011 Apple, Inc. Form 10-K (SEC).
SymantecŠSymantec FY2011 net revenue, http://phx.corporate-ir.net/External.File?item=UGFyZW50SUQ9NDQ
2MTY2fENoaWxkSUQ9NDY5NTEwfFR5cGU9MQ==&t=1.JuniperŠTotal revenue. Juniper Networks FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).
CiscoŠTotal revenue. Cisco Systems 2011 Annual Report, http://www.cisco.com/assets/cdc_content_elements/
docs/annualreports/media/2011-ar.pdf.
AkamaiŠTotal revenue. Akamai FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).

TwitterŠEstimated total revenue.  
Wall Street Journal
, 2011, ﬁTwitter as Tech Bubble Barometer,ﬂ http://www.npr.
org/blogs/thetwo-way/2011/02/10/133648669/twitters-value-up-to-10-billion-wall-street-journal-reports.
FacebookŠTotal 2011 revenue. Form 424B4 (SEC), filed May 18, 2012.

eBayŠTotal revenue. eBay FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).

AmazonŠSum of U.S.-based media sales ($8 billion) and electronics and merchandise sales ($17.3 billion); excludes 
Amazon Web Services and ﬁother,ﬂ which encompasses such things as Amazon-branded credit cards. Amazon 

FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).
GoogleŠRevenue except ﬁother.ﬂ Google FY2010 Form 10-K (SEC).

Yahoo!ŠTotal FY2011 revenue. Yahoo! FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).

GoogleŠNon-advertising revenue. Google FY2010 Form 10-K (SEC).
VMwareŠTotal revenue. VMware FY2010 Form 10-K (SEC). 
AmazonŠNon-e-commerce revenue from Amazon Web Services. Amazon FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).

OracleŠRevenue total for new software licenses ($9.2 billion), hardware systems ($4.4 billion), software license up
-dates and product support ($14.8 billion), and hardware systems support ($2.56 billion) and excluding cloud, 
consulting, and education. Oracle FY2010 Form 10-K (SEC).IBMŠ2011 revenue from software ($24.94 billion) and systems and technology ($18.99 billion) and excluding global 
business services, global technology services, and global financing. IBM 2011 Annual Report, http://www.ibm.
com/annualreport/2011/.
MicrosoftŠRevenue from server and tools product and service offerings (includes Windows Server, Microsoft SQL 
Server, Windows Azure, Visual Studio, System Center products, Windows Embedded device platforms, and 

Enterprise Services) ($17.1 billion); Business Division offerings (includes the Microsoft Office system, compris
-ing mainly Office, SharePoint, Exchange, and Lync; and Microsoft Dynamics business solutions) ($22.2 billion). 

Microsoft FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).
Electronic ArtsŠElectronic Arts FY2010 Form 10-K (SEC).

PixarŠPixar became a wholly owned subsidiary of the Walt Disney Company in 2006. Worldwide gross revenue 
from Pixar Studio releases was $766 million in 2009, $1.06 billion in 2010, and $554 million in 2011. See http://

www.the-numbers.com/movies/series/Pixar.php.
AdobeŠTotal revenue. Adobe FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).
iRobotŠTotal revenue. iRobot 2010 Annual Report, April 13, 2011, http://phx.corporate-ir.net/External.File?item=
UGFyZW50SUQ9NDIxNzg2fENoaWxkSUQ9NDM1NTYzfFR5cGU9MQ==&t=1.NuanceŠTotal revenue. Nuance FY2011 Form 10-K (SEC).
Intuitive SurgicalŠTotal revenue. Intuitive Surgical 2010 Annual Report, 
http://phx.corporate-ir.net/External.File
?item=UGFyZW50SUQ9ODQxMTJ8Q2hpbGRJRD0tMXxUeXBlPTM=&t=1.Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
TABLE 2 
Column Headed ﬁTodayﬂ 
Wireless and broadband industry
subscribers worldwide:  International Telecommunication Union, 2011, ﬁThe World in 2011: ICT Facts and Figures,ﬂ 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ICTFactsFigures2010.pdf
.subscribers in the United States: CTIA, ﬁ50 Wireless Quick Facts,ﬂ http://www.ctia.org/consumer_info/index.cfm/
AID/10323.mobile-broadband subscribers:
 International Telecommunication Union, 2011, ﬁMeasuring the Information Society,ﬂ 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/idi/2011/Material/MIS_2011_without_annex_5.pdf.
fixed broadband subscriptions:
 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, Directorate for Sci
-ence, Technology, and Industry, ﬁOECD Broadband Portal,ﬂ 
http://www.oecd.org/document/54/0,3746
,en_2649_34225_38690102_1_1_1_1,00.html.Microprocessor industry
8.3 billion: Lee Eng Kean, 2010, ﬁMCU to Intel Architecture Conversion,ﬂ
 EE Times
, May 31, http://www.eetimes.
com/design/microcontroller-mcu/4199788/MCU-to-Intel-architecture-conversion.
$40 billion: http://www.isuppli.com/Home-and-Consumer-Electronics/News/Pages/Fourth-Quarter-2010-
Micro
 processor
-SharesŒFinal-Microprocessor-Revenue-Share-Data.aspx
.Personal computing industry
1.4 billion: eTForecasts, ﬁWorldwide PC Market,ﬂ http://www.etforecasts.com/products/ES_pcww1203.htm.  
100 million:
 ﬁGartner Survey Shows U.S. Consumers More Likely to Purchase a Smartphone Than Other Consumer 
Devices in 2011,ﬂ 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1550814
.Internet and Web industries
One third . . . online, and 45%: International Telecommunication Union, 2011, ﬁThe World in 2011: ICT Facts and Fig
-ures,ﬂ http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ICTFactsFigures2010.pdf.
18 billion searches:
 comScore, 2011, ﬁcomScore Releases 2011 U.S. Search Engine Rankings,ﬂ press release, November 
11, http://www.comscore.com/Press_Events/Press_Releases/2011/11/comScore_Releases_October_2011_ 

U.S._Search_Engine_Rankings.
$48.2 billion and . . . 4.6% of total sales: U.S. Census Bureau, 2011, ﬁQuarterly Retail E-Commerce Sales: 3rd Quarter 
2011,ﬂ November 17, http://www.fortune3.com/blog/2011/01/ecommerce-sales-2011/.
$8 trillion: Matthieu Pélissié du Rausas, James Manyika, Eric Hazan, Jacques Bughin, Michael Chui, and Rémi Said, 2011, ﬁInternet Matters: The Net™s Sweeping Impact on Growth, Jobs, and Prosperity,ﬂ McKinsey Global Institute, 

May, 
http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/Technology_and_Innovation/Internet_matters
.Cloud computing industry
$1 billion . . . by 2013: In Stat, 2011, ﬁHealthcare to Spend $518 Million on Infrastructure as a Service in 2015,ﬂ August 
1, http://www.instat.com/newmk.asp?ID=3219&SourceID=00000352000000000000.
Expand 139% from 2010 to 2011:
 Business Technology Roundtable, 2011, ﬁIncreased Spending on Public Cloud 
Computing Services,ﬂ August 9, 
http://business-technology-roundtable.blogspot.com/2011/08/increased-
spending-on-public-cloud.html.Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTES 23Enterprise systems industry
583 terabytes of sales: Information Week
, 2006, ﬁData, Data Everywhere,ﬂ 
http://www.informationweek.com/
news/175801775?pgno=2; Regis McKenna, 2002, Total Access: Giving Customers What They Want in an Anytime 
Anywhere World,
 Harvard Business Press.
Entertainment industry
Highest-grossing film of 2010:
 Box Office Mojo, ﬁ2010 Worldwide Grosses,ﬂ 
http://boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart
/?view2=worldwide&yr=2010&p=.htm.Column Headed ﬁAdvances Expected,ﬂ 
 in Research Topic Noted
Networking
embedded everywhere:
 NRC/CSTB, 2001, Embedded, Everywhere: A Research Agenda for Networked Systems of Embedded 
Computers, National Academy Press, Washington. D.C.
Databases
energy-efficient computing:
 Stavros Harizopoulos, Mehul Shah, Justin Mexa, and Parthasarathy Ranganathan, 2009, 
ﬁEnergy Efficiency: The New Holy Grail of Data Management Systems Research,ﬂ 4th Biennial Conference on 

Innovative Data Systems Research (CIDR), January 4-7, Asilomar, California.
and other large-scale data management systems:
 Daniel J. Abadi, 2009, ﬁData Management in the Cloud: Limitations and 
Opportunities,ﬂ Bulletin of the [IEEE Computer Society] Technical Committee on Data Engineering 
32(1):3-12; Sam Madden and Maarten van Steen, 2012, ﬁInternet-Scale Data Management,ﬂ IEEE Internet Computing 16(1):10-12.Computer graphics
to the simulation code:
 James Ahrens and Han-Wei Shen, 2010, ﬁUltrascale Visualization,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications 30(3):20-21.Artificial intelligence and robotics
robots for more than vacuuming:
 Hans Moravec, 2009, ﬁRise of the RobotsŠThe Future of Artificial Intelligence,ﬂ 
Sci-entific American, March 23, http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=rise-of-the-robots.
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
Appendix A
Short Biographies of Committee Members
Peter Lee
 (Chair
) is a corporate vice president of Microsoft Research in Redmond, Washington. 
Prior to taking his position at Microsoft, Dr. Lee worked at the Defense Advanced Research Proj
-ects Agency (DARPA), where he was the founding director of the Transformational Convergence 
Technology Office. Prior to DARPA, Dr. Lee was a professor and the head of the Computer Science 
Department at Carnegie Mellon University. Peter Lee™s research contributions are in areas related to 
the foundations of software reliability, program analysis, security, and language design. A fellow of 
the Association for Computing Machinery and former chair of the board of directors of the Com
-puting Research Association, Peter Lee is called on in diverse venues as a contributor in research, 

education, and policy making. He conducted his doctoral studies at the University of Michigan.
Mark E. Dean 
is chief technology officer, IBM Middle East and Africa. He was previously a techni
-cal fellow and vice president, worldwide operations at IBM Research, and the vice president for 
Systems Research at IBM™s Watson Research Center in Yorktown Heights, New York, where he was 
responsible for the research and application of systems technologies spanning circuits to operating 
environments. During his career, Dr. Dean has held several engineering positions at IBM in the 
area of computer system hardware architecture and design. He has developed all types of com
-puter systems, from embedded systems to supercomputers, including testing of the first gigahertz 

CMOS microprocessor, and he established the team that developed the Blue Gene supercomputer. 
He was also chief engineer for the development of the IBM PC/AT, ISA systems bus, PS/2 Model 
70 and 80, and the color graphics adapter in the original IBM PC, and he holds three of the nine 
patents for the original IBM PC. One inventionŠthe Industry Standard Architecture (ISA) ﬁbus,ﬂ 
which permitted add-on devices like the keyboard, disk drives, and printers to be connected to 

the motherboardŠearned election to the National Inventors Hall of Fame for Dean and colleague 
Dennis Moeller. Dr. Dean™s most recent awards include a National Institute of Science Outstanding 
Scientist Award, member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy 
of Engineering, IEEE Fellow, the CCG Black Engineer of the Year, the NSBE Distinguished Engi
-neer Award, the University of Tennessee COE Dougherty Award, and recipient of the Ronald H. 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 25Brown American Innovators Award. Dr. Dean was appointed an IBM Fellow in 1995, IBM™s highest 
technical honor. He is a member of the IBM Academy of Technology. Dr. Dean has more than 40 
patents or patents pending. He received a BSEE degree from the University of Tennessee in 1979, 
an MSEE degree from Florida Atlantic University in 1982, and a Ph.D. in electrical engineering 
from Stanford University in 1992.
Deborah L. Estrin 
is a professor of computer science at UCLA and is director of the NSF-funded 
Center for Embedded Networked Sensing (CENS). Professor Estrin received her Ph.D. (1985) in 
computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, her M.S. (1982) from MIT, and her 
B.S. (1980) from the University of California, Berkeley. Before joining UCLA she was a member of 

the University of Southern California Computer Science Department from 1986 through the middle 

of 2000. In 1987, Professor Estrin received the National Science Foundation‚s Presidential Young 
Investigator Award for her research in network interconnection and security. During the subsequent 
10 years much of her research focused on the design of network and routing protocols for very 
large, global networks, self-configuring protocol mechanisms for scalability and robustness, and 
tools and methods for designing and studying large-scale networks. Since the late 1990s Professor 
Estrin has been collaborating with her colleagues and students to develop protocols and systems 
architectures needed to realize rapidly deployable and robustly operating networks of many 
hundreds of physically embedded devices, e.g., sensor networks. She is particularly interested in 
the application of spatially and temporally dense embedded sensors to environmental monitor
-ing. Dr. Estrin has been a co-principal investigator on many NSF- and DARPA-funded projects. 

She chaired a 1997-1998 ISAT study on sensor networks and the 2001 NRC study on networked 

embedded computing which produced the report 
Embedded, Everywhere
. Professor Estrin serves on 
the advisory committees for the NSF Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) 

and Environmental Research and Education (ERE) Directorates. She is a fellow of the ACM, AAAS, 
and IEEE. She has served on numerous panels for the NSF, National Academy of Sciences/NRC, 
and DARPA. She has also served as an editor for the ACM/IEEE 
Transactions on Networks
 and as 
a program committee member for many networking-related conferences, including Sigcomm and 

Infocom. She was general co-chair for the first ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor 
Systems, SenSys 2003. She was also an associate editor for the new ACM 
Transactions on Sensor 
Networks
 and was a member of the National Research Council™s Computer Science and Telecom
-munications Board from 2004 to 2011.
James T. Kajiya 
is currently a director of research at Microsoft Corporation. From 1994 to 1997, 
Dr. Kajiya was a senior researcher at Microsoft Research, where he built and led the graphics 
group. His recent work has focused on very-high-quality computer graphics. Most recently, Dr. 
Kajiya has returned to graphics hardware design. He was the principal architect on Talisman, a 
low-cost hardware architecture for very-high-quality real-time three-dimensional graphics. Dr. 
Kajiya also served as the principal investigator on a joint research project with IBM that produced 
an implementation of Prolog yielding a speed of 0.9 megalips and a new object-oriented systems 
programming language called FITH. In other work, he explored parallel ray tracing on the IBM 
RP3 and specified software architecture for scientific visualization in the IBM SVS, which became 
the Power Visualization System. In joint work with TRW, he has served as architect for super
-computers oriented toward military signal- and image-processing tasks. Dr. Kajiya has served 
on the external advisory board of the Defense Mapping Agency, on the National Neurocircuitry 
Database Committee for the National Academy of Sciences and Institute of Medicine, and on the 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
SIGGRAPH executive committee. He received the SIGGRAPH Technical Achievement Award in 
1991 and served as the technical program chair for SIGGRAPH 93. In 1997, Dr. Kajiya, along with 
Dr. Timothy Kay, received an Academy Award (technical certificate) for work on rendering hair 
and fur. In 2002 he was elected to the National Academy of Engineering for contributions to formal 
and practical methods of computer image generation. He received a Ph.D. in computer science 
from the University of Utah.
Prabhakar Raghavan
 is vice president of engineering at Google, Inc. He is also a consulting profes
-sor of computer science at Stanford University. His research interests include text and Web mining 
and algorithm design, and he has authored two textbooks on the subjects. Dr. Raghavan received 

his Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley, and is a member of the National Academy of 

Engineering and a fellow of the ACM and the IEEE. Prior to joining Google he was head of Yahoo! 
Labs and before that, senior vice-president and chief technology officer at Verity; before that he 
held a number of technical and managerial positions at IBM Research.
Andrew J. Viterbi 
is a co-founder and retired vice chair and chief technical officer of QUALCOMM 
Incorporated. He spent equal portions of his career in industry, having previously co-founded 
Linkabit Corporation, and in academia as a professor in the Schools of Engineering and Applied 
Science, first at UCLA and then at UCSD, at which he is now a professor emeritus. He is currently 
president of the Viterbi Group, a technical advisory and investment company. He also serves as 
Presidential Chair Visiting Professor at the University of Southern California and as a distinguished 
visiting professor at the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology. Dr. Viterbi has received numerous 

honors both in the United States and internationally. Among these are seven honorary doctorates, 
from universities in Canada, Israel, Italy, and the United States; the Marconi International Fellow
-ship Award; the IEEE Alexander Graham Bell, the Claude Shannon, and the James Clerk Maxwell 

Awards; the NEC C&C Award; the Eduard Rhein Foundation Award; the Christopher Columbus 
Medal, the Franklin Medal, and the Robert Noyes Semiconductor Industry Award; the Millennium 
Laureate Award; and the IEEE™s highest award, the Medal of Honor. He is a member of the National 
Academy of Engineering and the National Academy of Sciences and is a fellow of the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences. He has received an honorary title from the president of Italy and the 
National Medal of Science from the president of the United States. Dr. Viterbi serves on boards and 
committees of numerous nonprofit institutions, including the University of Southern California, 
MIT (Visiting Committee for Bioengineering), Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Burnham 
Institute for Medical Research, and Scripps Translational Science Institute, and he is the past chair 
of the Computer and Information Sciences Section of the National Academy of Sciences. 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27
Appendix B
Transfers of Ideas and People and Other 
Impacts Since 2003 Added to Figure 1
Table B.1 gives some examples of the many transfers of ideas and people and other impacts that 
occurred as the fields of computing and communications progressed, and it provides annotation 
for events depicted by arrows in Figure 1. It is not meant to be a comprehensive description of the 
history of the research in any of the areas listed. 
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
TABLE B.1
 Transfers and Other Impacts Since 2003 as Indicated by the New Arrows Added to 
 Figure 1
Research Track and Events
OriginsImpactDigital CommunicationsMultiple-input and multiple-outputClosely related university research 

pre-1996; industry R&D (Bell Labs 

BLAST) in 1998A fundamental enabler in today™s 

wireless communications, including 

WiFi, WiMax, 4G, LTE, and others
Radio-frequency complementary 

metal-oxide semiconductor 

integrated circuits
Basic research and some serious 

engineering efforts in universities 

throughout the 1990s
The foundational device technology for 

WiFi, GPS, Bluetooth, and others
Wireless locating
Industry R&D in the early 2000s, 

with subsequent university research
Fundamental to some wireless systems, 

and an energy-saving supplement 

to GPS for mobile devices; now a 

foundation for growing location-based 

servicesBluetoothEricsson and open SIG 1994, with 

participation by industry and 

university; based on earlier research 

in spread-spectrum radio
Now the industry standard for very-

short-range secure networking; used 

primarily for local connectivity of 

devicesMACA channel access protocol
University and industry research 

starting in 1990 and continuing to 

2000sThe foundation for collision avoidance 

on shared physical network links, 

particularly for wireless networks
Computer ArchitectureAdaptive branch predictors
Two-level adaptive branch predictors 

started in academic research around 

1992Significant influence on subsequent 

research, as well as influence on 

modern processor designs
Memory-dependence predictors
Both university and industrial 

research, emerging in practical form 

around 1996-1997
Fundamental to enabling aggressive 

out-of-order execution in practice, 

affecting research in compilers and 

architectures, and commercial products
Multicore
Early university-based 

developments, such as Stanford 

Hydra and MIT RAW, circa 2002; 

later, industry R&D such as Sun™s 

Niagara, around 2005
Fundamental to all processor 

architectures on the market today; 

furthermore, the problems of parallel 

computing have become central in 

research
Stream-based image-processing 

architectures
University-based research on stream-

processing for image and signal 

processing, leading to developments 

such as Imagine, circa 2002
The foundation for today™s GPUs; 

today there is considerable research 

and commercial development on 

applications that go far beyond 

graphics processing
Graphical processing unit in 

iPhoneIndustry 2007Present in mobile computers for some 

time, now considered de rigueur, 

given the user-experience advantages 

demonstrated by the iPad/iPhoneAdvances in parallel computing 

applied to commercial product 

developmentContinued university work on 

parallel computing in 2000s and 

earlierCollaboration by top computer 

architecture researchers in academia 

and movement between the university 

and industry communitiesContinuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 29continuedResearch Track and Events
OriginsImpactSoftware Technologies
Modern virtual machinesA long history of university 
research, with recent practical 

developments such as DISCO in 

1997, and companies like VMware 

in 1998A fundamental building block of cloud 

technology, allowing more effective 

provisioning of data-center services and 

securityModern buffer overrun 

protections
Universities and industry 

throughout the 2000s
Operating systems starting to 

incorporate dynamic methods for 

improving security
Web 2.0
Industry, 2004
A fundamental shift in thinking in the 

operating system research community, 

as a new layer of distributed 

application infrastructure emerges
Multitouch appears in iPhoneIndustry, 2007
New research thrusts in gesture-based 

user interfaces and some re-thinking of 

system architectures
KinectIndustry, 2010
Originally designed as a game 

controller, then adopted by researchers 

as a new core sensor for many 

applicationsNetworkingContent distribution networksEarly foundations developed in 

universities, contributing algorithms, 

systems concepts, and people to 

companies such as Akamai, 1998
A fundamental part of how the Internet 

works, essential to provision of services 

such as YouTube, news sites, and many 

othersMultiprotocol label switching
Early developments in companies 

such as Ipsilon Networks, circa 1996
Had a fundamental influence on 

subsequent university research in 

networkingGigaScope and othersIndustry and university research, in 

particular AT&T Labs around 2003
Stream-based measurement and traffic 

analysis on large networks (and the 

Internet)Ša fundamental tool for 

today™s research
OpenFlowStanford University, 2008
Issued as a standard in 2011
Parallel and Distributed SystemsMap-ReduceFundamental ideas date back to the 

1960s, but made practical at scale by 

Google in 2004Changed the research thinking in 

distributed computing; a foundation for 

many cloud systemsHadoopOpen-source development, around 

2006Had immediate influence on university 

research, including not only distributed 

systems but also areas such as machine 

learning and databases; increasingly the 

base for commercial offerings
Message passing interfaceA university and industry standards 

development, around 1994
The standard mechanism for 

programming high-performance 

computersTABLE B.1
 Continued
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 CONTINUING INNOVATION IN INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Research Track and Events
OriginsImpactParallel and Distributed Systems 
(continued)Parallel virtual machineOriginated at Oakridge National 

Laboratory and university around 

1990-1991A key foundation for programming a 

networked collection of computers as 

a single system, for both research and 

practical applicationsPeer-to-peer
Open community, picking up steam 

around 2004
Significant influence on a wide variety 

of widely used systems, such as SkypeDatabasesResearchers leave Stanford to 

found GoogleUniversity to start-up, 1998GoogleData integration technologiesUniversity and industry R&D 

throughout the 2000s
Fundamental impact on the ﬁbig dataﬂ 

movement, as seen in technologies such 

as Google Fusion Tables (2009)
Data-stream management systems
Industry R&D in the early 2000sA key driver and enabler for both 

research and commercial developments 

in ﬁbig dataﬂXMLBroad community process in 1997; 

earlier SGML late 1980s
A key foundation for representation of 

online content on the Web and other 

IT-based systems
Computer GraphicsPoisson image editingIndustry R&D, 2003A major advance in image editing, now 

a core of image-processing tools (like 

Photoshop) and associated algorithmsImage stitchingIndustry and university research, 

circa 2005
Omnipresent, from its use in mapping 

services (e.g., Google Maps) to modern 

filmmaking and panorama features in 

camerasSpherical harmonic shadingUniversities, around 2002
A major advance in (relatively) 

low-overhead realistic shading and 

shadowing in computer graphicsLightStage real-time capture
Universities (especially University of 

Southern California), in 2002A foundation for today™s digital image 

capture, used widely with particular 

impact in moviemaking and recognized 

recently with an Academy Award
Stable fluids and related methods
Universities, around 1999
The core of all image and video 

rendering for realistic smoke, water, 

and so onDisney/Pixar labsIndustry-university partnership, in 

2007Similar to the Intel ﬁlabletﬂ model, for 

closer collaboration between industry 

and university research
TABLE B.1
 Continued
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 31Research Track and Events
OriginsImpactAI and Robotics 
Incremental heuristic search
Universities, around 2004
A building block for a wide array of 
data mining and search technologies, as 

well as a foundation for basic research
Hidden Markov models for 

biology, speech, and the like
University and industry R&D 

throughout the 1990s
A major step in the general reduction 

of problems outside of core computing 

(genomics, speech processing, and so 

on) to algorithmic problems
Recommender systemsUniversity and industry R&D, circa 

1994A core element of today™s e-commerce 

systemsBayesian methods appliedUniversity and industry R&D 

throughout the 1990s
Fundamental to the major shift toward 

more statistical approaches to machine 

intelligenceKinect audio and visionMicrosoft, 2010
The most rapidly adopted consumer 

electronics device of all time
TABLE B.1
 Continued
Continuing Innovation in Information TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32
TABLE C.1
 Algorithms ResearchŠSome Examples of Impacts
Research Topic
OriginsImpactAlgorithms for network congestionUniversities in the mid-1990sA key building block for today™s 
networking technologies, such as 

content-distribution networksCPLEXUniversities pre-1985, later work in 

industry and start-ups (e.g., ILOG, 

IBM, and others)A foundation for a wide array of 

practical optimization and resource-

allocation problems and for logistics, 

delivery systems, and so onTurbo codes
Decades of university and industry 

research, reduced to practical form 

at Telecom-Bretagne in 1993
Absolutely essential in digital 

communications, and in particular in 

wireless networking technologies today
Eigenvalues, PageRank, and so onDecades of university research; 

PageRank emerged out of Stanford 

in 1998PageRank the core of Google 

search; today, related concepts still 

fundamentalDistributed hash tablesUniversities and industry, with 

practical algorithms available by 

2001A core element of today™s peer-to-peer 

systems; also a strong influence on 

university and industry R&DVCG auction mechanismUniversity research, emerging in 

2000A major impact on online advertising in 

the major search engines
N-gram matching for natural 

language processing
University and industry research, 

emerging as practical around 2004
The core of today™s language-processing 

and translation systemsAppendix C
Examples of Impacts from Algorithms Research
Research in theory and algorithms (see Box 1, ﬁResearch in the Theoretical and Algorithmic 
Foundations of Computingﬂ) has provided an important foundation for the advances depicted in 
Figure 1. Shown in Table C.1 are some of the many examples of research advances in algorithms 
that have helped lead to substantial economic impact.
