DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13476Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools andCapabilities: Summary of a Workshop72 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-26259-0 | DOI 10.17226/13476Dominic A. Brose and Lynette I. Millett, Rapporteurs; Committee on FosteringSustainability Considerations into Public and Private Sector Procurement Toolsand Capabilities; Science and Technology for Sustainability Program; Policy andGlobal Affairs; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board; Division onEngineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilSustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Dominic A. Brose and Lynette I. Millett, 
RapporteursCommittee on Fostering Sustainability Considerations into 
 Public and Private Sector Procurement Tools and Capabilities
Science and Technology for Sustainability Program 
Policy and Global Affairs 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesSUSTAINABILITYCONSIDERATIONSFOR PROCUREMENT TOOLS AND CAPABILITIESSUMMARY OF A WORKSHOPSustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 

for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 

appropriate balance.
This summary report and the workshop on which it was based were supported 
by Contract No. xx001-xx972 between the National Academy of Sciences and the 

U.S. General Services Administration. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or rec
-
ommendations expressed in this publication are those of the author(s) and do not 

necessarily re˚ect the views of the agency that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-26259-0
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-26259-3
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 

334-3313; 
http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 

National Academy of Sciences.
The 
National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the char
-ter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 

education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 

Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 

Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 

Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 

government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 

Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 

Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON FOSTERING SUSTAINABILITY 
CONSIDERATIONS INTO PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTOR 
PROCUREMENT TOOLS AND CAPABILITIES
Dara O™Rourke (Chair)
, Assistant Professor, University of California, 
Berkeley
Peter Graf, 
Chief Sustainability Of˜cer, SAP 
Patrick Mallet
, Founder, Credibility Director, ISEAL Alliance
 H. Scott Matthews
, Research Professor, Carnegie Mellon University
Teresa Neal
, Senior Purchasing Manager, Church & Dwight, Co., Inc. 
Staff
Marina Moses
, Director, Science and Technology for Sustainability 
Program
Jon Eisenberg,
 Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board 
Dominic Brose
, Program Of˜cer, Science and Technology for 
Sustainability Program
Lynette I. Millett
, Associate Director, Computer Science and 
Telecommunications Board
Jennifer Saunders
, Program Of˜cer, Science and Technology for 
Sustainability Program
Dylan Richmond
, Research Assistant, Science and Technology for 
Sustainability Program 
Pat Koshel
, Senior Program Of˜cer, Science and Technology for 
Sustainability Program 
Emi Kameyama
, Senior Program Assistant, Science and Technology for 
Sustainability Program
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Preface and Acknowledgments
In December 2011 the National Research Council™s Science and Tech
-nology for Sustainability Program, in collaboration with the Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board, held a workshop organized by 

the Committee on Fostering Sustainability Considerations into Public 

and Private Sector Procurement Tools and Capabilities. As sustainable 

purchasing becomes increasingly important in both the public and pri
-vate sectors, tools that can facilitate the sustainable acquisition of goods 

and services will play a critical role in meeting sustainability objectives. 

Participants at the workshop (listed in Appendix B) assessed the current 

landscape of sustainable procurement tools, identi˜ed opportunities and 

emerging needs for enhanced or new tools, identi˜ed potential barriers 

to progress (such as interoperability), and explored potential solutions. 

Participants also considered the procurement workforce and associated 

training required to realize the full bene˜ts of these tools. Workshop par
-ticipants included users of procurement tools (including federal, state, 

and local government and industry), experts in sustainable procurement, 

developers and users of various types of data, and individuals from com
-panies that develop and provide procurement tools and related software.
This document was prepared by the workshop rapporteurs as a fac
-tual summary of what occurred at the workshop. The examples and 

topics discussed in this report are limited to what was discussed at the 

workshop. For instance, although there are many examples of sustainable 

purchasing efforts in private industry and the public sector, the report 

describes only those that were explicitly discussed at the workshop. The 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
statements made in this volume are those of the rapporteurs and do not 
necessarily represent positions of the workshop participants as a whole, 

the steering committee, the Science and Technology for Sustainability 

program, or the National Academies. This workshop summary is the 

result of substantial effort and collaboration among several organizations 

and individuals. We wish to extend a sincere thanks to each member of 

the steering committee for their contributions in scoping, developing, and 
carrying out this project. The project would not have been possible with
-out ˜nancial support from the General Services Administration (GSA). 
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for 
their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with pro
-
cedures approved by the National Academies™ Report Review Committee. 

The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and critical 

comments that will assist the institution in making its published report 

as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institutional 

standards for quality and objectivity. The review comments and draft 

manuscript remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the process.
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this 
report: Leonardo Bonanni, Sourcemap; Scot Case, UL Environment; 

Wendy Gordon, Natural Resources Defense Council; and Verena Radulo
-vic, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the 

content of the report, nor did they see the ˜nal draft before its release. 

Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the 

rapporteurs and the institution.
 Dominic A. Brose
Lynette I. Millett
Rapporteurs
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
Contents
1 OVERVIEW 
12 GOVERNMENT E
FFORTS 
53 SOURCING
 AND
 M
ATERIALS 
13
4  
TOOLS
 AND
 T
ECHNOLOG
Y FOR SUSTAINABLE 
 PURCHASING
 21
5 WORKFORCE
 AND
 C
ULTURE 
29
APPENDI
XES 
A WORKSHOP
 AGENDA 
33
B REGISTERED
 P
ARTICIPANTS
 L
IST
  39
C BIOGRAPHIES
  43
D  
EX
AMPLES
 OF
 F
EDERAL
 A
GENC
Y 
PROCUREMENT
  SYSTEMS
 AND
 GREEN
 PURCHASING
 SYSTEMS 
55
E  
THE
 F
EDERAL
 LIFE
-CYCLE
 ASSESSMENT
 (LCA) 
DIGITAL
 COMMONS 
61
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Overview
Federal laws, regulations, and executive orders have imposed require
-ments for federal agencies to move toward the sustainable acquisi
-tion of goods and services, including the incorporation of sustain
-able purchasing into federal agency decision making. In particular, two 

Executive OrdersŠEO 13423, 
Strengthening Federal Environmental, Energy, 

and Transportation Management
, signed in 2007; and EO 13514, Federal 

Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Economic Performance
, signed in 
2009Šinclude speci˜c goals and objectives for sustainable purchasing by 

agencies. Federal government green purchasing efforts, however, can be 

traced back to at least EO 12759 signed by President Bush in 1991. The 

federal government spends tens of billions of dollars on goods and ser
-vices each year. Since the federal government is such a signi˜cant player 

in the market, its move to incorporate sustainable procurement practices 

could have a profound impact on the types of products being developed 

for the market as a whole.
The General Services Administration (GSA) has played a key role 
in furthering sustainable procurement practices throughout the federal 

government. GSA is responsible for formulating and maintaining govern
-
ment-wide policies covering a variety of administrative actions, including 
those related to procurement and management.
  GSA has several ongoing 

activities related to sustainable procurement, many of these related to Sec
-
tion 13 of EO 13514, which directed the agency, in coordination with other 

key agencies, to assess the feasibility of working with the federal sup
-plier communityŠvendors and contractors that serve federal agencies to 
1Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
measure and reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the supply chain while 
encouraging sustainable operations among suppliers. GSA has also been 

actively developing programs to assist federal agencies in making sustain
-able procurement decisions. As federal agencies cannot directly fund the 

development of sustainable procurement tools, they are particularly inter
-ested in understanding how to foster innovation and provide incentives 

for collaboration between developers and users of tools for sustainable 

purchasing throughout the supply chain. The training of procurement 

professionals is also a priority for these agencies. 
Agencies also face challenges related to whether and how suppliers 
collect and provide data on the sustainability of their operations. For 

example, suppliers may not be collecting data on their greenhouse gas 

emissions or may not be willing to provide the data to agencies due to 

concerns about con˜dentiality or competition. Agencies are actively eval
-uating opportunities to encourage suppliers to disclose relevant data on 

sustainability performance. Ultimately, procurement professionals may 

need to access these types of data to make decisions about sustainable 

acquisition activities for their agencies.
To assist efforts to build sustainability considerations into the pro
-curement process, the National Research Council appointed an ad hoc 

committee to organize a two-day workshop that explored ways to bet
-ter incorporate sustainability considerations into procurement tools and 

capabilities across the public and private sectors. The workshop was 

designed to help participants assess the current landscape of green pur
-chasing tools, identify emerging needs for enhanced or new tools and 

opportunities to develop them, identify potential barriers to progress, 

and explore potential solutions.
  Participants also considered the work
-force and associated training required to realize the full bene˜ts of these 

tools. Participants at the workshop included: users of sustainable procure
-
ment tools (including federal, state, and local governments and industry), 

experts in sustainable procurement, developers and users familiar with 

open data, and individuals from companies that develop and provide 

procurement tools and software. The workshop provided an opportunity 

for participants to discuss challenges related to sustainable purchasing 

and to developing new procurement tools.
Presenters discussed tools currently used in sustainable procurement, 
such as databases for ecolabels and standards, codes, or regulations; cal
-culators that track environmental footprints; software for traceability of 

materials; and life-cycle assessment (LCA) software. Some participants 

viewed the development of apps for smartphones and tablets as a useful 

emerging capability with signi˜cant potential for incorporating procure
-ment tools and applications. Other nontechnological tools were discussed 

as well, such as procurement policies, frameworks, rating systems, and 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.OVERVIEW
 3materials or product indexes. In considering existing tools and require
-ments for new ones, several overarching themes and associated criteria 
emerged from the workshop presentations, breakout groups, and discus
-sion sessions, including: 

























Participants discussed the enormous amount of data that would be 
required to give procurement professionals access to real-time information 

in order to make up-to-date, effective decisions. Integrating procurement 

systems with other systemsŠespecially ˜nancial onesŠwas discussed 

by many participants as key to new tools for sustainable procurement. 

Many participants also noted that agreement on a standard languageŠ

semantics and syntaxŠis important in furthering progress in systems 

integration and ultimately to entire sustainable purchasing networks. 
In addition, some participants pointed out that culture and workforce 
training are critical to ensuring the success of any new tools developed 

for sustainable purchasing systems. Sustainable procurement results from 

a complex system of suppliers, vendors, program managers, contracting 

of˜cers, and procurement professionals. Some participants noted that 

making information and tools available at points earlier in the procure
-ment processŠnot just at the purchasing phaseŠwould allow sustainable 

procurement to be approached more holistically. Empowering procure
-ment professionals to make more informed decisions was also suggested 

as key to making change in these areas. Pilot projects, training, and col
-laboration were presented as ways to build ﬁbuy-inﬂ from procurement 

professionals and leadership, which is important in ensuring that sustain
-
able purchasing practices and tools are used to their full potential. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 2
Government Efforts
Many of the sustainable procurement activities within the federal 
government have been spurred by the 2009 Executive Order 

EO 13514, 
Federal Leadership in Environmental, Energy, and Eco
-nomic Performance, which requires federal agencies to develop sustainabil
-
ity goals that focus on making improvements related to environmental, 

energy, and economic performance. As part of this effort, the General 

Services Administration (GSA) is working to integrate sustainability into 

its purchasing decisions. The Section 13 Interagency Working Group, cre
-ated under Section 13 of EO 13514, is evaluating the feasibility of working 

with the federal vendor and contractor community to provide informa
-tion to assist agencies in tracking and reducing greenhouse gas emissions 

(GHG) related to the supply of products and services to the government. 
According to workshop presenter Stephen Leeds
1 from the Of˜ce 
of the Administrator at GSA, the agency purchases about $95 billion 

in goods and services annually, including 12 million products through 

18,000 vendors, making the agency well positioned to in˚uence the fed
-eral government™s purchasing decisions. GSA™s goal is to have a supply 

chain that is sustainable throughout. Sustainable procurement, Mr. Leeds 

added, is about ﬁmaking smart investments in products that provide bet
-ter servicesﬂ for a longer period of time. Achieving a sustainable supply 

chain requires an understanding of the environmental ﬁhotspotsﬂ within 

an industryŠin other words, the components of the supply chain with 
1 
Senior Counselor to the Administrator at the time of the workshop.
5Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
the largest environmental impact. The agency™s thinking about sustain
-able purchasing is evolving, with a focus on life-cycle approaches, return 
on investment, risk mitigation, intentionality, and partnership, he said. 
GSA is adopting a life-cycle approach to sustainable purchasing as 
it ﬁbridges the silos of disposal and acquisition,ﬂ Mr. Leeds explained. 

The agency is sending a clear signal to the private sector that the focus is 

broader than the individual environmental impacts of purchasing deci
-sions. Partnering with the private sector, as well as with state and local 

governments, is important to the agency™s work and its goal of achieving 

a sustainable supply chain. 
Nancy Gillis from GSA™s Federal Supply Chain Emissions Program 
Management Of˜ce (PMO) described how GSA and other agencies have 

worked to advance sustainable acquisition in the federal supply chain. 

GSA does not view the concept of ﬁsustainabilityﬂ as synonymous with 

the ﬁenvironment,ﬂ Ms. Gillis said, but considers it a broader issue that 

encompasses economic and social issues as well. The agency is approach
-ing procurement decisions by prioritizing products™ life-cycle return on 

investment and by considering environmental, economic, and social ben
-e˜ts and costs. In other words, the agency is trying to balance the need to 

reduce energy use, resource use, and environmental impacts while also 

taking into account economic considerations. 
Ms. Gillis discussed the of˜ce™s other activities, including collabo
-rating with industry and supporting and managing the Sustainability 

in Procurement Fellowship Program. The program introduces fellows 

to the concept of sustainability and provides an overview of the federal 

government™s activities around sustainable procurement. Another effort is 

the GreenGov Supply Chain partnership, which was designed to increase 

the energy ef˜ciency of vendors and contractors™ supply chains and to 

reduce their GHG emissions. The partnership resulted from a GSA report 

that found sustainability considerations, especially GHG emissions data, 

should be used in the federal procurement process, and that agencies 

should engage the vendor community to track and reduce GHG emissions 

through a collaborative, transparent, and deliberative process.
2The Section 13 Interagency Working Group is currently evaluating 
and recommending ways to advance sustainable acquisition throughout 

the federal government, Ms. Gillis explained. For example, after evaluat
-ing whether it is feasible for the federal contractor community to provide 

GHG emissions data related to the supply of products for use in gov
-ernment procurement decisions, the working group recommended that 

suppliers not be required to provide complete inventories of their GHG 
2 
General Services Administration (GSA). 2010. Executive Order 13514 Section 13: Recom
-mendations for Vendor and Contractor Emissions. Washington, DC. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNMENT EFFORTS
 7emissions. Instead, the group recommended that the government, as an 
incentive, inform suppliers that GHG emissions data could be considered 

by agencies when making procurement decisions. 
Alison Kinn Bennett from the Environmental Protection Agency™s 
(EPA) Of˜ce of Pollution Prevention and Toxics described the activities of 

a subgroup of the Section 13 working group that focused on product stan
-
dards and ecolabels. This subgroup, which involves GSA, EPA, Depart
-ment of Defense (DOD), National Institutes of Health (NIH), United States 

Department of Agriculture (USDA), and other agencies is responsible for 

ensuring that the product-related acquisition goals of EO 13514 are met 

by providing guidelines for selecting environmental sustainability stan
-dards or ecolabeling programs. The subgroup views standards setting as 

a pyramid, as shown in Figure 2-1. Environmental and health data and 

tools are the base, with standards and incentives for green products built 

on those, Ms. Kinn Bennet said. From that, a system to verify standards 

is established, so that ultimately buyers are able to more easily ˜nd green 

products with effective, reliable standards.
Ms. Kinn Bennett noted that the subgroup™s work has had several 
phases, including grounding; developing draft guidelines; assessing the 

guidelines using a survey of standards and consultation among federal 

agencies; holding listening sessions with stakeholders; and preparing a 

report. The assessment phase of the subgroup™s work focused on existing 

U.S. and international protocols for standard setting and environmen
-tally preferable product claims and veri˜cation methodologies. A survey 

conducted by the subgroup identi˜ed about 80 guidelines for selecting 

standards in ecolabels. Those guidelines were then categorized into ˜ve 

general areas: 















standard criteria









it was third-party veri˜ed or compliance was self-declared 








and operated











in the market
Ms. Kinn Bennett noted that going forward, it will be important for 
agencies to address trade-offs and assess environmental impacts across 

media and life-cycle stages when making sustainable acquisition deci
-sions. The subgroup wants to encourage more holistic, comprehensive 

thinking on standards and criteria development, she said.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Josh Silverman from the Of˜ce of Sustainability Support at the 
Department of Energy (DOE) and Karen Moran from the Defense Logis
-tics Agency (DLA) with the Department of Defense described sustain
-able procurement efforts at their respective agencies. According to Dr. 
Silverman, DOE relies heavily on its contractors to implement and inte
-grate sustainability into procurement decisions; the agency establishes 

requirements, but contractors are responsible for implementing them. 

DOE also relies heavily on effective communication and information 

exchange; for example, the agency has an ongoing working group with 

hundreds of active members who regularly exchange information on 

best practices. The agency also tracks data on the use and procurement 

of green products and is trying to further integrate sustainability require
-ments into its contracting, with the goal of using sustainable procurement 

as a strategy to drive improved mission performance. The agency now 

requires contractorsŠparticularly those providing construction and cus
-todial servicesŠto review contract actions for ways to integrate sustain
-ability requirements.
Additionally, DOE conducted a quasi-ﬁhotspotﬂ analysis to assess both 
the products in highest demand and available standards, Dr. Silverman 

said. The Green Buy Program within DOE
 offers awards to contractors 
and vendors that purchase these priority products. He added that DOE 

is trying to incentivize and reward behavior that integrates sustainable 

approaches. It will be necessary to better quantify the bene˜ts of these 

activities so that their impact can be understood and used to make the 
FIGURE
 2-1
 Development of effective, green standards for products that buyers 
can readily identify. 
SOURCE
: Alison Kinn Bennet presentation, December 7, 2011. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNMENT EFFORTS
 9business case for sustainable procurement, he said; a purely compliance-
oriented approach may not be as effective in moving this effort forward.
Karen Moran described the role of the DLA as a combat logistics sup
-port agency and noted that much of the agency™s work is contracted. DLA 

is continually trying to incorporate sustainability into its procurement 

decisions and those of its contractors, Ms. Moran said. She described sev
-eral ongoing sustainable procurement programs at the agency, including 

efforts to encourage procurement of bio-based products; a program that 

returns unused medications to vendors; and a variety of alternative fuel 

initiatives, including efforts to increase use of renewable energy and bio
-diesel. Another initiative is incorporating environmental information into 

an electronic purchasing system known as the Federal Catalog System. 

This information includes environmental attribute codes that indicate a 

sustainable characteristic for a speci˜ed product. 
Ms. Moran described a recent joint GSA/DOD sustainable procure
-ment project that kicked off with a meeting on November 17, 2011. The 

meeting brought together representatives from both agencies to discuss 

translating policy into action, the need to integrate sustainable procure
-ment into the course of business, life-cycle assessment, and the value of 

synchronizing GSA and DOD to enhance standardization. Participants 

at the meeting discussed the need for compelling messaging that would 

cast sustainable procurement in terms of an agency™s mission, Ms. Moran 

said. Discussion at the November meeting also explored potential ways 

to motivate behavioral change related to sustainable procurement along 

with the recognition that training alone cannot create culture change. 

Finally, Ms. Moran noted that there was discussion of the need for a tool
-box, which should be scaled in complexity and size for different types of 

procurement, as well as the need for a mechanism to test products and 

provide feedback. 
Edward Rau from the Division of Environmental Protection at the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) spoke about efforts to incorporate sus
-
tainable procurement at NIH. His department directly purchases, funds, 

or in˚uences purchases related to health care, food, drugs, and biomedical 

research; however, NIH has few sustainable criteria for these products 

and no effective tools to help make such purchases more sustainable, he 

noted. The information on sustainable purchasing that is available consists 

primarily of static reference documents distributed across many separate 

Web sites, which typically cannot be applied by procurement profession
-als to perform, facilitate, or track purchasing transactions. One area where 

NIH would bene˜t from a sustainable procurement tool would be in pur
-chasing replacement freezer units that are 10 percent more energy ef˜cient 

than the current units on NIH™s Bethesda campus, Captain Rau said. This 

would save NIH about $1 million a year in electricity costs. According to 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
a recent survey, the current freezer units account for 29 percent of total 
electricity use, $12 million a year in costs, and releases of about 59,000 

metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalence per year. 
Another gap in sustainable procurement tools is in identifying haz
-ardous toxic or polluting substances, Captain Rau noted. From a public 

health perspective toxicity is one of the most important criteria in sus
-tainable acquisition, he said. Although the interim Federal Acquisition 

Regulations (FAR) require procurement of products and services that are 

nontoxic, this has been dif˜cult to implement, due in part to a lack of clear 

de˜nitions and toxicity data. To address gaps in available information, 

Captain Rau has spearheaded the development of a ﬁsubstance of con
-cernﬂ list that would restrict or prohibit the government from procuring 

products or services that contain or release listed substances of concern. 

The proposed list could be used as an interim screening and selection 

method until better data and methods of comparative toxicology are 

developed. The list would inventory substances by their chemical abstract 

service registry number to reduce synonym confusion, be derived from 

other well-established listings such as EPA™s Integrated Risk Information 

System (IRIS)3 or the Consumer Product Safety Commission™s Safer Prod
-ucts lists,
4 and characterize the listed substance as banned or restricted 
in certain uses. Where available, it would also list alternatives for the 

substance of concern. 
Another area with gaps that a procurement tool could address is the 
tracking and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions in the supply chain, 
3  
www.epa.gov/iris
4  
www.saferproducts.gov
Elements of a Sustainable Purchasing Tool:
 Provide an authoritative, one-stop sustainable shopping reference 
 Centralized and automated
 Interactive
 Simple, two-step search and buy function
 Have data collection and reporting functions
 Link directly to other procurement systems Characterize transactions as compliant or noncompliant to FAR
 Track desirable, sustainable attributes
 Link to agency approvals and published literature 
Edward Rau, National Institutes of Health, 
December 8, 2011.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GOVERNMENT EFFORTS
 11added Captain Rau. Metrics, emissions accounting requirements, and 
boundary de˜nitions would all need to be established for such a tool. 

Full life-cycle data would also be needed so that the focus is not just on 

the embodied greenhouse gas of the product but also its full life cycle. He 

gave the example of sulfur hexa˚uoride, which appears on the substance 

of concern list, not because it is toxic per se but because it is a potent 

greenhouse gas. 
Another major gap in sustainable procurement efforts is consider
-ation of a product™s end of life. Currently, procurement tends to focus on 

a product™s recycled material content or bio-based materials rather than 

on its reusability, recyclability, or biodegradability. These considerations 

are critical for meeting net zero goals that are becoming more widely 

adopted, Captain Rau said.
5He described his view of the elements that would be included in an 
effective sustainability-oriented procurement tool. It would provide an 

authoritative, one-stop sustainable shopping reference for all products 

and services, be very centralized, and be automated. It would be interac
-tive and not merely a reference companion or compilation. It would have 

a simple, two-step search-and-buy function; purchasers would search 

for a speci˜c product or service and then be directed to where to buy 

a compliant product. This would save time by eliminating the need to 

search for applicable requirements and products that conform to them, 

as is currently done. The tool would eliminate the need for purchasers to 

understand complex, rapidly-changing, sustainable procurement require
-
ments, thus minimizing training needs. It would also have data collection 

and reporting functions and would link directly to other procurement 

systems to avoid multiple data-entry errors. In addition, it would charac
-terize a transaction as compliant or noncompliant with any regulations, 

such as the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR), and track how well 

a product or service adheres to other desirable but not mandatory sus
-tainable attributes. It is critical that users have con˜dence in the quality 

of the data, and be assured that purchases made with the tool meet all 

applicable requirements, Captain Rau stressed. Lastly, for scienti˜c and 

medical applications, it would be critical that purchases of medical sup
-plies and devices directly link to agency approvals, such as Food & Drug 

Administration (FDA) approvals, and to published medical literature. 
5 
The DOD has a primary goal focused toward net zero, meaning net zero energy use, 
water use, and waste. The aim is to start with reduction, then progress through repurpos
-ing, recycling, energy recovery, and lastly disposal. Other agencies are moving toward this 
concept of net zero.  See: army-energy.hqda.pentagon.mil/netzero/.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Sourcing and Materials
Procurement is often thought of as simply the act of purchasing 
goods and services by processing a requisition, receiving an invoice, 

and then making a payment; however, many workshop participants 
emphasized that procurement should be thought of as a much broader 

process, from generating and soliciting requirements all the way to clos
-ing out a contract (Figure 3-1). Participants also noted that procurement 

tools to help foster sustainable purchasing could be integrated into all 

aspects of the process. Such integration could allow for better accounting 

of the actual costs of goods and services acquired through the procure
-ment process. That process, however, is often considered as starting with 

the procurement professional. Nancy Gillis from GSA™s Federal Supply 

Chain Emissions Program Management Of˜ce explained that many steps 

in the procurement process occur prior to the actual purchasing phase, 

but typically it is only at the point of purchasing where the conversation 

about sustainability begins. 
As Jonathan Rifkin from the District of Columbia™s Of˜ce of Contract
-ing and procurement noted, procurement professionals ensure that hun
-dreds of legal, regulatory, and policy requirements are implemented in 

an open and public way. Unless these professionals are given a clear idea 

of how to help meet sustainability goals when purchasing products, the 

process can essentially turn into a check-the-box exercise, making imple
-mentation of any sustainable strategy dif˜cult to do in a meaningful way. 
By the time a procurement professional ˜rst sees a solicitation, Mr. 
Rifkin noted, it is already too late in the process to affect any signi˜cant 
13
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
sustainability-related changes to products they purchase. It would be 
more in˚uential to insert sustainable speci˜cations earlier than the pur
-chasing phaseŠ for instance, when the statements of work for a particular 

procurement are being developed. New procurement tools could help, 

Mr. Rifkin said. A workshop participant also suggested that procurement 

professionals could be evaluated in part based on their performance in 

meeting certain sustainability criteria. Mr. Rifkin added that it would be 

possible to assess performance based on sustainability criteria only as 

long as clear speci˜cations, priorities, and procedures are provided.
Stephen Gordon from Old Dominion University echoed the theme 
that earlier stages in the procurement process are important and that 

sustainability considerations could be incorporated at any point along 

the supply chain and at any stage in the life of a product, including dis
-posal. Life-cycle assessments (LCAs) aim to assess the environmental, 

economic, and social impacts of a product throughout its lifespan. Attrib
-uting costs to different stages in the life cycle of a product is one use of 

LCAs, although even if a more sustainable product will save money over 

time, upfront costs can be a barrier to purchasing it. The cost of dispos
-ing of products, especially those containing hazardous components, is 

seldom considered during purchase, Dr. Gordon noted. If procurement 

professionals incorporate this consideration, they may decide to purchase 

a product that is costlier up front, but which may ultimately result in sav
-ings over the entire life cycle. Some participants discussed the possibility 

of ˜nancing upfront costs and then using cost savings to pay that amount 

backŠan example of a revolving funding scenario that could help address 

high initial costs. 
Dr. Gordon also noted that it is important to account for sustainability 
historically by looking at a product™s past performance to quantify sav
-ings and process improvements, referred to as the return on investment. 

Forecasting savings is important so that contracting of˜cers are not penal
-
ized up front for purchases that may initially be more expensive but that 

will save on externalities in the future. There are qualitative case studies 

but few peer-reviewed scienti˜c data on these forecasting methodologies, 

which would bene˜t from further analysis and quanti˜cation, Dr. Gordon 

said. 
FIGURE
 3-1
 The procurement process at a federal agency. 
SOURCE
: Nancy Gillis presentation, December 7, 2011. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCING AND MATERIALS
 15There is opportunity for more work on life-cycle assessments, as Dara 
O™Rourke from the University of California, Berkeley, pointed out. LCAs 
have primarily been used by academics and consultants and have been 

less useful for decision makers within procurement agencies or compa
-nies, he said. However, some modern LCA tools and approaches offer 

better visibility into the entire supply chain. A challenge is bridging the 

gap between the academic black box and general use so that information 

from a product™s anticipated life cycle is used in LCA tools in a way that 

helps decision makers make more informed choices about a product, Dr. 

O™Rourke noted. Participants offered potential solutions to make informa
-
tion from LCAs and LCA tools more accessible, such as providing such 

tools at little or no cost to the public sector.
Some participants also noted that the choice of technology platform 
and availability of data can affect how widely a tool is used. For instance, 

modern Web applications and associated mobile apps could help move 

technology and tools forward. In addition, a shift toward more accessible 

or ﬁopenﬂ data could enable an ecosystem to develop around agreed-

upon data structures and standards. Participants noted that conventional 

systems made up of proprietary data and code may not be the dominant 

model much longer. As one participant noted, such shifts are currently 

exempli˜ed by USDA™s National Agriculture Library™s Federal Life-Cycle 

Assessment Digital Commons, which is coordinating the collection of 

LCA data and information on organization, management, dissemina
-
tion, and preservation in a way that makes data available to all users 

(Appendix E). 
SUPPLY
 C
HAINS
Edan Dionne from IBM Corporation described the company™s Supply 
Chain Social Responsibility Audit Program. Third-party auditors are used 

to audit suppliers against IBM™s Supply Chain Code of Conduct, which 

addresses labor, safety, environment, ethics, and social responsibility. Sup
-
pliers found to be noncompliant are required to implement improvement 

plans, she said; IBM will discontinue using suppliers that fail to improve 

after implementing such a plan. Ms. Dionne noted the responsibility IBM 

feels to develop its supply base by working to educate suppliers and ask
-ing them to focus on environmental and social issues and impacts. 
It is especially helpful to work with ˜rst-tier suppliers, clarifying 
expectations by providing speci˜c tasks for improvement, Ms. Dionne 

added. For example, IBM recently imposed a management system require
-
ment that allows suppliers to examine environmental and social impacts 

more holistically and requires them to implement programs to address 

noncompliance in these areas. Many suppliers want to do the right thing, 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Ms. Dionne noted, but they need to have the organization, policies, and 
capability in place to sustain their performance over time.
Patrick Mallet from ISEAL Alliance noted that a big challenge is inte
-grating data and ensuring consistency, both in how data are understood 

and also in the language used to convey meaning. One tool that has 

been developed to address such challenges is the Nike Considered Index. 

Lorri Vogel from Nike Inc. stated that the company focuses on design
-ers because, as the earliest group in the product-development process, 

designers have the largest impact downstream. As such, they need design 

tools and systems that allow them to make better choices. Peter Graf from 

SAP also noted that the connection between the design phase and recy
-cling is key, and that in terms of procurement tools, there are overarching 

elements that apply regardless of the sector or type of products purchased 

(Figure 3-2). 
Nike™s Considered Index focuses on materials, waste, solvents, and 
innovation, said Ms. Vogel. She gave as an example a particular Nike shoe, 

which scored well on environmentally preferred materials and reduced 

weight but not as well on solvents. The key issue was bonding dissimilar 

materials, such as the plastic plates in the shoe. The design team came up 

with a new way to bond the plates to the midsole, improving the shoe™s 

score on solvents and also scoring well on innovation.
FIGURE 3-2 The connection between the design phase and recycling is key; there 
is opportunity for information technology and software to take a model that is 
based on linear processes and make it cyclical. 
SOURCE
: Peter Graf presentation, December 8, 2011.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCING AND MATERIALS
 17The Nike Material Sustainability Index (MSI) is another tool used 
by Nike to organize information on the materials they use. Nike‚s Jim 
Goddard noted that the company tracks materials from their sourcesŠ 

whether the material was grown in a ˜eld or extracted from an oil wellŠ 

to the product factory. This takes into account all of the early life-cycle 

stages of the material, which can account for up to an estimated 60 per
-cent of the environmental impact of a product. The idea behind the MSI, 

Mr. Goddard said, is to ensure that useful information is available at the 

right time in the product design process, so that designers and develop
-ers can make decisions about the best material while creating a product. 

Trade-offs are necessary when making decisions about what material to 

use, and that information needs to be integrated as a normal part of the 

design process.
A R
OLE
 FOR
 E
COLABELS
Some participants noted that different types and amounts of informa
-tion are needed at different points in the procurement process. For exam
-ple, the procurement professional may not need to know all of the details 

about the sustainability of a particular supplier™s supply chain, as long as 

someone within the purchasing organization with a broader perspective 

incorporates that information. Ecolabels, standards, and certi˜cations are 

tools that can convey some kinds of sustainability-related information. 

Ecolabels could also address the desire for a single, simple notation that 

represents an agreed-upon optimization of the environmental, social, and 

economic attributes of a product or service, some participants said. 
Being able to represent these products™ attributes in a simple, easily 
understood label could enhance the ef˜ciency of the purchasing process. 

Certi˜cations could be especially useful in areas where ﬁgreen-washing
1ﬂ take place. Alicia Culver from the Responsible Purchasing Network 

emphasized that purchasers who are not trained in sustainability could 

easily fall for what looks like a sustainable product based on claims from 

a label. Claims such as ﬁnaturalﬂ or ﬁearth friendlyﬂ are commonly used 

on consumer products, Ms. Culver noted. She also explained that claims 

on many retailer-created ecolabels are inconsistent, which increases con
-fusion. Harmonization and agreement on the claims and criteria would 

help clarify matters.
Anastasia O™Rourke from Big Room Inc. said that her company had 
tracked the growth of ecolabels back to 1954 when the ˜rst such labelŠ

a ﬁsafeﬂ toy label in GermanyŠemerged. Since then, the number and 
1 
Practice of making an unsubstantiated or misleading claim about the environmental 
bene˜ts of a product, service or technology.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
complexity of ecolabels has increased signi˜cantly; labels can be multi-
attribute or single-attribute based, life-cycle based, speci˜c to a region, 

or global. Ms. Kinn Bennet from Environmentally Preferable Purchasing 

at EPA described ecolabels or standards as residing at the tip of a tri
-angle, which would be all the information some people, such as procure
-ment professionals, may need (see Figure 2-1). But information that goes 

beyond the labelŠsuch as information from LCAs and standards-setting 

and veri˜cation proceduresŠcan also help, she said. Single-attribute and 

multiple-attribute certi˜cations are currently being used, with single-

attribute labels focusing on just one area, such as human health or envi
-ronmental impact. Choosing one attribute often requires a trade-off with 

another attribute, Ms. Culver noted. Multi-attribute certi˜cations can 

address several areas, such as life-cycle impacts, human and environ
-mental toxicity, packaging, and performance. 
An ecolabel could serve as a visualization that might be enough 
for the purchaser, explained Dara O™Rourke. With current technology, 

however, a deeper dive into more data and information could be readily 

available, though not necessarily required each time a purchaser selects 

that product, he said. Josh Saunders from Greencurement commented that 

certi˜cations exist for some products for which a lot of environmental or 

health information is available; however, for many other products such 

data do not exist, and so neither do the certi˜cations. Not many ongoing 

efforts in the public or private sector are attempting to solve this problem, 

he added. Also, some consumer efforts are trying to increase transparency 

in the market, creating an opportunity to demand better data to inform 

purchasing decisions, Mr. Saunders said. Gathering more information, 

standardizing data, and increasing interoperability of systems are all 

potential components of this approach. 
Mr. Saunders also commented that one way to move forward would 
be to convince a number of large institutional, in˚uential purchasers to 

gather better information that can be used by all to make more informed 

decisions. Dara O™Rourke noted that a broad framework is needed to 

encompass all of this information from products, standards, and labels; 

purchasers need information from suppliers, who need information from 

their suppliers, and so on down the supply chain. It is key that this infor
-mation is meaningful, relevant, and accurate, he said. Other participants 

noted that such a framework should be developed in an iterative fashion; 

as data are collected and used, it would likely become clear some data 

are not useful and that different information is needed. Thus, it would 

be important to feed this information back into the process and to adapt 

it accordingly. As one participant expressed, we have to build systems 

that allow us to learn over time and ensure that the right information is 

sought out. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SOURCING AND MATERIALS
 19Yalmaz Siddiqui from Of˜ce Depot discussed an example of a frame
-work for sustainable products he has worked on with the Green Products 
Roundtable, a voluntary stakeholder group working to reduce confusions 

over the ﬁgreenﬂ marketplace and improve the production and buying 

decisions of manufacturers, institutional purchasers, and consumers.
2 The framework attempts to incorporate many concepts surrounding the 

idea of a sustainable product, such as LCA outcomes, attribute-based 

concepts, standards, and single- and multi-attribute ecolabels. Work needs 

to be done on de˜nitions so that everyone has the same understanding of 

the concepts being discussed, he added. Those concepts and de˜nitions 

then need to be incorporated into procurement tools. The ˜rst step in 

the group™s approach to developing the framework was to identify the 

terms and concepts used in major environmentally preferable purchasing 

policies (EPPs). This involved identifying the attributes most looked for 

and the ecolabels most frequently used (Figure 3-3). The next step was to 

determine how to prioritize the different ways of reducing the impact of 

that product, where ﬁimpactﬂ might refer to water use, greenhouse gas 

emissions, or some other environmental impact. 
Mr. Siddiqui summarized the main ideas in the frameworkŠan LCA 
that identi˜es types of life-cycle impacts, such as abiotic depletion or 
2 
Keystone Center. 2012. The Green Products Roundtable. [online.] [Available at: 
http://
www.keystone.org/spp/environment/Green-Products-Roundtable
] [Accessed April 24, 
2012].
FIGURE 3-3 Terms and concepts in environmentally preferable purchasing (EPP) 
that feed into a framework for sustainable products.  
SOURCE
: 
Yalmaz Siddiqui presentation, December 8, 2011.  
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
toxicity, and four broad ﬁfootprintﬂ areas that focus on materials and 
waste, water use, energy use, and toxicity. The framework then connects 

attributes that purport to reduce certain types of life-cycle impacts. Mr. 

Siddiqui stressed that data will be needed in order to understand what 

sectors and product categories are driving the highest life-cycle impact 

types. The framework itself is a tool of sorts, he added, but it could also 

serve as a reference for developing standards. In addition, it could func
-tion as a foundation for a procurement tool to help clarify which attri
-butes, ecolabels, or behaviors reduce impacts in meaningful ways. The 

framework could also provide a way to distinguish between criteria used 

in making decisions. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Tools and Technology for 
Sustainable Purchasing
Different types of tools are used in procurement, whether in the 
private sector or in the federal system. These tools may be sim
-ple, such as speci˜c ecolabels (described in Chapter 3), or more 
complex, such as tracking and reporting software or customized search 

engines used for purchasing and maintaining inventories. Complicating 

matters is that there are many different attributes of products, a variety of 

stakeholders with diverging opinions as to what attributes are important, 

trade-offs between attributes, a range of methodologies and terminology 

to de˜ne them, and many different technical platforms to convey this 

information (Figure 4-1). 
Edward Rau from the Division of Environmental Protection at the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH) said that NIH™s success in imple
-menting sustainable procurement will depend on the availability of clear, 

complete criteria and on data that enable suppliers to access sustainable 

procurement criteria and distinguish compliant products from others. 

Success will also depend on purchasers selecting the most sustainable and 

competitive products in ef˜ciently placed procurement transactions, and 

on procurement managers collecting and consolidating the acquisition 

data needed to assess how well the requirements have been implemented. 

Chris O™Brien from American University described several important fac
-
tors that should be considered as new tools or technology for procurement 

are developed: stakeholder engagement, comparative capabilities, ability 

to integrate with other systems, alignment with policies, and format and 

aesthetics. 
21
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Three programs familiar to Mr. O™Brien in a university setting are 
the Sustainability, Tracking, Assessment, and Rating System (STARS),
1 Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED),
2 and American 
College and University Presidents™ Climate Commitment (ACUPCC).
3 All three programs are voluntary, Mr. O™Brien commented, and have suc
-cessfully become de facto standards for universitiesŠa result he attrib
-uted to the time invested in engaging stakeholders as the programs were 
developed. That investment resulted in immediate ﬁbuy-inﬂ so that when 

the programs were released, they were readily taken up by stakehold
-ers. Similarly, the openness of a toolŠwhether it is public or private in 

designŠis important, he said; for example, the information provided to 

STARS and ACUPCC are public and available online, but data for LEED 

are generally not. A program is also informative if it allows benchmark
-ing against peers, Mr. O™Brien added; with STARS or ACUPCC users are 

rated or provided a score and are able to compare themselves against peer 

scores in that system. 
Mr. O™Brien emphasized that a tool used for procurement needs to 
be able to be integrated with other systems and especially with ˜nancial 

tools. Ideally, ˜nancial decision making and sustainable procurement 

should be part of the same tool, so that comparisons of data are made 

within a single integrated system. Also commenting on integration was 
1 
stars.aashe.org
2 www.usgbc.org
3 www.presidentsclimatecommitment.org
FIGURE
 4-1
 The landscape of product sustainability tools.
SOURCE:  Anastasia O™Rouke presentation, December 7, 2011.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR SUSTAINABLE PURCHASING
 23Josh Saunders from Greencurement, who said that having to use multiple 
systems for a purchase is a challenge to sustainable procurement. Right 

now, he noted, one might have to go to supplier Web sites, a certi˜cation 

Web site, internal spreadsheets or an internal Web site, a manufacturer™s 

Web site, and of course, one™s own procurement systems to gather the 

necessary information for a single sustainable purchase. Integration is 

needed so that new tools can share data and information in an accessible 

and usable fashion, Mr. Saunders said.
Peter Graf of SAP noted that as soon as people have to use systems 
running at different companies, the process slows down dramatically. 

These systems should work more effectively with each other, he said. 

Another important aspect of integration is that procurement is not a self-

contained process; it is connected to many components of the organiza
-
tion, such as sourcing, contracting, ˜nancing, analytics, and auditing. 

Procurement tools that incorporate all parts of the process and integrate 

information on the ˜nancial impact would be very useful.
None of the three tools described earlierŠSTARS, LEED, or 
ACUPCC-Šhave attained this ˜nancial integration, said Mr. O™Brien; 

however, they have all incorporated policies that require sustainable pur
-chasing, even though they cover different aspects of it. In developing 

policy language to enable sustainable procurement of paper, for example, 

Mr. O™Brien said that in some cases he has to compare and contrast three 

different sets of guidance. 
Usability of tools is also important, he added, noting that STARS is 
Web-based and straightforward to view and navigate. LEED certi˜cations 

and ACUPCC, by contrast, are based on spreadsheets, and managing the 

voluminous amount of data and numerous tabs can make data gather
-ing for these programs challenging. Engaging people with these tools is 

important, he said; to achieve sustainability goals, people need tools they 

can relate to and use readily or behavior will not change very quickly. 
Better Sustainable Purchasing Tools:
 Integrated with ˜nancial systems
 Integrated with other sustainability-related systems
 Openness - online and optionally public
 Aesthetically beautiful to motivate users
 Enables behavior change
Chris O™Brien, American University, December 8, 2011.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Well-designed dashboards are another way to represent and foster inte
-gration, Mr. O™Brien added, presenting an energy dashboard that incorpo
-rates energy purchasing decisions into a graphical display. These data are 

projected on screens in every building on American University™s campus, 

and occasionally energy ef˜ciency competitions are held between build
-ings (Figure 4-2). 
EMERGING
 R
EQUIREMENTS
 AND
 C
RITERIA
 Tools that are designed to work within or take into account an entire 
procurement process, not just the purchasing step, will be critical (see 

Figure 3-1), said Dr. Graf, who commented on emerging functional 

requirements, or, as he stated, ﬁthe evolution of procurement.ﬂ Emerging 

functional requirements are focused on compliance, active management 

of suppliers, and optimization. Even more important is the recognition 
FIGURE 4-2 Screenshot of energy ef˜ciency dashboard used at American 
University.
SOURCE
: Chris O™Brien presentation, December 8, 2011.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR SUSTAINABLE PURCHASING
 25that procurement is not simply one company or organization procuring 
products from suppliers; rather, it is an entire economy encompassing a 

network of companies and organizations. 
Addressing compliance entails looking at, among other things, the 
bill of material, which helps to ensure that supplier codes of conduct for 

regulatory compliance are met, Dr. Graf said. Addressing compliance 

also often includes aggregating data across an entire network of suppli
-ers. One active management approach is to use a questionnaire or other 

check-the-box type format, such as that done to generate an Energy Star 

rating. For example, a company can take the bill of material of what was 

purchased and, based on data and information related to the material, 

convert energy use into a carbon footprint. 
The optimization stage is a signi˜cant challenge, Dr. Graf noted. It 
requires understanding the complete supply chain for a product, the most 

relevant attributes, and how those attributes can be compared with those 

of products provided by another supply chain. Optimization is where 

comparisons and benchmarks become important. The benchmarks are 

sometimes between products and other times between suppliers. Dr. Graf 

commented that the transition from compliance to active management to 

optimization used to be considered in the context of a single company. It 

has since expanded to the whole supply chain of that company, and now 

to entire networks of companies and organizations and their respective 

supply chains.
Josh Saunders from Greencurement noted that all stages of the pro
-curement processŠde˜ning purchasing requirements, contract RFP writ
-ing, deciding what to buy, contract administration, compliance, reporting, 

and measurementŠare ripe for tool development. 
Tools could be developed to overcome the current barriers to sustain
-able purchasing, such as information overload, Mr. Saunders said. For 

example, although ecolabels are important for sustainable purchasing, 

there are hundreds of ecolabels in the market. Purchasers already need to 

understand a great deal of information, and new information is constantly 

being generated. Tools that provide the right information to the right 

users at the right times would greatly assist procurement professionals, 

he said. 
Related to information overload is the need for procurement profes
-sionals to make trade-offs among the different criteria and policies guid
-ing them, Mr. Saunders added. Procurement professionals are primarily 

focused on optimizing price, availability, and the performance or quality 

of a given product. A tool is needed to allow sustainable criteria to be inte
-
grated into this focus so that procurement professionals can ˜nd products 

that are competitive with or lower in price than non-green products and 

that perform as well or better. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Integration and interoperability are also important, and shared seman
-tics and application programming interfaces need to be developed where 
appropriate. Interoperability between tools is about translation between 

tools, said Anastasia O™Rourke of Big Room; it is fundamentally about 

how what one person says is translated for another person to understand. 

The potential bene˜t of making this work is increased data ˚ow and acces
-
sibility of information. Another bene˜t would be increased accountability, 

because effective interoperability could allow information to be tracked 

across different systems. It could also allow for an increase in the scale 

and scope of accessible information and allow for better comparisons, 

helping purchasers gain more clarity. To move this forward, she stated, 

purchasers need to identify necessary tools and types of format; develop 

common glossaries and classi˜cation systems or methods for translating 

between systems; collaborate to map and compare systems; develop data 

frameworks and reporting templates; develop the ability to export data as 

appropriate to other systems; and participate in various multi-stakeholder 

forums. With so many stakeholders interested in sustainability issues, she 

added, purchasers need to be part of those conversations.
Procurement tools will increasingly incorporate more data into their 
functions, Ms. O™Rourke said. If, for instance, a tool displays a green but
-ton to indicate a good product, the data that helps determine whether that 

green button should be displayed may be only available elsewhere, or the 

metric indicated by the button may depend on near-real-time informa
-tion. Such situations may require access to other systems and real-time 

connectivity. 
Dr. Graf also commented on cloud computing and mobility. More 
Procurement Components with Opportunity 
for New Tool Development:
Purchasing requirementsRequest for proposals (RFPs)
Purchase decisionmaking, e.g., trade offs
Contract administration
Compliance with sustainability policiesMeasurement and tracking
Reporting

Overcoming barriers to sustainability: information overload, cost assess
-ment, and establishing criteria 
Josh Saunders, Greencurement, December 8, 2011.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TOOLS AND TECHNOLOGY FOR SUSTAINABLE PURCHASING
 27and more, he noted, companies want to leverage cloud-based tools and 
systems in part because they can usually be deployed more quickly. Also, 

individuals want information to be accessible wherever they happen to 

be, not only through their desktop computers but from mobile devices. 

A procurement manager who needs to approve a speci˜c purchase, for 

example, could see from glancing at his or her mobile device that a requi
-sition is urgent. Figure 4-3 summarizes what many participants described 

as the technical requirements for sustainable procurement, including data 

management. 
COMMON THEMES GOING FORWARD
During the last session of the workshop, participants discussed major 
gaps in knowledge for sustainable procurement, positive or negative 

attributes that characterize sustainable procurement, and what those attri
-
butes should be moving forward. The following are themes and issues 

many participants observed to be relevant and in need of further attention 

as sustainable procurement continues to be adopted by private and public 

sector organizations.
˜˚
Semantics and units of measurement were raised as an issue, espe
-
cially regarding relevance and materiality. For example, even if the 

same unit of measurement is being used for the rating of a given 

product, the rating and information presented within a single 

product category are often not reported in the same away across 
FIGURE
 4-3
 Technical requirements for sustainable procurement.
SOURCE
: Peter Graf presentation, December 8, 2011. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
organizations. Increasing cohesiveness in the measurement and 
language used, such as by using product category rules, would 

bring more clarity to ratings and reports on products and be useful 

to purchasers. 










from the companies they are certifying so that the process is more 

transparent, many participants felt.
˜˚
Many participants observed a disconnect between certi˜cations/

ecolabels and outcomes. The actual environmental health or soci
-etal impacts of products bearing such labels are typically not 

tracked and accounted for in any systematic way. A related issue 

is how inputs relate to the output of certi˜ed products, and how 

products could be designed with more consideration of outcomes.
˜˚
Harmonizing de˜nitions on product types or moving toward 

unique identi˜ers like a sku number would allow different pur
-chasers and procurement systems to readily identify the same 

product. This could also improve interoperability between tech
-nologies and data sharing among systems.
˜˚
In addition to the purchasing phase of procurement, many partici
-pants felt that contracting is also important. However, it may not 

be possible to address outcomes in this context; it may be better 

to address sustainability concerns by writing constraints into a 

statement of work. In this case, tracking and evaluating work per
-formance in an effective way would be a more accurate assessment 

of sustainability practices. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Workforce and Culture
Behind the ecolabels, standards, tools, and technology are the pro
-curement professionals and other staff who make the decisions to 
move sustainable procurement programs forward. Alicia Culver 
from the Responsible Purchasing Network noted that one best practice 

organizations can use is to institutionalize sustainable procurement, 

which ensures top-level support. Procurement professionals do not want 

to make decisions for end users unless the policy is clear to all stakehold
-ers, Ms. Culver noted. Organizations need to determine a process for 

collaboration among different parts of the organization, adopt a policy 

with clear goals and reporting requirements, and establish communica
-tion and outreach strategies. Collecting baseline data at the beginning of a 

program is important for demonstrating the success of a program, show
-ing improvement over time, and identifying cost impacts and savings, all 

of which could help demonstrate the case for a responsible purchasing 

program. 
Also, Ms. Culver commented, there seems to be a movement toward 
decentralization of purchasing, which can pose challenges to sustainable 

procurement. When the decision-making process is centralized around 

green and sustainable products and services, an organization can often 

negotiate better prices. It is harder to aggregate demand when each 

agency or department is ordering on its own. Also, when purchasing is 

centralized, it is easier to control and monitor purchases, which simpli˜es 

the education and training process. 
Participants discussed needs for training in the workforce, and one 
29
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Best Practices for Instilling Sustainable Procurement 
in an Organization and Workforce:
Determine a process for collaboration within an organization
Adopt a policy with clear goals and reporting requirements
Establish communication and outreach strategies
Track information and establish a baseline at the beginning of a program
Centralize procurement activities in the organization 
Alicia Culver, Sustainable Purchasing Network, December 7, 2011.
participant noted that the roles and responsibilities for different workers 
need to be clearly identi˜ed so that the proper level of training can be 

targeted to that group for best results. Another aspect of this, said another 

participant, is that a culture change is needed in addition to training. One 

solution is to have a pilot-scale project in order to foster buy-in from some, 

and then expand the effort to all, a participant suggested. Once a small 

example is out there, another participant added, it could lead to larger 

efforts and eventually to buy-in from leadership.
Training should be presented and viewed as education, and it should 
be a two-way activity, commented one participant. Receiving feedback, 

both data-driven and qualitative, helps point out opportunities for 

improvement and reveals whether the training had the right focus. One 

participant urged that culture change, especially empowering procure
-ment professionals to make more informed choices and provide guidance, 

should be incorporated into the strategic vision of organizations; instilling 

sustainability principles will not be successful unless it is connected to the 
vision of the organization. Also important are promoting proper practices 

and giving recognition to the people who are doing things the right way, 

some participants noted. 
Jonathan Rifkin from the District of Columbia™s Of˜ce of Contracting 
and Procurement presented the case for an interagency, jurisdiction-wide 

team capable of addressing issues around sustainable procurement. The 

team should include a procurement professional who can move the pro
-cess forward and who understands how to write contract language that 

can be readily applied. An environmental expert will also be needed, 

such as a representative from the jurisdiction™s environmental unit. Such 

expertise would help inform the purchaser, who may not be able to make 

environmental value judgments for that particular jurisdiction. Mr. Rifkin 

also said that people from budget and ˜nance would be needed on the 

team to overcome the notion that sustainable products are more expen
-Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WORKFORCE AND CULTURE
 31sive. Also important are people who could help recognize when a product 
with higher initial costs would result in savings over time. Such sav
-ings, he noted, could possibly fund this type of program in a way that it 

becomes a self-funding mechanism. In Mr. Rifkin™s view, another impor
-tant member of team would be someone from the of˜ce of the mayor (or 

city administrator or governor), to make clear to everyone that leadership 

supports the new approach. 
Finally, having someone from the supplier community can be bene˜
-cial. This allows local businesses to be apprised of sustainable initiatives 

and any new requirements when it is time for a bid for particular types 

of products, Mr. Rifkin added; such information helps them prepare and 

be ready with any needed speci˜cations. Pulling together this team ulti
-mately gains an element of buy-in from this very politically powerful 

group of people, and turns into allies a group of individuals who before 

may have resisted sustainability initiatives. Such an effort would have 

many bene˜ts, such as streamlining the sustainable purchasing process 

by giving procurement professionals clear and precise guidance about 

the process and making them a partner in it. This type of program could 

also make tracking purchases easier, Mr. Rifkin said; effectively tracking 

purchases is dif˜cult, and without tracking it is hard to measure progress. 

Such programs would also allow jurisdictions to be creative, he said; 

states and local communities are the laboratories of the country, and giv
-ing them the tools and infrastructure to make decisions could allow for 

them to come up with distinctive solutions that will help everybody. Mr. 

Rifkin concluded that at the end of the day, bringing this group to the 

table and asking them to speak to these issues builds buy-in, which is 

probably the most dif˜cult thing to achieve because of different priorities, 

needs, and other pressures. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Workshop Agenda
Fostering Sustainability Considerations into Public and Private Sector 
Procurement Tools and Capabilities
A National Academies Workshop
December 7-8, 2011
20 F St. Conference Center
20 F St. NW
Washington, D.C.
Conference Room A
Wednesday, December 7, 2011
8:30 AM
 Welcome and Goals of the Workshop
  
Marina Moses, Director, Science and Technology for 
Sustainability Program 
  Dara O™Rourke, Chair, Workshop Planning Committee, 
University of California, Berkeley 
Session I: Procurement ProcessesŠChallenges and Opportunities
Moderator: Dara O™Rourke, Chair, Workshop Planning Committee, University 
of California, Berkeley 

 
8:45 AM 
 GSA Comments on Sustainable Procurement
  Steven J. Kempf, Commissioner, Federal Acquisition Service, 

General Services Administration 
9:00 AM
 Section 13 Interagency Working Group Overview: 
 Sustainable Procurement and Processes
  Nancy Gillis,
 Director, Federal Supply Chain Emissions 
Program Management Of˜ce General Services Administration 
33
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
9:15 AM
 Best Practices in Sustainable Procurement
 Alicia Culver, Director, Responsible Purchasing Network 
9:45 AM
  
Section 13 Product Standards and Ecolabels Sub-working 
Group 
  Alison Kinn Bennett, Senior Advisor on Product Sustainability, 
Environmental Protection Agency 
  Brennan Conaway, Contracting Of˜cer, General Services 
Administration 
10:15 AM
 BREAK
10:45 AM
 Breakout Groups
  
  What are purchasers™ challenges and needs across the 
lifecycle of purchasing? What are some examples of hitting 

barriers when trying to buy ﬁgreenﬂ? What would be the 

design criteria in developing the ideal tool?  
 Moderator: Leo Bonanni, Chief Executive Of˜cer, Sourcemap
 Location: Conference Room A
  What information about products is needed regarding 
sustainable attributes, whether directly and through 

certi˜cation and ecolabels? 
  Moderator: Alison Kinn Bennett, Senior Advisor on Product 
Sustainability, Environmental Protection Agency 
  Brennan Conaway, Contracting Of˜cer, General Services 
Administration 
 Location: Board Room
11:45 PM 
 Breakout Group Report Back to Plenary
  Moderator: Dara O™Rourke, Chair, Workshop Planning 
Committee, University of California, Berkeley
 Location: Conference Room A
12:30 PM
 LUNCH
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 35Session II: Fostering Sustainability in Procurement Processes 
Moderator: Teresa Neal, Senior Purchasing Manager, Church & Dwight, Co., 

Inc. 
1:30 PM
  
Sustainability in Procurement ProcessesŠData Needs and 
Challenges 
 Anastasia O™Rourke, Co-Founder, Big Room 
 2:00 PM 
 Fostering Sustainability into the Procurement Process
 Stephen Gordon, Professor, Old Dominion University 
2:30 PM
 BREAK
2:45 PM 
 Federal Perspectives on Sustainable Procurement 
  Josh Silverman, Director, Of˜ce of Sustainability Support, 
Department of Energy
  Karen Moran,
 Environmental Protection Specialist, Pollution 
Prevention Team Lead, Defense Logistics Agency 
3:15 PM
 Considerations in Sustainable Sourcing and Procurement
  Lorrie Vogel, General Manager, Nike™s Considered Products, 
Nike Inc. (Teleconference)
3:45 PM
 Summary Remarks 
 Chair: Dara O™Rourke, University of California, Berkeley
4:00 PM 
 MEETING
 ADJOURNS
Thursday, December 8, 2011
8:15 AM 
 Introduction and Previous Day Recap 
 Chair: Dara O™Rourke, University of California, Berkeley
Session III: Analysis and Optimization with Sustainable Purchasing 

Tools

Moderator: Patrick Mallet, Founder, Credibility Director, ISEAL Alliance 
8:30 AM 
 Current Landscape of Sustainable Procurement Tools
 Chris O™Brien, Director of Sustainability, American University 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
9:00 AM
  
Criteria for Best Practices with Sustainable Procurement 
Tools
  Josh Saunders, Sustainable Products Evangelist, Greencurement 
9:30 AM
  
Opportunities and Emerging Requirements for Sustainable 
Procurement Tools
 Peter Graf, Chief Sustainability Of˜cer, SAP
10:00 AM
  
Requirements for Procurement Processes Along the Supply 

Chain
  Edan Dionne, Director, Corporate Environmental Affairs, IBM 
Corporation 
10:30 AM 
 BREAK
 
10:45 AM 
  
A Framework for Greener Procurement: Connecting 

Life-cycle Attributes and Ecolabels to Bring Clarity to 

Institutional Buyers
 Jonathan Rifkin, Washington, DC and NASPO 
  Yalmaz Siddiqui, Environmental Strategy Advisor, Of˜ce Depot 
11:30 AM
 LUNCH
Session IV: Moving Forward

Moderator: H. Scott Matthews, Professor, Carnegie Mellon University 
12:15 PM
 Components of a Proposed Sustainable Acquisition Tool 
  Edward Rau, Chair, HHS Sustainability Innovations Working 
Group, National Institutes of Health 
12:45 PM 
 A Roadmap for Achieving Sustainable Procurement
  Stephen Leeds, Senior Counselor to the Administrator, General 
Services Administration
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 371:15 PM
 BREAKOUT
 G
ROUPS
   What training and skills will be required to realize the full 
bene˜ts of sustainable purchasing tools? What methods 

are there for broadening the use of sustainable purchasing 

tools to a more mainstream audience and encouraging a 

culture change among purchasers and suppliers?
  Moderator: Chris O™Brien, Director of Sustainability, American 
University 
 Location: Conference Room A
  What are major data gaps and data availability issues 
related to sustainable procurement? What are the different 

attributes, whether positive or negative, that characterize 

sustainable procurement and what should they be moving 

forward?
  Moderator: Teresa Neal, Senior Purchasing Manager, Church & 
Dwight, Co., Inc. 
 Location: Board Room
2:15 PM
 Breakout Group Report Back to Plenary
  Moderator: H. Scott Matthews, Professor, Carnegie Mellon 
University 
 Location: Conference Room A
2:45 PM
 Closing Remarks
 Chair: Dara O™Rourke, University of California, Berkeley
3:00 PM 
 MEETING
 ADJOURNS
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Registered Participants List
Sustainable Acquisition: Fostering Sustainability Considerations into 
Public and Private Sector Procurement Tools and Capabilities
20 F St. NW Conference Center
Washington, DC
December 7-8, 2011
Meadow Anderson
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (US EPA)
David Asiello

U.S. Department of Defense
Leo Bonanni
Sourcemap
Dominic Brose
The National Academies
Erica Brown
 Noblis

Yvonne Burgess
 Climate Earth, Inc.

Scot Case
 UL Environment

Kris Colby
 Ariba
Brennan Conaway
 U.S. General Services 
Administration (US GSA)
Mile Corrigan
 Noblis

Richard Crespin
CROA
Alicia Culver
Responsible Purchasing Network
Jim Darr
 US EPA

Edan Dionne
IBM
Janet Dobbs
 US GSA

Beth Drake
 US EPA
39
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Jeff Eagan
 U.S. Department of Energy 
 (US DOE)
Jon Eisenberg
The National Academies
Holly Elwood
 US EPA
Jonathan Estes
 Facilities Solutions Group, LLC

Neal Etre
 Industrial Economics

Shabnam Fardanesh
 US DOE

Jim Fava
 PE and Five Winds Strategic 
Consulting
Nancy Gillis
US GSA
Sheena Gilmore
 International Trade Centre

Stephen Gordon
Old Dominion University
Peter Graf
SAP
Lara Greden
 CA Technologies

Matt Haggerty
The National Academies
Deborah Hamilton
 The Keystone Center
Brian Heath
 U.S. Department of the Interior

Susan Hinton
 U.S. National Institutes of Health 
(US NIH)
Rupert Hopkins
 XSB
Ann-Marie Johnson
 CSC

Adam Jones
US GSA
Emi Kameyama
The National Academies
Steven J. Kempf
US GSA
Alison Kinn Bennett
US EPA
Pat Koshel
The National Academies
Emily Lawrence
Booz Allen Hamilton
Eliza Lee
 Veterans Affairs

Stephen Leeds
US GSA
C. Lindsay
 Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 41Patrick Mallett
ISEAL Alliance
H. Scott Matthews
Carnegie Mellon University
Paul McRandle
 NRDC
Katie Miller
 US GSA

Lynette Millett
The National Academies
Karen Moran
Defense Logistics Agency
Marina Moses
The National Academies
Teresa Neal
Church & Dwight, Inc.
Ann Ngo
 U.S. Department of Commerce

Chris O™Brien
American University
Syvera O™Pharrow
 National Institute of 
Environmental Health 
Sciences
Anastasia O™Rourke

Big Room
Dara O™Rourke
University of California, Berkeley
Christopher Payne
 Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory
Edward P˜ster
 U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services (US HHS)
Kristin Pierre
 US EPA
Edward Rau
US NIH
Joshua Reese
 Booz Allen Hamilton

Dylan Richmond
The National Academies
Jennifer Riddell
 US EPA

Jonathan Rifkin
DC Of˜ce of Contracting and 
Procurement
Stephanie Rivera
 US GSA
Anne Roberts-Smith
 SAIC

Alec Rogers
 Xerox
Kesa Russell
 US HSS
 Amanda Sahl
 US DOE

Joshua Saunders
 Greencurement

Rita Schenck
 IERE
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Kristen Sebasky
 Industrial Economics
Nick Shufro
 PwC

Yalmaz Siddiqui
Of˜ce Depot
Josh Silverman
 US DOE

Amy Smith
 World Wildlife Fund

Jan Stensland
 Inside Matters

Joni Teter
 US GSA

Peter Teuscher
 BSD Consulting
Norma Tregurtha
 iSEAL Alliance

Kathleen Turco
 US GSA
Lorrie Vogel (teleconference)
Nike
Cindy Wasser
 NACo

Andrew Weber
 Lawrence Berkeley National 
Laboratory
Justin Yuen
 FM
YIEric Zoetmulder
SciQuest
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Biographies
Fostering Sustainability Considerations into Public and Private Sector
Procurement Tools and Capabilities
December 7-8, 2011
Washington, D.C.
BIOGRAPHICAL
 I
NFORMATION
: 
 PLANNING
 C
OMMITTEE
, S
PEAKERS
 AND
 S
TAFF
DARA O™ROURKE (Committee Chair) 
is associate professor in the 
Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management at the 

University of California, Berkeley. Previously, he was assistant profes
-sor in the Department of Urban Studies and Planning at the Massachu
-setts Institute of Technology. Dr. O™Rourke™s research interests include the 

political economy and policy aspects global supply chains; governmental 

and nongovernmental strategies for monitoring and accountability over 

these production systems; and new models of public participation in 

environmental and labor policy regulation. He is currently leading a team 

of researchers focused on analyzing and improving the quality of infor
-mation available to consumers on the social, environmental, and health 

impacts of products and companies; researching the impacts of this infor
-mation on consumer behavior; and developing Web and mobile tools to 

deliver better information to consumers at their point-of-decision. He has 

recently applied this research to a social venture startupŠGoodGuide.

comŠwhich provides information to consumers on the health, environ
-mental and social performance of products and companies. Dr. O™Rourke 

previously served on the National Research Council™s Committee Toward 

Improved International Labor Standards: Data, Monitoring, and Compli
-ance. He completed his Ph.D. in the Energy and Resources program at the 

University of California at Berkeley.
43
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
ALISON KINN BENNETT 
is the senior advisor for product sustainabil
-ity in EPA™s Of˜ce of Pollution Prevention and Toxics. She co-founded and 
co-leads two in˚uential, cross-media networks within EPAŠthe Green 

Building Workgroup and the Sustainable Products NetworkŠwhich 

bring together policy and technical staff from around the agency in order 

to advance holistic, life-cycle based approaches to environmental and 

public health protection. Since 2001, Ms. Bennett has served in EPA™s 

Environmentally Preferable Purchasing Program, focusing her efforts on 

coordinating EPA positions on standards and speci˜cations for greener 

building products and construction services. Ms. Bennett is vice chair of 

ASTM International™s Sustainability Committee (E60). Ms. Bennett earned 

a bachelor™s degree in political science and geography from the University 

of California at Berkeley and a master™s degree in urban and environ
-mental planning from the University of Virginia™s School of Architecture.
LEO BONANNI 
is the founder and CEO of Sourcemap.com, the crowd-
sourced directory of product supply chains and carbon footprints. The 

open-source Web site offers tools for companies and individuals to share 

information about where things come from, what they are made of, and 

their social and environmental impact. Thousands of people have created 

sourcemaps of food, furniture, clothing, electronics, and more. Source
-map™s social network technology can also be used internally to help orga
-nizations gather supply chain information for traceability and risk man
-agement. Dr. Bonanni has a Ph.D. from the MIT Media Lab, an M.S. and 

a Master of Architecture from MIT, and a B.A. from Columbia University. 

He teaches sustainable product design at Parsons and at MIT.
DOMINIC A. BROSE (Staff) 
is a program of˜cer for the Science and Tech
-nology for Sustainability Program (STS) at the National Academies. Prior 

to STS, Dr. Brose was with the Institute of Medicine (IOM) of the National 

Academies where he collaborated on science policy reports sponsored 

by the Department of Veteran Affairs (VA) addressing the potential for 

adverse health effects from exposure of select military personnel to envi
-ronmental contaminants. Previously, he was an environmental scientist 

at ToxServices LLC, where he reviewed product formulations for EPA™s 

Design for the Environment (DfE) program, which was a third-party 

service provided to EPA that evaluated product formulations against 

human health and environmental screening criteria. Dr. Brose received 

his M.S. and Ph.D. in environmental soil chemistry from the University 

of Maryland, and his B.S. in natural resources and environmental science 

from Purdue University. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 45BRENNAN CONAWAY 
has served as a contracting professional with 
General Services Administration™s (GSA) Federal Acquisition Service 

(FAS) since 2004. Currently, Mr. Brennan works within GSA™s Program 

Analysis Division, which is actively engaged in initiatives to green the 

agency™s operations and supply chain. Brennan was awarded a B.B.A. 

from James Madison University and an M.B.A. from George Mason 
University.
ALICIA CULVER 
is the executive director of the Responsible Purchasing 
Network, an international network dedicated to advancing sustainable 

procurement policies and practices among government agencies and pub
-
lic institutions. Ms. Culver has over two decades of experience working 

in the sustainable procurement ˜eld. She got her start in 1994 evaluating 

the federal government™s environmentally preferable purchasing efforts 

as Coordinator of the Government Purchasing Project based in Washing
-ton, D.C. She later served as deputy director of the New Jersey Of˜ce of 

Sustainability and, in 2004, founded the Green Purchasing Institute. Ms. 

Culver is currently serving as an advisor to the UN Environment Program 

and the World Bank, identifying the best practices for the procurement of 

energy-ef˜cient products around the world. She also chairs San Francis
-co™s Sweatfree Procurement Advisory Group. She has co-authored many 

publications on sustainable procurement, including 
Cleaning for Health: 
Products and Practices for a Safer Indoor Environment
, 
RPN™s Responsible Pur
-chasing Guide to LED Lighting
, and 
Buying Smart: Experiences of Municipal 
Green Purchasing Pioneers
. EDAN DIONNE 
is
 director of corporate environmental affairs at IBM 
Corporation. IBM™s Corporate Environmental Affairs staff sets the com
-pany™s global strategy for and oversees IBM™s programs and performance 

worldwide in environment, energy and climate, product and process 

environmental stewardship. She joined IBM in 1983 as environmental 

engineer and became part of IBM™s corporate environmental affairs staff 

in 1990. Prior to assuming her current position, her experience included 

managing a wide range of environmental and climate protection pro
-grams, partnership with others in industry, the USEPA and nongovern
-mental organizations. She assumed her present position in 2002.
 Ms. 
Dionne has a master of science degree in chemical engineering.
JON
 E
ISENBERG
 (Staff)
 is director of the Computer Science and Tele
-communications Board of the National Academies. At CSTB, he has also 
been study director for more than a dozen major studies, including a series 

of reports exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and 

communications technologies. From 1995 to 1997 he was a AAAS Science, 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Engineering, and Diplomacy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International 
Development, where he worked on technology transfer and information 

and telecommunications policy issues. Dr. Eisenberg received his Ph.D. in 

physics from the University of Washington in 1996 and a B.S. in physics 

with honors from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988.
NANCY GILLIS 
directs the GSA Federal Supply Chain Emissions Pro
-gram Management Of˜ce (PMO), which is tasked to create and promote 
a more sustainable federal supply chain. She chairs the Section 13 Inter
-agency Working Group, addressing the technical and policy recommenda
-
tions outlined in the EO 13514 Vendor and Contractor Emissions report, 

and manages the GreenGov Supply Chain Partnership, a public/private 

collaboration seeking to reduce environmental impacts throughout the 

supply chain. Ms. Gillis has spent the majority of her career in the area 

of sustainability and has worked internationally on biodiversity, supply 

chain, economic development, and technology innovation projects. Ms. 

Gillis received her graduate degree from Georgetown University and is a 

proud alumnus of the Santa Fe Institute Complexity program.
STEPHEN GORDON
 directs the Graduate Certi˜cate Program in Public 
Procurement and Contract Management in the Department of Urban 
Studies and Public Administration at Old Dominion University in Nor
-folk, Virginia. Experienced as a manager, leader, thinker, and innovator 

in the not-for-pro˜t, for-pro˜t, and public sectors, Dr. Gordon teaches 

graduate classes in public procurement and contract management and 

public policy. Dr. Gordon™s primary areas of research interest include 

performance-based contracting, sustainable procurement, out-sourcing 

and in-sourcing of public services, and relationships in an intergovern
-mental and multi-sector environment. Throughout his career, Dr. Gordon 

has contributed to the advancement of the practice of governmental pro
-curement, especially at the state and local levels. He co-chairs the Steering 

Group of the Sustainable Procurement Initiative, a group of professionals 

with differing but complementary expertise and perspectives that came 

together in 2010 to jointly focus on cost-effectively organizing govern
-mental procurement in the United States to promote sustainability. The 

Sustainable Procurement Initiative is developing an organized, market-

driven, non-regulatory strategy involving performance-based acquisition, 

contract incentives, large scale cooperative contracts, and information 

sharing and networking to dramatically increase sustainable purchases 

and contracts.
PETER GRAF (Committee Member) 
is chief sustainability of˜cer and 
executive vice president of sustainability solutions with SAP, where he 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 47is responsible for developing sustainable solutions that best serve the 
needs of SAP™s global customers, while also driving sustainable opera
-tions within SAP. At SAP, Dr. Graf has held various management roles. 

Previously, he was the executive vice president of solution marketing at 

SAP. In this role, he was responsible for shaping the company™s industry 

solution, application, and platform strategy. Dr. Graf holds a master™s 

degree in computer science and economics as well as a Ph.D. in arti˜cial 

intelligence.
STEVEN J. KEMPF
 was appointed commissioner for the U.S. General 
Services Administration™s Federal Acquisition Service (FAS), effective 
July 10, 2010. In this capacity, he sets strategic direction and oversees the 

delivery of over $50 billion of best-value products, services, and solutions 

to federal customers, allowing them to effectively and ef˜ciently achieve 

their missions. He also held this position in an acting capacity from April 

through June 2010, and was the deputy commissioner prior to that. Mr. 

Kempf has held multiple leadership positions throughout FAS and its pre
-
decessor organizations. He served as the acting FAS deputy commissioner 

from October 2008 through January 2009. In February 2008, he was named 

assistant commissioner for the FAS Of˜ce of Acquisition Management, 

where he was responsible for overall acquisition policy planning and 

coordination. Mr. Kempf holds a B.A. in history from Marquette Univer
-sity in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and a law degree and an M.B.A. from the 

George Washington University in Washington, D.C.
STEPHEN LEEDS
1 was appointed as senior counselor to the adminis
-trator for the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA) on August 10, 
2009. As senior counselor, Mr. Leeds advises and assists the administra
-tor on a variety of GSA™s enterprise initiatives. He also coordinates the 

activities of the regional administrators. Mr. Leeds is the senior account
-able of˜cial for recovery, placing him in charge of the agency™s efforts to 

implement the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. He is also the 

agency senior sustainability of˜cer, leading GSA™s efforts under Executive 

Orders 13423 and 13514 to ful˜ll GSA™s responsibilities and opportunities 

under those EOs as well as assisting GSA™s federal agency customers with 

solutions to help them integrate sustainability throughout their agencies 

and achieve their sustainability goals. Mr. Leeds graduated from Michi
-gan State University with a B.A. in business and received a J.D. from the 

University of Michigan.
1 
Senior Counselor to the Administrator as of December 7, 2011
.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
PATRICK MALLET (Committee Member) 
is founder and credibility 
director with ISEAL Alliance, the global association for social and envi
-ronmental standards. At ISEAL Alliance, Mr. Mallet is responsible for 

managing the development of consensus-based codes of good practice 

for the effective operation of voluntary standards systems. In 2004, he led 

the development of the ISEAL Code of Good Practice for Setting Social 

and Environmental Standards which has since become the normative 

reference point for credible standard-setting practices. Prior to founding 

the ISEAL Alliance in 2000, Mr. Mallet managed an international program 

in certi˜cation and marketing of non-timber forest products and was 

lead author on the multi-stakeholder Conservation Principles for Coffee 

Production. He is past board chair of the Certi˜ed Organic Associations 

of British Columbia. He earned his degrees at Dalhousie and McGill Uni
-versities in eastern Canada.
H. SCOTT MATTHEWS (Committee Member) 
is the research director of 
the Green Design Institute and professor in the Department of Civil and 

Environmental Engineering and the Department of Engineering and Pub
-
lic Policy at Carnegie Mellon University. His work includes valuing the 

socioeconomic implications of environmental systems and infrastructure 

and industrial ecology. He focuses on using the Internet to facilitate envi
-ronmental life-cycle assessment of products and processes, estimating and 

tracking carbon emissions across the supply chain, and the sustainability 

of product systems and infrastructure as connected to public policy. Dr. 

Matthews previously served on the National Research Council Commit
-tee on Health, Environmental, and Other External Costs and Bene˜ts of 

Energy Production and Consumption. He holds a Ph.D. in economics 

from Carnegie Mellon University.
LYNETTE
 I. M
ILLETT
 (Staff)
 is associate director at the Computer Sci
-ence and Telecommunications Board (CSTB), National Research Council 
of the National Academies. She currently directs several CSTB projects, 

including an investigation into foundational science in cybersecurity and 

an examination of opportunities for computing research to help meet 

sustainability challenges. She served as the study director for the CSTB 

reports 
Strategies and Priorities for Information Technology at the Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services and
 Social Security Administration Electronic 
Service Provision: A Strategic Assessment.
 Ms. Millett™s portfolio includes 
signi˜cant portions of CSTB™s recent work on software, identity systems, 

and privacy. She directed, among other projects, those that produced 

Software for Dependable Systems: Suf˜cient Evidence?,
 an exploration of 

fundamental approaches to developing dependable mission-critical sys
-tems; Biometric Recognition: Challenges and Opportunities, a comprehen
-Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 49sive assessment of biometric technology; 
Who Goes There? Authentication 
Through the Lens of Privacy,
 a discussion of authentication technologies 
and their privacy implications; and 
IDsŠNot That Easy: Questions About 

Nationwide Identity Systems,
 a post-9/11 analysis of the challenges pre
-sented by large-scale identity systems. She has an M.Sc. in computer 

science from Cornell University and a B.A. in mathematics and computer 

science from Colby College.
KAREN MORAN
 is currently the team lead for Pollution Prevention at 
Headquarters Defense Logistics Agency. She has over 30 years of experi
-ence in Environmental, Safety, and Occupational Health management 
with the Department of Defense. Her assignments have included instal
-lations, Headquarters for Major Commands & Components, and the 

Pentagon. She holds B.S. and M.S. degrees from the College of William 

and Mary in Virginia and the University of Southern California. 
MARINA S. MOSES (Staff) 
serves as the director for the Science and 
Technology for Sustainability Program (STS) in the Division of Policy and 

Global Affairs of the National Academies. In this capacity, she also serves 

as the director of the Roundtable on Science and Technology for Sus
-tainability. Under her leadership, the STS program issued the consensus 

report Sustainability and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and 

has recently undertaken the multi-sponsored study Sustainability Link
-ages in the Federal Government. Prior to joining the National Academies, 

Dr. Moses served on the faculty of the George Washington University 

School of Public Health and Health Services in the Department of Envi
-ronmental and Occupational Health, where she also directed the Doctoral 

Program and was the practicum coordinator for the graduate program. 

Dr. Moses was the recipient of the 2005 P˜zer Scholar in Public Health 

Award and has worked in emergency preparedness and communication 

with communities on public health issues. Previously, Dr. Moses held 

senior scienti˜c positions in the Environmental Management Division of 

the U.S. Department of Energy, where she worked on the development 

of a qualitative framework to assess hazardous and nuclear waste risks, 

and served as the senior health risk assessor in the New 
York City of˜ce 
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency™s Superfund Program. Dr. 

Moses received her Bachelor of Arts (Chemistry) and her Master of Sci
-ence (Environmental Health Sciences) degrees from Case Western Reserve 

University. She received her doctorate of public health (Environmental 

Health Sciences) from Columbia University School of Public Health.
TERESA NEAL
 (Committee Member) 
is senior purchasing manager at 
Church & Dwight, Co. Inc. Formerly, Dr. Neal was the product marketing 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
director for SciQuest™s Commercial sector, where she was responsible for 
product strategy and driving growth in the emerging commercial markets 

and served as SciQuest™s thought leader for Green Procurement. Before 

joining SciQuest, she was a senior marketing manager for North America 

and Latin America at Novozymes, where she positioned enzymes as 

Green ingredients in the household care industry. She has an M.B.A. from 

the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, and a Ph.D. in bioinorganic 

chemistry from the University of Notre Dame.
CHRIS O™BRIEN 
joined American University in 2009 as the university™s 
˜rst director of sustainability. He is responsible for sustainability policy, 

planning, outreach, and implementation. His work includes leading the 

university™s commitment to achieving climate-neutrality by the year 2020, 
as well as building and operation green buildings, eliminating waste 

sent to land˜ll, and greening the university™s procurement. Previously, 

he directed the Responsible Purchasing Network at the Center for a New 

American Dream, and earlier served as Managing Director of the Green 

Business Network and the Fair Trade Federation. He is treasurer of the 

Fair Trade Resource Network and co-owns the Seven Bridges Organic 

Brewing Supply Cooperative. He serves on the Electronic Products Envi
-ronmental Assessment Tool (EPEAT) Advisory Board, the Green Advan
-tage Board, and the Association for the Advancement of Sustainability in 

Higher Education™s STARS Steering Committee. In 2006, Chris authored 

the award-winning book 
Fermenting Revolution: How to Drink Beer and Save 

the World
 (New Society Publishers). He has a bachelor™s degree in liberal 
arts from Penn State University and a master™s degree in science and 

technology studies from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.
ANASTASIA O™ROURKE 
is a co-founder of Big Room Inc.Šthe creators 
of Ecolabel Index (www.ecolabelindex.com), and a proposal for a new top 

level domain (
www.doteco.org
). Big Room also provides advisory services 
to clients such as the GSA, UNEP, and FedEx Corporation. She co-chairs 

the Green Products Roundtable, a multi-stakeholder group of corpora
-tions, nonpro˜ts, certi˜ers, and government who are working together 

to ˜nd ways to help bring clarity to the green marketplace. Dr. O™Rourke 

is an expert in designing information platforms that facilitate the growth 

of green markets and in assessing sustainability of companies, from her 

recent work on green products and certi˜cation systems, to prior work 

on cleantech venture investments, socially responsible investment met
-rics, and corporate and governmental environmental reporting. She has 

a Ph.D. from 
Yale University and an M.Sc. from Lund University, both 
in environmental management. She has lived and worked in Australia, 

Sweden, France, and the United States, where she currently resides. 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 51EDWARD RAU
 serves as chair of the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services Sustainability Innovations Working Group at the 
National Institutes of Health (NIH). He has a 30-year tour of active duty 

as an Environmental Health Of˜cer in the U.S. Public Health Service 

Commissioned Corps, continuing in civilian service with the NIH. He 

has served initially as chemical waste manager, advanced to chief of haz
-ardous and solid waste management and special assistant to the director, 

Division Environmental Protection, NIH. Captain Rau has a bachelor™s 

degree in biology and an M.S. in environmental and occupational health 

sciences from California State University at Northridge, and a graduate 

certi˜cate in hazardous materials management from the University of 

California, Davis. 
DYLAN RICHMOND (Staff) 
is a research assistant for the Science and 
Technology for Sustainability Program (STS) at the National Academies. 

Before joining the Academies in the fall of 2010, he attended Georgetown 

University and graduated with a B.A. in economics in May 2010. While 

at Georgetown, Mr. Richmond was an editor for 
The Georgetown Voice.
JONATHAN RIFKIN 
is a special assistant to the director for the District 

of Columbia Of˜ce of Contracting and Procurement (OCP). His work in 

Green Procurement began approximately four years ago when he was 

given the opportunity to work for OCP. He has spent the last year devel
-oping a green purchasing program within the District, which continues 

to mature. He also serves on the District™s ﬁDC Green Team,ﬂ which 

is the District™s uni˜ed effort to enact sustainable practices across the 

government. Most recently, he was appointed to serve as liaison to the 

District™s Mayor™s Sustainability Initiative, which will establish a compre
-
hensive sustainable strategy for the District for the approaching decades. 

In addition, Jonathan serves on the National Association of State Procure
-ment Of˜cers (NASPO) Green Purchasing Work Group, which works to 

identify and share Green Purchasing best practices with its membership; 

and the Keystone Group™s Green Products Roundtable, which is a multi-

stakeholder group dedicated to bringing clarity to the green marketplace 

and endorsing practices that simplify and maximize green purchasing 

efforts for Institutional Purchasers. He is fascinated by the complexities of 

the green marketplace and takes enormous satisfaction from the positive 

impact that environmentally preferable purchasing can have on his local 

and global world.
JOSH SAUNDERS 
is a nationally recognized expert on product-level 
sustainability and environmental certi˜cations. Joshua is the co-founder 

and CEO of Greencurement, a company that provides environmental 
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
information for institutional purchasing. At Greencurement, Joshua 
works with leading organizations to identify green products and make 

smarter purchasing decisions. Prior to Greencurement, Joshua was the 

senior director of business development for GoodGuide, where he was 

responsible for partnerships, alliances, and commercial sales. Joshua has 

also worked closely with a number of environmental standard setting, 

ecolabeling, and certi˜cation programs across a wide range of industries 

from electronics to building products. Joshua was a co-founder of UL 

Environment, a subsidiary of Underwriters Laboratories, where he led 

global operations and oversaw the environmental claims veri˜cation and 

sustainable products certi˜cation programs. He has been heavily involved 

in many sustainability initiatives, including participating in past round
-tables with the National Academies and the Keystone Center as well as 

being a contributor to NPR™s Marketplace Report. Mr. Saunders holds a 

bachelor™s degree in electrical and computer engineering and an M.B.A. 

in ˜nance and entrepreneurship.
YALMAZ SIDDI
QUI
 is Of˜ce Depot™s senior director of environmental 
strategy. He is responsible for setting strategy, de˜ning metrics, and driv
-ing integration of a wide range of environmental programs into the global 
organization. Under his leadership, Newsweek magazine ranked Of˜ce 

Depot in 2011 as the #1 greenest large retailer and the #8 greenest large 

U.S. company overall. Mr. Siddiqui is on the Board of Advisors of EPEAT; 

is the co-chair of the Green Products Roundtable, a multi-stakeholder 

group working on de˜ning ‚green products™ for institutional purchasers; 

and was the only private sector recipient of the Responsible Purchasing 

Network™s 2009 Responsible Purchaser of the 
Year Award. He holds a 
master of philosophy in environment & development from the University 

of Cambridge, where his thesis focused on industrial ecology, life-cycle 

analysis, and bio-mimicry. He also has a bachelor of commerce degree 

from McGill University in Canada.
JOSH SILVERMAN
 is the director of the Of˜ce of Sustainability Support 
at the U.S. Department of Energy. His of˜ce provides training, technical 
assistance, and corporate reporting and analysis support to help DOE 

achieve its sustainability goals. He engages in a broad spectrum of activi
-ties within DOE, including sustainable acquisition, sustainable buildings, 

green electronics, and toxic chemical reduction. He recently received an 

Achievement Award from the Secretary of Energy for helping DOE reduce 

fugitive emissions of potent greenhouse gases. Dr. Silverman joined DOE 

in 2000, after completing a dissertation at Carnegie Mellon University on 

environment, safety, and health practices in nuclear weapons production.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 53LORRIE VOGEL, general manager of Considered Design, Nike™s sustain
-able design team, seeks to intertwine design innovation and conservation. Through Considered Design, Ms. Vogel™s focus is to design out waste, 

chemicals and energy, and design in new materials and approaches. Prior 

to becoming the general manager, she was the innovation director for 

Nike Footwear, Apparel, and Equipment. Her innovative thinking has led 

to several new product technologies and patents. Her passion for design, 

innovation and sustainability together brought her to the role as a leader 

in bringing sustainability to all facets of Nike products. With an industrial 

design degree from Syracuse University, Ms. Vogel has become a lead
-ing expert in design innovation. She has worked for many companies in 

product design and research and development for Texas Instruments and 

S.G. Hauser, a top design consulting ˜rm in Los Angeles. In early 2007 

Ms. Vogel was named to Fast Company™s Fast 50, the magazine™s annual 

compilation of innovative companies and the ﬁincubators of genius.ﬂ Her 

team™s innovative work around sustainable design has been recognized 

in several publications:
 Strategies for Sustainable Design
 (Adam Worbach), 
Green to Gold
 (Dan Esty), and as a M.I.T. Case Study.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix D
Examples of Federal Agency 
Procurement Systems and 
Green Purchasing Programs
Procurement System
DescriptionDepartment of Agriculture
Integrated Acquisition 
System (IAS)1IAS is a Web-based eProcurement system designed 

to streamline and automate contract management 

and acquisition processes throughout USDA.  USDA 

Advantage, part of IAS e-alliance initiative, was formed 

as a partnership between USDA and GSA to better 

leverage USDA spending power to obtain better pricing, 

ordering methods, and delivery terms for commonly 

acquired items and services.  
USDA Purchase Card 

Management System 

(PCMS)2PCMS is a customized, Web-based online relational 

database used to manage purchases made with 

government-wide commercial purchase cards, 

convenience checks, or fleet cards issued by an 

authorized GSA contractor.
USDA BioPreferred  

program
3The USDA BioPreferred program promotes the increased 

purchase and use of biobased products, which is 

expected to reduce petroleum consumption, increase 

the use of renewable resources, better manage the 

carbon cycle, and may contribute to reducing adverse 

environmental and health impacts. 
  55
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Procurement System
DescriptionDepartment of DefenseDOD EMALL4DOD EMALL is an Internet-based mall that allows 
military and other authorized government customers to 

procure items from government and commercial sources.  

DOD EMALL is a Department of Defense program 

operated by the Defense Logistics Information Service.DoD Standard 

Procurement System 

(SPS)5The SPS program was created to standardize the 

procurement process throughout DOD by developing, 

testing, and deploying a suite of software products for 

use by contracting professionals in the Army, Navy, Air 

Force, Marines, and other defense agencies. 
Defense Acquisition 

System6The Defense Acquisition System is the management 

process that guides all DOD acquisition programs, 

provides the policies and principles, and  establishes the 

management framework that implements these policies 

and principles.Department of Energy
Federal Energy 

Management Program
7The DOE Federal Energy Management Program (FEMP) 

supports federal agencies in identifying energy- and 

water-efficient products that meet federal acquisition 

requirements (FAR), conserve energy, save taxpayer 

dollars, and reduce environmental impacts. This is 

achieved through technical assistance, guidance, and 

efficiency requirements for energy-efficient, water-

efficient, and low standby power products.
ENERGY STAR (Joint 
program with EPA)
8ENERGY STAR, a joint DOE and EPA program, delivers 
technical information and tools that organizations and 

consumers use to select energy-efficient solutions and 

best management practices. This program encourages 

and assists governments, schools, and businesses 

in procuring ENERG
Y STAR qualified and FEMP 
designated products.
Strategic Integrated 

Procurement Enterprise 

System (STRIPES)9The Strategic Integrated Procurement Enterprise System 

(STRIPES) is the procurement and contracts management 

component of the DOE™s Integrated Management 

Navigation System program and encompasses both 

acquisition and financial assistance.  The STRIPES 

project reduced the number of procurement-related 

systems across the department.
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D 57Procurement System
DescriptionEnvironmental Protection Agency
EPA™s WaterSense 
Program
10 WaterSense is a partnership program by the U.S. 

Environmental Protection Agency that aims to protect 

the nation™s water supply by offering people a simple 

way to use less water with water-efficient products, new 

homes, and services.  The goal is to provide consumers 

with a label for products and an information resource 

to help people use water more efficiently; encourage 

innovation in manufacturing; and decrease water use 

and reduce strain on water resources and infrastructure.  

Products and services with the WaterSense label have 

been certified to be at least 20 percent more efficient 

without sacrificing performance.Comprehensive 

Procurement Guideline 

(CPG)11  
The CPG program is a continuing effort to promote the 

use of materials recovered from solid waste.  The CPG 

program is authorized by Congress under section 6002 

of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and 

EPA is required to designate products that are or can 

be made with recovered materials and to recommend 

practices for buying these products.  Procuring agencies 

are then required to purchase designated products 

with the highest recovered material content level 

practicable.  Recovered Materials Advisory Notices 

provide purchasing guidance and recommend recovered 

and postconsumer material content levels for designated 

items.Environmentally 

Preferable Products 

(EPP)12The EPP is a database to facilitate the purchase of 

products and services with reduced environmental 

impacts by providing information on mandatory 

purchase programs contained in FAR Part 23 (Energy 

Star, CPG, and Biopreferred Products).  
Significant New 

Alternatives Policy 

(SNAP)13SNAP is EPA™s program to evaluate and regulate 

substitutes for the ozone-depleting chemicals that 

are being phased out under the stratospheric ozone 

protection provisions of the Clean Air Act (CAA).
General Services Administration
GSA Advantage
14The GSA Advantage is a one-stop online resource to 

help agencies better serve the public by meeting their 

needs for products and services, and to simplify access 

to information.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
Procurement System
DescriptionE-Buy15GSA™s E-Buy is an online procurement tool that 
allows buyers to issue requests for quotations for 

products and services offered on GSA multiple award 

schedules.  E-Buy is designed to be complementary 

to GSA Advantage and is available for use by federal 

buyers.  
GSA Global Supply
16GSA Global Supply™s online ordering site that has 

access to approximately 400,000 tools, office supplies, 

computers, and other supplies. 
Green Products 

Compilation17Green Products Compilation (GPC) is designed to 

facilitate the procurement of green/sustainable products 

and services.  The products listed are those for which the 

EPA, DOE, and USDA issued designations or guidance 

for environmental or energy attributes.  
National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationNASA Acquisition Internet 

Service (NAIS)18 NAIS is an online service that grants industry immediate 
access to current acquisition information. NAIS is a feeder 

system for federal E-Gov systems like the Federal Business 
Opportunities (FBO). NAIS provides industry links to refer
-ence information such as regulations, clauses, provisions, 

handbooks, and guidance documents.  NAIS also provides 

industry a central location to ˜nd each NASA ˜eld center™s 

procurement home page. Additionally, NAIS provides 

NASA procurement professionals with a suite of procure
-
ment tools for internal use.Recycling and Sustainable 
Acquisition (RSA)19NASA™s Lead Center for Recycling and Sustainable Acquisi
-
tion (RSA) provides technical resources and program sup
-
port for NASA Headquarters Environmental Management 

Division.National Institutes of HealthNIH Green Purchasing 

Program
20The NIH Green Purchasing Program involves the selection 

and acquisition of products and services that most effective
-
ly minimize negative environmental impacts over their life 

cycle of manufacturing, transportation, use and recycling or 

disposal. The Green Purchasing Program helps NIH improve 

safety and health of patients, workers and the public; reduce 

pollution; conserve natural resources; stimulate new markets 

for recycled materials, improve environmental stewardship; 

provide potential cost savings; and comply with environ
-
mental laws and regulations.
NOTES
1 www.afm.ars.usda.gov/initiatives/ias/
2 www.dm.usda.gov/procurement/card/pcms.htm
3 www.biopreferred.gov/?SMSESSION=NO
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX D 594 www.landandmaritime.dla.mil/programs/emall/
5 http://sps.caci.com/
6 https://dap.dau.mil/aphome/das/Pages/Default.aspx
7 www1.eere.energy.gov/femp/
8 www.energystar.gov/
9  
http://energy.gov/management/downloads/pia-imanage-strategic-integrated-procurement-
 enterprise-system-stripes
10
 www.epa.gov/watersense/
11 www.epa.gov/epawaste/conserve/tools/cpg/about.htm
12
 www.epa.gov/opptintr/epp/index.htm
13
 www.epa.gov/ozone/snap/
14
 www.gsaadvantage.gov
15
 www.ebuy.gsa.gov
16
 www.gsaglobalsupply.gsa.gov
17
 www.gsa.gov/portal/content/198257
18
 http://prod.nais.nasa.gov/cgi-bin/nais/index.cgi
19
 http://nasarecycles.nasa.gov/
20
 http://nems.nih.gov/programs/Pages/purchasing.aspx
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix E
The Federal Life-Cycle Assessment 
(LCA) Digital Commons
1 Life-cycle assessment is the assessment of environmental, economical, 
and social impact of a product throughout its lifespan, and is increasingly 
important in product design, procurement decisions, and policy making 

in the public and private sectors.  The USDA, EPA, DOE, and other federal 

agencies have generated and are continuing to produce a critical mass of 

data available to support LCA activities.  However, there is currently a 

lack of reliable, comprehensive, and open access data to support life-cycle 

assessments (LCA) for public and private decision making.  
The primary purpose of the federal LCA Digital Commons is to fully 
leverage federal investments in sustainability science and technology to 

maximize bene˜ts by coordinating LCA data collection, organization, 

management, dissemination, and preservation.  This project adopts an 

open source, open standard, and open access approach for system devel
-opment.  Stated deliverables from the federal LCA Digital Commons 

include: 
˜˚
Peer-reviewed LCA data, which ensures validity and reliability 

for analyses by providing reliable and comprehensive data made 

available through open database access
˜˚
Data preservation 
˜˚
Standards and protocols, which are open, practical, and matured 

standards to represent and exchange LCA data and models 
1www.lcacommons.gov/
61
Sustainability Considerations for Procurement Tools and Capabilities: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT CONSIDERATIONS
˜˚
Nomenclatures, which provide a shared vocabulary and naming 
convention to represent LCA data and model LCA methods and 

practices 
˜˚
Tools to collect, organize, validate, analyze, and visualize LCA 

data and models, and services to facilitate activities in the LCA 

community
