DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13479Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of aWorkshop54 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-26264-4 | DOI 10.17226/13479Ethan N. Chiang and Patricia S. Wrightson, Rapporteurs; Board on Global Scienceand Technology; Policy and Global Affairs; National Research CouncilIntelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION   Summary of a Workshop  
  Ethan N. Chiang and Pa
tricia S. Wrightson Rapporteurs
   
 Board on Global Science and Technology  Policy and Global Affairs    
 
      THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS  
Washington, D.C. 
www.nap.edu 
 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 500 Fifth Street, NW  Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of th
is report was approved by the Governing Board 
of the National Research Council, whose member
s are drawn from the councils of the National 
Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of 
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. 
The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special compe-
tences and with regard for appropriate balance. 
 
This study was supported by Contract No. HHM402-10-D-0036 between the National Acade-

my of Sciences and the Department of Defens
e. Any opinions, findings
, conclusions, or rec-
ommendations expressed in this publication are those of  the authors and do not necessarily 

reflect the views of the organizations or ag
encies that provided support for the project. 
 International Standard Book 
Number-13: 978-0-309-26264-4 
 International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-26264-X 

  Additional copies of  this report are availabl
e from the National Academies Press, 500 Fifth 
Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC
 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3314; 
http://www.nap.edu
.  
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 

 Printed in the United States of America 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of 
distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the 
furtherance of science and technology and to th
eir use for the general welfare. Upon the 
authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. 
Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy of Sciences. 
 The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the 
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel or
ganization of outstanding engineers. It is 
autonomous in its administration and in the 
selection of its members, sharing with the 
National Academy of Sciences the responsibil
ity for advising the federal government. 
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors engineering programs aimed at 
meeting national needs, encoura
ges education and research, an
d recognizes the superior 
achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles M. Vest is president of the National Academy of 
Engineering.  The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences 
to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination 
of policy matters pertaining to the health of 
the public. The Institute acts under the re-
sponsibility given to the National Academy of Scie
nces by its congressional charter to be 
an adviser to the federal government and, up
on its own initiative, to identify issues of 
medical care, research, and education. Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute 
of Medicine. 
 The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 
1916 to associate the broad community of scie
nce and technology with the Academy™s 
purposes of furthering knowledge and advising th
e federal government. Functioning in 
accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become 
the principal operating agency of both the Na
tional Academy of Sciences and the Nation-
al Academy of Engineering in providing servi
ces to the government, the public, and the 
scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both 
Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ra
lph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest 
are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v PLANNING COMMITTEE FOR THE 
WORKSHOP ON INTELLIGENT 
HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
  JEFFREY M. BRADSHAW (Chair), Florida Institute for Human and Machine 
Cognition 
DIANNE CHONG, The Boeing Company 

GAL KAMINKA, Bar-Ilan University 
GEERT-JAN KRUIJFF, Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche 
Intelligenz (DFKI) 
BRIAN WILLIAMS, Massachusetts
 Institute of Technology 
  Principal Project Staff 
 
WILLIAM O. BERRY, Director 
ETHAN N. CHIANG, Program Officer 
PATRICIA S. WRIGHTSON,
 Associate Director 
   Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi 
BOARD ON GLOBAL SCIENCE
 AND TECHNOLOGY 
  RUTH DAVID, Analytic Se
rvices, Inc. (Chair) 
HAMIDEH AFSARMANESH, University of Amsterdam 
KATY BÖRNER, Indiana University Bloomington 
JEFFREY BRADSHAW, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition 

DIANNE CHONG, The Boeing Company 
JARED COHON, Carnegie Mellon University 
ERIC HASELTINE, Haseltine Partners, LLC 

JOHN HENNESSEY, Stanford University 
NAN JOKERST, Duke University 
PETER KOLCHINSKY, RA Capital Management, LLC 
CHEN-CHING LIU, Washington State University 
KIN MUN LYE, Singapore™s Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research 
BERNARD MEYERSON, IBM Corporation 
KENNETH OYE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
NEELA PATEL, Abbott Laboratories 

DANIEL REED, Microsoft Corporation 
DAVID REJESKI, Woodrow Wilson Center 
 
Staff 
WILLIAM O. BERRY, Director 
ETHAN N. CHIANG, Program Officer 

NEERAJ GORKHALY, Research Associate 
PATRICIA S. WRIGHTSON,
 Associate Director 
 
  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii 
  Preface    
   
  The Workshop on Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration was orga-
nized by a planning committee whose role was limited to identification of topics 
and speakers. During its deliberations, the planning committee focused on topics 

that addressed the challenges and opportunities presented by intelligent collabo-
ration between humans and machines. In acknowledging that interpretations of 
ﬁintelligentﬂ and ﬁcollaborationﬂ vary 
among different scientific communities, 
the planning committee sought workshop participants from a range of science 
and engineering disciplines relevant to human-machine collaboration. Through-
out the workshop, participants were not asked to arrive at consensus on any  

issue but, to explore human-machine collaboration issues from diverse discipli-
nary and cultural perspectives. 
As such, the selected workshop topics and subsequent discussions were 
not intended to provide comprehensive coverage of all research efforts in the 
field of human-computer or human-robot in
teraction, but to glean insights into 
the research challenges and opportunities presented by intelligent human-

machine collaboration in dynamic and unstructured environments. 
The present summary was prepared 
by the rapporteurs as a factual 
summary of the presentations
 and discussions that t
ook place at the workshop. 
Statements and opinions expressed are those of individual presenters and partic-
ipants and are not necessarily endorsed 
or verified by the National Academies, 
and they should not be construed as reflecting any group consensus. 
   Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. viii 
  Acknowledgment of Reviewers 
   
   
  This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for 
their diverse perspectives and technical 
expertise, in accordan
ce with procedures 
approved by the National Academies™ Report Review Committee. The purpose 

of this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 

assist the institution
 in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to 
ensure that the report meets institutional standards for quality and objectivity. 

The review comments and draft manuscrip
t remain confidential to protect the 
integrity of the process. 
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this re-
port: Henrik Christensen, Georgia Institute of Technology; Michael Goodrich, 

Brigham Young University; Paul Maglio, 
University of Calif
ornia; and Branko 
Sarh, The Boeing Company. 
Although the reviewers listed above 
have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the content of the 

report, nor did they see the final draft before its release.  Responsibility for the 

final content of this report rests entirely with the rapporteurs and the institution. 
 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. ix 
   Contents   
   
   1 Introduction       1 
2 Scenario Exercises      3 
3 Human-Machine Teamwork Panels    11 
4 Common Challenges and Breakthroughs   17 
5 Global and Transnational Issues    23 
6 Revisiting the Scenarios     25 
  
APPENDIXES 
 A Workshop Participants     31 

B Workshop Agenda      33 
C Presentation Abstracts     39 
 
   
 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 1  1   Introduction  
   
    n June 12-14, 2012, the Board on Global Science and Technology held 
an international, multidisciplinary workshop in Washington, D.C., to 
explore the challenges and advances in intelligent human-machine col-
laboration (IH-MC), particularly as it app
lies to unstructured environments. This 
workshop convened researchers from a 
range of science and engineering disci-
plines, including robotics, human-robot and human-machine interaction, soft-
ware agents and multi-agent systems, cognitive sciences, and human-machine 

teamwork. Participants were drawn from
 research organizations in Australia, 
China, Germany, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
the Netherlands, the Un
ited Arab Emirates, 
the United Kingdom, and the United States. 
On day one of the workshop, participants worked in small, interdisci-
plinary groups to determine how advances in IH-MC over the next two to three 
years could be applied to solving a variety of different real-world scenarios in 

dynamic unstructured environments, rangin
g from managing a natural disaster to 
improving small-lot agile manufacturing. 
On day two, participants organized into small groups for a ﬁdeeper    
diveﬂ exploration of four research topics that had arisen during the scenario dis-
cussions. Later in the afternoon, the full group discussed IH-MC in terms of 
common challenges, hoped-for breakthroughs, and the national, transnational, 
and global context in which this research occurs. 
On day three, participants again organized into small groups to focus 
on longer term research deliverables. In addition, ten participants gave presenta-
tions on their research, with topics ranging from human-robot communication, 
to disaster response robots, to human-in-the-loop control of robot systems. 
Throughout the workshop, participants were not asked to arrive at con-
sensus on any issue but, rather, to id
entify challenges and opportunities from 
different disciplinary and cultural perspectives. 

   OIntelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  2 INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
What Is Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration? 
 Prior to the workshop, participants we
re asked to give their own defini-
tion of ﬁintelligent human-machine collaborationﬂ in a preparatory question-
naire. The following samples show the rich diversity of their responses: 
 . . . machines and humans combining eac
h other™s strengths and filling-in for 
their weaknesses and empowering each other™s capabilities; 

. . . joint and coordinated action by people and computationally based systems, 
in which each have some stake in the 
outcome or performance of the mission; 
. . . humans AND machines jointly perform tasks that they would not be able to 
perform on their own;  
. . . integration of AI into machines; 

. . . humans and machines are able to mutually adapt their behavior, intentions, 
and communications; 
. . . cooperation that mimics interactions between two humans;  

. . . naturalness of the observed human-machine interaction;  
. . . neither human nor machine treats the 
other as a disturbance to be minimized. 
. . . machines being partners, and not a tool, for humans; 

. . . technology that amplifies and extends human abilities to know, perceive, and 
collaborate; 
. . . better overall performance of the mission, independently of how it was 

achieved; 
. . . shared responsibility, authority, goals. 
   Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 3  2   Scenario Exercises 
   
     ach group was allotted two hours to discuss their scenarios and then pre-
pare a PowerPoint presentation of their findings and proposed solutions. 
Among the questions posed to each group were: What kind of progress 
can be demonstrated within two years? 
What could be done in years three to 
five? What issues are raised by including both software agents and robots as 
team members? In what circumstances is
 this system likely to fail when de-
ployed in a real-world environment? 
 Scenario A: Preparing For and Managing a Major Disaster Moderator: Mich
ael Goodrich Group Members: Michael Goodrich, Geert-Jan (GJ) Kruijff, Alex Morison, 
Daniele Nardi, Lin Padgham, Satoshi Tadokoro 
 
Description: Mexico City™s 18 million 
inhabitants live within 40 miles of 
Mount Popocatepetl, an active volcano th
at most recently erupted in 2000. 
Group A, a private enterprise dubbed ﬁ007 and Beyond,ﬂ was given two years 

to develop a prototype for human-mach
ine collaboration that would prepare 
for, respond to, and help with rebuilding following a major eruption. In this 
scenario, the group sought to address th
e life cycle of activities that constitute 
disaster managementŠfrom prediction through evacuation, to disaster miti-
gation and eventual reconstruction. The ai
m of this scenario was to consider 
how humans, robots, and software agents could co-manage a disaster and its 
aftermath. 
 The group™s moderator, Michael 
Goodrich, summarized the group™s 
discussion. According to Goodrich, the gr
oup focused on what it determined to 
be the core human-machine collaboration challenge of managing a major disas-

ter: a decision-support system that enab
les affected individuals, their families, 
individual responders, groups of responders, agencies, and centralized planners 
to give and receive needed, reliable (trustworthy), and timely information. The 
E Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  4 INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
goal of such a system would be to enable individuals to make independent deci-
sions in ways that ultimately support safety and survivability. 
The group™s system design included three networked components: a 
centralized information repository; role-sp
ecific clients (e.g., the Red Cross or 
emergency food relief programs) that both ﬁpushﬂ data into the repository and 
ﬁpullﬂ information to facilitate decision making; and a scenario simulator that 
could explore and evaluate feasibility for various interventions. Robots that ex-

plore areas unreachable by (or unsafe 
for) humans following an eruption could 
also be system ﬁclients.ﬂ By exploring numerous scenarios in advance, the simu-
lator could be used before a disaster to help design evacuation and responder 

protocols and after a disaster to help plan and manage search and rescue opera-
tions in real time. The group also designed the ﬁiVolcano appﬂ to facilitate inter-
actions between the information repository and the humans, agents, and robots 
that use it. Thus, through iVolcano, people who are affected by the eruption 
could obtain critical information, such 
as where to find food, medical supplies, 
shelter, and water and where to charge their cell phones.  
Goodrich also indicated that too mu
ch information can sometimes be as 
dangerous as too little in a major disaster
Šfor example, if hundreds of people 
learned at approximately the same time 
where food was available, a stampede 
could ensue. The group saw two other potential problems: (1) many people 
would not willingly ﬁpushﬂ information to a centralized data repository, either 

because of interagency tensions or possibl
e concerns over privacy or trust, and 
(2) the system would need a method for differentiating the meanings of critical 
words. For example, 
water
 means ﬁfire suppressorﬂ to
 a fireman but something 
completely different to a nurse. Thus it would help if different word usages are 
mapped to a common ontology so that, in a time-critical situation, the person 
seeking information from the server is
n™t overwhelmed by irrelevant infor-
mation. 
The group suggested that by year two it would be possible to put into 
operation a ﬁthinﬂ server capable of integrating a lot of the information that al-

ready exists. Althoug
h this achievement would no
t be ﬁearthshakingﬂ (no pun 
intended, said Goodrich), it could be useful. The group thought that in years 
three to five it would be possible to deploy the interactive planning simulator 
tool. Several of the client programs would likely take longer to develop. 
 Scenario B: Small-Lot Agile Manufacturing Moderator: Matthias Scheutz 
Group members: Tal Oron-Gilad, Don Mottaz, Gopal Ramchurn, Matthias 
Scheutz, Lakmal Seneviratne, Brian Williams 

 Description: George owns a small furniture company that builds one-of-a-
kind furniture for its customers. As su
ch piecemeal work negates economies of 
scale, he needs another way to generate
 profits. George retains the developers 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  5 SCENARIO EXERCISES 
of the Pengo9000 (the members of Group B), to create a coworker robot that 
will make it possible for him to triple 
his profits without adding manpower or 
major retooling costs
.  The group™s moderator, Matthias Scheutz, summarized the group™s dis-
cussion. Scheutz initiated his discussion by commenting that the group found the 
exercise immensely challengingŠso much 
so that solving this scenario required 
solving all of AI. Thus the group decided 
to separate the ﬁspirit of the exerciseﬂ 
from a prototype that could potentially be available in a two-year time frame. 
Aspirationally, a collaborative robot would have natural language capabilities 

and would be able to learn and generalize from its lessons to real-world task 
completion. The robot would have sensing and perception capabilities that 
would, for example, enable it to distinguish between different kinds of wood, 
drill-bit requirements, and so on. It would have ﬁcommon senseﬂ knowledge, in 
addition to the domain knowledge necessary for understanding the com-

monsense meaning of words. For example, when someone is told to ﬁgo to the 
kitchen and turn the stove on,ﬂ a human understands that he must go to the 
kitchen before he turns the stove on. A conventional robot might be expected to 

know that the word ﬁandﬂ refers to parallel, sequential, or temporal sequencing, 
but it would not have the intuitive capability to infer the correct meaning. The 
aspirational collaborative robot would be able to take directions from a combi-

nation of verbal and gestural cues. Finally, that robot would have perceptual and 
actuation capabilities that would enable it to find chairs in another room and 
then know which ones need to be drilled. 
The group suggested that a robot could be developed within two years 
to fulfill certain tasks. It would have 
effectors for drilling and clamping and al-
gorithms for planning and scheduling, as well as detecting and targeting objects. 

The robot would also understand simple instructions, such as ﬁdrill a hole into 
the chair,ﬂ but it might not be able to do 
so repeatedly. In year
s three to five, the 
group posited that the robot would be able to pick up tools and learn how to use 

new tools. It would respond to more complex chained commands in combination 
with gestures and could detect errors. As a result, the robot would be a more 
active participant in the manufacturing 
process. Generally, though, the robot 
would still be very constrained in its capabilities, and after five years it would 
still not be a partner for the human furniture maker. 

 Scenario C: Hospital Service Robotics 
Moderator: Candy Sidner 

Group Members: Paul Maglio, Candy Sidner, Liz Sonenberg, Tom Wagner, 

Rong Xiong, Holly Yanco 
 Description: A large healthcare organization calculates the enormous sums 

spent in simply moving thingsŠfood, laundry, trash, wheelchairs, even pa-
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  6 INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
tientsŠin a hospital environment. The aim of Group C was to design within 
two years a system for collaboration between hospital staff and patients, ro-
bots, and software agents. 
 The moderator, Candy Sidner, who spoke on behalf of the group, dis-
cussed how the group grappled with the complexity of designing an integrated 
system of humans, robots, and software agents that could significantly improve 

nonurgent hospital operations. In addition, many of the skills required to make 
such a system both useful and cost-effectiveŠsuch as high-level language and 
locomotive skills, and high-level human-behavior-recognition skillsŠare still 

many years out from real-time operability. 
The group observed that many factors contribute to these complexities. 
First, many of the potential system ﬁusersﬂ would be people with no expertise in 
robotics or software agent systems. Second
, it is often difficult to separate the 
urgent from the nonurgent in hospital settings. For example, hospital staff would 

want even the simplest delivery robot 
to communicate to the appropriate staff 
person that it had come across a patient who had fallen on the floor. To achieve 
this, the robot would have to know that finding someone on the floor was an 

anomaly, who was the right person to contact, and that its request for help had 
been received and acted upon. Completion 
of these tasks by robots is currently 
infeasible. Third, many issues of cultural and language diversity of both staff 

and patient populations (not to mention 
hospitals in urban versus rural settings 
or in advanced versus developing countries) exist. Thus, some members of the 
group speculated, robots and software agents would best be programmed to ad-

dress a variety of cultural norms regarding gender differences, the notion of per-
sonal space, and concerns about safety, to name just a few. 
According to Sidner, the group surmis
ed that within two years it would 
be possible to deploy a ﬁtugﬂ robot capable of carrying things in a basket from 
Point A to Point B. They also suggested that it would be possible to deploy a 
virtual ﬁmy hospital friendﬂ capable of engaging in simple language communi-

cations with humans and helping patients with tasks that are not medically criti-
cal, such as ordering meals or leaving the facility on patient discharge. An opti-
mal systemŠparts of which could take 20 years or more to realizeŠwould 
require breakthroughs in numerous subdisciplines related to human-machine 
collaboration. This system would include the following attributes: robots that 

can safely lift and carry patients; robots and agents that can engage in natural 
speech with humans; a networked system of
 robots and agents that can effective-
ly communicate with each other and with re
levant hospital staff; agents and ro-
bots that can successfully negotiate task 
priorities with huma
ns (and with each 
other); agents and robots that are capable of prioritizing and carrying out re-
quests from multiple operators; and robots and virtual agents that can interact 

appropriately with patients of varying ages, cognitive abilities, emotional states, 
and medical conditions. 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  7 SCENARIO EXERCISES 
During the Q&A session, a workshop participant asked what a robot 
would have to do to convince a human that its own immediate priorities are 
more important than the human™s. Sidner 
answered that this presents a complex 
negotiation problem that is yet to be fully investigated by the science communi-

ty. As an example, she pointed out that negotiation between humans and robots 
presumes advances in modeling wherein researchers understand the cognitive 
model that the robot has of itself and of the person with whom it is communi-

cating. These advances, she explained, have yet to occur. 
 Scenario D: Virtual Team Training 
Moderator: Mark Neerincx 

Group Members: Michael Beetz, Jef
frey Bradshaw, Frank Dignum, Michael 
Freed, Yukie Nagai, Mark Neerincx 

 Description: A U.S. ship will soon be passing through the Straits of Hormuz, 
an area of high risk for terrorist attack. The ship™s captain would like to have 

an on-board training system that will help crew members prepare for any pos-
sible encounter. Group D was charged w
ith developing an agent-based system 
for virtual team training that mixes humans and software agents in ways that 

challenge and improve their team skills. 
 The moderator, Mark Neerincx, summ
arized the group™s discussions. 
As he explained, the group sought to design a virtual training system that would 
learn along with the trainees
 so that (1) the system™s feedback to the trainees 
would improve incrementally; (2) the lessons themselves would become more 

challenging as the trainees™ capabilities grew; and (3) the system would provide 
team as well as individual feedback. In 
effect, a successful system would result 
in the coevolution of the virtual instruct
or, the students, and the software agents. 
The ideal system must have a degree of 
complexity, Neerincx suggested, to de-
velop models of the trainees that the virtual instructor can use to provide useful 
feedback in an ongoing way, and to change the nature of the training as the 
trainees improve. 
Within two years, the group suggested, it would be possible to establish 
a basic evolving framework if the followi
ng subtasks could be accomplished: (1) 
specifying ontologies that provide the basic foundation for how the virtual in-
structor will act and reason over time; (2
) designing scenario-building tools; (3) 
developing templates for the use-cases; (4) developing a taxonomy of feedback 
rules; (5) developing both a task and user model; (6) creating feedback types 
that are appropriate to the templates; and (7) developing a small set of behavior 

detectors to trigger specific types of feedback. It would also be useful for the 
learners to provide feedback to each other. Such data would be fed back into the 
system (which is capable of pattern-finding) to improve future feedback and 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  8 INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
exercises. Neerincx suggested that ad
apting interactive language programs 
might help develop the feedback templates in the two-year time frame. 
In truth, the group believed that just about all of these tasks would be 
difficult to accomplish within two years, or
 even in years three to five. Neerincx 
noted that work on serious games might help
 in this area, as well as research on 
emotion modeling. 
 Scenario E: The Personal Satellite Assistant1 Moderator: Terry Fong 
Group Members: Terry Fong, Robert Hoffman, Andreas Hofmann, Dirk Schulz, 
Jean Scholtz, Manuela Veloso 
 Description: The 
Enterprise on television™s 
Star Trek 
is a roomy place; in any 
actual spacecraft, however, space is at 
an extreme premium. This group™s task 
is to develop a Portable 
Satellite Assistant (PSA)Šflying spherical robots ap-
proximately three inches in diameterŠcapable of assessing hazards, monitor-

ing conditions, and traveling within a spacecraft to places that an astronaut is 
too large to enter. 
 The moderator, Terry Fong, presented the group™s discussion. He ex-
plained that working on a spacecraft presen
ts two unique challenges: First, an 
astronaut™s time is precious and costly; they actually have little time to do 

ﬁwork,ﬂ as most of life on board is co
nsumed by ﬁhousekeepingﬂ and such hu-
man functions as sleeping, exercising, and eating. Second, the ship™s interior is 
extremely cramped, cluttered, and without a defined floor or ceiling. Thus it 

would be very helpful to have on board a small robot that could serve as an extra 
set of eyes and, perhaps, an extra brain. One prototype for such a PSA would be 
a spherical object about three inches 
in diameter. The PSA™s key capabilities 
would be mobile sensing; monitoring standard procedures to detect anomalies 
and possibly alert the astronaut when things go wrong; supporting normal pro-
cedures such as providing astr
onauts with temporal cues (e.g., ﬁThe next step is 
this.ﬂ) and spatial cues (e.g., by asking, ﬁDid you look at this thing?ﬂ and then 
shining a laser pointer on something); and providing reference data to a crew 

member who is carryin
g out a piece of work. 
The group designed the PSA to include the following technologies: 
cameras with zoom, 3-D, and color capabilities; sensors for reading temperature, 

barcodes, RFID, etc.; microphones; avionics for independent navigation; and 
wireless communication. With these technologies, PSAs could potentially assist 
astronauts by executing checklist procedures, an otherwise time-consuming task. 

PSAs would also have the capacity to view
 areas of the spacecraft that are out of 
                                                          
 1 Very limited PSA-like technologies have been
 tested in outer space
. See, for example, 
http://psa.arc.nasa.gov/ and http://ssl.mit.edu/spheres/. 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  9 SCENARIO EXERCISES 
an astronaut™s line of sight, model the environment and show changes or abnor-
malities over time, confirm that procedural models are being followed, and pro-
vide timing alerts that anticipate what is needed next. 
Fong added that the PSA would have a model of the particular human it 
is assigned to and would be tasked to 
learn the preferences and work-related 
idiosyncrasies (e.g., left-handedness) of ﬁitsﬂ astronaut. The PSA would also 
have to ﬁknowﬂ and compensate should
 its astronaut becomes less alert over 
time. The PSA would also have to be sufficiently resilient to adapt to a revised 
plan if its astronaut changes the sequence of a task for good reason. To achieve 
this, humans and their PSAs would undertake joint training prior to their mis-

sion. The advantage of having such an assistant is that PSAs do not criticize 
or take offense. The disadvantages fo
llow from the advantages: robots are inca-
pable of exhibiting human behavior and the ﬁuncanny valleyﬂ problem is likely 
to arise. The group speculated that accomplishing fixed tasks and mobility were 

achievable within two years. The PSA™s ability to change its models of the envi-
ronment, task at hand, and so on and to observe and engage in unanticipated 
tasks could exist by years three to five. 

   Participants were asked prior to the 
meeting to give examples of success-
ful Intelligent human-machine collaboration that are currently in use. The 
most popular responses were: 
  Robotic surgery 
 Google Search/search engines 
 Siri  Production systems where humans and robots work together 
(e.g., Kiva Warehouse Robotics) 
 Flight management and navigation systems on commercial air-
craft 
 Intelligent vehicles (e.g., Google™s unmanned vehicle) 
 I have seen no successful examples 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11 
 3   Human-Machine Teamwork Panels
     
    he workshop participants began the second day™s discussions with four 

panels that sought to plunge deeper into some of the issues that arose 
during the five scenario presentations. The topics varied from rethinking 
the user-vendor relationship in robotics procurement, to enhancing the planning 

capabilities of agents and robots, to the deep-level meaning of communication, 
to the potential for real collaboration between humans and robots. The panels 
addressed research challenges and, in some cases, suggested possible approach-

es.  Panel One: Design, Evaluation, and Training Moderator: Robert Hoffman 
Group Members: Michael Freed, Robert 
Hoffman, Don Mottaz,
 Mark Neerincx, 
Jean Scholtz  The panel moderator, Robert Hoffman, provided the panel™s approach 
to the design-build-test-deployment process of human-machine systems. They 
found problems with the process at every 
stage. Users cannot describe what they 
want because they don™t know what is pos
sible. They also don™t speak the same 
substantive language as the engineers who will build the systems, thus practical-
ly ensuring a mismatch between what the 
user wants and what the engineer will 
build. The human models that are used 
to construct human-machine systems are 
usually too crude; at the opposite end of the spectrum, such cognitive modeling 

architectures as Soar and ACT-R, while having many uses, may be too complex. 
Hoffman spoke of the paradox underlying the construction of human-machine 
systems: Although these systems would be better overall if they were based on 

more complex cognitive models, as the models become more complex, they also 
become more ﬁbrittle,ﬂ thus changing the original requirements of the system. 
Next, system components are often built in
 isolation from each other, with the 
result that they don™t fit with the overa
ll workflow. Finally, user training of the 
T Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  12 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
system is too little and too late, and it tends to focus more on the designer™s the-
ory than the user™s needs. 
To fix these problems, the panel offered a wish list of changes to cur-
rent practice. The process should: (1) base models on knowledge and meaning 

and not just on data; (2) include hypotheses in cognitive models to make them 
less rigid and more adaptive; (3) create th
e role of ﬁmodelerﬂ who can bridge the 
worlds of the user and engineer-builder; and (4) colocate testbeds with deployed 

systems so that user involv
ement can be rich from the start. Moreover, (5) engi-
neers should not only train but also mentor the users of the system so as to max-
imize their usefulness. In addition, product deployment should not be the end of 

the relationship between the user and the vendor but, rather, the beginning of a 
second stage of empirical study by the vendor to deal with the unintended con-
sequences of the system (both positive and negative) once it is in place. This 
second stage will improve the usability of the system at that particular site while 
offering lessons to the vendor for the next generation of the system. 
During the Q&A portion of this panel discussion, Lin Padgham sug-
gested that a looser funding model that 
focuses on the end product as opposed to 
item-by-item accounting could result in a 
cocreative process that more accurate-
ly reflects the vendor™s capabilities and the user™s needs. 
 Panel Two: Intent Recognition, Execution Monitoring, and 
Planning Moderator: Andreas Hofmann 
Group Members: Michael Beetz, Tal 
Oron-Gilad, Andreas Hofmann, Paul 
Maglio, Dirk Shulz, Lakmal Seneviratne, Liz Sonenberg, Satoshi Tadokoro 
 The moderator, Andreas Hofmann, spoke on behalf of the panel. As he 
explained, the panel focused on the challenges of intent recognition, execution 
monitoring, and planning that are associ
ated with the sense-
deliberate-act loop 
(also known as the robotics paradigm). He explained that most sensor-based data 
is ﬁnoisyﬂ and requires filtering for quick and correct evaluation. The panel sug-
gested that more sophisticated algorithms based on plan context might be able to 
filter out the ﬁnoiseﬂ related to visual and tactile sensors. This notion led the 
panel to consider the planning phase of the robotics paradigm: How would the 

agent(s), robot(s), or mixed teams a
ssess the success of the plan itself? 
Hofmann noted that it is unrealistic to define the successful outcome of 
a plan in terms of specific assumptions going in. A more realistic strategy would 

be to continually evaluate the plan™s su
ccess. Here the panel suggested that exe-
cution should include an evaluation capability that can give a probabilistic esti-
mate of the plan™s success. If the estima
te goes below a certain threshold, a hu-
man operator would be called in to re-plan or somehow alter the original plan. 
The challenge, according to Hofmann, is to 
do this sooner rather than later in the 
course of the plan™s execution. Another challenge is that it may be difficult to 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  13 
HUMAN-MACHINE TEAMWORK PANELS 
design appropriate predictors for estim
ating a plan™s success because humans 
actually use a variety of methods to perform tasks. Thus it may be difficult to 
assess when execution has dipped below th
e expected threshold because there 
are, indeed, many potentially acceptable thresholds.  
Next the panel turned to a basic problem of the planning phase of the 
robotics paradigm: in the real world, environments are uncertain and dynamic; 
moreover, sometimes, plans are simply in
feasible. Because data keep changing, 
planning is computationally intensive. The challenge is for the planning phase to 
happen quickly enough to keep the loop
 robust. The panel speculated that in-
cremental planning algorithms could address the changing data challenges. 

Hofmann also suggested collaborative plan diagnosis as a promising area of 
research. This method views plan failure as a diagnostic problemŠalgorithms 
look for conflicts that need to be resolved or constraints that need to be removed 
to make the plan feasible. Some members of the panel also suggested that plan-
ning domains could be made more realistic if they were defined by the robot™s 

action capabilities. 
Hofmann concluded his discussion with a set of questions about the 
mental modeling that constitutes the foundation of intent recognition, execution 

monitoring, and planning. What is the right level of abstractionŠquantitative, 
qualitative, or hybrid models? How should
 shared plans be represented? How 
should agent resource capabilities be re
presented? How should human resource 
capabilities be modeled? How should the human psychological or operational 
safety model be represented? What are 
the best estimation model learning algo-
rithms that support estimation and control? 
 Panel Three: Communication
 Moderator: GJ Kruijff 
Group Members: Frank Dignum, GJ Kruijff, Yukie Nagai, Daniele Nardi, Lin 

Padgham, Matthias Scheutz, Candy Sidner 
 GJ Kruijff, the moderator, provided a summary of the panel™s discus-
sions. Kruijff indicated that the panel addressed fundamental problems associat-
ed with communicationŠnot simply the sharing of words and gestures but the 

depth of meaning that words and gestures represent. The panel™s goal was not to 
solve these problems as much as to de
scribe them. Every dimension of commu-
nication, Kruijff noted, is composed of multiple sub-dimensions that affect the 

communication process. For example, wh
at are the tasks in which communica-
tion occurs: single events or repeated ones? Structured or unstructured? Well or 
poorly understood? How many actors are communicating? What kind of 

knowledge is necessary for communicati
on: Domain specific? Common sense? 
What kind of communication is going to
 take place: Face-to-face or side by 
side?  
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  14 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
In the realm of human-robot inter
action, Kruijff remarked, there are 
two functions that describe collaboration: teamwork and taskwork. Teamwork in 
this context refers to humans and robots coordinating their behavior to accom-
plish a task. Taskwork refers to the ﬁdoingﬂ of the task itself.  
Even before the task itself is undertaken, the team must communicate 
how to coordinate the team™s behavior: negotiating who does what, who is re-
sponsible for what, who is expected to su
cceed at a particular task, and so on. 
Plans may need to be adjusted, because things in the environment have changed. 
A robot needs to understand all these different aspects of the team™s coordina-
tion as well as what it means to progress for itself and others in carrying out 

these activities. The robot also needs to be able to identify when it or others need 
help. 
Within the context of carrying out a task, communication is used to 
build up shared beliefs, or ﬁcommon ground,ﬂ among the actors so that everyone 
on the team is at the same level of understanding. Traditional approaches to 

modeling and various other AI issues assume an objective model that everyone 
can map into. But from the perspective of
 communication, this is not the case. 
All the members of the team perceive an
d act subjectively. They have their own 
experiences and their own understanding of the world. This is particularly true 
for robots versus humans in the team context, Kruijff remarked. 
How, then, is it possible to align all team members, given that people 
and robots perceive quite differently? Kruijff speculated on behalf of the panel 
that the problem of communication is how to fit everything together: simple 
communication, the social dimensions, collaboration in terms of planning and 

execution, and motivations and expectations. Scheutz ended the panel™s presen-
tation by observing that sharing the deep representation of meaning is difficult 
enough between one human and one robot; it 
will take considerable research to 
be able to achieve this at the level of multi-member teams. 
 Panel Four: Collaboration Group Members: Terry Fong, Mike Goodrich, Alex Morison, Gopal Ramchurn, 
Manuela Veloso, Tom Wagner, Rong Xiong 
 In contrast to the other panels that chose a moderator to speak for the 
entire group, each member of the group 
discussed aspects of collaboration of 
interest to him or her. Alex Morison discussed how collaboration involves reci-

procity; team members cannot achieve their own goals without helping others. 
This means that each team member gives 
up some of his own goals in order to 
help others and to accomplish the overall mission. Yet in the world of human-

robot interaction, Morison 
noted, reciprocity is not necessarily standard operat-
ing procedure. If a pilot sees a UAV, for example, he has orders to get out of the 
way because he cannot be sure what the UAV is going to do. Thus collaboration 

is still a work in progress for human-robot teams. 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  15 
HUMAN-MACHINE TEAMWORK PANELS 
For Fong, collaboration should be 
seen as a spectrum from loosely 
coupledŠeven independentŠcoactivity to tightly coupled interaction. He sug-
gested that a team can be productive as
 long as it coordinates what it does. Or-
ganization, which he defines here as the 
allocation of tasks, is central to success-
ful coordination. 
According to Rong Xiong, evaluation is an integral component of col-
laboration. Robots need a basis for self-evaluation that is derived from shared 
information. Similarly, when a human n
eeds help, he needs to know what the 
robot can do and how to ask for it. 
Goodrich would like to 
see collaboration research over the 
next ten years take place in the cen-
tral area of overlapping circles 
(hatch marks) of the Venn diagram 
(shown left). Multiple human-robot 

teams have disparate or asymmetric 
goals, information, and abilities. 
Understanding collaboration will 

involve accounting for and aligning 
these asymmetries. Goodrich™s 
understanding of collaboration is 

relevant to comments made by Jeff 
Bradshaw during the previous 
breakout session, in which he de-

scribed seven myths related to au-
tonomous systems. Taken together, these myths suggest that autonomy is more 

multidimensional, complex, and collaborative than is often viewed in the litera-

ture. 
Manuela Veloso suggested that the robot™s planning algorithmsŠsuch 
as Partially Observable Markov Decisi
on Processes (POMDP), which enable 
robots to plan paths under partially observable conditionsŠwould benefit from 
including models of the human that the robot may encounter in its environment. 
This will help the robot infer human intentions. In contrast to Goodrich™s ap-
proach to collaboration, Veloso questione
d whether complexity is really neces-
sary for collaboration. Does the robot need to know why the human needs it to 
do a particular task, such as ﬁgo to the doorﬂ? In her view, it would be a great 
contribution just to be able to coordinate on minimal knowledge of intentions or 
needs. Tom Wagner defined coordination as the process of managing interde-
pendencies between tasks or plans and 
suggested taking Veloso™s POMDP ap-
proach to the next step: to make an explicit representation of interdependence 

that would enable a robot to divert a human™s attention to help it. For example, a 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  16 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
robot waiting at an elevator would, instead of waiting opportunistically for the 
elevator door to open, ask a person walking by to press the button for it. 
Gopal Ramchurn suggested that research is still to be done to find the 
balance between interaction design and m
echanism design so that rules of en-
gagement between and among humans and robots take incentives of team mem-
bers into account.
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17 
 4   Common Challenges and Breakthroughs 
 
   fter the scenario and panel discussions, workshop participants discussed 
common challenges in IH-MC, as well as breakthroughs to transform 
the ways in which humans and machines will collaborate in the future. 
Some of these breakthroughs, discussed below, were also touched upon during 
the scenario exercises. 

 Rethinking Roles for Humans and Machines 
 For some participants, achieving the desired breakthroughs begins with 
a reevaluation of the role humans play in IH-MC. According to Kruijff, this be-
gins with recognizing that humans have 
a central role. Rather
 than focusing on 
the human as a part of the problem or only as a partial solution, he proposed that 

collaboration should be designed with and around humans and take into consid-
eration the broader sociotechnological context. 
From the machine side, Sidner observed that current robots have lim-
ited sensing, manipulation, and communication capabilities. However, as ma-
chine capabilities improve, machines will be able to play a larger and more 
complex role in IH-MC. For some observers, this could result not only in new 

roles for machines in human-machine collaboration, but also a shift in human-
machine team dynamics. Beyond humans 
leading teams of machines, Hoffman 
hypothesized that one day computational devices could serve as mentors or 

trainers for human (and/or human-robot) teams. If that were to happen, he asked, 
how might humans be trained to work with machine partners or even machine 
mentors? Understanding these questions, according to Liz Sonenberg, will bene-
fit from a better understanding of what 
makes a human a good member/leader of 
a human-machine or 
all-machine team. 
Jeff Bradshaw suggested that intelligent human-machine systems may 
also have a role in virtual and real-wor
ld training activities. For example, by 
designing experiments that require individuals to adapt in a changing environ-

ment, both on the field and in the laboratory, researchers could study individual 
and team dynamics. There was a debate
 over how closely human-machine train-
ing could replicate human team training (given the elaborate physical, cognitive, 

and communications skills that humans bring to bear). The efficiency of profi-
AIntelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  18 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
ciency scaling through these 
types of training was seen by some as likely to be 
domain dependent. 
During these discussions, participants highlighted several common re-
search areas necessary to advance IH-MC, such as communication, flexibility 

and resilience, human-machine models, user experience and system design, 
testbeds, and data overload. 
 Communication 
 For many participants, effective co
mmunication represents a significant 
barrier to advances in human-machine collaboration. According to Kruijff, it 
would be useful if robots could better explain to humans what they can or cannot 
do and what they actually do. An inability to effectively communicate this, he 

added, makes it difficult for humans and machines to gain common ground. In 
addition to verbal communication, Sidner noted the challenges posed by non-
verbal behaviorŠfor example, how might
 a robot ﬁnoticeﬂ what a human notic-
es? 
Other participants commented on the benefit of further research in how 
humans and machines communicate and understand intent. Bradshaw empha-

sized that by improving machine observability or ﬁapparency,ﬂ humans will be 
better able to understand a device™s intent. In contrast, Veloso observed that 
cases may exist in which a human does not necessarily need to monitor or un-

derstand what the robot is doing, as long as he or she trusts the robot to proac-
tively ask for help when necessary. Or
on-Gilad cautioned that effectively con-
veying intent between two human operators, let alone between humans and 

robots, is still a challenge. For example,
 if a software agent incorrectly ﬁguess-
esﬂ a human™s intent, it might unnecessarily automate a taskŠthus leading to 
dangerous and unintended consequences. 
Padgham proposed the development of a ﬁteaming compactﬂ whereby 
humans and machines mutually communicate their capabilities, goals, and inten-
tions. Perhaps what is required, she said, is one common and simple language 
that can be used by any system. Also
 necessary, Matthias Scheutz added, are 
feedback mechanisms and intelligent and tangible interfaces between humans 

and agents. Other participants commented that this feedback should be dynamic 
so that human-machine co
llaboration can change over
 timeŠfor example, as a 
result of training or changes in familiarity or trust. 
This prompted a discussion on whether new ways for robots to com-
municate with one another could reduce the number of humans in human-robot 
teams. In response, one participant sugges
ted that challenges of effective robot-
to-robot communication would be made simpler by removing the cultural bag-
gage of human communication. 
  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  19 
COMMON CHALLENGES AND BREAKTHROUGHS 
 Flexibility and Resilience 
 Some participants commented that
 improved human-machine collabo-
ration will require improved flexibility and resilience. For example, Hoffman 

observed that human-machine interfaces w
ould be improved by engineering for 
resilience, that is, designed for unanticipat
ed tasks. Such flexibility is particular-
ly important, Jean Scholtz added, as the tasks people do today will not be identi-

cal to those being done tomorrow or in five or ten years. Humans can rapidly 
adapt and apply their capabilities to new situations, so how can this flexibility 
and learning be applied to robots without significant programming? 
Frank Dignum suggested that lessons may be learned from human 
adaptabilityŠfor example, the adaptation of human language to widespread 

adoption of text messaging. Rather than wait for convergence in, for example, 
natural language between humans and robots, he proposed a deeper examination 
into situations in which humans but not robots are able to adapt. 
This resilience, Neerincx noted, w
ill require breakthroughs in context-
driven adaptive autonomy. Both Hoffman 
and Sidner commented that such high 
levels of complex autonomy would first depend on significant breakthroughs in 

commonsense knowledge and pr
actical manipulation tasks. 
 Modeling 
 Another common challenge discussed was the potential benefit of im-
proved human, machine, and shared hum
an-machine models. Goodrich spoke to 
the difficulties of developing such shared models by describing human and ma-

chine dynamic asymmetries in experience
, understanding, goals, and capabili-
ties. Although some participants emphasized 
the need to provide robots with 
better models of humans, Scheutz noted the challenges of building correct mod-
els of robots for humans. Human models of robots, he said, need to be compati-
ble with the ways humans will interact w
ith them. For example, if a robot does 
not have good natural language or good visual sensing capabilities, perhaps an-
thropomorphized robot mouths or eyes w
ill mislead humans to overestimate the 
robot™s capabilities. While highly realis
tic Geminoid robots exist, Holly Yanco 
added that the ﬁuncanny valleyﬂ factor should also be taken into consideration. 
According to Dignum, new social reality models may allow machines 
to do things ﬁwithﬂ humans, and not just ﬁforﬂ humans in a limited role. Many of 
the workshop participants remarked that it would help for humans to develop 
social understanding and acceptance of 
such sophisticated
 machine capabilities 
in order for this level of collaboration to occur. 
  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  20 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
Testbeds and Fielded Systems  Several participants suggested that more and improved large-scale dy-
namic testbeds (as well as their ongoing evaluation) would benefit many of the 
previously discussed research issues. Going beyond testbeds, Kruijff observed 

that some of the challenges the group discussed would best be studied using 
deployed or fielded systems. For example, some challenges, such as philosophi-
cal linguistics issues, are more likely to arise in the field as opposed to the labor-

atory. True collaboration under stressful circumstances, he noted, cannot be rep-
licated in the laboratory. 
   ﬁBig Dataﬂ  Challenges posed by ﬁdata overloadﬂ were also highlighted, in the con-
text of improving both human-machine interaction and teamwork, as well as the 
value of using ﬁbig dataﬂ to
 solve large-scale problems. 
Some suggested that new ways for teams to share concrete and dynam-
ic information about their environment could provide novel perspectives that 
lead to interesting and new solutions. For Satoshi Tadokoro, this is particularly 
relevant in the context of supporting teams composed of one human and multi-

ple robots. This type of coordination, he observed, requires significant amounts 
of and access to data. In the rescue domai
n, this means data about human-robot 
coordination and interaction, as well as the environment. 
Morison proposed that significant opportunities exist for breakthroughs 
in the ways that large-scal
e robot/sensor data are used to expand the ways hu-
mans perceive the world. Systems could be designed, he said, for effective ex-

ploration so that relevant information can be quickly extracted. 
    Shared Resources for Shared Problems 
 Using IH-MC to solve highly complex problems, Hoffman noted, re-
quires big research budgets, often in harsh economic climates. One path for-

ward, he proposed, might be to choose a single problem large enough to require 
international funding efforts. 
Padgham acknowledged that many fields associated with human-
machine collaboration have not been as 
successful as others in disciplining 
themselves to combine resources in pursuit of solving larger-scale challenges. In 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  21 
COMMON CHALLENGES AND BREAKTHROUGHS 
part, this is because long-term funding to support such initiatives has not been as 
available in this field as it has been in 
others. As an example of a successful ini-
tiative, Sidner posited that the success of the physics research communities in 
effectively combining resources has, to 
some degree, been a result of 400 years 
of maturation within a set of unified fields. Perhaps, Padgham suggested, IH-
MC efforts to manage a small disaster would be appropriate for international 
funding and combined large-
scale research efforts. 
 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 23 
 5   Global and Transnational Issues  
   
    here are significant real-world probl
ems, Bradshaw proposed, that by 
their very nature are international in scope and would benefit by partici-
pation from researchers from different countries and different disciplines.  
Sonenberg added that for many large-scale (and potentially international or 

global) problems, great opportunities exist for collaboration and coordination to 
meet shared goals. Today, researchers ar
e tapping into the potential to exploit 
the Web to collect, integrate, and share da
ta in useful ways to support the flow 
of data from information to knowledge. In addition, new technological capabili-
ties, such as large-scale and massively di
stributed sensor systems, are allowing 
researchers to explore new, and potentia
lly global, scales where the ﬁfieldﬂ has 
become the ﬁlaboratory.ﬂ 
She also referred to the scenario 
discussions on cross-cultural issues 
that addressed differing norms regard
ing ﬁpersonal space,ﬂ gender roles and 
preferences, safety and trust in automation, and communication. Addressing 
these cultural differences, she noted, would benefit from national and localŠas 
well as globalŒexpertise. 
From an international manufacturing and assembly collaboration per-
spective, Don Mottaz described the challenges of translating process information 
into other languages and cultures. While current efforts focus on teaching hu-
mans, he proposed that machines may one
 day be used to teach humans from a 
variety of different cultural backgrounds. 
Thus spoken, written, tactile, and other 
teaching strategies will help to incorp
orate cross-cultural human-machine inter-
action requirements. 
Lakmal Seneviratne discussed the increasing global use of automated 
tools in surgical environments, as well as long-distance teleoperated robotic sur-
geries. In addition to time zone differ
ences, technological challenges from com-
puter-robot delays (above 1/100 of a second), operating room team dynamics 

and hierarchies, and social acceptance of
 robot surgery tools across cultures by 
both medical practitioners and patients still present significant obstacles. 
In addition to robotic surgery applications, Wagner proposed that med-
ical doctors might beam into rural or underserved hospitals and clinics to con-
T Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  24 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
duct physical exams and deploy further specialization. He would like to see  
these tasks move beyond ﬁskype-on-wheel
s.ﬂ Oron-Gilad suggested that envi-
ronmental context is also an important f
actor in remote presence. For example, 
remote participants may not realize that 
they have beamed into a stressful, un-
predictable, or dangerous environment, such as a war zone, thus underappreciat-
ing or underutilizing the context in which the local staff is operating.  
Ramchurn identified energy management as a global issue in which 
agents and machines will play a role. As nations shift their focus to renewable 
energy sources, he suggested, intermittent sources and supply/demand con-
straints may require agents to have some control of devices (e.g., washing ma-

chines) to influence energy usage patte
rns. In these circumstances, humans 
would actually be adapting their behavior to agents. 
For search and rescue missions, Kr
uijff commented that cultural con-
siderations come into play when local, national, and regional agencies or organi-
zations need to deliver, share, and coordinate information. For this reason, 

Tadokoro emphasized multiculturally sensitive data-gathering and -sharing 
strategies. Lastly, Sonenberg commented that eff
ectively addressing the social and 
cultural implications of human-machine collaboration will call for social scien-
tists and anthropologists to work together with engineers. Further, many of these 
kinds of collaborations will be studied mo
re effectively in natural settings than 
in the lab. 
  
 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 25 
 6   Revisiting the Scenarios  
   
  n day three of the workshop, particip
ants were placed into small groups 
and given the opportunity to revisit previous scenarios for a second 
round of analysis. Loosely following the DARPA Grand Challenge 
competition, each group developed a 10-y
ear research proposal on a topic of 
their own choosing, using two of the earli
er scenario discussions as a starting 
point: Hospital Service Robotics and Preparing For and Managing a Major Dis-

aster. In addition to receiving an unlimit
ed research budget, each group was ob-
ligated to rely on the actual expertise of
 its members. For ex
ample, if a group 
did not possess a natural language expert, its delivered system could not employ 

sophisticated or innovative natural language. 
 Group 1: Disaster Management 
System for a Collapsed Urban 
Hotel 
Moderator: Alex Morison 
Group Members: Paul Maglio, Alex Morison, Don Mottaz, Gopal Ramchurn 
 The moderator, Alex Morison, spoke on behalf of the group. Based on 
the large-scale volcanic eruption scenario, he discussed the group™s development 
of a Disaster Management System for search and rescue efforts following the 
collapse of an urban hotel. As a result of the collapse, people are believed to be 
trapped in the rubble within contained cavities that are not navigable by humans 
or dogs. The group™s system would make effective use of robots to map cavities 

within the rubble (for size, location, in
terconnectedness) and coordinate the ex-
ploration. Key technological challenges include: mobility, structural stability, 
communications, environmental awareness, multi-robot coordination, and ﬁbig 

dataﬂ sense making. The system™s design considerations would very likely in-
clude both staged rescue scenarios and r
eal-world rescue efforts with actual res-
cue personnel. 
To provide the mobility 
necessary for such a system, the group pro-
posed the design of a crawling robot comp
osed of multiple modular sensor units. 
This ﬁslug-likeﬂ robot would consist of a series of sensor arrays; for example, 

one module might be an antenna system to improve communication capabilities. 
OIntelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  26 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
In addition to navigating confined an
d unstable spaces, mu
ltiple robotsŠeach 
with different perspectivesŠwould prov
ide improved spatial awareness; new 
reasoning functions could provide 3-D mapping capabilities. 
Morison noted that the system™s success will depend on how well mul-
tiple robots can work together as a team
. In fact, the group identified multi-robot 
teamwork as the group™s most significant challenge, citing the current lack of 
breakthroughs in communications protocols and multi-agent coordination. Ef-

fective multi-robot coordination becomes especially critical in post-disaster en-
vironments that are often resource limited and unpredictable. Under some cir-
cumstances, humans would assume a larger or primary role in coordination 

effortsŠfor example, under system failure or when human expertise is required. 
In cases where humans and robots sh
are responsibilities, automated reasoning 
would be combined with human reasoning. 
Lastly, the group observed that as robots develop increased autono-
mous capabilities, there may be a push for increased autonomous decision mak-

ing. The group questioned what if anything might limit such autonomy. For ex-
ample, what ethical considerations ex
ist for human robot rescue teams (with 
varying various levels of autonomous capabilities) that triage lost or injured in-

dividuals? 
 Group 2: Team Clean 
Moderator: Michael Beetz 
Group Member: Michael Beetz, Andr
eas Hofmann, Mark Neerincx, Liz 
Sonenberg 
 Michael Beetz, the moderator, provided a summary of the group™s dis-
cussions. Beetz indicated th
at the group focused its efforts on designing a home 
robotic cleaning team, ﬁTeam Clean,ﬂ composed of multiple machines (e.g., 

humanoid robot, vacuum cleaner, small UAV to ﬁmapﬂ the environment), and 
potentially a human director. The team would be capable of accomplishing a 
number of tasks with varying degrees of difficulty, from cleaning bathrooms to 
washing dishes, vacuuming, and doing the laundry. 
To do this, a number of research challenges would be addressed, in-
cluding: practical task manipulation (e.g., picking up fragile objects), smooth 
locomotion and navigation in a dynamic environment (e.g., going up stairs and 
opening doors), safety (e.g., not getting in the way of residents or pets), human-

robot communication, and social robotics. In addition, machines would have to 
be able to learn and recover from mist
akes and possess sufficient knowledge 
intensiveness (e.g., to go from an abst
ract task ﬁto clean upﬂ to understanding 
how clean is ﬁclean enoughﬂ). 
Some tasks, Beetz acknowledged, would require varying degrees of in-
teraction between machines and resident
s. In some cases, a robot may request 
feedback from the resident. For example, 
a robot might ask whether a dirty glass 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  27 
REVISITING THE SCENARIOS 
situated near the resident is currently being used or in need of washing. In other 
cases, the system should be adaptable if 
it is re-tasked by the resident. This 
could occur if the resident™s cleaning expectations differ from those of the robot. 
The robot may also need to resolve conflicting resident demandsŠfor example, 

balancing a parental request to ﬁpick thin
gs up off the floorﬂ
 and a teenager™s 
request to ﬁleave the bedroom as it is.ﬂ To deal with this situation, the group 
proposed a system with one ﬁchief,ﬂ as well as an organizational structure to 

deal with conflicting goals. 
Lastly, the group identified performance evaluation as a significant el-
ement of the system. For example, how many tasks were accomplished and in 

what time frame? How well did the team function? As the team evolved, the 
system would be scalable to accomplish a wider range of tasks. 
 Group 3: Biped Hospital Companion Robot Moderator: Candy Sidner 

Group Members: Robert Hoffman, Lakmal Seneviratne, Candy Sidner, Rong 

Xiong 
 The moderator, Candy Sidner, provided a description of the group™s 
proposal for creating a biped hospital companion robot (based on an earlier dis-
cussion of hospital service robotics). This robot would undertake personal care 
activities (e.g., dressing and bathing patients and picking up laundry) and pro-

vide mobility/balance support by pr
eventing mobility-related accidents and 
catching patients who are falling. In addition to physical manipulation require-
ments, some basis for human-robot communication is required and humans need 

to be comfortable receiving robotic assi
stance. For this r
eason, human-robot 
trust is an important systems requirement. 
To accomplish these tasks, the proposed biped robot would be designed 
with articulated, touch-sensitive hands and somewhat soft bodies with suitable, 
nonaversive ﬁskins.ﬂ In addition, visual recognition would be integrated with 
touch and task-manipulation capabilities. Communication between the robot and 
patient would be computer-controlled and employ simple dialogueŠfor exam-
ple, questions that can be answered with
 a ﬁyesﬂ or ﬁnoﬂ or with a very short 
statement. 
Sidner added that algorithms, such as
 those used to predict the move-
ments of rapidly traveling Ping-Pong balls, would be tuned and applied to pre-

dict when a human is falling and to re
spond appropriately. This would require 
the robot to distinguish not only between 
types of falling (e.g., falling while con-
scious or unconscious), but also between similar actions (e.g., falling versus 

bending over to pick something up). For some frail individuals, the group noted, 
the line between falling and bending over is thin. By merging robot companion 
and robot assistant technologies, the robot
 could also act as an instructor or 
coach for patients. For example, a robot 
that has learned to balance itself could 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  28 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
not only help feeble patients cross hospita
l floors but could also act as a physical 
therapy coach. 
As a part of its design, the group would also develop a number of 
testbeds to assess both communication an
d trust issues, as well as appropriate 
and safe interactions between robots 
and patients. Questions addressed would 
include: How does the nature of human-robot communication and interaction 
change when robots are working with patients who may be sick, feeble, or phys-

ically or cognitively impaired? How anthropomorphic should a robot companion 
be, and should it be more or less anthro
pomorphic if it is engaging in a conver-
sation or dressing/undressing a patient? How might robot companions work with 

other robot companions in this environment? 
 Group 4: The Robotic Patient Advocate Moderator: Michael Freed 
Group Members: Michael Fr
eed, Yukie Nagai, Jean Scholtz, Satoshi Tadokoro, 
Manuela Veloso 

 The moderator, Michael Freed, spoke on
 behalf of the group. Using the 
medical service robots as a starting point, Freed described the group™s proposal 

for creating a robotic patient advocate that 
would work either as an intermediary 
between the patient and hospital staff or 
directly with patients. The robotic pa-
tient advocate would keep nurses up-to-date (e.g.., monitor and report changes 

in patient physical or emotional states), provide continuity when nurses change 
shifts or when patients are assigned new doctors, and communicate with nurses 
when patients are asleep or unable to 
effectively communicate.
 In addition, the 
advocate would directly provide information to confused or forgetful patients 
(e.g., asking ﬁWhy am I being wheeled to Room 108?ﬂ or ﬁHave I taken my 
medication already?ﬂ). The advocate would also support medical staff when the 

patient required encouragement. Lastly
, the advocate would run interference 
with visitors and people who stay too long or get in the way of medical staff. 
As Freed explained, the advocate would leverage the group™s collective 
experience in autonomous systems, communications and dialogue, human emo-
tion, machine-human interaction, and perf
ormance evaluation of both robots and 
humans. Although some of these capabilities were possible using conventional 
technologies, six key breakthroughs would be required. (1) 
Dialog
: The advo-
cate should be capable of high-level discussions with people possessing different 

knowledge, motives, and cultures. (2) 
Multimodal Sensing
: The advocate should 
be able to tap intoŠvia many and complex sensorsŠa hospital™s data-rich envi-
ronments to access a patient™s medical 
records, real-time 
physiological condi-
tions, test results, and schedules. (3) 
Strategic Planning
: The advocate should 
take action by balancing a patient™s immediate goals and requests with long-
term patient support that consid
ers legal and safety issues. (4) 
Safe Navigation
: The advocate should navigate a complex environment of constantly changing 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  29 
REVISITING THE SCENARIOS 
people, carts, beds, and equipment. (5) 
Social Understanding
: This might re-
quire the advocate to know when and how to ﬁshooﬂ away visitors who are un-
wanted or have stayed too long. (6) 
Multi-Persona Negotiation
: The advocate 
should be a middleman or ﬁmiddlerobotﬂ among a floating team consisting of 
patients, family members, doctors, nurses, and others. 
The group acknowledged 
that evaluation of the system was critical; 
thus, the advocate would be developed first with limited capabilities that would 

be expanded on the basis of experience and learning. 
 Group 5: Providing Post-Disaster Basic Services 
Moderator: Lin Padgham 

Group Members: Tal Oron-Gilad, Lin Padgham, Dirk Schulz, Holly Yanco
  Lin Padgham, the moderator, provided the description of the group™s 
proposal. As one component of the volcanic eruption disaster-management sce-
nario, Padgham described the group™s design of an information management 

system to provide basic services, such
 as communications, food, power, and 
water, in the first week following a major disaster. The system would not pro-

vide total coordination across the entire disaster management value chain, but 

rather would provide on-the-ground individuals with decision support. 
Such a decision-support system would require data inputs from numer-
ous sources, including cell phones, sensors, weather reports, and UAVs. The 

system would take in data in a variety of formats and then organize and share 
those data with a range of specialized users. For example, data inputs from 
UAVs that show downed power lines could be used to coordinate prompt robot 

deliveries of electrical and other power sources to neighborhoods lacking elec-
tricity. Effectively distributing and acting 
on this information will require simple 
yet specialized huma
n-machine interfaces. 
Ongoing access to massive amounts of parallel data would allow man-
agement officials to better prioritize th
eir attention and effortsŠfor example, 
whether to immediately evacuate a neighborhood or to first restore basic infra-

structure. Padgham added that the system could be used as a simulation tool in 
advance of a disaster to improve emergency management response. By assessing 

the efficacy of different 
communications protocols a
nd of evacuation routes un-
der different environmental and social circumstances, authorities can identify 

where critical post-disaster respon
se failures are likely to occur. 
The system would also make ﬁindiv
idualizedﬂ information available to 
both specialized users (e.g., UAV operator
s with specific data needs to survey 
for downed power lines) and to untrained users who are stranded in their homes 

with limited food and water. Although acknowledging that such a system would 
provide complex decision support, the group noted that human judgment will 
always remain key. 

 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 31 
 A   Workshop Participants 
 
   
    MICHAEL BEETZ, Technische Universitat Muenchen 
JEFFREY M. BRADSHAW, Florida Institute for Human and Machine        
Cognition 
FRANK DIGNUM, Utrecht University 

TERRY FONG, NASA Ames 
MICHAEL FREED, SRI International 
TAL ORON-GILAD, Ben-Gurion University 

MICHAEL GOODRICH, Brigham Young University 
ROBERT HOFFMAN, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition 
ANDREAS HOFMANN, Vecna Technologies 

GEERT-JAN (GJ) KRUIJFF,
 Deutsches Forschungszentrum für Künstliche 
Intelligenz  
PAUL MAGLIO, IBM Research and Un
iversity of California, Merced 
ALEXANDER MORISON, The Ohio State University 
DON MOTTAZ, The Boeing Company 
YUKIE NAGAI, Osaka University 

DANIELE NARDI, University of Rome 
MARK NEERINCX, Delft Univ
ersity of Technology 
LIN PADGHAM, Royal Melbourne 
Institute of Technology 
SARVAPALI (GOPAL) RAMCHURN, Southampton University 
MATTHIAS SCHEUTZ, Tufts University 

JEAN SCHOLTZ, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory 
DIRK SHULZ, Fraunhofer Institute for Communications, Information          
Processing and Ergonomics 
LAKMAL SENEVIRATNE, Khalifa University and King™s College London 

CANDY SIDNER, Worcester 
Polytechnic University 
LIZ SONENBERG, University of Melbourne 
SATOSHI TADOKORO, Tohoku University 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  32 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
 MANUELA VELOSO, Carneg
ie Mellon University 
RONG XIONG, Zhejiang University 

TOM WAGNER, iRobot 

BRIAN WILLIAMS, Massachusetts
 Institute of Technology 
HOLLY YANCO, University of Massachusetts, Lowell 

 
  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 33 
 B  Workshop Agenda 
  
   
   Monday, June 11th 
 6:00 Œ 7:30 PM Welcome receptio
n (State Plaza Hotel, Ambassador 
Room) 
 Tuesday, June 12th 
 8:00 Œ 8:30 AM  Breakfast (Room 120) 

 8:30 Œ 8:45 AM  Welcome and setting the stage 
 
8:45 Œ 9:45 AM  Participant introductions 
 9:45 Œ 10:00 AM  Introduction to scenario exercise 
Moderator: Brian Williams 
 10:00 Œ 12:30 PM Breakout Groups: Real-World Applications of Intel-
ligent Human-Machine Collaboration (IH-MC) 
 Scenario A: Disaster Management 
Moderator: Mich
ael Goodrich Scenario B: Small-Lo
t Agile Manufacturing 
Moderator: Matthias Scheutz 
Scenario C: Hospital Service Robotics 
Moderator: Candy Sidner 

Scenario D: Virtual Team Training 
Moderator: Mark Neerincx 
Scenario E: Personal Satellite Assistants 

Moderator: Terry Fong 
 12:30 Œ 1:30 PM  Lunch 

 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  34 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
1:30 Œ 3:00 PM  Group discussion (Moderator: Jean Scholtz) 
 Breakout groups A, B, and C report back on findings 
from earlier scenario exercise (30 minutes each) 
 3:00 Œ 3:15 PM Break (refreshments available) 
 
3:15 Œ 4:15 PM Group discussion (Moderator: Tal Oron-Gilad) 
 Breakout groups D and E report back on findings 

from earlier scenario exercise (30 minutes each) 
 4:15 Œ 4:30 PM Break 
 4:30 Œ 5:30 PM Group discussion (Moderator: Lin Padgham) 
Ł What international, global, or cross-cultural con-
siderations were raised during your scenario dis-
cussions? 
Ł What are the benefits of intelligent human-
machine collaboration vs. traditional autonomy? 
Ł What are some of the commonalities in human-
machine issues that were raised across the sce-

narios? 
Ł What are the issues that were not raised? 
Ł What are the biggest overall research challenges? 
Which of these challenges would require signifi-
cant breakthroughs? Which of these break-
throughs are unlikely to occur in the next ten 

years? In twenty years? 
 Based on this discussion, 
workshop participants will 
select and self-organize in
to 5 topics for the next 
day™s Collaboration Panels. 
 
5:30 PM End of day one. 
 Wednesday, June 13th
  8:00 Œ 8:30 AM  Breakfast 
 8:30 Œ 10:400 AM Reflections from day one 
 
8:45 Œ 9:45 AM  Panel Breakout Groups 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  35 
APPENDIX B 
Participants will meet with their respective panels 
(organized the previous afternoon) to organize a 30-
minute discussion. Each panel should create a Pow-
erPoint presentation for the discussion. 
 10:00 Œ 10:30 AM Panel I: (30 minutes) 
 
10:30 Œ 10:45 AM Break (refreshments available) 
 10:45 Œ 11:15 AM Panel II: (30 minutes) 

 11:15 Œ 11:45 AM Panel III: (30 minutes) 
 11:45 Œ 12:15 PM Panel IV: (30 minutes) 
 
12:15 Œ 1:30 PM Lunch (Group picture at Albert Einstein statue) 
 1:30 Œ 2:30 PM Group discussion (Moderator: Manuela Veloso) 
 What kinds of breakthroughs would be game chang-
ers for significantly improved intelligent human-

machine collaboration? What are the implications of 
these breakthroughs for national and global security, 
competitiveness, and human well-being? 
 2:30 Œ 3:00 PM  Break (refreshments available) 
 
3:00 Œ 4:00 PM Group discussion (Moderator: Liz Sonenberg) 
 What are the global (or transnational) challenges that 

intelligent human-machine collaboration can help to 
solve? 
 4:00 Œ 5:00 PM Group discussion (Moderator: GJ Kruijff) 
 
Summary of challenges and solutions discussed 
throughout workshop 
 
5:00 PM End of day two. 
 Thursday, June 14th
  8:00 Œ 8:30 AM  Breakfast 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  36 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
 8:30 Œ 10:30 AM Research Topics in Intelligent Human-Machine Col-
laboration (IH-MC) 
 Session 1: Sociocognitive Issues 
Moderator: Jeff Bradshaw 
 
Yukie Nagai, Osaka University 
Robots That Learn to Communicate with Humans 
 
Alex Morison, Ohio State University
 Expanding Human Perception and Attention to New 
Spatial-Temporal Scale through Networks of Sensor 
Systems 
 
Candy Sidner, Worcester Polytechnic University 
Agents for Long-Term Relationships with Isolated 
Older Adults 

 Frank Dignum, Utrecht University 
Interaction in Context 
 10:30 Œ 10:45 AM Break (refreshments available) 
 
10:45 Œ 11:45 PM Research Topics in IH-MC (continued)  
 Session 2: Challenging Applications 

Moderator: GJ Kruijff 
 Lakmal Seneviratne, Khalifa University & King™s 

College London 
Force Feedback and Haptic Interfaces during Robot-
Assisted Surgical Interventions 
 Rong Xiong, Zhejiang University 

A Study on Humanoid Robots Playing Table Tennis 
 11:45 Œ 1:30 PM  Working Lunch (meal tickets at cafeteria) 
 Breakouts: Grand Challeng
es/Scenario Revisits 
 Describe your scenario and the aspect(s) you 
will address. 
 What is your conceptual architecture? 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  37 
APPENDIX B 
 What are your innovative claims? 
 1:30 -2:45 PM  Report Back 
 
2:45 Œ 3:00 PM  Break (refreshments available) 
 3:00 Œ 4:30 PM Research Topics in IH-MC (continued) 
 Session 3: Learning and Adaptation in Dynamic Set-
tings 
Moderator: Jeff Bradshaw 
 
Michael Freed, SRI International 
A Virtual Assistant for E-mail Overload 
 
Satoshi Tadokoro, Tohoku University 
The Disaster Response Robot Named ﬁQuinceﬂ and 
Lessons at the Fukushima-Daiichi Nuclear Power 

Plant Accident 
 Michael Goodrich, Bri
gham Young University 
Autonomy, Interaction, and Collaboration: A WiSAR 
Perspective  4:30 Œ 5:00 PM Research Topics in IH-MC (continued) 
 Session 4: Human-Machine Interaction and Teaming 

Moderator: Brian Williams 
 Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell 
Human-in-the-Loop Control of Robot Systems 
 
5:00 Œ 5:15 PM  Final discussion 
 5:15 PM   Meeting adjourned 

 Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 39 
C   Presentation Abstracts  
   
    Session 1: Sociocognitive Issues 
 Yukie Nagai, Osaka University 
Title: Robots that learn to communicate with humans 
 Abstract: How can robots learn to co
mmunicate with humans? How can they 
acquire the ability to read the intentions of humans? In order to collaborate with 

human partners, robots need to understand what the goal of the partner™s action 
is. Inspired by studies of developmental psychology and neuroscience, our lab 
has been developing robots that learn to communicate with others based on the 

mirror neuron system (MNS). The MNS plays a central role in understanding 
the goal of the other™s actions and imitating them. We have hypothesized that 
the MNS emerges through sensorimotor 
learning accompanied by perceptual 
development; immature perception in the early stages of development enables 
robots as well as infants to find the correspondence between the self and other 
(an important property of the MNS). My 
talk will present the results of the ro-
botics experiment to verify this hypothesis and also the results of an additional 
experiment, which analyzes the microsco
pic structure of caregiver-infant inter-
action in order to better understand the developmental mechanism of infants. In 
this paper, I emphasize the importance of perceptual and motor immaturity in 
leading to further- and better-organized cognitive development. 

 Alex Morison, Ohio
 State University 
Title: Expanding human perception and attention to new spatial-temporal scales 
through networks of sensor systems 
 Abstract: Ubiquitous sensing capabilities create the potential to expand human 

reach to new spatial-temporal scales, bu
t to date the potential is unrealized. 
Models of how human perceptual system
s function successfully to manage mul-
tiple data streams and directly apprehend the world have inspired new technolo-
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  40 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
gies and visualizations to overcome data overload and release the power of new 
human-sensor systems. 
 Candy Sidner, Worcester Polytechnic University 
Title: Agents for long-term relations
hips with isolated older adults 
 Abstract: We are exploring the development of virtual agents who "live" in the 

homes of socially isolated older adults 
for extended periods of time. Our agent 
reasons about activities that 
are appropriate to undertak
e with the adult as its 
relationship changes, from stranger to something one might call "companion" in 

the course of daily interactions. In this
 talk, I will discuss the relationship man-
ager that reasons about the relationship and plans activities, and the real-time 
collaboration manager, which puts those plans into effect while also reasoning 
about time and the time available to complete those plans. I will also discuss 
experiments with older adults in their homes, who use prototype agents to help 

us discover what the agent can best be doing with adults. 
 Frank Dignum, Utrecht University 
Title: Interaction in context 
 Abstract: When people interact they use context to both express and interpret the 

meaning of the information they want 
to exchange. Unfortunately, there are 
many overlapping contexts that might be active at the same time. Thus, choosing 
the right context to generate or interpret a message is a complex but very im-

portant issue for human-machine collaboration, especially for human, agent, and 
robot teams. 
 Session 2: Challenging Applications 
 Lakmal Seneviratne, 
Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, UAE, and King™s Col-
lege London, UK  
Title: Force feedback and haptic interfaces
 during robot-assisted surgical inter-
ventions 
 Abstract: In recent years there have been 
significant advances in robot-assisted 
minimally invasive surgical (MIS) procedures. However, although robot-
assisted MIS represents significant improvements over traditional MIS, it does 
not provide the surgeon with a sense of touch from the operating interface. 

Many robotic surgical applications requ
ire active interactions with complex dy-
namic environments such as soft tissu
e. A fundamental understanding of the 
interaction dynamics between the surgi
cal system and the environment is an 
essential element in intelligent surgeon-robot collaboration. The sensing of 
forces at the robot-tissue interface is a very
 challenging research problem. In this 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  41 
APPENDIX C  
presentation we survey a number of force and stiffness sensors developed for 
surgical robotic systems. These include 
force and stiffness sensors based on fi-
ber-optic and pneumatic technologies. We
 explore finite element (FE) modeling 
of the robot-tissue interface, including in
verse FE models for identifying tissue 
properties for diagnosis. The 
use of haptic interfaces at the surgeon-master inter-
face is also investigated. 
 Rong Xiong, Zhejiang University, China 
Title: A study on humanoid robots playing table tennis 
 
Abstract: Over the past twenty years, 
the research on humanoid robots has rapid-
ly advanced, and various humanoid robots have been developed. They can walk, 
run, dance, play Taiji, et
c. The ongoing research on humanoids is moving to-
ward complex task performing in different environments, such as providing do-
mestic service in a home environment or collaborating with human beings to 

move heavy objects. We take table tennis playing as an entry point to explore 
related technologies, because both intelligent interaction and dynamic response, 
which are fundamental factor
s for future service robots
, are required but chal-
lenging issues in such a task. We have proposed algorithms for fast visual 
recognition and accurate trajectory prediction of a Ping-Pong ball and coordina-
tive motion planning and balance maintenance of the humanoid robot, and we 

have developed a real-time field bus to
 meet the requirements for quick re-
sponse. Now the two 165 cm-tall humanoid robots we developed, ﬁWuﬂ and 
ﬁKong,ﬂ can play table tennis continuous
ly with each other and with amateur 
human players. This research topic also provides an interesting point of view for 
studies on autonomous cooperative or co
mpetitive interaction between robots or 
between a human and a robot. For example, how should the robot learn play 

motions and play strategies from human players? How should the robot vary its 
play motion and strategies depending on its real-time perception? 
 Session 3: Learning and Adaptation in Dynamic Settings 
 Michael Freed, SRI International 
Title: A virtual assistant for e-mail overload 
 
Abstract: E-mail client software is widely used for personal task management, a 
purpose for which it was not designed and is poorly suited. Past attempts to 
remedy the problem have focused on adding task management features to the 

client user interaction. RADAR uses an
 alternative approach modeled on a trust-
ed human assistant who read
s mail, identifies task-relev
ant message content, and 
helps manage and execute tasks. This talk describes the integration of diverse AI 

technologies and presents results from human evaluation studies comparing 
RADAR user performance to unaided commercial-off-the-shelf tool users and 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  42 
INTELLIGENT HUMAN-MACHINE COLLABORATION 
users partnered with a human assistant. As
 machine learning plays a central role 
in many system components, we also compare versions of RADAR with and 
without learning. Our tests show a clear
 advantage for learning-enabled RADAR 
over all other test conditions. 

 Satoshi Tadokoro, Tohoku University 
Title: The disaster response robot name
d ﬁQuinceﬂ and lessons at the Fukushi-
ma-Daiichi nuclear power plant accident 
 Abstract: The accident at the Fukushima-
Daiichi power plant, caused by the 
tsunami on March 11, 2011, resulted in a meltdown of nuclear fuel and in the 
hydrogen explosion of nuclear reactor 
buildings. Several robotic systems were 
applied to stabilize the situation there. A 
disaster response robot, Quince, which 
was developed by the presenter's group, was utilized for surveillance of the 2nd 
through 5th floors of the nuclear reactor 
buildings and achieved a certain contri-
bution to their cool shutdown. It was a typical human-machine collaboration 
task. Both the researcher and engineer side and the user side learned many 
things in order to apply the robotic system to the unknown environment. This 

talk introduces an overview of this mission and lessons learned. 
 Michael Goodrich, Brigham Young University 
Title: Autonomy, interaction, and collaboration: A WiSAR perspective 
 Abstract: Based on discussions at the workshop, an operational definition of 

"collaboration" was created. Collaboration is a multi-agent problem that emerg-
es when agents have asymmetric inform
ation, asymmetric goals, and asymmet-
ric capabilities. These asymmetries enable 
agents to share resources to solve a 
problem that the agents couldn't solve independently, but these asymmetries also 
lead to potential conflicts of interest or points of confusion. This definition of 
collaboration sheds light on how a techni
cal search team can use an unmanned 
aerial vehicle to support wilderness search and rescue. Technologies developed 
to support wilderness search and rescue
 teams can benefit by supporting the 
collaborative nature of the team. Importantly, collaboration can be seen as the 
(re)unification of two threads of research 
that were both present in Sheridan and 
Verplank's classic report, which is known for defining levels of autonomy but 

split the discussion into research on these levels and research on interaction de-
sign.  
   
  Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  43 
APPENDIX C  
Session 4: Human-Machine Interaction and Teaming 
 Holly Yanco, University of Massachusetts Lowell 
Title: Human-in-the-loop control of robot systems 
 Abstract: Robots navigating in difficult and dynamic environments often need 
assistance from human operators or su
pervisors, either in the form of 
teleoperation or occasional interventions 
when the robot cannot handle the cur-
rent situation autonomously. Even in office environments, robots may need to 
ask for directions in unknown buildings. 
In this presentation, I will discuss my 
lab's research on the best practices for controlling both individual robots and 
groups of robots, in applications ranging from assistive technology to 
telepresence to search and rescue. A number of methods for this type of human-
robot interaction (HRI), including larg
e and small multi-touch devices, software-
based operator control units (softOCUs), 
haptics, and natural language, will be 
presented. I will also discuss how we can improve HRI by modeling a user's 
current level of trust in a robot system. 
Intelligent Human-Machine Collaboration: Summary of a WorkshopCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.