DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13472The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implicationsfor U.S. Competitiveness and National Security116 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-26235-4 | DOI 10.17226/13472Committee on Global Approaches to Advanced Computing; Board on Global Scienceand Technology; Policy and Global Affairs; National Research CouncilThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 
 
 Committee on Global Approaches
 to Advanced Computing 
Board on Global Science and Technology Policy and Global Affairs Division      
   
 
   
 
 THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
Washington, D.C. www.nap.edu  
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 Fift
h Street, NW      Washington, DC 20001 
  NOTICE: The project that is the subject of
 this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, w
hose members are drawn from the councils of 
the National Academy of Sciences, the Na
tional Academy of Engineering, and the 
Institute of Medicine.  The members of th
e committee responsible for the report were 
chosen for their special competences and 
with regard for appropriate balance. 
 This study was supported by Contract No. HHM402-10-D-0036 between the National 

Academy of Sciences and the Department
 of Defense.  Any opinions, findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors 

and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided 
support for the project. 
 
 
International Standard Book Number-13:   978-0-309-26235-4 

International Standard Book Number-10:   0-309-26235-6 

  Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 500 

Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; 

http://www.nap.edu. 
 Copyright 2012 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America 

 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ThscteCanThofththmenThseheitsisMThthadAanscInof  he National A
cholars engage
dchnology and t
oongress in 1863
nd technical mathe National Ac
af Sciences, as a 
phe selection of i
the federal gover
nmeeting national ngineers.  Dr. C
hhe Institute of 
ervices of emine
nealth of the publs congressional 
sues of medica
lMedicine. 
he National Re
he broad commudvising the fed
eAcademy, the Co
und the National 
cientific and en
gnstitute of Medi
cf the National R
ecademy of Sc
id in scientific 
o their use for 
t, the Academy 
hters.  Dr. Ralph ademy of Engi
nparallel organiz
ats members, sha
rnment.  The Nat
ineeds, encour
aharles M. Vest isMedicine
 was 
nt members of 
aic.  The Institut
echarter to be a
nl care, research
,search Counci
lunity of science 
eral governme
nuncil has beco
mAcademy of 
Egineering com
mcine.  Dr. Ralph 
esearch Council
.iences
 is a pri
vand engineerin
gthe general wel
fhas a mandate t
hJ. Cicerone is prneering
 was est
aation of outstandring with the N
aional Academy 
oages education as president of th
eestablished in 
appropriate profee acts under the 
rn adviser to the 
, and educatio
nl was organized 
and technology 
nt.  Functionin
gme the principal 
oEngineering in pmunities.  The 
CJ. Cicerone an
d.   vate, nonprofit, 
g research, de
dfare.  Upon the 
hat requires it t
oresident of the 
Nablished in 196
4ding engineers.  
ational Academ
yof Engineering aand research, a
ne National Acad
1970 by the N
aessions in the ex
responsibility g
ifederal govern
mn.  Dr. Harvey 
Vby the Nationa
lwith the Acad
eg in accordanc
eoperating agenc
yproviding servi
cCouncil is admi
nd Dr. Charles M
self-
perpetuati
ndicated to the 
authority of th
eo advise the fed
eNational Acade
m4, under the cha
rIt is autonomo
uy of Sciences t
halso sponsors e
nnd recognizes t
hemy of Enginee
rational Academ
yamination of po
iven to the Natioment and, upon 
iV. Fineberg is 
pl Academy of 
Semy™s purposes 
oe with general 
y of both the N
aces to the gove
nistered jointly 
. Vest are chair 
www.na
tng society of 
dfurtherance of 
e charter grante
deral government 
my of Sciences. 
rter of the Natio
nus in its adminis
the responsibility 
ngineering prograhe superior ach
iring. y of Sciences 
tlicy matters per
tonal Academy o
fits own initiativ
epresident of th
eSciences in 191
6of furthering k
npolicies determational Academ
yrnment, the pu
bby both Acade
mand vice chair, 
tional-acadedistinguished 
science and 
d to it by the 
on scientific 
nal Academy 
tration and in 
for advising ams aimed at 
ievements of 
to secure the 
taining to the 
f Sciences by 
e, to identify 
e Institute of 
6 to associate 
nowledge and 
mined by the 
y of Sciences 
blic, and the 
mies and the 
respectively, 
emies.org The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.v COMMITTEE ON GLOBAL 
APPROACHES TO 
ADVANCED 
COMPUTING
   
DANIEL A. REED, Chair, University of Iowa 
CONG CAO, University of Nottingham 
TAI MING CHEUNG, University of California, San Diego 

JOHN CRAWFORD, Intel Corporation 

DIETER ERNST, East-West Center 
MARK D. HILL, University of WisconsinŒMadison 
STEPHEN W. KECKLER, NVIDIA (on sabbatical from the University of Texas at Austin) 

DAVID LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners 

KATHRYN S. MCKINLEY, Microsoft Corporation (on sabbatical from the University of Texas at Austin) 
  
 PRINCIPAL 
PROJECT STAFF  
 WILLIAM O. BERRY, Study Director, Board on Global Science and Technology 
ETHAN N. CHIANG, Program Officer, Board on Global Science and Technology 

LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director, Comput
er Science and Tele
communications Board 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi 
BOARD ON 
GLOBAL 
SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY
   RUTH DAVID, Chair, Anal
ytic Services, Inc. 
HAMIDEH AFSARMANESH, University of Amsterdam 

KATY BÖRNER, Indiana University Bloomington 

JEFFREY BRADSHAW, Florida Institute for Human and Machine Cognition 

DIANNE CHONG, The Boeing Company 

JARED COHON, Carnegie Mellon University 

ERIC HASELTINE, Haseltine Partners, LLC 
JOHN HENNESSY, Stanford University 
NAN JOKERST, Duke University 

PETER KOLCHINSKY, RA Capital Management, LLC 

CHEN-CHING LIU, Washington State University 
KIN MUN LYE, Singapore™s Agency for 
Science, Technology and Research 
BERNARD MEYERSON, IBM Corporation 

KENNETH OYE, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
NEELA PATEL, Abbott Laboratories 
DANIEL REED, University of Iowa 

DAVID REJESKI, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars 
  
 STAFF
  
 WILLIAM O. BERRY, Director 
PATRICIA WRIGHTSON, Associate Director 

ETHAN N. CHIANG, Program Officer 

NEERAJ GORKHALY, Research Associate 
PETER HUNSBERGER, Financial Officer    The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii    Preface    
 
 he information revolution of the last half-century has been driven by dramatic 
improvements in computing technologyŠin particular by year-over-year exponential 

growth in single-processor computing perfo
rmance that translated into phenomenal 
new technologies and indeed served as the foundation for entire new industries. 
Improvements in hardware and associated software advances sustained this growth for 
decades. In the last few years, those si
ngle-processor performan
ce gains have slowed 
dramatically due to fundamental physical and technical constraints related to power 

dissipation.
1 Moreover, there is substantial uncertainty as to which technological 
breakthroughs, if any, may make it possible to continue this approach. This technology 
disruption has implications not just for the information technology (IT) industry and sectors 

that depend on it, but for U.S. competitiveness and national security. 
The United States has traditionally been on the leading edge of research related to 
general-purpose computing performance, demonstrated in part by its dominant position in 
commodity microprocessors for personal computer
s and servers. The United States has also 
long been the leader in high-performance computing (HPC) systems, both in research and in 

deployment. Finally, the United States has also be
en a leader in the development of graphics 
processing units (GPUs) and 
other specialized processors.
2 However, the shift to mobile-
based devices and the globalization of the international economy, of communications, and of 
science and technolo
gy (S&T) threatens to erode U.S. 
technological leadership in these 
critical areas. 
The emergence of global competitors to th
e United States in advanced computing 
underscores the need for U.S. policymakers to both understand the advancement of global 
S&T related to advanced computing and to integrate this understanding with programmatic 

S&T decision making. To understand these issues more fully, the Office of the Assistant 
                                                 1National Research Council, 2011, 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next Level?
, Washington, D.C.: The National Acad
emies Press (available online at www.na
p.edu/catalog.php?record_id 
=12980). ﬁBefore 2004, processor performance was growing 
by a factor of about 100 per decade; since 2004, 
processor performance has been growing and is forecasted to grow by a factor of only about 2 per decade. An 
expectation gap is apparent.ﬂ
 2Although both HPC systems and specialized processors 
are key elements of U.S. competitiveness and na-
tional security, the committee™s guidance from the spons
or was to focus on the broader computing environ-
ment, not on high-end computing. The enabling technol
ogies for these HPC systems are based on the same 
single-processor, multicore and GPU 
technologies that are the basis for consumer commodity computing. 
TThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii 
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineer
ing at the Department of Defense asked the 
National Research Council (NRC
) to assess the global S&T landscape for responding to the 
challenge of improving computing performance in 
an era where parallel rather than sequential 
computing is at the forefront. 
The Committee on Global Approaches to Adva
nced Computing was appointed under the 
auspices of the NRC™s Board on Global Science and 
Technology to conduct this exploration. The 
nine members of the study committee represent academia and private industry and have expertise 
in computer science, international S&T, technology assessment, and global innovation. 
Biographical information for members of the comm
ittee is presented in Appendix A. Box P-1 
contains committee™s statement of task. The comm
ittee held three meetings during the course of 
its work (August, Sept
ember, and October 2011). 
To meet its charge, the committee took a two-pa
rt approach. First, it investigated worldwide 
global research capabilities and commercial competitiveness related to advanced computing,
3 beginning with technology context setting and definitions. As an additional data-gathering 

experiment, the committee solicited insights from approximately one dozen leading computer 

scientists and engineers to help identify potential ﬁhubsﬂ of science and technology, relevant to 
the computing performance challenge (see Appendi
x B). The committee then examined different 
innovation strategies, policy tools, and institutional arrangements in a variety of countries that 

are potentially important players in the development of computing devices technologies and 

products. Finally, the committee explored the implications of changes in the global advanced 
computing landscape for U.S. national security. 
The data analyses presented in this report are intended to be a starting point for further 
exploration. The committee™s observations highli
ght important global trends with regard to 
computing and potential implications for U.S. 
leadership and for U.S. defense and national 
security. Rather than providing formal recommenda
tions, this report offers an assessment of the 
landscape based on the observations and insights of the study committee. 
I would like to thank the members of the study 
committee for their efforts and contributions 
in developing this report. I also thank the br
iefers who came and spoke to the committee and 
provided crucial input and insights that helped to
 guide our thinking. (Briefers to the committee 
are listed in Appendix C.) I also thank the reviewers (see Acknowledgment of Reviewers on page 

xi). Lastly, the support of the NRC staff was indispensible to accomplishing this study. Special 
thanks go to Ethan Chiang, who worked closel
y with the committee throughout the study and 
played a major role in the preparation of this report. Thanks also go to Lynette Millett for her 
many valuable insights and contributions. 

 Daniel Reed, 
Chair, Committee on Global Approaches to Advanced Computing 
  
 
 
 
 
                                                  3By ﬁadvanced computingﬂ the committee means any i
nnovations in semiconduct
or technologies (includ-
ing fabrication, processing and manuf
acturing); computer architectures, computing hardware, algorithms and 
programming approaches; and software developments 
that improve computing performance or provide new 
or improved functionality. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix  BOX P-1 
Statement of Task 
An ad hoc committee of the Board on Gl
obal Science and Tech
nology (BGST) will 
describe and assess the global S&T landscape for responding to the challenges of 

sustaining historical trends in computing performance improvement in general and to 

the challenge presented by the shift to 
multicore processors in particular. The 
committee will identify cutting-
edge approaches in computer hardware (e.g., multicore 
architectures) and soft
ware (e.g., emerging parallel prog
ramming models) technologies to 
meet this challenge. The committee will also identify hot spots of innovation around the 

world and project areas of technological leader
ship in the United St
ates and elsewhere. 
Lastly, the committee will consider the implications of these global advances for the U.S. 
S&T enterprise and for U.S. 
national security. Based on their work, the committee may 
suggest criteria or methodologies to more eff
ectively assess the global state of play in a 
variety of emergent areas of S&T. 

 To accomplish this task, the committee should consider, but is not limited to, the 
following questions: 
1. What is the cutting edge of approaches for responding to the computing 
performance challenge? 
2. How do other nations and institutions view the computing performance 
challenge, and what strategies do they have for responding to it? 
3. Where are the innovation hot spots in efforts to advance computing performance 
in the United States and overseas? 
4. How are efforts to improve computing performance likely to advance (or stall) 
over time? Can such efforts be regionally identified? If so, what are they? 
5. What are U.S. strengths relative to other international technology leaders in 
advanced computing performance currently and how might those strengths be 
expected to change over time? 
6. What are the implications of these global advances for U.S. national security in 
the near and far terms? What are potential resulting IT capabilities and what 
implications do these have for U.S. nati
onal security in the near and far terms?
   The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     
   
 
   
   
   
 
   
   
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi Acknowledgment of Reviewers    
  his report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in ac
cordance with procedures approved by the 
National Research Council™s Report Revi
ew Committee. The purpose of this 
independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, eviden
ce, and responsiveness to the study charge. The 
review comments and draft manus
cript remain confidential to protect the integrity of the 
deliberative process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this 
report: 
 Eric Archambault, Science-Metrix Inc.; 

Mark Bohr, Intel Corporation; 
Katy Börner, Indiana University; 
Keith Cooper, Rice University; 

Peter Cowhey, University of California, San Diego; 

Robert Doering, Texas Instruments Incorporated; 
Daniel Edelstein, IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center; 
David Kirk, NVIDIA Corporation; 

James Larus, Microsoft Research; 

David Messerschmitt, University of California, Berkeley; 

Henk Moed, Elsevier; and 
James Valdes, United States Department of the Army. 
 
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or recommendations, nor did 
they see the final draft of the report before its 
release. The review of this report was overseen 
by Anita Jones, University of Virginia and Samuel Fuller,
 Analog Devices, Inc. 
 Appointed 
by the National Research Council, they were responsible for making certain that an 

independent examination of this report was 
carried out in accordance with institutional 
procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the 
final content of this report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution. 
  
 
 
 
 
 TThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
    Contents    
 
 SUMMARY           1 
 
1 COMPUTER AND SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNOLO
GY TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS 5 
1.1 Interrelated Challenges to Continued Performance Scaling , 5 
1.2 Future Directions for Hardware
 and Software Innovation, 11 
1.3 The Rise of Mobile Computing, Services, and Software, 13 
1.4 Summary and Implications, 14 
 2 THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE       17 
2.1 Preliminary Observations from Pilot Study 
of Papers at Top Technical Conferences, 17 
2.2 Increased International Collaboration, 19 

2.3 Commercialization of Technologies, 19 
2.4 Growing Complexity in IT Trade Œ Tracing Shifts in International Competitiveness, 24 
2.5 China™s Position in the Global Semiconductor Value Chain, 28 

2.6 Concluding Remarks, 30 
 
3 INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS   31 
3.1 Development of the U.S. Computer and Semiconductor Industry, 32 
3.2 China Œ Strengthening Indigenous Innovation, 36 

3.3 Taiwan Œ Low-cost and Fast Innovation, 39 

3.4 Korea Œ Coevolution of International and Domestic Knowledge Linkages, 43 
3.5 Europe Œ Integrated EU-wide Innovation Policy Coordination, 44 
3.6 Conclusions and Policy Implications, 46 
 
4 IMPLICATIONS OF CHANGES IN THE GLOBAL ADVANCED COMPUTING 
LANDSCAPE FOR U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY      49 
4.1 Parallelism in Hardwa
re and Software, 49 
4.2 Integrity and Reliability of the Global Supply Chain, 50 

4.3 Decline of Custom Production, 51 

4.4 Convergence of Civilian and Defense Technological Capabilities, 51 
4.5 Rise of a New Post-PC Paradigm Driven by Mass ICT Consumerization, 52 
4.6 New Market-Driven Innovation Centers, 53 

4.7 The Future Educational and Research Landscape in Advanced Computing, 53 

4.8 Cybersecurity and Software, 53 
4.9 Possible Defense IT Outcomes, 54 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv 
  
APPENDIXES           55 
 A. Committee Member Biographies        57 
B. Identifying Hubs of Research Activity in Ke
y Areas of S&T Critical to this Study  61 
C. Contributors to the Study         65 
D. Findings and Recommendations from 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game
 Over or Next Level?
          67 
E. Dennard Scaling and Implications        69 
F. Pilot Study of Papers at Top Technical Conferences in Advanced Computing   71 
G. Conference Bibliometric Data        89 
H. Top 20 Largest Hardware and So
ftware Companies      97 
I. China™s Medium- and Long-Term Plan       99 
J. List of Abbreviations          101 
  
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1    Summary    
 
 omputing and information and communications 
technology (ICT) has dramatically changed how 

we work and live, has had profound effects on 
nearly every sector of society, has transformed whole 
industries, and is a key component of U.S. global 
leadership. A fundamental 
driver of advances in 
computing and ICT has been the fact that the single-

processor performance has, until recently, been steadily 
and dramatically increasing y
ear over year, based on a 
combination of architectural techniques, semiconductor 

advances, and software improvements. Users, 

developers, and innovators were able to depend on those 
increases, translating that
 performance into numerous 
technological innovations and creating successive 

generations of ever more rich and diverse products, 

software services, and applications that had profound 

effects across all sectors of society.
1 However, we can no 
longer depend on those extrao
rdinary advances in single-
processor performance continuing. 
This slowdown in the growth of single-processor 
computing performance has its roots in fundamental 
physics and engineering constraintsŠmultiple 
technological barriers have converged to pose deep 

research challenges, and the 
consequences of this shift 
are deep and profound for computing and for the sectors 
of the economy that depend on and assume, implicitly or 
explicitly, ever-increasing performance. From a 

technology standpoint, these challenges have led to 

heterogeneous multicore chips and a shift to alternate 

innovation axes that include, but are not limited to, 
                                                 1National Research Council, 
The Future of Computing: Game 
Over or Next Level?
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press (available online at http
://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_ 
id=12980) and NRC, 2003, 
Innovation in Information Technology
, Washington, D.C.: The National
 Academies Press (available 
online at http://books.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=10795). 
improving chip performance, mobile devices, and cloud 
services. As these technical shifts reshape the computing 

industry, with global consequences, the United States 

must be prepared to exploit new opportunities and to 
deal with technical challenges. The following sections 
outline the technical challenges, describe the global 

research landscape, and explore implications for 

competition and national security. 
 Sequential Past, Parallel Future 
 For multiple decades, single-processor performance 
has increased exponentially, driv
en by higher clock rates, 
reductions in transistor size, faster switching via 
fabrication improvements, and architectural and software 
innovations that increased performance while preserving 

software compatibility with previous-generation 

processors. This practical manifestation of Moore™s 

LawŠthe doubling of the number of transistors on a 
given amount of chip area every 18 to 24 monthsŠ
created a virtuous cycle of ever-improving single-

processor performance and enhanced software 

functionality. 
Hardware and software capabilities and 
sophistication grew exponentially in part because 

hardware designers and so
ftware developers could 
innovate in isolation from each other, while still 
leveraging each other™s advances. Software developers 
created new and more feature-filled applications, 

confident that new hardware would deliver the requisite 

performance to execute those applications. In turn, chip 
designers delivered ever-higher performance chips, 
while maintaining compatibility with previous 

generations. 
Users benefitted from this hardware-software 
interdependence in two ways. Not only would old 
C The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  software execute faster 
on new hardware, without 
change, but also new applications exploited advances in 
graphics and rendering, digital signal processing and 

audio, networking and communications, cryptography 

and securityŠall made possible by hardware advances. 
Unfortunately, single-pro
cessor performance is now 
increasing at much lower ratesŠa situation that is not 

expected to change in the foreseeable future. 
The causes for the declining rates of chip hardware 
performance improvements begin with the limit on chip 
power consumption, which is proportional to the product 

of the chip clock frequency and the square of the chip 

operating voltage. As chip clock frequencies rose from 

megahertz to gigahertz, chip vendors improved 
fabrication processes and reduced chip operating 
voltages and, thus, power consumption. 
However, it is no longer practical to increase 
performance via higher clock rates, due to power and 
heat dissipation constraints. These constraints are 
themselves manifestations of more fundamental 

challenges in materials science and semiconductor 

physics at increasingly sma
ll feature sizes. While the 
market for the highest performance server processor 
chips continues to grow, the market demand for phones, 

tablets, and netbooks has also increased emphasis on 

low-power, energy-efficient 
processors that maximize 
battery lifetime. 
Finally, the use of additional transistors to preserve 
the sequential instruction execution model while 

accelerating instruction execution reached the point of 

diminishing returns. Indeed, most of the architectural 
ideas that were once found only in exotic 
supercomputers (e.g., deep pipelines, multiple instruction 

issue, out-of-order instruction logic, branch prediction, 

data and instruction prefetching) are commonplace 
within microprocessors. 
The combination of these challengesŠpower 
limitations, diminishing architecture returns, and 

semiconductor physics challengesŠdrove a shift to 
multicore processors (i.e., placing multiple processors, 
sometimes of differing power or performance and 

function, on a single chip). By making parallelism 

visible to the software, this technological shift disrupted 

the cycle of sequential performance improvements and 
software evolution atop a standard hardware base. 
Beginning with homogeneous multicore chips (i.e., 
multiple copies of the same processor core), design 

alternatives are evolving rapidly, driven by the twin 
constraints of energy efficiency and high performance. 
In addition, system-on-a-ch
ip designs are combining 
heterogeneous hardware functions used in smartphones, 

tablets, and other devices. The result is a dizzying variety 
of parallel functionality on each chip. It is likely that 
even more heterogeneity will arise from expanded use of 
accelerators and reconfigurable logic for increased 
performance while simultaneously meeting power 
constraints. 
Whether homogeneous or heterogeneous, these 
chips are dependent on paralle
l software for operation, 
for there is no known alternative to parallel 
programming for sustaining growth in computing 

performance. However, unlike in the sequential case, 

there is no universally accepted, compelling 
programming paradigm for parallel computing. Absent 
such programming models and tools, creating 

increasingly sophisticated applications that fully and 

effectively exploit parallel chips is difficult at best. Thus, 

there exists a great opportunity and need for renewed 
research on parallel algorithms and programming 
methodologies, recognizing th
at this is a challenge and 
long-studied problem. However, because multicore chips 

are dependent on parallel programming, it is prudent to 
continue such explorations. 
Although further research 
in parallel programming 
models and tools may ameliorate this problem (e.g., via 

domain-specific languages, high-level libraries, and 
toolkits), 40 years of rese
arch in parallel computing 
suggests this outcome is 
by no means certain. When 
combined with the need for increasingly rapid 

development cycles to respond to changing demands and 
the rising importance of software security and resilience 
in an Internet-connected world, the programming 

challenges are daunting. In combination, the continued 

slowing of processor performance and the uncertainty of 

a parallel software future poses potential short- and long-
term risks for U.S. nationa
l security and the U.S. 
economy. This report focuses on the competitive 

position of the U.S. semiconductor and software 

industries and their impact on U.S. national security in 
the new norm of parallel computing. 
 Global Competition and the Research Landscape 
 Because of this disruption to the computing 
ecosystem,
2 major innovations in semiconductor 
processes, computer architecture, and parallel 
programming tools and techniqu
es are all needed if we 
are to continue to deliver ever-greater application 

performance. 
                                                 2The advanced computing ecosystem refers not only to the 
benefits from and interdepende
ncies between breakthroughs in 
academic and industry science and engineering research and 
commercialization success by national, multi-national and global 
companies, but also the underlying 
infrastructure (that includes 
components such as workforce; 
innovation models, e.g., centralist 
versus entrepreneurial; global 
knowledge networks; government 
leadership and investment; the 
interconnectedness of economies; 
and global markets) that underpin technological success. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY 3   In the past, the U.S. Department of Defense™s 
(DOD) uptake of U.S. computing technology research 
designed especially for it and now increasingly adapted 

from the fast-moving consumer 
market has re
sulted in a 
large U.S. advantage. In the fu
ture, the rate of change in 
the competitive position of the United States in 
computing technology will increasingly depend in part 

on other countries™ basic research capabilities and the 

types of research and development (R&D) policies they 
pursue, as well as the associated economic climate. Of 
course, many factors influence the range and type of 

policy options available in each region. Countries also 

differ in their levels of development and in their 

economic institutions, and pursue quite different 
approaches to innovation policy. 
Historically, the United States has relied on market 
forces and the private sector to convert university 

research ideas, funded by the federal government, into 
marketable products. In contrast, the European Union 
and emerging economies such
 as China, Korea, and 
Taiwan rely much more on the government to define the 

strategic objectives and key parameters. For example, 
recent Chinese innovation pol
icies have played an 
increasing role in strengthening its indigenous 

innovation capabilities. There 
is also evidence that China 
is transitioning toward economic outcome-driven science 
and technology programs focused on technologies of 
national strategic importanceŠmany of which are 

advanced computing technologies. In contrast, Taiwan™s 

innovation policies are focused on moving its IT 

industries beyond the traditional ﬁglobal factoryﬂ model. 
Thus, innovation polices emphasize low-cost and fast 
innovation by strengthening public and private 

partnerships that leverage domestic and global 

innovation networks. 
 Competitive Implications and National Security 
 In the committee™s view, the United States currently 
enjoys a technological advantage in many computing 

technologies. Nonetheless, this technological gap is 
narrowing as other countries, such as China, make a 
concerted effort to develop their own indigenous 

computing design and manufacturing capabilities and as 

design and fabrication of such technologies, as well as 
software development, are increasingly distributed 
globally. 
Thus, it is important to take a long-term perspective 
on our approaches to computing innovation, technology 

uptake, and defense policy, for the United State™s global 
competitors certainly are. The principal future national 
security concerns for the United States related to 
anticipated computing shifts and limits on single-

processor performance come not just from the threat to 

U.S. technological superiority, but also from changes to 
the nature and structure of the marketplace for 
computing and information technology. U.S. challenges 

include maintaining the integrity of the global supply 

chain for semiconductors, which is exacerbated by the 
convergence of civilian and 
defense technologies, as 
well as the rise of a new ecosystem of smart devices, 

based on licensable components and created by 

semiconductor design firms without fabrication 

capabilities. 
Over time, the increasing presence and 
establishment of foreign ma
rkets that are larger, are 
potentially more lucrative, and have better long-term 

growth potential than in the United States and other 
developed countries could also have significant 
implications. Any shift in the global commercial center 

of gravity could lead to a shift in the global R&D center 

of gravity as international fi
rms are required to locate in 
these markets if they are to remain competitive and to 
meet the requirements of government regulations in the 

target markets. 
Shifting from policy to technology, the parallel 
programming challenges in delivering high performance 
on multicore chips are real and global, with no obvious 

technical solutions. Barring research breakthroughs, 

developing applications that exploit on-chip parallelism 

effectively (or vice versa, by developing approaches to 
on-chip parallelism that better support application needs) 
will remain an intellectually challenging task that is 

dependent on highly skilled software developers. When 

combined with the need for rapid application 
development, nimble response to shifting threats, and the 
ever-present desire for new features, equating 

competitive advantage in computing solely with single-

processor performance (and associated application 
performance) may not be wise. Going forward, metrics 
such as system reliability, 
energy efficiency, security 
adaptability, and cost will inevitably become more 

salient. Power consumption is the major constraint on 

chip performance and device utility. Innovation in 
software, architecture, hard
ware, and other computing 
technologies will continue apace, but the primary axes of 

innovation are shifting, and organizations such as the 

U.S. DOD will need to adapt their computing and IT 
strategies accordingly. 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 5 1   Computer and Semiconductor Technology Trends and Implications   
 
 omputing and information and communications 
technology has had incredible effects on nearly 

every sector of society. Until recently, advances 
in information and communications technology have 
been driven by steady and dramatic gains in single-
processor (core) speeds. Ho
wever, current and future 
generations of users, developers, and innovators will be 

unable to depend on these improvements in computing 
performance. 
In the several decades leading up to the early 2000s, 
single-core processor performance doubled about every 

2 years. These repeated performance doublings came to 
be referred to in the popular press as ﬁMoore™s Law,ﬂ 
even though Moore™s Law itself was a narrow 

observation about the economics of chip lithography 

feature sizes.
1 This popular understanding of Moore™s 
Law was enabled by both technologyŠhigher clock 
rates, reductions in transist
or size, and faster switching 
via fabrication improvementsŠand architectural and 

compiler innovations that increased performance while 

preserving software compatibility with previous-
generation processors. Ongoing and predictable 
improvements in processor 
performance created a cycle 
of improved single-processor performance followed by 

enhanced software functionality. However, it is no 
longer possible to increase performance via higher clock 
rates, because of power and heat dissipation constraints. 

These constraints are themselv
es manifestations of more 
fundamental challenges in materials science and 
                                                 1The technological and economic 
challenges are intertwined. 
For example, Moore™s Law is enabled by the revenues needed to 
fund the research and development necessary to advance the 
technology. See, for example, 
The Economic Limit to Moore™s 
Law Œ 
IEEE Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing
, Vol. 
24, No. 1, February 2011. 
semiconductor physics at 
increasingly small feature 
sizes. 
A National Research Council (NRC) report, 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next 
Level?
,2 explored the causes and implications of the 
slowdown in the historically dramatic exponential 

growth in computing performance and the end of the 

dominance of the single microprocessor in computing. 
The findings and recommendations from that report are 
provided in Appendix D. The authoring committee of 

this report concurs with those findings and 

recommendations. This chapter draws on material in that 
report and the committee™s own expertise and discusses 
the technological challenges to sustaining growth in 

computing performance and their implications for 

computing and innovation. The chapter concludes with a 

discussion of the implications of these technological 
realities for United States defense. Subsequent chapters 
have a broader emphasis, beyond technology, on the 

implications for global technology policy and innovation 

issues.  1.1 Interrelated Challenges to Continued Performance Scaling  The reasons for the slowdown in the traditional 
exponential growth in computing performance are many. 

Several technical drivers have led to a shift from ever-

faster single-processor comput
er chips as the foundation 
for nearly all computing devices to an emphasis on what 
have been called ﬁmulticoreﬂ processorsŠplacing 
                                                 2NRC, The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or 
Next Level?
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press 
(available online at http://www.
nap.edu/catalog.
php?record_id 
=12980. C The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  multiple processors, sometimes of differing power and/or 
performance characteristics and functions, on a single 
chip. This section describes those intertwined technical 
drivers and the resulting challenges to continued growth 

in computing performance. This shift away from an 

emphasis on ever-increasing speed has disrupted what 
has historically been a continuing progression of 
dramatic sequential performance improvements and 

associated software innovation and evolution atop a 

predictable hardware base followed by increased demand 
for ever more software innovations that in turn motivated 
hardware improvements. This disruption has profound 

implications not just for the information technology 

industry, but for society as a whole. This section first 

describes the benefits of this virtuous cycleŠnow 
endingŠthat we have depended on for so long. The 
technical challenges related to scaling nanometer 

devices, what the shift to multicore architectures means 

for architectural innovation, programming explicitly 
parallel hardware, increased heterogeneity in hardware, 
and the need for correct, secure, and evolvable software 

are then discussed. 

 1.1.1 Hardware-Software Virtuous Cycle 
 The hardware and performance improvements 
described above came with a stable programming 
interface between hardware and software. This interface 
persisted over multiple hardware generations and in turn 

contributed to the creation of a virtuous hardware-

software cycle (see Figure 1-1). Hardware and software 

capabilities and sophistication each grew dramatically in 
part because hardware and software designers could 
innovate in isolation from each other, while still 

leveraging each other™s advances in a predictable and 

sustained fashion. For example, hardware designers 
added sophisticated out-of-order instruction issue logic, 
branch prediction, data prefetching, and instruction 

prefetching to the capabilities. Yet, even as the hardware 

became more complex, application software did not have 
to change to take advantage of the greater performance 
in the underlying hardware and, consequently, achieve 

greater performance on the software side as well. 
Software designers were able to make grounded and 
generally accurate assumptions about future capabilities 
of the hardware and couldŠand didŠcreate software 
that needed faster, next-gener
ation processors with larger 
memories even before chip and system architects 

actually were able to deliver them. Moreover, rising 
hardware performance allowed 
software tool developers 
to raise the level of abstraction for software development 

via advanced libraries and programming models, further 

accelerating application development. New, more 
demanding applications that only executed on the latest, 
highest performance hardware 
drove the market for the 
newest, fastest, and largest memory machines as they 
appeared. 

 
  FIGURE 1-1 Cracks in the hardware-software virtuous cycle. 
SOURCE: Adapted from a 2011 briefing presentation on the 

Computer Science and Telecommunications Board report 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next Level? 
  Another manifestation of the virtuous cycle in 
software was the adoption of high-level programming 
language abstractions, such as object orientation, 
managed runtimes, automatic memory management, 

libraries, and domain-specific languages. Programmers 

embraced these abstractions (1) to manage software size, 

sophistication, and complexity and (2) to leverage 
existing components developed by others. However, 
these abstractions are not 
without cost and rely on 
system software (i.e., compilers, runtimes, virtual 

machines, and operating systems) to manage software 
complexity and to map abstractions to efficient hardware 
implementations. In the past, as long as the software 

used a sequential programming interface, the cost of 

abstraction was hidden by ongoing, significant 
improvements in hardware performance. Programmers 
embraced abstraction and consequently produced 

working software faster. 
Looking ahead, it seems likely that the right choice 
of new abstractions will expand the pool of programmers 
further. For example, a domain specialist can become a 

programmer if the language is intuitive and the 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER AND SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNO
LOGY TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS 
7   abstractions match his or her domain expertise well. 
Higher-level abstractions and domain-specific toolkits, 
whether for technical computing or World Wide Web 
services, have allowed software developers to create 

complex systems quickly and with fewer common errors. 

However, implicit in this approach has been an 
assumption that hardware performance would continue 
to increase (hiding the over
head of these abstractions) 
and that developers need not understand the mapping of 

the abstractions to hardware to achieve adequate 
performance.
3 As these assumptions break down, the 
difficulty in achieving high performance from software 

will rise, requiring hardware designers and software 

developers to work together much more closely and 

exposing increasing amounts of parallelism to software 
developers (discussed further below). One possible 
example of this is the use of computer-aided design tools 

for hardware-software co-d
esign. Another source of 
continued improvements in delivered application 
performance could also come from efficient 
implementation techniques for high-level programming 

language abstractions. 

 1.1.2 Problems in Scaling Nanometer Devices 
 Early in the 2000s, semiconductor scalingŠthe 
process of technology improvement so that it performs 
the same functionalities at ever smaller scalesŠ
encountered fundamental physical limits that now make 

it impractical to continue along the historical paths to 

ever-increasing performance.
4 Expected improvements 
in both performance and power achieved with 
technology scaling have slowed from their historical 
rates, whereas implicit expectations were that chip speed 

and performance would continue to increase 

dramatically. There are deep technical reasons for (1) 
why the scaling worked so 
well for so long and (2) why 
it is no longer delivering dramatic performance 

improvements. See Appendix E for a brief overview of 

the relationship between slowing processor performance 
growth and Dennard scaling and the powerful 
implications of this slowdown. 
                                                 3Such abstractions may increase the energy costs of computa-
tion over time; a focus on energy costs (as opposed to perfor-
mance) may have led to radicall
y different strategies for both 
hardware and software
. Hence, energy-efficient software abstrac-
tions are an important area for future development. 
4In ﬁHigh-Performance Processors
 in a Power-Limited World,ﬂ 
Sam Naffziger reviews the V
dd limitations and describes various 
approaches (circuit, architecture) to future processor design given 
the voltage scaling limitations
: Sam Naffziger, 2006, ﬁHigh-
performance processors in a power-limited world,ﬂ 
Proceedings of 
the IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits
, Honolulu, HI, June 15Œ17, 
2006, p. 93Œ97. 
In fact, scaling of semiconductor technology hit 
several coincident roadblocks that led to this slowdown, 
including architectural design constraints, power 
limitations, and chip lithography challenges (both the 

high costs associated with patterning smaller and smaller 

integrated circuit features and with fundamental device 
physics). As described below, the combination of these 
challenges can be viewed as a perfect storm of difficulty 

for microprocessor pe
rformance scaling. With regard to power, through the 1990s and early 
2000s the power needed to deliver performance 
improvements on the best performing microprocessors 

grew from about 5Œ10 watts in 1990 to 100Œ150 watts in 

2004 (see Figure 1-2). This increase in power stopped in 

2004, because cooling and heat dissipation proved 
inadequate. Furthermore, the exploding demand for 
portable devices, such as phones, tablets, and netbooks, 

increased the market impor
tance of lower-power and 
energy-efficient processor designs. 
  FIGURE 1-2 Thirty five years of microprocessor trend data. 
SOURCE: Original data collected and plotted by M. Horowitz, 

F. Labonte, O. Shacham, K. Olukotun, L. Hammond, and C. 

Batten. Dotted-line extrapolations by C. Moore: Chuck Moore, 
2011, ﬁData processing in exascale-class computer systems,ﬂ 
The Salishan Conference on High Speed Computing
, April 27, 2011. (www.lanl.gov/orgs/hpc/salishan) 
  In the past, computer architects increased 
performance with clever architectural techniques such as 
ILP (instruction-level parallelism through the use of deep 
pipelines, multiple instruction issue, and speculation) 

and memory locality (multiple 
levels of caches). As the 
number of transistors per unit area on a chip continued to 
increase (as predicted by Moore™s Law), microprocessor 
designers used these transistors to, in part, increase the 

potential to exploit ILP by increasing the number of 

instructions executed in parallel (IPC, or instructions per 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  clock cycle).
5 Transistors were also used to achieve 
higher frequencies than were supported by the raw 
transistor speedups, for example, by duplicating logic 
and by reducing the depth of logic between pipeline 

latches to allow faster clock cycles. Both of these efforts 

yielded diminishing returns in the mid-2000s. ILP 
improvements are continuing, but also with diminishing 
returns.6 Continuing the progress of semiconductor scalingŠ
whether used for multiple cores or notŠis now 
dependent on innovation in structures and materials to 
overcome the reduced performance scaling traditionally 

provided by Dennard scaling.
7 Continued scaling also depends on continued 
innovation in lithography. Current state-of-the-art 
manufacturing uses a 193-nanometer wavelength to print 
structures that are only tens of nanometers in size. This 

apparent violation of optical laws has been supported by 

innovations in mask patterning and compensated for by 
increasingly complex computational optics. Future 
lithography scaling is dependent on continued 

innovation. 

 1.1.3 The Shift to Multicore Architectures and Related 
Architectural Trends 

 The shift to multicore architectures meant that 
architects began using the still-increasing transistor 
counts per chip to build multiple cores per chip rather 
                                                 5Achieved application performance depends on the characteris-
tics of the application™s resource demands and on the hardware. 
6ILP improvements are incremental (10Œ20 percent), leading to 
single-digit compound annual growth rates. 
7According to Mark Bohr, ﬁClassical MOSFET scaling tech-
niques were followed 
successfully until around the 90nm genera-
tion, when gate-oxide scaling st
arted to slow down due to in-
creased gate leakageﬂ (Mark Bohr, February 9, 2009, ﬁISSCC 
Plenary Talk: The New Era of Scaling in an SOC Worldﬂ) At 
roughly the same time, subthreshold 
leakage limited the scaling of 
the transistor V
t (threshold voltage), which in turn limited the 
scaling of the voltage supply in 
order to maintain performance. 
Since the active power of a circuit is proportional to the square of 
the supply voltage, this reduced 
scaling of supply voltage had a 
dramatic impact on power. This interaction between leakage 
power and active power has led chip designers to a balance where 
leakage consumes roughly 30 percent of the power budget. Sev-
eral approaches are being undertaken. 
Copper interconnects
 have 
replaced aluminum. 
Strained silicon
 and 
Silicon-on-Insulator
 have 
provided improved transistor performance. Use of a 
low-K 
dielectric material
 for the interconnect layers has reduced the par-
asitic capacitance, improving performance. 
High-K metal gate 
transistor structures restarted gate ﬁoxideﬂ 
scaling with orders of 
magnitude reduction in gate leakage. Transistor structures such as 
FinFET, or Intel™s 
Tri-Gate have improved control of the transis-
tor channel, allowing additional scaling of V
t for improved tran-
sistor performance and reduced active and leakage power. 
than higher-performance single-core chips. Higher-
performance cores were eschewed in part because of 
diminishing performance returns and emerging chip 
power constraints that made small performance gains at 

a cost of larger power use un
attractive. When single-core 
scaling slowed, a shift in emphasis to multicore chips 
was the obvious choice, in part because it was the only 
alternative that could be deployed rapidly. Multicore 

chips consisting of less complex cores that exploited 

only the most effective ILP ideas were developed. These 
chips offered the promise of performance scaling linearly 
with power. However, this scaling was only possible if 

software could effectively make use of them (a 

significant challenge). Moreover, early multicore chips 

with just a few cores could be used effectively at either 
the operating system level, avoiding the need to change 
application software, or by a select group of applications 

retargeted for multicore chips. 
With the turn to multicore, at least three other 
related architectural trends 
are important to note to 
understand how computer designers and architects seek 

to optimize performanceŠa shift toward increased data 

parallelism, accelerators and reconfigurable circuit 
designs, and system-on-a-chip (SoC) integrated designs. 
First, a shift toward increased data parallelism is 
evident particularly in graphics processing units (GPUs). 

GPUs have evolved, moving from fixed-function 
pipelines to somewhat configurable ones to a set of 
throughput-oriented ﬁcoresﬂ that allowed more 

successful general-purpose GPU (GP-GPU) 

programming. 
Second, accelerators and reconfigurable circuit 
designs have matured to provide an intermediate 
alternative between software 
running on fixed hardware, 
for example, a multicore chip, and a complete hardware 

solution such as an application-specific integrated 
circuit, albeit with their own cost and configuration 
challenges. Accelerators perform fixed functions well, 

such as encryption-decryption and compression-

decompression, but do nothing else. Reconfigurable 
fabrics, such as field-programmable gate arrays 
(FPGAs), sacrifice some of the performance and power 

benefits of fixed-function accelerators but can be 

retargeted to different needs. Both offer intermediate 

solutions in at least four ways: time needed to design and 
test, flexibility, performance, and power. 
Reconfigurable accelerators pose some serious 
challenges in building and configuring applications; tool 

chain issues need to be addressed before FPGAs can 
become widely used as cores.  To use accelerators and 
reconfigurable logic effectively, their costs must be 

overcome when they are not in use. Fortunately, if 

power, not silicon area, is the primary cost measure, 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER AND SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNO
LOGY TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS 
9   turning the units off when they are not needed reduces 
energy consumption (see discussion of dark and dim 
silicon, below). 
Third, increasing levels of integration that made the 
microprocessor possible four decades ago now enable 

complete SoCs. They combine most of the functions of a 
motherboard onto a single ch
ip, usually with off-chip 
main memory. These processors integrate memory and 

input/output controllers, graphics processors, and other 

special-purpose accelerators.
 These (SoC) designs are 
widely used in almost all devices, from servers and 
personal computers to smartphones and embedded 

devices. 
Fourth, power efficiency is increasingly a major 
factor in the design of multicore chips. Power has gone 
from a factor to optimize in
 the near-final design of 
computer architectures to a 
second-order constraint to, 
now, a first-order design constraint. As the right side of 

Figure 1-2 projects, future systems cannot achieve more 
performance from simply a linear
 increase in core count 
at a linear increase in power. Chips deployed in 

everything from phones, tablets, and laptops to servers 

and data centers must take into account power needs. 
One technique for enabling 
more transistors per chip 
at better performance levels without dramatically 

increasing the power needed per chip is dark silicon. 

Dark silicon refers to a design wherein a chip has many 
transistors, but only a fraction of them are powered on at 
any one time to stay within a power budget. Thus, 

function-specific accelerators can be powered on and off 

to maximize chip performance. A related design is dim 

silicon where transistors operate in a low-power but still-
useful state. Dark and dim silicon make accelerators and 
reconfigurable logic more effective. However, making 

dark and dim silicon practical is not easy, because 

adding silicon area per chip always raises cost, even if 
the silicon only provides value when it is on. This also 
presents significant software challenges, as each 

heterogeneous functional unit requires efficient code 

(e.g., this may mean multiversion code, as well as 
compilers and tool chains designed for many variations). 
Thus, even as dark and dim silicon become more widely 

adopted, using them to create value is a significant open 

challenge. 
Moreover, emerging transistors have more 
variability than in the past, due to variations in the chip 
fabrication process: Some tran
sistors will be faster, while 
others are slower, and some use more power and others 

use less. This variability is emerging now, because some 
aspects of fabrication technology (e.g., gate oxides) are 
reaching atomic dimensions. Classically, hardware hid 

almost all errors from softwa
re (except memory errors) 
with techniques (such as guard bands) that 
conservatively set parameters
 well above a mean value 
to tolerate variation while creating the illusion of error-
free hardware. As process variation grows relative to 
mean values, guard bands become overly conservative. 

This means that new errors will be exposed more 

frequently to software, posing software and system 
reliability challenges. 
 
1.1.4 Game Changer: Programming for Explicitly 

Parallel Commodity Hardware 
 The advent of multicore chips changes the software 
interface. Sequential software 
no longer becomes faster 
with every hardware generati
on, and software needs to 
be written to leverage parallel hardware explicitly. 
Current trends in hardware, specifically multicore, might 
seem to suggest that every technology generation will 

increase the number of processors and, accordingly, that 

parallel software written for these chips would speed up 
in proportion to the number of processors (often referred 
to as scalable software). 
Reality is not so straightforward. There are limits to 
the number of cores that can usefully be placed on a 
chip. Moreover, even softwa
re written in parallel 
languages typically has a sequential component. In 

addition, there are intrinsic limits in the theoretically 

available parallelism in some problems, as well as in 
their solution via currently known algorithms. Even a 
small fraction of sequential computation significantly 

compromises scalability (see Figure 1-3), compromising 

expected improvements that might be gained by 

additional processors on the chip. 
   FIGURE 1-3 Amdahl™s Law example of potential speedup on 
16 cores based on the fraction of the program that is parallel. 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  As part of ongoing research programs, it will be 
important to analyze the interplay among the available 
parallelism in applications, energy consumption by the 
resulting chip (under load with real applications), the 

performance of different algorithmic formulations, and 

programming complexity. 
In addition, most programs written in existing 
parallel languages are dependent on the number of 

hardware processors. Further developments in parallel 

software are necessary to be performance portable, that 
is, it should execute on a variety of parallel computing 
platforms and should show performance in proportion to 

the number of processors on all these platforms without 

modifications, within some reasonable bounds. 
Deeply coupled to parallelism is data com-
munication. To operate on the same data in parallel on 
different processors, the data must be communicated to 

each processor. More processors imply more 

communication. Communicating data between 
processors on the same chip or between chips is costly in 
power and time. Unfortunately, most parallel 

programming systems result in programs whose 

performance heavily depends on the memory hierarchy 
organization of the processor. Where the data is located 
in a system directly affects performance and energy. 

Consequently, sequential and even existing parallel 

software is not performance portable to successive 
generations of evolving parallel hardware, or even 
between two machines of the same generation with the 

same number of processors if they have different 

memory organizations. Software designers currently 

must modify software for it 
to run efficiently on each 
multicore machine. The need for such efforts breaks the 
virtuous cycle described above and makes building and 

evolving correct, secure, and performance-portable 

software a substantial challenge. 
Finally, automatic parallelization systems, which 
seek to transform a sequential program into a parallel 

programmer without programmer intervention, have 

mostly failed. Had they been successful, programmers 
would be able to write in a familiar sequential language 
and yet still see the performance benefits of parallel 

execution. As a result, research now focuses on program-

mer-specified parallelism. 

 1.1.5 Heterogeneity in Hardware 
 As mentioned above, not only are technology trends 
leading designers and developers of computer hardware 
to focus on multicore systems, but they are also leading 
to an emphasis on specialization and heterogeneity to 

provide power, performance, an
d energy efficiency. This 
specialization is a marked contrast to previous 
approaches. GPUs are an example of hardware 
specialization designed to be substantially more power 
efficient for a specific workload. The problem with this 
trend is three-fold. 
First, hardware specialization can only be justified 
for ubiquitous and/or high-value workloads due to the 
high cost of chip design and fabrication. Second, 
creating software that exploits hardware specialization 

and heterogeneity closely couples hardware and 

softwareŠsuch coupling may be good for performance, 
power, and energy, but it typi
cally sacrifices software 
portability to different hardware, a mainstay expectation 

in computing over many decades. 
Third, the lead time need
ed for effective software 
support of these heterogeneous devices may reduce the 
time they can be competitive in the marketplace. If it 
takes longer to deliver the tools (compilers, domain-

specific language, and so on) than it takes to design and 

deliver the chip, then the tools will appear after the chip, 
with negative consequences.
8 This problem, however, is 
not new. For example, by holding the IA-32 instruction 

set architecture relatively constant across generations of 

hardware, software could be delivered in a timely 
manner. Designing and building a software system for 
hardware that does not exist, or is not similar to prior 

hardware, requires well-specified hardware-software 
interfaces and accurate simulators to test the software 
independently. Because executing software on 
simulators requires tens to thousands of more time than 

executing on actual hardware, software will lag hardware 

without careful system and interface design. In summary, 

writing portable and high-performance software is hard, 
making such software parallel is harder, and developing 
software that can exploit heterogeneous parallel 

architectures is even harder. 

 1.1.6 Correct and Secure Software that Evolves 
 PerformanceŠin the sense of
 ever-increasing chip 
speedŠis not the only critical demand of modern 
application and system software. Although performance 
is fungible and ever-faster co
mputer chips can be used to 
enable a variety of functionality, software is the 

underpinning of virtually all our economic, government, 

and military infrastructure. Thus, the criticality of 
Secure, 
Parallel 
Evolvable, 
Reliable, and 
Correct software cannot be overemphasized. This report uses the 

term 
SPERC software
 to refer to 
these software 
properties. 
                                                 8The same is true for hardware-software co-design efforts. Suc-
cess in co-design requires that both the hardware and software be 
delivered at roughly the same time
. If the software lags behind the 
hardware, it diminishes the strategy™s effectiveness. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER AND SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNO
LOGY TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS 
11   Achieving each of these desirable SPERC software 
properties is difficult in isolation, and each property is 
still the subject of much research. In an era where new 
technologiesŠat all levels of the systemŠappear 

quickly, yet the rate of hardware performance 

improvement is slowing, an alternative to the virtuous 
cycle described earlier is essential. Rather than 
remaining oblivious to hardware shifts, new approaches 

and methodologies are needed that allow our complex 

software systems to 
evolve
 nimbly, using new 
technologies and adapting to changing conditions for 
rapid deployment. This flexibility and rapid adaptation 

will be key to continued superiority, for all large-scale 

enterprises, including military and defense needs. 
In addition to flexibility and nimbleness, as the 
world becomes more connected, building software that 
executes 
reliably and guarantees some 
security 
properties is critical. For example, modern programming 

systems for languages such as
 PHP, JavaScript, Java, and 
C#, while more secure than native systems because of 
their type and memory safety, do not guarantee provably 

secure programs. For example, mainstream programming 

models do not yet support concise expression of 
semantic security properties such as ﬁonly an 
authenticated user can access their own data,ﬂ which is 

key to proving security properties. Even recipes of best 

practices for secure programming remain an open 
problem. 
Finally, functional correctness remains a major 
challenge. Designing and building 
correct
 parallel 
software is a daunting task. For example, static 

verification is the process that analyzes code to ensure 
that it guarantees certain 
properties and user-defined 
specifications. Static verification of even basic properties 

of sequential software in some cases cannot be decided, 

and computing approximations often involves 
exponential amounts of computation to analyze 
properties on all programming paths. Evaluating the 

same properties in 
parallel
 programs is even harder, 
since the analysis must consider all possible execution 
interleaving of concurrent statements in distinct parallel 
tasks. Current practice sometimes verifies small critical 

components of large systems, but for the most part, 

executes the program on a variety of test inputs (testing) 

to detect errors. Correctness and security demands on 
software may trump performance in some cases, but 
applications will typically need to combine these 

properties with high performance and parallelism. 
Even assuming that there are programming models 
that establish a solid foundation for creating SPERC 
software, adoption will be a challenge. Commodity and 

defense software will need to be created or ported to use 

them. The enormous investment in legacy software and 
the large cost of porting software to new languages and 
platforms will be a barrier to adoption. 
 1.2 Future Directions for Hardware and Software 
Innovation 
 Section 1.1 outlined many of the technological 
challenges to continued growth in computing 

performance and some of the implications (e.g., the shift 

to multicore and increased emphasis on power 
efficiency.) This section provides a brief overview of 
current hardware and software
 research strategies for 
building and evolving future computer systems that seek 

continued improvements to high performance and energy 
efficiencies. 
 
1.2.1 Advanced Hardware Technology Options 

 Earlier sections of this chapter described issues that 
have hindered continued scaling of modern 

semiconductor technology and some of the current 

innovations in materials and structures that have allowed 
continued progress. All are variations on historical 
approaches. Are there more radical innovations that may 

deliver future improvements? In principle, yes, but there 

are daunting challenges. 
Transistors built from alternative materials such as 
germanium (Ge) and Group 
IIIŒV materials, such as 
gallium arsenide, indium phosphide, indium arsenide, 

and indium antimonide, promise improved power 

efficiency,
9 but only by about a factor of two, as they 
also suffer from the same threshold voltage limits, and 
limit on-supply voltage scaling inherent in current 

complementary-symmetry metal-oxide semiconductor 

technologies. 
Advances in packaging technology continue, and 
some of those offer promise for power and performance 

improvements. For example, 3D stacking and through-

silicon vias are being explored for some SoC designs. 

The primary limitation for 3D stacking of memory, 
however, is capacity (i.e., only limited dynamic random-
access memory can be placed in the stack). 
Finally, more exotic alternatives to the use of 
electrons as the ﬁtokens,ﬂ coupl
ed with an energy barrier 
as the controlŠthe method used by all modern computer 
chipsŠare under investigation.
10 Although all of these 
                                                 9Donghyun Kim, Tejas Krishna
mohan, and Krishna C. 
Saraswat, 2008, ﬁPerformance Evaluation of 15nm Gate Length 
Double-Gate n-MOSFETs with 
High Mobility Channels: IIIŒV, 
Ge and Si,ﬂ 
The Electroch. Soc. Trans.
 16(11): 47Œ55. 
10K. Bernstein, R. Calvin, W. 
Porod, A. Seabaugh, and J. 
Welser, 2010, ﬁDevice and Arch
itecture Outlook for Beyond 
CMOS Switches,ﬂ Proceedings of the IEEE
 98(12): 2169Œ2184. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  technologies show potential, each has serious challenges 
that need to be resolved through continued fundamental 
research before they could be adopted for high-volume 
manufacturing. 

 
1.2.2 Prospects for Performance Improvements 
 In the committee™s view, there is no ﬁsilver bulletﬂ 
to address current challenges
 in computer architecture 
and the slowdown in growth in computing performance. 
Rather, efforts in complementary directions to continue 
to increase value, that is, performance, under power 

constraints, will be needed. Early multicore chips offered 

homogeneous parallelism. Heterogeneous cores on a 

single chip are now part of an effort to achieve greater 
power efficiency, but they
 present even greater 
programming challenges. 
Efforts to advance conventional multicore chips and 
to create more power-effi
cient core designs will 
continue. On one hand, researchers will continue to 
explore techniques that reduce the power used by 

individual cores without unduly sacrificing performance. 

In turn, this will allow placement of more cores on each 
chip. Researchers could also 
explore radical redesigns of 
cores that focus on power first, for example, by 

minimizing nonlocal information movement through 

spatially aware designs that limit communication of data 
(see Section 1.1.4). 
GP-GPU computing, in particular, and vector and 
single-instruction multiple-data operation, in general, 

offer promise for specific 
workloads. Each of these 
reduce power consumption by amortizing the cost of 
dealing with an instruction (e.g., fetch and decode) 
across the benefit of many data manipulations. All offer 

great peak performance, but this performance can be 

hard to achieve without deep expertise coupling 
algorithm and architecture, hardly a prescription for 
broad programmability. Moreover, software that runs on 

such chips must allocate work to cope with allocating 

work to heterogeneous computing units, such as 
throughput-oriented GPUs and latency-oriented 
conventional central processing units, highlighting the 

need for advances in software and programming 

methodologies as described earlier. 
More heterogeneity will arise from expanded use of 
accelerators and reconfigurable logic, described earlier, 
that is needed for increased performance under power 

constraints. Accelerators are so-named because they can 

accelerate performance. While this is true, recent work 
shows that the greater benef
it of accelerators may be in 
reducing power.
11 However, accelerator effectiveness 
                                                 11Rehan Hameed, Wajahat Qadeer, 
Megan Wachs, Omid Azizi, 
Alex Solomatnikov, Benjamin 
C. Lee, Stephen Richardson, 
can be blunted by the overheads of communicating 
control and data to and from 
accelerators, especially if 
someone seeks to offload even smaller amounts of work 
to expand the availabilit
y of off-loadable work. 
Reconfigurable designs, such as FPGAs, described 

earlier, may provide a middle ground, but they are not 
yet easily programmable. Similarly, SoCs combine 
specialized accelerators on a single chip and have had 

great success in the embedded market, such as 

smartphones and tablets. As SoCs continue to proliferate, 
the challenge will be simplifying software and hardware 
design and programmability while maximizing 

performance and power efficiency. 
Moreover, communication at all levelsŠclose, 
cross-chip, off-chip, off-boa
rd, off-node, offsiteŠmust 
be minimized to save energy. For example, moving 
operands from a close-by register file can use energy 

comparable to an operation (e.g., floating-point multiply-

add), while moving 
them from cross- 
or off-chip uses 
tens to hundreds of times more energy. Thus, a focus on 
reducing computational energy without a concomitant 

focus on reducing communication is doomed to have 

limited effect. 
Finally, a reconsideration of the hardware-software 
boundary may be in order. While abstraction layers hide 

complexity at each boundary, 
they also hide optimization 
and innovation possibilities. For decades, software and 
hardware experts innovated independently on opposite 
sides of the instruction set architecture boundary. 

Multicore chips began the end of the era of separation. 

Going forward, co-design 
is needed, where chip 
functionality and software are designed in concert, with 
repeated design and optimization feedback between the 
hardware and software t
eams. However, since the 
software development cycle typically significantly lags 

behind the hardware development cycle, effective co-
design will also require more rapid deployment of 
effective tools in a timescale commensurate with the 

specialized hardware if its full functionality is to be 

realized. 
 1.2.3 Software 

 Creating software system
s and applications for 
parallel, power-constrained computing systems on a 
single chip requires innovations at all levels of the 
software-hardware design and engineering stack: 

algorithms, programming models, compilers, runtime 
                                                                                  Christos Kozyrakis, and Mark
 Horowitz, 2010, "Understanding 
Sources of Inefficiency in General-Purpose Chips," 
Proceedings 
of the 37th International Sym
posium on Computer Architecture 
(ISCA)
, Saint-Malo, France, June 2010. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER AND SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNO
LOGY TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS 
13   systems, operating systems,
 and hardware-software 
interfaces. 
One strategy for addressing the challenges inherent 
to parallel programming is to first design application-

specific languages and system
 software and then seek 
generalizations. The most successful examples of 
parallelism come from distri
buted search systems, Web 
services, and databases executing on distinct devices, as 

opposed to the challenge of parallelism within a single 

device (chip) that is addressed here. Parallel algorithm 
and system design success 
stories include MapReduce
12 for processing data used in search, databases for 
persistent storage and retrieval, and domain-specific 

toolkits with parallel support, such as MATLAB. Part of 

their success is rooted in providing a level of abstraction 
in which programmers write sequential components, 
while the runtime and system software implement and 

manage the parallelism. On the other hand, GPU 

programming is also a success story, but when used for 
game engineering development, for instance, it relies on 
expert programmers with deep knowledge of parallelism, 

algorithm-to-hardware mappings, and performance 

tuning. General-purpose computing on GPUs does not 
require in-depth knowledge about graphics hardware, but 
does require programmers to understand parallelism, 

locality, and bandwidthŠgeneral-purpose computing 

primitives. 
More research is needed in domain-specific parallel 
algorithms, because most ap
plications are sequential. 
Sequential algorithms are almost never appropriate for 

parallel systems. Expressing
 algorithms in such a way 
that they satisfy the key SPERC properties and are 
performance portable across different parallel hardware 
and generations of parallel hardware requires investment 

and research in new programming models and 

programming languages. 
These programming models must enable expert, 
typical, and potentially naïve programmers to use 

parallel hardware effect
ively. Since parallel 
programming is extremely complex, the expertise 
necessary to effectively work in this realm is currently 
only within reach of the most expert programmers, and 

the majority of existing systems are not performance 

portable. A key requirement will be to create modular 

programming models that make it possible to 
encapsulate parallel software in libraries in such a way 
that (1) they can be reused by many applications and (2) 

the system adapts and controls the total amount of 

parallelism that effectively utilizes the hardware, without 
over- or undersubscription. Mapping applications, which 
                                                 12In 2004, Google introduced the software framework, 
MapReduce, to support distribute
d computing on large datasets on 
clusters of computers. 
use these new models, to parallel hardware will require 
new compiler, runtime, and operating system services 
that model, observe, and r
eason, and then adapt to and 
change dynamic program behaviors to satisfy 

performance and energy constraints. 
Because power and energy are now the first-order 
constraint in hardware design, there is an opportunity for 
algorithmic design and system software to play a much 

larger role in power and energy management. This area 

is a critical research topi
c with broad applicability. 
 1.3 The Rise of Mobile Computing, Services, and 
Software  Historically, the x86 instru
ction set architecture has 
come to dominate the commercial computing space, 

including laptops, desktops, and servers. Developed 

originally by Intel and licensed by AMD, the commercial 
success of this architecture has either eliminated or 
forced into smaller markets other architectures 

developed by MIPS, HP, DEC, and IBM, among others. 

More than 300 million PCs are sold each year, most of 
them powered by x86 processors.
13 Further, since the 
improvement in capabilities of single-core processors 

started slowing dramatically, nearly all laptops, desktops, 

and servers are now shipping with multicore processors. 
Over the past decade, the availability of capable, 
affordable, and very low-power processor chips has 
spurred a fast rise in mobile computing devices in the 

form of smartphones and tablets. The annual sales 

volume of smartphones and tablets already exceeds that 
of PCs and servers.
14 The dominant architecture is U.K.-
based ARM, rather than x86. ARM does not 

manufacture chips; instead it licenses the architecture to 

third parties for incorporation into custom SoC designs 
by other vendors. The openness of the ARM architecture 
has facilitated its adoption by many hardware 

manufacturers. In addition, these mobile devices now 

commonly incorporate two cores, and at least one SoC 

vendor has been shipping four-core designs in volume 
since early 2012. Furthermore, new heterogeneous big- 
and small-core designs that couple a higher performance, 

higher power core with 
a lower performance, lower 
power core have recently been announced.
15 Multicore 
chips are now ubiquitous across the entire range of 
computing devices. 
                                                 13See http://www.gartner.com/i
t/page.jsp?id=1893523. Last ac-
cessed on February 7, 2012. 
14See http://www.canalys.com
/newsroom/smart-phones-over 
take-client-pcs-2011. Last accessed on February 7, 2012. 
15See www.tegra3.org; http://www.
reuters.com/article/2011/10/ 
19/arm-idUSL5E7LJ42H20111019. La
st accessed on June 25, 
2012. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  The rise of the ARM architecture in mobile 
computing has the potential to adjust the balance of 
power in the computing world as mobile devices become 
more popular and supplant PCs for many users. 

Although the ARM architecture comes from the United 

Kingdom, Qualcomm, Texas Instruments, and NVIDIA 
are all U.S.-based companies with strong positions in 
this space. However, the shift does open the door to 

more foreign competition, such as Korea™s Samsung, and 

new entries, because ARM licenses are relatively 
inexpensive, allowing many vendors to design ARM-
based chips and have them fabricated in Asia. 
However, just as technica
l challenges are changing 
the hardware and software development cycle and the 

software-hardware interface, the rise of mobile 
computing and its associated software ecosystems are 
changing the nature of software deployment and 

innovation in applications. In contrast to developing 

applications for general-purpose PCsŠwhere any 
application developer, for example, a U.S. defense 
contractor or independent software vendor, can create 

software that executes on any PC of their choosingŠin 

many cases, developing software for mobile devices 
imposes additional requirements on developers, with 
ﬁappsﬂ having to be approved by the hardware vendors 

before deployment. There are advantages and 

disadvantage to each approach, but changes in the 
amount and locus of control over software deployments 
will have implications for what kind of software is 

developed and how innovation proceeds. 
A final inflection point is the rise of large-scale 
services, as exemplified by search engines, social 
networks and cloud-hosting services.  At the largest 
scale, the systems supporti
ng each of these are larger 
than the entire Internet was just a few years ago.  

Associated innovations have included a renewed focus 
on analysis of unstructured and ill-structured data (so-
called big data), packaging and energy efficiency for 

massive data centers, and the architecture of service 

delivery and content distribution systems.  All of these 
are the enabling technologies for delivery of services to 
mobile devices. The mobile device is already becoming 

the primary personal computing system for many people, 

backed up by data storage, augmented computational 

horsepower, and services provided by the cloud. 
Leadership in the technologies associated with 
distributed cloud services, data center hardware and 

software, and mobile devices will provide a competitive 

advantage in the global computing marketplace. 
Software innovations in mobile systems where 
power constraints are severe (b
attery life directly affects 
user experience) are predicted to use a different model 

than PCs, in which more and more processing is 
performed in the ﬁcloudﬂ ra
ther than on the mobile 
device. A flexible software 
infrastructure and algorithms 
that optimize for network availability, power on the 
device, and precision are heralding a challenging 

ecosystem. 
Fundamental to these technologies are algorithms 
for ensuring properties such as reliability, availability, 
and security in a distributed computing system, as well 

as algorithms for deep data mining and inference. These 

algorithms are very differe
nt in nature from parallel 
algorithms suitable for traditional supercomputing 
applications. While U.S. researchers have made 

investments in these areas already, the importance and 

commercial growth potential demand research and 

development into algorithmic areas including encryption, 
machine learning, data mining, and asynchronous 
algorithms for distribu
ted systems protocols. 
 1.4 Summary and Implications  Semiconductor scaling has encountered fundamental 
physical limits, and improvements in performance and 
power are slowing. This slowdown has, among other 

things, driven a shift from the single microprocessor 

computer architectures to homogenous and now 
heterogeneous multicore processors, which break the 
virtuous cycle that most software innovation has 

expected and relied on. While innovations in transistor 

materials, lithography, and chip architecture provide 
promising opportunities for improvements in 
performance and power, there is no consensus by the 

semiconductor and computer industry on the most 

promising path forward. 
It is likely that these limitations will require a shift 
in the locus of innovation away from dependence on 
single-thread performance, at least in the way 

performance has been achieved (i.e., increasing transistor 

count per chip at reduced power). Performance at the 
processor level will continue to be important, as that 
performance can be translated into desired functionalities 

(such as increased security, reliability, more capable 

software, and so on.) But new ways of thinking about 
overall system goals and how to achieve them may be 
needed. 
What, then, are the most promising opportunities for 
innovation breakthroughs by the semiconductor and 
computing industry? The ongoing globalization of 
science and technology 
and increased
Šand cheaperŠ
access to new materials, technologies, infrastructure, and 

markets have the potential to shift the U.S. competitive 

advantage in the global computing ecosystem, as well as 
to refocus opportunities for innovation in the computing 
space. In addition, the computing and semiconductor 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER AND SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNO
LOGY TRENDS AND IMPLICATIONS 
15   industry has become a global enterprise, fueled by 
increasingly competitive overseas semiconductor 
markets and firms that have made large and focused 
investments in the computing space over the last decade. 

The possibility of new technological approaches 

emerging both in the Unit
ed States and overseas 
reinforces the critical need for the United States to assess 
the geographic and technological landscape of research 
and development focused on this and other areas of 
computer and semiconductor innovation. 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17 2   The Global Research Landscape    
 
 n assessment of the global landscape for 
research and developmen
t (R&D) of advanced 
computingŠespecially efforts to address the 
computing performance challenges outlined in Chapter 
1Šmust include an examination of research efforts 
related to the technologies described in Chapter 1, 

including semiconductor devices and circuits, 

architecture, programming systems, and applications. 
Further, assessing the global competitiveness in these 
technologies requires examination of both advanced 

research and development as well as how successful 

commercialization of these technologies has been and for 
whom. 
Research capability is a leading indicator for a 
nation™s future technical competitiveness in science-

intensive technological fields. For the purposes of this 

report, a nation™s research capabilities include the 
education provided by and output from universities as 
well as the training by and output from industry and 

government laboratories. This chapter examines two 

broad indicators to assess national technological research 
capabilities and competitiveness: (1) commercialization 
of semiconductors, as well as computing hardware and 

software, technologies; and (2) bilateral trade revenues 

from U.S. exports and imports of advanced electronics 
and technology products critical to the computing 
performance challenges described in Chapter 1. 
The committee also conducted a pilot study of a 
third indicator: national contributions of papers at top 

technical conferences. In computer science, papers 
presented at conferences are an important (and often 
underused) measure of research quality, in addition to 

journal articles. The committee analyzed authorshipŠ

specifically, authors™ geographical locationsŠof papers 
at many of the top technical
 conferences in the four 
research areas most closely related to the challenges 
outlined in Chapter 1: semiconductor devices and 
circuits, computer architecture, programming systems, 

and applications. The pilot study included an analysis of 

data from papers presented at 2011 conferences in these 
four research areas and a similar analysis of conference 
papers from 1996Œ2011 to show recent changes in 

representation at these conferences. The complete results 

of the pilot study, along with a methodological overview 
and discussion of its limitations, are discussed in 
Appendixes F and G. 
Section 2.1 provides a brief snapshot of some 
preliminary observations and insights that can be gleaned 
from the pilot study. Section 2.2 uses the conference 
publication data to examine how the international 

collaborative nature of th
ese conference papers has 
changed over time. Section 2.3 provides a description of 

the global landscape in commercialization of 
semiconductor, as well as computing hardware and 
software, technologies. Section 2.4 presents an analysis 

of bilateral (U.S.-China, -K
orea, -Taiwan, and -Japan) 
trade data for U.S. exports and imports of electronics and 
products specifically relevant to the computing 
challenges outlined in Chapter 1. Lastly, Section 2.5 

examines China™s growing role
 as a major consumer and 
supplier of semiconductors, as well as its contribution to 
the global semiconductor value chain. 
 2.1 Preliminary Observations from Pilot Study of 
Papers at Top Technical Conferences 
 The committee encountered some methodological 
challenges in its analysis of publication data from 

conference papers (for example, determining whether the 
location of a conference can introduce travel biases for 
researchers), making it diffi
cult to draw concrete 
conclusions about the technological research capabilities 
AThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  of individual countries. There are some interesting 
observations about overall trends and emerging 
strengths, however, which can be made from this 

preliminary analysis. 

 2.1.1. Current (2011) national and regional advanced 
computing research contributions at top technical 

conferences 

 The committee™s preliminary assessment of 
conference papers at selected technical conferences in 

2011 indicates that the United States is strongly 

represented in each of the f
our research areas identified 
by the committee as critical for meeting the computing 
performance challenges outlined in Chapter 1 
(semiconductor devices and circuits, architecture, 

programming systems, and applications), contributing 

more than half of all papers across each research area. Of 
these areas, the United States has the strongest 
representation in architecture research with no other 

individual nation contributing as significantly. These 

data are consistent with the historical U.S. strengths in 
commercial microprocessors, including Intel, AMD, and 
IBM, as well as former commercial microprocessors 

from DEC, HP, and others (see Table F-5). The 

committee notes, however, that the UK-based ARM 
processor ecosystem now dominates by processor 
shipment volume, largely based on smartphones and 

embedded devices. 
Limited or no representation 
at architecture research 
conferences may suggest that some nations™ universities 
and industry research institutions are not focused on 
mainstream computer architecture. For example, while 

Japan has activity and exper
tise in architecture research, 
notably the custom processors from Fujitsu that are in 
the K supercomputer, the data suggest its national 
research focus may lie in other areas such as advanced 

semiconductor and nanoscale devices and circuits (see 

Table F-4). As another example, Germany and the U.K., 
while poorly represented at architecture research 
conferences, have notable representation in advanced 

programming research (see Table F-6). 
Several interesting observations can also be made 
about regional representation at these conferences. For 
example, while the United States maintains a significant 
lead over Europe and Asia in paper contributions at 

semiconductor and nanoscale devices conferences, its 

contributions in semiconductor circuits research are 
comparable to Europe and Asia. In programming 
systems and applications, the United States maintains a 

lead followed by Europe and distantly by Asia. See 

Figures F-2 through F-6. 
 2.1.2 Time series assessment of national and regional 
advanced computing research contributions at top 
technical conferences 

 Longitudinal analysis of conference data from 1996Œ
2011 also provides insight into trends in national (see 
Tables F-8 through F-11) and regional (see Figures F-7 

through F-11) contributions to advanced research. 

During this time, for the tw
o conference series (IEDM 
and NANO) in the semiconductor devices area, the U.S. 
lead has remained relatively stable with the largest gains 

made by Taiwan and Belg
ium (IMEC). For the ISSCC 
conference series in semiconductor circuits research, the 

United States shows a moderate decline, in tandem with 
an overall broadening in international representation. In 
this area, the largest leaps were made by Korea, Taiwan, 

and the Netherlands. For the four conference series 

(ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, and MICRO) in architecture 
research, the United States has maintained a significant 
lead, with no major advances by any other nation or 

region. For the five conference series (ECOOP, OOPSLA, 
PLDP, POPL, and PPoPP) in programming systems 
research, the U.S. lead has been challenged somewhat by 

increases in Europe by small but steady gains by Israel, 

Switzerland, and the UK (as well as by China, India, and 
Korea to a lesser degree). For the seven conference 
series (Eurographics, OSDI, SC, SIGGRAPH, SOSP, 

VLDB, and WWW) in applic
ations research, U.S. 
representation has retained a st
able lead over the 15-year 
period with no significant representation by other 
nations. While only representing a small percentage of 
papers in the applications 
research areas, China moved 
from no representation in 1996 to ~4 percent of 

conference papers in 2011. 
Strong R&D investments by U.S. universities and 
industry laboratories over the last 15 years have yielded 

numerous innovations and have helped to sustain the 

United State™s position as a lead contributor of 
conference papers across the four specific technology 
areas identified by the committ
ee. Despite this fact, the 
U.S. position is now being challenged by increasing 

technical and manufacturing capabilities in Europe and, 

in particular, Asia. For example, while showing 
relatively few contributions to conference papers, China 
continues to make significant contributions to U.S.Œ

China trade revenues (discussed in Section 2.4) and 

demonstrates increasing competitiveness in the global 
semiconductor value chain (discussed in Section 2.5). 
The committee expects that these trends will likely 

continue as nations make greater investments in 

domestic university and industry research, as well as 
through multinational, and increasingly global, 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE 
19   commercial partnerships and international research 
collaborations. 
 2.2 Increased International Collaboration 
 Data on coauthored papers presented at several of 
the sampled conferences
1 discussed above and in 
Appendix F were used to examine how international 
collaborations have changed over time. In the network 

connectivity graphs
2 of Figure 2-1, the nodes (circles) 
represent individual countries, and the size of each node 
represents the number of papers produced by that 
country. The edges (lines connecting two circles) 

represent collaborations on coauthored papers, and the 

weight of each edge indicates 
the number of papers that 
share coauthorship between nations. 
In each area except archit
ecture, the network graphs 
show an increasing geographical diversity in research 

and a tremendous increase in international 

collaborations. The network graphs show that between 
1996 and 2011, international participation and 
collaboration between the United States and other 

nations has dramatically increased. In the devices and 

circuits areas, many of the 
international collaborations 
come from work that spans multiple international sites 
within the same company. This trend toward greater 

collaboration across national boundaries will likely 

continue due to the increasing global investments in 
research by both nations and global industries. 
International research collaborations in computer 
architecture have not increased dramatically, although 

more papers are being published as collaborations 

between U.S. and foreign researchers. The emergence of 
the ARM architecture in the mobile computing space 
provides impetus for foreign investment in architecture 

research, particularly in Europe, as European funding 

agencies prefer to invest in activities that are synergistic 
with European-based technologies. 
Today, leading U.S. universities are linking to 
remote campuses in Asia and Europe and are describing 

themselves as ﬁglobal universities.ﬂ This trend, as well 
as the growing number of global companies, may have 
an impact on future U.S. competitiveness. 

 
                                                   1Conferences included in each of the four technology areas are 
as follows: (1) Architecture:
 ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, and 
MICRO; (2) Programming: ECOOP, OOPSLA, PLDI, POPL, and 
PPoPP; (3) Applications: SIGGRAPH, SC, VLDB, and WWW; 
and (4) Semiconductor Devices a
nd Circuits: IEDM and ISSCC. 
2Coauthor networks were generate
d with the Science of Science 
(Sci2) Tool: Sci2 Team (2009). Science of Science (Sci2) Tool. 
Indiana University and SciTech Strategies, http://sci2.cns.iu.edu. 
2.3 Commercialization of Technologies 
 This section provides a snapshot of the global 
landscape in the commercialization of semiconductor 

and computing hardware and software technologies 

using data from iSuppli, Gartner, the Hardware Top 100, 

and the Software Top 100.
3  2.3.1 Semiconductor Commercialization
  The committee began by analyzing revenues from 
the largest semiconductor, as well as computing 
hardware and software, companies. Table 2-1 shows the 

top 20 semiconductor companies, ranked by 2010 

revenues4 and includes companies that sell 
semiconductor components.
5 The chart shows the nation 
where the company is headquartered, its primary 

technology area, whether it has its own in-house 

fabrication capability, 2010 revenues in U.S. dollars, and 

the fraction of the global semiconductor market. 
These top 20 companies account for a total of $197 
billion, which is about two-thirds of the global 

semiconductor market. Of these top 20 companies, the 

United States accounts for 47 percent of revenue. Japan 
and Korea account for about 20 percent each, while 
Europe accounts for 10 percent. Historically, being a 

major semiconductor company required owning and 

operating significant semiconductor fabrication factories. 
However, the rising cost of deploying such facilities, 
both in R&D and capital investments, combined with the 

availability of ﬁfab-for-hireﬂ foundry services from 

companies such as Taiwan Semiconductor 

Manufacturing Corporation (TSMC), have given rise to 
an increasing number of fabless
6 semiconductor 
companies. Foundries such as TSMC have grown to be 

about 10 percent of th
e overall semiconductor 
component market (Gartner
7 estimate is U.S. $28.3
                                                 3See www.isuppli.com; www.gart
ner.com; www.hardwaretop 
100.org; and www.so
ftwaretop100.org. 
4See http://www.isuppli.com/Semiconductor-Value-Chain/ News/Pages/Intel-Reasserts-Semiconductor-Market-Leadership-in 
-2011.aspx. Last accessed on August 16, 2012. 
5Companies that supply only fabr
ication services (such as 
TSMC with 2010 revenues of over $13 billion) are not included. 
Systems companies that design their own chips (such as Apple) 
are included in Table 2-1 below. 
6Fabless semiconductor companies specialize in the design and 
sale of hardware devices and se
miconductor chips, as opposed to 
device fabrication. 
7ﬁSemiconductor foundry revenue increased 40.5%, reaching 
$28.3 billion in 2010. Foundry fab u
tilization reached its peak in 
3Q10 after several quarters of 
good growth. Leading-edge tech-
nologies (65 nm to 45 nm) have been in high demand from found-
ries, increasing in revenue contribution.ﬂ Available at 
http://www.gartner.com/id=1634315.
 Last accessed on February 
7, 2012. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
   FIGURE 2-1 International conference collaboration networks. Data compiled from the following conferences: 
ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA and MICRO (architecture); EC
OOP, OOPSLA, PLDI, POPL, and PPoPP (programming 
systems); SC, SIGGRAPH, VLDB, and WWW (applications
); and IEDM and ISSCC (semiconductor devices and 
circuits). Collaboration maps were generated using the Science of Science (Sci2) Tool available at 

http://sci2.cns.iu.edu. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE 
21   TABLE 2-1 Top 20 Largest Semiconductor Companies (by revenue) in 2010 
Rank Company Country of Origi
nPrimary Market Fab 
$ Sales (U.S. millions) 
% Market 
Share 1 Intel* USA microprocessors yes 40,394  13.2 
2 Samsung* 
South Korea 
memory, mobile SoCs 
yes 
28,380  9.3 3 Toshiba Japan memory yes 13,010  4.3 
4 Texas Instruments* 
USA 
DSP, mobile SOC 
yes 
12,944  4.3 5 Renesas Japan microcontrollers yes 11,893  3.9 
6 Hynix 
South Korea 
memory 
yes 
10,380  3.5 7 ST Microeletronics France, Italy memory, microcontrollers yes 10,346  3.4 
8 Micron 
USA 
memory 
yes 
8,876  2.9 9 Qualcomm* USA mobile SOC no 7,204  2.4 
10 Broadcom 
USA 
communication 
no 6,682  2.3 11 Elpida Japan memory yes 6,446  2.1 
12 AMD* 
USA 
microprocessors, GPUs 
no 6,345  2.1 13 Infineon Germany microcontrollers yes 6,319  2.0 
14 Sony 
Japan 
LCD, microprocessors 
yes 
5,224  1.8 15 Panasonic Japan microcontrollers yes 4,946  1.7 
16 Freescale 
USA 
microcontrollers 
no 4,357  1.4 17 NXP Netherlands 
microcontrollers, mixed 
signal 
yes 4,028  1.3 
18 Marvell* 
USA 
mobile SOCs 
no 3,606  1.2 19 MediaTek Taiwan communication no 3,553  1.2 
20 NVIDIA* 
USA 
GPUs, mobile SOCs 
no 3,196  1.0 Data compiled from isuppli™s Preliminary Worldwide Ranking of the Top 20 Suppliers of Semiconductors in 2010 
(www.isuppli.com). 
  
 billion foundry revenue out of roughly U.S. $300 billion 
overall semiconductor revenue). This trend has enabled 

startup companies to grow into large semiconductor 

companies, focused on design. While 13 of the top 20 on 
the 2010 list have their own semiconductor fabrication 
capability, 6 fabless semiconductor companies make the 

list, all of which are from the United States. The 

companies in the table that are marked by an asterisk 
design and sell multicore processors. Companies that sell 
multicore processors for PCs and servers (including 

graphics and high-performance
 accelerators) are Intel, 
AMD, and NVIDIA. Companies such as IBM and 

Oracle also design and sell multicore server processors, 
but have semiconductor revenues that place them outside 
the top 20. Companies that produce multicore processors 
for mobile devices such as cell phones and tablets 
include Samsung, Texas Instruments, Qualcomm, 

Marvell, and NVIDIA. As noted in Chapter 1, while the 

dominant instruction set in the PC and server space is 
x86 (Intel and AMD), the ARM instruction set 
dominates the mobile computin
g space. In addition to the 
mobile processor companies listed above, Apple designs 

its own multicore ARM-based processors for its mobile 
and tablet computers. The openness of the ARM 
architecture and ecosystem, along with ARM™s focus on 

power efficiency, has led it to dominate in this fast-

growing space. 
It is equally important to assess how 
commercialization of these semiconductor technologies 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  has changed over time. Table 2-2
8 ranks the largest 
semiconductor companies in 5-year intervals between 
1995 and 2010. While mergers and acquisitions have 

changed the names of some of the companies, the 

country of origin still reflects the relative competitive 
stature of different nations and regions. In general, the 
United States has become more competitive in the 

semiconductor sectors. In 1995, 6 U.S. companies were 

in the top 20, representing 34 percent of the revenue of 
the top 20 companies. By 2010, 9 U.S. companies were 
in the top 20, representing 47 percent of revenue of the 

top 20 companies. While South Korea saw a drop in the 

number of companies in the top 20 from 3 to 2, the 

combined revenue share of Samsung and SK Hynix 
accounted for 19 percent of
 revenue of the top 20. 
Japan™s representation in the top 20 also dropped, from 7 

to 5, with its revenue share dropping even more 

precipitously, from 44 percent to 21 percent of the top 
20. 
 
2.3.2 Computing Hardware and Software 

Commercialization 
 In addition to assessing nations™ competitive posture 
in the commercialization of semiconductor technologies, 

insight can also be gained from monitoring the world™s 
largest computing hardware (including semiconductors, 
devices, and systems) and software companies. 

According to the Top 100 Research Foundation,
9 in 2010 
the world™s 20 largest hardware companies accounted for 

nearly U.S. $650 billion in annual revenue. Of just these 
top 20 companies, alone, the United States accounts for 
about 35 percent of total revenue, followed by Japan, 

South Korea, and Taiwan, each with about 19 percent. 

Europe™s only entry is Nokia in Finland. China™s Lenovo 
is a relatively recent entry to the global market, 
following their acquisition of IBM™s laptop business in 

2005. 
A similar analysis finds that the world™s 20 largest 
software companies account 
for more than U.S. $160 
billion in revenue and nearly half of the overall U.S. 

$300 billion plus worldwide software market
10 in 2010 
(see Appendix H). U.S.-based companies account for 

nearly 80 percent of revenues, with European companies 
accounting for about 15 percent.
 The only Asian country 
represented is Japan, with about 6 percent of the top 20 
                                                 8Reported revenues for each company may not be independent; 
for example, due to the outsour
cing of manufacturing across com-
panies, as well as cross-licensing
 and use of intellectual property. 
9See http://www.hardwaretop100.org/. Last accessed on June 
16, 2012. 
10See http://www.softwaretop100.
org/. Last accessed on June 
16, 2012. 
in revenue. The top U.S. companies, including 
Microsoft, IBM, Oracle, and HP, all have significant 
R&D investments in software and tools for parallel and 

multicore systems. The companies that produce game 

software all have core competence in parallel and 
multicore systems. 
Information technology (IT) companies such as 
Google and Amazon do not appear in this list because 

their business models do not rely on selling software. 
However, they depend on a distributed parallel 
infrastructure that is now ba
sed on multicore systems. 
They are thus both producers and consumers of 

multicore hardware and software technology. 

 2.3.3 Summary of Commercialization Landscape 
 The degree to which indicators of national research 
capability and productivity, such as those discussed in 
Appendix F, are correlated with a nation™s current 
commercial competitiveness, is a complex question, 

especially when the lag betw
een research discovery and 
commercialization can be substantial and global 
information flow makes research results widely 
available. Similarly, the interplay between a country™s 

research prowess and its educational systems affect 

global talent flow and retention in subtle and complex 
ways. These complexities underlie the longstanding 
questions about the interplay between basic research and 

technology commercialization, with broad implications 

for national, regional, and global economic policies. 
Conversely, a nations™ economic competitiveness 
may influence both its research capabilities and the 
ability of its companies to capitalize effectively on new 

research ideas. For example, if an industry can no longer 

translate the combination of government-funded basic 
research ideas and its own R&D investments into 
commercial successes with wide-enough profit margins, 

next-generation product development investments can 

become cost-prohibitive. This is akin to an economics 
argument that underlies Moore™s LawŠthat the scaling 
rate parameter is significantly driven by the economics 

of internal investment and risk. For industries that can no 

longer make these investments 
or take the risks, residing 
at the leading edge of technology is no longer a viable 
business model and new strategies are required to remain 
competitive. 
In considering a nation™s ability to commercialize 
technological investments, it is important to recognize 
that most of the world™s largest semiconductor, 
hardware, and software companies are global in nature, 
with R&D and manufacturing facilities worldwide, along 

with a complex set of technology cross-licensing 
agreements and supply chai
n interdependencies. Very 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE 
23   TABLE 2-2 Largest Semiconductor Companies by Revenue (1995-2010)
 Company Country of Origin 1995 Rank 2000 Rank 2005 Rank 2010 Rank 
Intel USA 1 1 1 1 
Samsung 
South Korea 
6 4 2 2 Toshiba Japan 3 2 4 3 
Texas Instruments 
USA 
7 3 3 4 Renesas Japan N/A N/A 7 5 
SK Hynix 
South Korea 
N/A 
14 11 6 STMicroeletronics France, Italy N/A 6 5 7 
Micron 
USA 
18 10 12 8 Qualcomm USA N/A N/A 16 9 
Broadcom 
USA 
N/A 
N/A 
20 10 Elpida Japan N/A N/A N/A 11 
AMD 
USA 
N/A 
16 15 12 Infineon Germany N/A 8 6 13 
Sony 
Japan 
N/A 
20 13 14 Panasonic Japan N/A N/A N/A 15 
Freescale 
USA 
N/A 
N/A 
10 16 NXP Netherlands 11 9 9 17 
Marvell 
USA 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
18 MediaTek Taiwan N/A N/A N/A 19 
NVIDIA 
USA 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
20 NEC Japan 2 5 8 N/A 
Matsushita 
Japan 
13 17 14 N/A 
Sharp Japan 19 19 17 N/A 
Rohm 
Japan 
N/A 
N/A 
18 N/A 
IBM Microelectronics USA 12 18 19 N/A 
Motorola USA 
5 7 N/A 
N/A 
Mitsubishi Japan 9 11 N/A N/A 
Hitachi 
Japan 
4 12 N/A 
N/A 
Agere USA N/A 13 N/A N/A 
Fujitsu 
Japan 
8 15 N/A 
N/A 
Hyundai South Korea 10 N/A N/A N/A 
SGS Thompson 
France, Italy 14 N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Siemens Germany 15 N/A N/A N/A 
LG South Korea 
16 N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Sanyo Japan 17 N/A N/A N/A 
National Semiconductor 
USA 
20 N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Data compiled from www.isuppli.com (2000, 2005, 2010) and www.gartner.com (1995). 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  few, if any products are designed, manufactured, and 
sold entirely within the bo
rders of a single country. 
For example, nearly all Taiwanese companies 
maintain manufacturing facilities in China, as does Intel 

and other U.S.-based companies. Many of these 
companies also operate assembly and test factories in 
lower-cost countries such as Vietnam, Malaysia, Costa 

Rica, and others. Furthermore, many companies on the 

list outsource manufacturing to other companies on the 
list. In particular, Foxconn, Quanta Computer, and 
Compal Electronics each manufacture systems on behalf 

of companies such as Toshiba, Dell, HP, and Apple. This 

interconnectedness of international economies 

underscores the need for researchers, as well as policy 
makers, to maintain a global awareness of not only 
emerging research capabilities, but also of successes in 

the commercialization of semiconductor, hardware, and 

software technologies. 
In the last decade, Asia has gained an increasing role 
in the commercialization of technologies, particularly in 

manufacturing. In the areas centered on design (as 

exemplified by the U.S. fabless semiconductor industry), 
the United States still leads in both hardware and 
software. However, other nations seek to climb the value 

chain from manufacturing to integrated system design. 

Samsung™s investment in its own system-on-a-chip 
designs are but one example of that type of activity. 
In the following section, U.S. Census Bureau trade 
data on advanced technology products are examined to 

provide a view of how different nations transform 

innovation from advanced research investments into 
commercially successful products. 
 2.4 Growing Complexity in IT Trade Œ Tracing 
Shifts in International Competitiveness  Trade data provide additional information on the 
global R&D landscape in advanced computing 

technologies and products, and on potential future shifts 
in competitive advantages. 
 
2.4.1 U.S. Census ATP Trade Data at the 10-digit Level 

for Information and Communications (Code 4) and 
Electronics (Code 5) 
 Analysis of U.S. Census Bureau Advanced 
Technology Product (ATP) tr
ade data allows a closer 
look at changing patterns of trade in Code 4 information 
and communications technology (ICT) products and 

Code 5 electronics, including integrated circuits (ICs), 

products
11 between the United States and China, Taiwan, 
                                                 11The US Census Bureau defines ﬁinformation and com-
municationsﬂ (Code 4 of its ATP tr
ade database) as products that 
Japan, and Korea. In addition, the ATP trade data may 
also provide useful proxy indicators on the development 
of technological capabilities in those four countries. 
While U.S. ATP exports fared better than other U.S. 
exports during 2009,
12 the recession induced a great deal 
of volatility for information technology and electronics 
ATP exports. For example, U.S. electronics (including 

integrated circuits) exports fell by 27 percent in 2009 and 

then increased by 23 percent in 2010. The same volatility 
can be seen for U.S. ATP exports to Asia. After 
declining by 15 percent in 2009, U.S. ATP exports to 

Asia grew by a record 23 percent in 2010, driven by the 

rapid growth in both electronics and ICT exports. Here, 

China emerges as the most important growth determinant 
of U.S. ATP exports, electronics in particular. In fact, in 
2009, electronics accounted for roughly half of U.S. ATP 

exports to China. It is important to emphasize that the 

focus increasingly is on semiconductors (~90 percent of 
U.S. electronics exports to China) intended for use in 
China™s manufacturing plants.
13  
2.4.2 Trade analysis of ‚Advanced Computing™ (AC) ATP 
exports/imports 
 As an additional metric for assessing international 
competitiveness, U.S. Census Bureau ATP trade data at 
the 10-digit level was examined to quantify changes in 
ICT and electronics exports to (and imports from) China, 

Korea, Taiwan, and Japan between 2006 and 2010.
14 In 
                                                                                  are able to process increased volumes of information in shorter 
periods of time. This includes cen
tral processing units, all comput-
ers, and some peripheral units such as disk drive units and control 
units, along with modems, facs
imile machines, and telephonic 
switching apparatus. Examples of other products included are 
radar apparatus and communication sa
tellites. Code 5 (electronics) 
concentrates on recent design advances in electronic components 
(with the exception of optoelectronic components) that result in 
improved performance and capacity 
and, in many cases, reduced 
size. Products included are integrated circuits, multilayer printed 
circuit boards and surface-mounted components such as capacitors 
and resistors. 
12D. Hill, September 2011, 
U.S. Exports of Advanced Technol-
ogy Products Declined Less t
han Other U.S. Exports in 
2009, 
InfoBrief, National Center for Science and Engineering Statistics, 
National Science Foundation. The 
U.S. Census Bureau defines 
ATP trade to consist of advanced materials, aerospace, biotech-
nology, electronics, flexible manufacturing, information and 
communication technology (ICT), 
life science, optoelectronics, 
nuclear technology, and weapons. Four
 of these 10 categories (i.e., 
aerospace, electronics, ICT, and lif
e science) together accounted 
for 85 percent of U.S. ATP exports in 2010. 
13A. Hammer, R. Koopman, A. Martinez, 2009, 
U.S. Exports of 
Advanced Technology Products to China
, U.S. International Trade 
Commission, October, No. RN-2009-10E. 
14This time period allows for a c
onsideration of the effects of 
the 2008-2009 global recession. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE 
25   particular, the committee selected from the Code 4 and 5 
export-import data a narrower set of product groups 
directly relevant to the computer and semiconductor 

R&D and commercial ecosystem.
15 These focused 
product groups are referred to as Code 4 AC (advanced 
computing) and Code 5 AC. These AC products are 
technologically more complex than the rest of the Code 4 

and Code 5 product groups, and hence may pose higher 

entry barriers for latecomers like China (discussed in 
Chapter 3). 
Figure 2-2 compares the growth of U.S. Code 4 AC 
and 5 AC exports with that of all U.S. Code 4 and 5 

exports. Between 2006 and 2010, U.S. Code 4 AC (blue 

triangles) exports grew four times faster than all Code 4 
(blue circles) exports. In contrast, all U.S. electronics 
exports were negatively affect
ed by the global recession, 
with Code 5 AC (red triangles) and Code 5 (red circles) 

exports falling ~11 percent and ~14 percent, 
respectively. 
For U.S. imports, Figure 2-3 shows that U.S. Code 4 
AC imports (blue triangles) grew more than twice as fast 

as all Code 4 imports (~68 percent compared to ~28 
percent) between 2006 and 2010. In contrast, both U.S. 
Code 5 and 5 AC imports show relatively flat growth (± 

~1 percent). During this time, the shares of both U.S. 

Code 4 AC and 5 AC exports in all Code 4 and 5 exports 
showed a slight increase of 
~3Œ4 percent. The same is 
true for U.S. Code 4 AC and 5 AC imports, with the 

share of Code 4 AC imports in all Code 4 imports 

showing a larger increase of ~7 percent. 

 2.4.3 Changing Patterns of Trade 
 Figure 2-4 shows changes in total values of U.S. 
Code 4 and 4 AC exports to four leading Asian 
countriesŠChina, Japan, Korea, and TaiwanŠbetween 
2006 and 2010. In 2007, China became the largest 

overseas market for U.S. Code 4 and 4 AC exports, 

followed by Japan, Korea, and Taiwan. Since then, the 
export markets of Korea, Taiwan, and Japan, in 
particular, have all declined (the most dramatic being a 

~39 percent decline by Japan). In contrast, China has 

experienced remarkable growth as a market for U.S. 

exports of Code 4 and, especially, 4 AC products (~86 
percent growth over 4 years). 
As a result, China held the 
                                                 15From the Code 4 and Code 5 data, the committee analyzed 
import and export products associat
ed with advanced computing. 
In particular, the committee focused on categories that included 
(1) products associated with the 
implementation of integrated cir-
cuits and (2) memory and logic-integrated circuits themselves. The 
committee did not include discrete
 electronic components (e.g., 
diodes and amplifiers), display 
technologies, low-frequency inte-
grated circuits, printer technolog
ies, magnetic storage, and radio 
and telecommunication technologies. 
largest share (nearly half) of all U.S. Code 4 AC exports 
to Asia in 2010, with Japan in second place (~34 
percent). However, Japan™s relatively stagnant export 

market is unlikely to be a challenger (at least in the near 

term) as China emerges as a leading market for more 
sophisticated U.S. ICT exports. 
Figure 2-5 shows that China has also become an 
important market for U.S. Code 5 AC exports, well 

ahead of Taiwan, Korea, and Japan. Even during the 
global recession, China™s market for U.S. electronics 
exports, including semiconductors, continued to 

increase, while each of the other Asian markets 

experienced significant declines, in particular Korea and 

Japan with more than 40 percent reductions. By 2010, 
China held the largest share (nearly half) of all U.S. 
electronics exports (both Code 5 and 5 AC) to Asia, 

followed by Taiwan (~25 pe
rcent) and Korea (~20 
percent). As such, China has established itself as a 
leading market for sophisticated U.S. electronics exports, 
and especially for semiconductors. 
Figure 2-6 shows that Chin
a clearly dominates as a 
major source of Code 4 AC products, well ahead of 
Korea (which overtook Japan in 2008), Japan, and 
Taiwan (by more than an order of magnitude). Between 

2006 and 2010, U.S. Code 4 AC imports from China 

grew by almost 130 percent. More importantly, by 2010 
China held a ~95 percent share of all Code 4 AC exports 
from Asia to the United States, establishing its role as a 

major source of U.S. imports of sophisticated ICT 

products. While they do not pose any perceivable threat 

to China™s lead, it is worth noting that an increasing 
share of U.S. Code 4 imports from Korea and 
Taiwan,16Šbut not Japan, which has experienced 
negative growthŠnow constitute more sophisticated 

Code 4 AC products. 
Figure 2-7 shows that, despite the trade disruption 
resulting from the global recession, Taiwan remains the 

leading source of Code 5 AC imports to the United 

States, ahead of Korea, Japa
n, and China. Historically, 
China has lagged behind the rest of Asia as a source of 
U.S. Code 5 and 5 AC imports. However, it is worth 

emphasizing that, since 2009, Code 5 AC imports to the 

United States from China have grown much faster (~72   
                                                 16In 2010, U.S. imports of Code 4 AC products from Korea and Taiwan 
grew by ~1,328 percent and ~98 percent, respectfully. However, high 
growth rates should not necessarily be associated with high export-import 
values. For example, while Korea exhibits
 a high growth rate of Code 4 AC 
products to the United States betw
een 2006 and 2010, the total value of 
these exports remains very low (increasing from U.S. $30 million to $470 
million), compared with China (U.S. $16.9 billion to $38.8 billion). 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
   FIGURE 2-2 Total value of U.S. Code 4, 4 AC, 5, and 5 AC 
exports. Data compiled from U.
S. Census Bureau Advanced 
Technology Product trade data. 
   FIGURE 2-4 Total value of U.S. Code 4 and 4 AC exports to 
Asia. Data compiled from U.S. Census Bureau Advanced 

Technology Product trade data. 
 FIGURE 2-3 Total value of U.S. Code 4, 4 AC, 5, and 5 AC 
imports. Data compiled from U.S. Census Bureau Advanced 
Technology Product trade data 
   FIGURE 2-5 Total value of U.S. Code 5 and 5 AC exports to 
Asia. Data compiled from U.S. Census Bureau Advanced 

Technology Product trade data. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE 
27    FIGURE 2-6 Total value of U.S. Code 4 and 4 AC imports 
from Asia. Data compiled from U.S. Census Bureau Advanced 

Technology Product trade data. 
  FIGURE 2-7 Total value of U.S. Code 5 and 5 AC imports 

from Asia. Data compiled from U.S. Census Bureau Advanced 

Technology Product trade data. 
    percent) than any of the other three Asian countries. As a 

result, China now has a 20 percent share of all U.S. Code 
5 AC imports from Asia, suggesting that China is 
making continuous progress as an exporter despite its 

persistent weakness as a semiconductor producer. 

 2.4.4 Summary of Trade Data Analysis 
 The overall picture that emerges from the analysis of 
trade data is that the United States has kept its leading 
position as a supplier of leading-edge semiconductors, as 
reflected by Code 5 and 5 AC export data. China is also 

increasingly becoming a major market for both Code 5 

and 5 AC products. Most U.S.
 exports of semiconductors 
to China end up in Chinese ICT products. The trade data 
also suggest that China 
is exhibiting increased 
competitiveness as both a consumer and supplier of 
Code 4 and 4 AC products. 
 
Another important finding is that shifts in 
competitiveness are very pronounced among the four 
leading Asian countries. While these shifts differ across 
product markets, China consistently leads the group, 

except in being a supplier of Code 5 and 5 AC products 

(though it is growing in that market, as well).  
Finally, with regard to China™s position in the global 
semiconductor value chain, the trade data analysis 

suggests that while the China market increases in 

importance, its domestic semiconductor industry 
continues to play a secondary role. Although China has 
growing strengths in the O-S-D (optoelectronics-sensor-

discrete) industry and in the SPA&T (semiconductor 

packaging, assembly, and test) industry, these are 

somewhat secondary markets that do not define future 
technology trajectories. 
In summary, the United States cannot afford to be 
complacent. There is no doubt
 that over time China™s 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  position in the global semiconductor value chain will 
keep improving. The United States needs to be prepared 
for a long-term shift in competitiveness. 

 2.5 China™s Position in the Global Semiconductor 
Value Chain  So far, three broad metrics have been discussedŠ
preliminary pilot study data on national representation at 
technical conferences (i.e.,
 authorship of conference 
papers); revenues generated by leading semiconductor, 

hardware, and software comp
anies; and analyses of 
advanced electronics and ICT imports from and exports 
to AsiaŠto assess national technological leadership and 
competitivenessŠeach of which has indicated that the 

United States continues to maintain a leadership 

position. 
However, these metrics also shed insight into the 
potential for competitor nations, such as China, to now 

meet or surpass U.S. technological capabilities. For 

example, while Table F-4 suggests that China™s research 
contributions (via conference papers) are low relative to 
the United States and other leaders like Japan, Section 

2.4 shows that China is
 exhibiting increased 
competitiveness as a strong consumer and supplier of 

advanced electronics and ICT products. China™s rapidly 
growing semiconductor market continues to transform 
the semiconductor industry worldwide (both 

geographically and economi
cally). Accordingly, many 
questions arise as to whether and how these emerging 
changes may affect the global semiconductor value 
chain. 
The following sections examine China™s growing 
role as a major consumer and supplier of 
semiconductors, as well as its contribution to the global 
semiconductor value chain. The following description 

relies heavily on the PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) 

report, Continued growth Œ China™s impact on the 
semiconductor industry Œ 2011 update
.17  2.5.1 China has become a Major Consumer of 

Semiconductors 

 Over the last decade, 
China™s semiconductor 
market
18 has grown at an incredible 24.8 percent 
compounded annual growth rate (CAGR), far outpacing 
                                                 17PwC, 2011, 
Continued growth: China™s impact on the semi-
conductor industry Œ 2011 update
. Available at http://www.pwc. 
com/gx/en/technology/assets/chi
na-semiconductor-report-2011.pdf. 
Last accessed January 27, 2012. 
18China™s semiconductor market refe
rs to the value of all semi-
conductor devices consumed in Ch
ina by EMSs (electronics man-
ufacturing service providers), OEMs (original equipment manu-
facturers), and ODMs (original design manufacturers). 
the worldwide semiconductor market (3.9 percent 
CAGR). In 2010 alone, China™s semiconductor market 
grew by ~30 percent to U.S. $132 billion, accounting for 

more than 40 percent of the worldwide market. Much of 

this growth is driven by two factors: (1) a significant 
portion of consumed semiconductors are incorporated 
into final products that are assembled in China and then 

exported for sale elsewhere (such as in the United States, 

the European Union, Japan, and India) and (2) electronic 
products produced in China have higher semiconductor 
content (~27 percent) than the worldwide average (~19 

percent). 
To fairly assess the implications of China™s large 
share of the worldwide semiconductor market, it is 
important to recognize that, unlike in the United States, 
China™s semiconductor market is dominated by 

multinational and global semiconductor companies. For 

example, the 10 largest suppliers of semiconductors to 
China are not Chinese-owned companies and account for 
a combined 47 percent share of China™s semiconductor 

market. However, although no Chinese-owned 

semiconductor companies are among the top 10 suppliers 
to either the worldwide or
 Chinese market, China™s 
domestic semiconductor market has experienced 

significant growth, increasing from U.S. $10 billion in 

2003 to U.S. $46 billion in 2010, representing more than 
27 percent of worldwide semiconductor market growth. 
Today, China™s domestic consumption of 
semiconductors accounts for more than 15 percent of the 

worldwide market. This sugge
sts that Chinese original 
equipment manufacturers (OEMs) may play a more 
prominent role in the future in shaping the parameters of 
semiconductor designs. 

 
2.5.2 China™s Semiconductor Manufacturing Industry 
 In 2010, China™s semiconductor industry
19 experienced record growth (~30 percent) with revenues 

that account for ~8Œ11 pe
rcent of the worldwide 
semiconductor industry (compared with ~2 percent in 
2000). Similar to its largest semiconductor suppliers, 

China™s largest semiconductor manufacturing enterprises 

are multinational integrated device manufacturers 

(IDMs). Various aspects of the industry have been 
demonstrating significant growth.
20 China™s IC design industry has become one of the 
fastest growing sectors in China™s semiconductor 
                                                 19China™s semiconductor industry refers to the sum of all re-
ported revenues of all semiconduc
tor manufacturers in China, 
including IC design, IC manufact
uring and wafer foundries, IC 
packaging and test, and O-S-D companies. 
20See China Semiconductor Industry Association 
(.‰!â%Ð+¶!’ ©
 2010). Last accessed on February 23, 2012. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GLOBAL RESEARCH LANDSCAPE 
29   industry, generating revenues of U.S. $5.4 billion (46 
percent CAGR) in 2010, up from U.S. $178 million in 
2001.
21 In 2010, China™s semiconductor packaging, 
assembly, and test (SPA&T) 
sector also experienced 
positive growth (~27 percent) with revenues of U.S. $9.3 
billion, representing 20 percent of worldwide SPA&T 

facilities.
22 China™s O-S-D sector, in particular its light-
emitting diode industries, experienced similar growth 
with revenues more than twice that of its SPA&T sector 
(U.S. $23.4 billion). In addition, revenues generated in 

2010 by China™s wafer foundries grew by more than 45 

percent, accounting for ~11 percent of worldwide 

foundry revenues. 
 2.5.3 Contribution to the Global Semiconductor Value 

Chain 

 To assess China™s position in the global 
semiconductor value chain, it is important to assess 

China™s strengths and weaknesse
s along each step of the 
value chain. Table 2-3 reports disaggregated 
semiconductor value chain revenue generated both by 
China and worldwide. The data illustrates that China 

currently acts primarily as a semiconductor consumer, 

accounting for ~37 per
cent of the worldwide 
semiconductor value chain. While the majority of these 
semiconductors consumed in China were ultimately 

exported for sale outside of China, more than one-third 

were used in electronic products consumed within China. 
In contrast, China™s contribution as a semiconductor 
producer, that is, sales, only accounts for ~8 percent 
(total sales in China divided by total worldwide revenue) 

of the worldwide value chain. Although its aggregated 

contributions as a semiconductor provider remains low, 
China is also a strong contributor to worldwide discrete 
device revenues and continues to develop its IC design 

capabilities. 

 2.5.4: Summary of China™s Position in the Global 
Semiconductor Value Chain 

 In the last several years, China has steadily increased 
its position in the global semiconductor value chainŠ
particularly as a consumer of semiconductor devices. 
China™s IC design industry 
has also made significant 
gains. However, numerous challenges remain that have 
                                                 21See China High-Tech Industry Development Almanac 
( 2010). Last accessed on February 23, 
2012 22See semi.org.cn (
&÷8˙). Last accessed on February 23, 2012.
 Table 2-3 China™s 2010 Contribution to Worldwide 
Semiconductor Value Chain Revenue (in Billions of U.S. 
Dollars) 
 Worldwide China 
 Revenue Sales Consumption 
Electronic Design 
Automation 
4.2 N/A 0.31 
Semiconductor 
Intellectual Property 1.5 N/A 
0.12 Equipment 39.5 0.10 3.63 
Materials 
43.6 0.43 4.15 IDMs 224.7 18.9 99.6 
Fabless 73.6 5.4 32.4 Foundries 30.2 3.2 13.4 
SATS 23.6 9.1 10.4 Total 440.9 36.6 164.01 
Adapted from the PwC report: 
Continued growth: China's 
impact on the semiconductor industry Œ2011 update
, including 
source material from CSIA, EDAC, Gartner Dataquest, GSA, 

and SEMI (available at www.pwc.com). 
  the potential to reduce China™s overall position in the 
value chain, as well as to alleviate concerns that the 

semiconductor value chain is threatened in the near term. 

While China has certainly emerged as what might be 
termed the dominant global factory for IT equipment, all 
products manufactured in China could also be 

manufactured elsewhere if th
ere was an interruption in 
trade with China. In addition
, the overwhelming majority 
of suppliers to China™s semiconductor market are foreign 
companies. 
While China™s IC design industry continues to 
experience strong growth, it lags behind the United 

States, Japan, Taiwan, and Korea in terms of process 
technology and design line width. This is partly a result 
of (1) lacking or technologically inferior Chinese 

suppliers of electronic design automation tools and 

software and domestic licensors of IC design-related 
intellectual property and (2) significant supply-side 
constraints (e.g., intense competition and price wars) that 

have bankrupted many of China™s domestic IC houses. In 

addition, a narrow focus on low- and middle-end 

consumer products threatens to constrain the growth of 
China™s IC design industry. By fueling its dependence on
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  mature and relatively standardized products, China limits 
its R&D and semiconductor capability developments. 
Similarly, it is questionable whether China can sustain its 

increasing share of total worldwide wafer production as 

its leading foundries (e.g., SMIC, Shougang NEC 
Electronics, and HeJian Technology) have experienced 
dramatic revenue declines in 2010. While it continues to 

lead in the number of new wafer fabrications, these 

plants use older technology. 
 2.6 Concluding Remarks 
 This chapter provides two measures for assessing 
advanced research efforts related to the key advanced 

computing technologies described in Chapter 1, as well 
as for assessing global competitiveness in these 
technologies. These two measures include (1) 

descriptions of the global landscape of the 

commercialization of semiconductor, computing 

hardware, and software tech
nologies; and (2) bilateral 
trade data analysis of electronics and ICT ATP products 
with a focus on technologies specifically relevant to the 

computing challenges outlined in Chapter 1. 
Preliminary observations from a pilot study of a 
third possible measure, conference publication data, 
indicate that the United States has maintained its position 

as a strong contributor of res
earch papers at the technical 
conferences sampled by the committee over the last 15 
years, with particular strengths
 in the area of architecture 
research. Early results fr
om the pilot study also 
demonstrate the value of a more focused examination of 

a nation™s technology-specific paper contributions (say, 

compared to a bulk analys
is across all advanced 
computing sectors). The longitudinal data analyses also 
provide a starting point for identifying trends in national 

 
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
 and regional participation in specific technology areas. 
While these early data suggest a strong U.S. position, a 
more thorough investigation is necessary.
23 The advanced technology product trade data 
analyses indicate that China is increasingly becoming a 
major market for advanced electronics products. China 
also is exhibiting increased competitiveness as both a 

user and supplier of ICT products; its domestic 

semiconductor industry also continues to grow. In 
addition, Taiwanese manufacturing and assembly are 
increasingly being transferred to China. While the 

United States has maintainedŠand is likely to continue 

in the near termŠits leading position as a supplier of 

leading-edge semiconductor designs, it has a more minor 
position in semiconductor manufacturing. 
Though conference data fro
m the pilot study suggest 
that China currently lags behind the United States in 

leading research capabilities (though it is growing, 
especially in the applicati
ons research areas), it is 
important to consider other indicators of China™s 

research capabilitiesŠfor example, the technology 

transfer through U.S. education of Chinese foreign 
nationals. By sending its best students to top U.S. 
research universities, China can capitalize on the ﬁvalue 

addedﬂ by American education and bootstrap its 

manufacturing and design prowess without these 
capabilities showing up in publication data. 
China is already a major consumer of ICT products, 
which is increasingly shaping product expectations and 

standards; over time, China™s position in the global 

semiconductor value chain will continue to improve. 
Thus, the United States can
not be complacent and needs 
to be prepared for this long-term shift in 

competitiveness.
   
                                                  23For example, as discussed in A
ppendix F, future iterations of 
this analysis would ideally take in
to consideration all papers rele-
vant to the computing performance challenges outlined in Chapter 
1, whether published at conferences or in traditional journals, 
weighted by citations and impact 
factors, as well as expert judg-
ment. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 31 3   Innovation Policy Landscape Œ Comparative Analysis    
 
 undamental physical limitations in semiconductor 
scaling have slowed future expectations of 

improved, single-processor computing 
performance on which all sectors of society in the United 
StatesŠand around the worldŠhave relied. Many of 
these technological challenges at the frontiers of device 

design, computer architecture, and parallel programming 

methodologies were described in Chapter 1. While many 
short-term technological fixes have led to recent 
computing performance improvements, no silver bullets 

have emerged to reclaim the steady exponential 

computing performance gains once achieved by 
successive generations of single microprocessor 
computer systems. 
How, then, will the next generation of 
semiconductor, computer architecture and programming 

breakthroughs come about? What types of policies and 
institutions, whether public, private or partnerships, will 
be required to bring about the technological innovation 

necessary for next-generation hardware devices, system 

architectures, and programming systems? To address 
these questions, it is important to understand the role 
innovation policies have played in supporting U.S. 

innovation and, in the context of this report, the policies 

that strengthen, sustain, and/or erode the innovative 
capabilities of the computer and semiconductor 
industries. 
Innovation policies differ across countries, 
industries, and technologies
. Countries differ in their 
levels of development and in their economic institutions, 
and hence pursue quite different approaches to 
innovation policy. The United States model, for instance, 

has largely been based on a belief that market forces 

(which include government and defense as consumers 
that demand leading-edge technology) and the private 
sector should play a primary role in innovation, backed 
by government investment in basic academic research. In 
contrast, the European Union and emerging economies 

such as China, Korea, and Taiwan rely much more on 

the government to articulate strategic objectives and key 
parameters. 
In the United States, there is a widespread 
expectation that government-centered innovation 

systems will ﬁnaturallyﬂ converge to a U.S.-style market-
led system. However, comparative research on national 
innovation policies suggests that this convergence is 

limited.
1 In addition, innovation policies change over 
time, even within the same country. As Charles Vest 
emphasizes, the American innovation system has a long 
tradition of highly decen
tralized, market-driven 
innovation networks, where the government historically 

played a role primarily at the local level.
2 However, as 
ubiquitous globalization disaggregates manufacturing, 
product development, and research, it is not yet clear 
which policies will best support future innovation in the 

United States.
3 To understand how requirements for innovation 
policy differ across industries and technologies, it is 
                                                 1See R. R. Nels
on, 1993, ed., 
National Innovation Systems. A 
Comparative Analysis,
 Oxford University Press, New York.
 For an analysis of the persistent di
versity of China™s and America™s 
innovation and standards polic
ies, see D. Ernst, 2011, 
Indigenous 
Innovation and Globalization: The Challenge for China's Stand-
ardization Strategy, University of California Institute on Global 
Conflict and Cooperation, La Jo
lla, CA, and East-West Center, 
Honolulu, HI, 123 pp. 
2C. Vest, 2011, ﬁUniversities and 
the U.S. Innovation System,ﬂ 
in C. W. Wessner, ed., 
Building the 21st Century. U.S.-China Co-
operation on Science, Technology, and Innovation
, Washington, 
D.C.: The National Acad
emies Press, pp. 70-73. 
3D. C. Mowery, 2009, Plus ca change: Industrial R&D in the 
ﬁthird industrial revolution,ﬂ 
Industrial and Corporate Change
, (18):1, pp. 1-50. 
F The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  useful to consider how innovations differŠin the 
complexity of the infrastructure and capabilities required 
to foster and implement them. Furthermore, the demands 

of innovation policy differ, depending on the nature and 

the intensity of innovation barriers that constrain the 
deployment of new ideas, inventions, and discoveries 
into commercially successful products, services, and 

business models. 
Today, the effects of globalization extend across all 
stages of the value chain, including engineering, product 
development, and applied and basic research. This has 

resulted in an increase in the organizational and 

geographic mobility of knowledge.
4 However, the new 
geography of knowledge is not a flatter world where 
technical change and liberalization spread the benefits of 
globalization rapidly and equally. Instead, even mature 

and established technology 
and manufacturing leaders 
now face competition from a handful of newŠyet very 
diverse and intensely competitiveŠmanufacturing and 
research and developmen
t hubs around the world.
5 Therefore, the United States can learn a great deal by 

looking at the strengths and weaknesses of alternative 
information technology (IT) in
novation policies in other 
nations.
6 An analysis of these 
diverse approaches to 
innovation policy is shaped 
by issues such as: the range 
of policy options that have been pursued, how policy 
approaches differ, how these differences affect 
innovation capacities, and how innovation policies 

pursued elsewhere affect the global supply chain.  
This chapter examines the strengths and weaknesses 
of different innovation strategies, policy tools, and 
institutional arrangements implemented in countries that 
are potentially important players in the development of 

computing devices, technologies, and products. While 

U.S. innovation strategies have primarily relied on 
market forces and the private sector, it is important to 
understand the varied and complex factors that drive the 

evolution of different national innovation ecosystems. 

For example, countries such as China and Taiwan have 
relied on top-down government leadership to define 
strategic objectives and key parameters of innovation 
                                                 4D. Ernst, 2005, ﬁThe New Mobilit
y of Knowledge: Digital In-
formation Systems and Global Flagsh
ip Networks,ﬂ in R. Latham 
and S. Sassen (eds.), 
Digital Formations: IT and New Architec-
tures in the Global Realm
, Princeton University Press, Princeton 
and Oxford. 5D. Ernst, 
A New Geography of Knowledge in the Electronics 
Industry? Asia™s Role in Global Innovation Networks
, Policy 
Studies, No. 54, August 2009, East-West Center, Honolulu, HI, 65 
pp. 6This is in line with Jacques 
Gansler™s argument for a ﬁglobal 
strategyﬂ made for the U.S. de
fense industry (J. Gansler, 2011, 
Democracy™s Arsenal: Creating a Twenty-First-Century Defense 
Industry, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA). 
programs. Another variant of innovation policy can be 
found in the European Union™s recent push toward new 
forms of cross-border coordination of innovation 

markets and infrastructures. Section 3.1 provides a history of the U.S. 
semiconductor industry and examines how America™s 
decentralized market-driven innovation system has led to 

where the United States is today. Section 3.2 looks at 

China™s indigenous innovation policy, especially its 
recent Strategic Emerging Industries (SEI) Program. 
Section 3.3 examines the evolving role of Taiwanese 

innovation policies to support low-cost and fast 

innovation through domestic and global innovation 

networks. Section 3.4 looks at Korea™s coevolution of 
international and domestic knowledge linkages. Section 
3.5 examines the European Union™s recent efforts to 

develop an integrated innovation strategy and its recent 

Key Enabling Technologies (KETs) Program. Section 
3.6 provides concluding remarks and policy 
implications. 
 3.1 Development of the U.S. Computer and 
Semiconductor Industry  3.1.1 Historical Context 
 Several factors influence the range and type of 
policy options available to nations to promote and 

manage development and competitiveness in the 

semiconductor, computer architecture, and software 
programming arenas. Among those factors historically 
dominating U.S. policy considerations are 
 The economic importance of semiconductors and 
computing in the U.S. national economy; 
 The economic importance of closely related U.S. 
industries (e.g., telecommunications, consumer 
electronics, military and aerospace); 
 The outlook on the U.S. federal budget, the climate 
for public and private investment, the employment 
picture, and predictions on economic growth; 
 Political perceptions about the health of these 
industries relative to others; 
 Public perceptions about the United State™s 
competitive commercial position, as well as 
leadership of the United States vs. other nations, in 

these industries; 
 Both real and perceived dependence of U.S. 
intelligence and national security on leadership in 

these industries, and U.S. reliance on foreign 
technologies and assistance in areas related to 

intelligence and national security; and  
 Prevailing political philosophies regarding industrial 
policy. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
33   The last two decades have exposed significant 
conflicts among these traditional influences on policy, 
largely brought about by three important changes: (1) the 

end of the cold war, (2) the general stagnation of the 

Japanese economy, and (3) the globalization of the 
computer and semiconductor industries into well-
established
7 and mutually dependent supply chains and 
markets. 
Federal funding of electronic development, from the 
launch of Sputnik in 1957 almost until the fall of the 
Berlin Wall, was driven by perceived military 

requirements, which had significant noneconomic 

motivation. During this period, significant federal R&D 

investment was made in innovative semiconductor 
technology for military application. After some cost 
reduction and normal technology adoption delay, the 

same technology and technology roadmap steadily 

appeared in the commercial market, including advanced 
compound semiconductors and dramatically new 
manufacturing equipment, which also found strong 

commercial adoption, for example, in lithography. 
By the mid-1990s this pattern had reversed; that is, 
the incredible acceleration of the personal computer (PC) 
and server industries meant that commercial technology 

was leading rather than lagging behind military 

technology. This shift led to an increasing focus on the 
use and adaptation of 
commercial off-the-shelf technology in federal procurement and contributed to the 

steady decline in fede
ral funding for R&D,
8 given the 
U.S. preeminence in the area and the already high levels 

of research investments by the U.S. computer and 
semiconductor industry. 
Today, cutting-edge R&D in semiconductors, the 
historical engine of computer performance growth, has 

become unmanageably expensive for the usual U.S. 
federal agencies. At the same time, it is extremely 
difficult for industry
 to invest in long-term R&D, given 
the near-term expectations of the financial markets. One 

consequence has been limited commercial R&D 
investment in hardware and software technologies whose 
economic return is not realized rather quickly. 
In the United States, industrial policy has typically 
not been viewed as an offensive tool for economic 

competition or a means to create new industries or 
accelerate successful ones, but 
rather as a defensive tool 
to protect or restore existing industries under competitive 
                                                 7While well established and interdependent, these value chains 
can be highly vulnerable to sudden disruptions from natural dis-
asters, geopolitical conf
licts, and so on. Some of these are dis-
cussed in greater detail in Chapter 4. 
8J. Gansler, 2011, 
Democracy™s Arsenal: Creating a Twenty-
First-Century Defense Industry, The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
economic pressure.
9 The perception of favoring certain 
industries, ﬁpicking winners,ﬂ by government pressures 
and incentives, rather than allowing for natural market 

forces and laissez-faire investment, has been politically 

toxic. On the other hand, rescuing at least some 
foundering industries, or attempting to regain lost ground 
in critical ones, has been generally politically rewarding. 

The Asian competitor nations, for example, China and 

Japan, traditionally have both subsidized and protected 
(by legal and covert subsidies and tariffs) those 
industries that they choose to target. 
In contrast, it is important to recognize that U.S. 
industries, and information technology in particular, do 

not tend to receive attention or assistance from federal 
sources simply because they are slowing down in growth 
or maturing; there typically must be a specific adversary. 

For example, once U.S. superiority in electronics and 

computation (e.g., for guidance systems) over the Soviet 
Union became assured, the focus of government policy 
switched to the rising Japanese dominance in electronics, 

especially including memories. 
While countries such as Japan began forming R&D 
consortia as early as 1956, the practice was illegal in the 
United States until Congress passed the National 

Cooperative Research Act in 1984.
10 Two years later, 
concerns of a U.S. decline in semiconductor market 
share prompted a call by the Semiconductor Research 
Corporation (SRC) and Semiconductor Industry 

Association (SIA)
11 for increased cooperation to provide 
the U.S. semiconductor industry with the capability of 

regaining world leadership in semiconductor 
manufacturing. As a result of this effort, SEMATECH 
(Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology) was created 

in 1987 as a partnership of 14 U.S. semiconductor 

companies with the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), wh
ich contributed U.S. $500 
                                                 9U.S. innovation policy can be th
ought of as ﬁmarket conform-
ingﬂ in its intent to address pr
oblems that economis
ts have deemed 
weaknesses for technological adva
ncements. In particular, these 
were externality problems that
 required collective R&D funding 
and that funding took specific paths because of appropriation pro-
cesses in Congress. 
10D. V. Gibson, and E. M. Rogers, 1994, 
R&D Collaborations 
on Trial, Harvard Business School 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
11ﬁFounded in 1977 by five microelectronics pioneers, SIA 
unites over 60 companies that account for 80 percent of the semi-
conductor production of this country.ﬂ (see www.sia-online.org) 
SIA, along with the European Semiconductor Industry Association 
(ESIA), the Japan Electronics and Information Technology Indus-
tries Association (JEITA), the Korea Semiconductor Industry As-
sociation (KSIA) and the Taiwan Semiconductor Industry Associ-
ation (TSIA), sponsors the International Technology Roadmap for 
Semiconductors, a15-year assess
ment of the semiconductor in-
dustry™s future technology require
ments (see www.public.itrs.net). 
Last accessed on June 30, 2012. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  million over 5 years, to solve common manufacturing 
problems and to regain U.S. competitiveness in the 
semiconductor industry that had been lost to Japanese 

industry in the mid-1980s
12. In the committee™s view, 
SEMATECH played a strong role in early efforts to 
reclaim U.S. semiconductor manufacturing leadership 
and has been a successful example of a U.S. consortium 

demonstrating the value of federal funds and federal 

participation. This position is reiterated by a 2002 
National Research Council report, 
Government-Industry 
Partnerships for the Development of New Technologies
, which found that the SEMATECH partnership directly 

contributed to the global competitiveness of U.S. 

industry, specifically the resurgence of the U.S. 
semiconductor industry.
13 Today, the SRC also continues to play a significant 
role in advancing the semiconductor industry though 

synergetic industry and univ
ersity research
 programs and 
support initiatives around the world, such as the Global 
Research Collaboration Program, Nanoelectronics 

Research Initiative, Focus Center Research Program, and 

Semiconductor Research Corporation Education 
Alliance. The National Nanofabrication Infrastructure 
Network (NNIN) also provides
 a successful example of 
U.S. government (National Science Foundation) support 

of university semiconductor research. By paying for 
some expensive semiconductor research equipment at 
universities, the NNIN enables leading-edge research, 

which indirectly supports the U.S. semiconductor 

industry with research results and science and 

engineering graduates. 
In contrast, two other industry-only consortia, 
started near the same time and for similar reasons, both 

failed. The Microelectronics and Computer Technology 

Consortium (MCC) was formed in the early 1980s as a 
response to Japan™s Fifth Generation Computer Systems 
(FGCS) project.
14 Entirely funded by corporate partners, 
MCC worked on a wide range of technology and 

software projects, with early sponsorship particularly 
from mainframe computer companies. By 2000 the 
Board of Directors had decided to dissolve the 

organization. Another industry-only consortium, U.S. 

Memories was organized in 1989 to manufacture 
                                                 12See www.sematech.org
/corporate history;
 www.sematech.org/ 
corporate/timeline; NRC, 2003, 
Securing the Future: Support to the 
Semiconductor Industry, Washington, D.C.: The National Acad-
emies Press (available online at 
http://www.nap.e
du/catalog.php? 
record_id=10677#toc). 
13NRC, 2002, 
Government-Industry Partnerships for the 
Development of New Technologies
, Washington, D.C.: The 
National Academies Press (available online at http://www.nap.edu 
/catalog.php?record_id=10584). 
14Kazuhiro Fuchi, 1984, 
Revisiting Original Philosophy of Fifth 
Generation Computer Systems Project, 
FGCS, pp. 1-2. memories based on technology from IBM, to avoid 
dependence on Japanese vendors. However, by early 
1990 the consortium members had proven unwilling to 

make the necessary investments, and major memory 

users like Apple, HP, and Sun did not participate, so the 
project was canceled. Thus far, consortia that include IT 
competitors but that do not have government leadership 

have fared poorly, due to a combination of mutual 

suspicion, lack of focus, and no real sense of urgency. 
In summary, U.S. federal support and investment 
has historically relied upon a perception of military 

threat, economic decline, industry crisis, and/or loss of 

competitive position; and in the United States, electronic 

and computer consortia without both federal R&D 
support and federal direction have not generally 
succeeded. Thus, centralist technology policies that may 

work in nations and cultures that accept such direction 

readily are a poor match to the U.S. free-market model. 
Further, innovation policy ha
s to reflect each country™s 
unique economic institutions, industry structure, and 

growth model. 

 3.1.2 Global Semiconductor Competition 
 While it could be proposed that some U.S. computer 
vendors ﬁfailed to innovate,ﬂ or ﬁgave up the fightﬂ to 
foreign competition, it is important to recognize the 
paired advantages and shortcomings of a free-market 

industrial economy, and the capacity it provides for 

innovation, not only in technology, but in the creation 

(and destruction) of whole economic sectors. U.S. capital 
market investors are often quick to spot and to capitalize 
on transformative shifts in a business paradigm, and, 

consequently, to move their investments in a way that 

often accelerates the change
. Capital markets tend to 
value short-term quarterly profits and tend to reward or 
punish a company accordingly, which manifests in 

changes in its stock price. This has advantages and 

disadvantages. On the one hand, it discourages waste and 
encourages competitiveness. On the other hand, a short-
term focus often discourages long-term thinking and 

R&D investment, particularly during difficult economic 

times. Federal R&D programs and public-private 

consortia play a crucial role in coping with this tension. 
In the late 1980s, when 
it appeared that focused 
government programs in Japan, as well as unfair or 

unreasonable trade practi
ces, might overtake U.S. 
competitiveness, DARPA investments, especially 
SEMATECH, drove the necessary R&D efforts in 
process and equipment to sustain Moore™s Law and to 

maintain the confidence of capital markets. 

Concurrently, IBM began to accelerate its investment in 
very high-performance semiconductor technology and to 
form joint innovation partnerships with numerous (non-
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
35   Intel) semiconductor fabrication companies, creating a 
business counterpoint to Intel. More recently, the rise of 
mobile computing devices has created new competition, 

both among existing companies and new ones formed in 

response to emerging market economies. 
 3.1.3 Creation of the U.S. (and Global) Software 

Industry
15  Continuous technical innovation that sustained 
Moore™s Law (and exponential growth in computing 

performance) led also to the creation of the commercial 

software industry as a mean
ingful force in the U.S. 
economy. This took place in two ways. First, the falling 
cost and wide availability of powerful microprocessors 
greatly increased the number of computers in use, and 

successful software products could be sold in enormous 

numbers at modest prices. 
Second, the fact that a small number of instruction 
set architectures (ISAs) dominated the PC and server 

marketplace
16 meant there was a larger and consolidated 
software market that 
would benefit from steady 
improvements in cost and performance, while seldom 
requiring any significant changes to the programs. 

Vendors rarely prefer to use 
new instructions sets until 
they have been in the market for many years and are 
available on a significant fraction of deployed machines. 
This allowed larger software investments to be made, in 

products that would surely perform better over time, 

courtesy of Moore™s Law. 
U.S. firms dominate this 30-year-old PC and server 
industry, although a few Europ
ean firms (e.g., SAP) are 
of significant size and share of the market. There is early 

evidence that this market dominance may extend to the 

new world of smartphones and tablets, as well as cloud 
services, though global competition in this space is new 
and intense. 

 
3.1.4 Consequences of the U.S. Free-Market Approach 
 These three phenomenaŠthe enormous growth of 
the semiconductor industry, the commoditization of the 

computer industry, and the emergence of a huge software 

industryŠare mutually dependent, and have created a 
virtuous economic framework. 
They also afforded the 
United States the opportunity to achieve and maintain its 
                                                 15Section 3.1.3 and part of Sec
tion 3.1.4 rely heavily on David 
Liddle, ﬁThe Wider Imp
act of Moore™s Law,ﬂ 
IEEE SSCS News-letter
, September 2006. Available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ 
stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=4785858.
 Last accessed August 21, 
2012. 16The history of the mobile and embedded computing space is 
much more varied, with a diversity of ISAs and vendors. 
leadership in information technology generally. 
Although federal support to long-term R&D has been 
indispensible, particularly in bad economic 

environments, such achievements would almost certainly 

not have been possible under a centrally managed policy 
regime. For instance, in a more managed environment, 
the policy impulse might have been to save legacy 

computer companies; instead, market forces coupled 

with a noninterventionist approach and (to a lesser 
extent) government antitrust efforts helped ensure the 
ﬁcreative destructionﬂ that has transformed computing 

and the role of the United States in it. The United States 

has been rewarded by the emergence of very strong 

semiconductor design and software industry 
leadershipŠin exchange 
for the loss of some 
semiconductor fabrication and the assembly and testing 

of commodity products to foreign vendors, for example, 

the off-shore assembly by co
ntract manufacturers of 
even the strongest U.S. computer brands, based upon 
cost. 
However, staying strictly on any technical path 
involves bypassing others, and sacrificing progress in 
some areas to sustain others. It is certainly worth 
examining some of the approaches delayed or abandoned 

by the course taken by the IT industry. 
In the 1960s and 1970s, computers were expensive, 
resources were limited, and programmers were scarce. 
There was great emphasis on creating clever algorithms 

that required the least number of instructions or smallest 

amount of memory, or both. Elegant, parsimonious 

program design was celebrated, and improvements to 
compilers for denser code and new languages for 
programmer productivity were high priorities in 

academia and industry alike. High-productivity 

programming languages help programmers produce 
working programmers faster, as compared with high-
performance programming languages, which help 

programmers extract as much performance as possible 

by exposing machine details to them. From high-
productivity languages and the relentless hardware 
performance improvements enabled by Moore™s Law, a 

new and much larger pool of programmers emerged. 

These programmers applied application-specific 

knowledge, for example, machine learning, graphics, 
animation, accounting, government functions, and so on, 
driving an explosion in software capabilities in the era of 

ever-faster and cheaper central
 processing units (CPUs) 
and memory. In addition, programming emphasis moved 
from performance productivity to getting new products 
out faster. 
Another area of technology research and innovation 
affected by Moore™s Law was parallel computing. In the 
1970s, very large scientific computers with parallelism 
among several arithmetic units were just beginning to 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  work well. Equally important, software researchers were 
beginning to make real progress on the problem of 
programming systems for parallel machines. Moore™s 

Law advances relegated most work in parallel computing 

to business servers and scientific and technical 
computing.
17 A revival of parallel computing research 
and development in the 1990s yielded several new 

approaches and companies, but the early promise was 

not realized, for many reasons. Because the size of the 
technical computing market was small relative to the PC 
market, the research and product development took a 

different path, focusing on performance maximization at 

reduced costs rather than ease of use and programmer 

productivity. 
Only now that the limits of growth in CPU clock 
frequency are in sight for consumer devices has serious 

focus on parallel processing reentered the mainstream. 

Earlier research from the 1980s and 1990s showed the 
difficulty of developing tools that can easily convert 
legacy sequential codes into scalable parallel code that 

run well on current generation or next-generation 

machines. This research experience suggests that future 
work should emphasize simplicity and programmability 
of heterogeneous multicore devices to address 

mainstream product needs. In addition, such research 

should be driven by an awareness of the demonstrated 
limitations of automatic parallelization and recognition 
that the intrinsic parallelism in application problems 

differs markedly. 
Another effect of Moore™s Law over the years has 
been that the capital markets, given the visible, vast 
investment in scalable complementary-symmetry metal-
oxide-semiconductors (CMOS)
 (except for extremely 
low-volume exotic noncommercial uses) have not 

encouraged R&D on new post-silicon materials. Even 
small deviations from the CMOS path, like silicon-
germanium or silicon carbide have aroused skepticism, 

let alone compound IIIŒV semiconductors. 
Typically, a free-market a
pproach will continue on a 
profitable path until it begins to reach diminishing 
returns; unfortunately, that point is sometimes 

recognized too late. The uniprocessor CMOS clock-

frequency race has already ended, leaving the United 

States ill prepared with either semiconductor or software 
succession plans. This type of situation has traditionally 
been one in which U.S. government participation with 

academia and industry has been effective. Neither the 

U.S. federal government nor the U.S. computer industry 
has come to consensus on a 
strategy that ensures U.S. 
leadership in the next generation of computing 

technologies. Thus, those developing future U.S. policy 
                                                 17It is worth noting that parallel
 computing work continued in 
the high-performance computing 
(HPC) and server segments. in these areas should carefu
lly consider the opportunities 
and consequences of alternative innovation strategies, 
some of which have been tried elsewhere.
18  3.2 China Œ Strengthening Indigenous Innovation 
 Over the last several decades, China has made 
significant efforts to align its science, technology, and 
innovation policies to support indigenous innovation. 

These trends towards technonationalism
19 were 
prompted by political concerns within China that it both 
lacks indigenous technology and depends on foreign 
technology, as well as from several lessons learned over 

the past several decades. For example, after its 

relationship with the former Soviet Union ruptured in the 
1950s, China shed its reliance 
on Soviet technology and 
developed a national strategic weapons program, 

developing its own nuclear weapons, missiles, and 

satellites. 
Then, in the late 1970s, China embraced 
globalization by opening its huge market to multinational 
corporations for the exchange of advanced technology. 

In turn, the rapid growth of China™s semiconductor 

consumption primarily reflects its emergence as the 
dominant global factory for IT equipment. Between 2004 
and 2009, alone, China™s share of global electronic 

equipment production increased from 17 percent to 31 
                                                 18When examining innovation strategies elsewhere, it is 
important to recognize that most
 are being applied to those 
whose attempts to enter the advanced computing market were 
late relative to the United States. Latecomers have disad-
vantages and advantages that 
need to be assessed and taken 
into account when considering policy options and what les-
sons might be learned. For inst
ance, latecomers to advanced 
computing need to overcome ve
ry substantial entry barriers 
(disadvantages), as 
well as to exploit ne
w opportunities that 
result from beginning with less-
complicated technology and 
having fewer legacy constraint
s on technology development, 
strategy, and organization (adva
ntages). Economies of scale 
may be a barrier to market entry requiring nonprice means of 
market penetration, that is
, through product differentiation 
and the creation of new markets and distribution channels. 
On the other hand, latecomers 
who become fast followers of 
established technology roadmaps are able to set clear targets 
for product development and rela
ted research, as well as to 
compare and learn from the experience and failures of in-
cumbent leaders. Latecomers are also not locked into sup-
porting and maintaining legacy technologies or infrastruc-
tures. 
19Policy orientation towards autonomy and independence from 
other states (see B. Naughton 
and A. Segal, 2001, ﬁTechnology 
Development in the New Millenium [sic]: China in Search of a 
Workable Model,ﬂ 
MIT Japan Program
, Working Paper Series 
01.03., May 28). 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
37   percent.
20 This marked increase suggests a reshaping of 
the IT equipment manufacturing landscape.  
However, as the global financial and economic crisis 
continues, exports from China have slowed, placing 

pressure on China™s export-oriented economic 
development model. In pursuit of new growth engines 
for its economy, several government policies and 

initiatives have facilitated the strengthening Chinese 

indigenous innovation. 
 3.2.1 Government Policies and Initiatives to Strengthen 

Indigenous Innovation 

 
Medium and Long-Term Plan (2006Œ2020) 
 In early 2006, China released its Medium- and 
Long-Term Plan for the De
velopment of Science and 
Technology (MLP) (2006Œ2020). This plan set the tone 
for strengthening China™s indigenous innovation 
capability by addressing four problems in China™s 

scientific and technological development: (1) lack of 

innovation in commercial technologies and dependence 
on foreign technology; (2) increasingly unfriendly 
international environment for acquisition of foreign 

technologies; (3) technological failure to meet critical 

energy, water and resource utilization generally, and 
environmental protection and public health needs; and 
(4) mounting technological challenges for meeting 

national defense needs.
21 While not specifying what 
indigenous innovation means, the MLP highlights three 

channels through which indigenous innovation 
capabilities may be strengthened: (1) genuine ﬁoriginal 
innovation,ﬂ (2) ﬁintegrated 
innovationﬂ (fusing together 
existing technologies in new ways), and (3) 

ﬁreinnovationﬂ (assimilation and improvement of 
imported technologies)
. The MLP singles out 16 engineering mega-
programs, as well as identifies 11 key areas, 8 frontier 

technologies, and 4 science mega-programs, to support 
in the next 15 years (see Appendix I). Many of these 
programs and focus areas are directly relevant to 

advanced computing, including the IT industry and 

modern services (key areas);
 information technology and 
new and advanced materials (frontier technologies); and 
core electronic components, high-end generic chips, 
                                                 20PwC, 2011, 
Continued growth: China™s impact on the semi-
conductor industry Œ 2011 update
, p 13. Available at www.pwc. 
com/gx/en/technology/assets/c
hina-semiconductor-report-2011. 
pdf. Last accessed January 27, 2012
. 21C. Cao, R. P. Suttmeier, D. F.
 Simon, 2009, ﬁSuccess in State 
Directed Innovation? Perspectives on China™s Plan for the Devel-
opment of Science and Technology
,ﬂ in G. Parayil and A. P. 
D™Costa (eds.), 
The New Asian Innovation Dynamics: China and 
India in Perspective
, Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp. 247Œ264. 
basic software, extra-large-scale integrated circuit (IC) 
manufacturing and techniques, and new-generation 
broadband wireless mobile telecommunications (mega-

engineering programs).
22  Strategic Emerging Industries (SEI) Program
  Strategic emerging indus
tries (SEIs) refer to 
industries
23 associated with the development of 
technologies (e.g., information, biotechnology, medical, 
new energy, environment, marine, and space) that have 

strategic importance to China; many are similar to the 

frontier technologies prioritized in the MLP. These SEIs 

have been said to represent the future direction of 
industrial development in China and will play a critical 
role in its continuous and sustainable economic growth, 

particularly in national econ
omic and social development 
and optimization and upgrading of industrial structure. 
Launched in October 2010,
24 the SEI Program was 
highlighted as an important component of the 12th Five-

Year Plan for National Economic and Social 

Development (2011Œ2015). As selected SEIs are science 
and technology based, the SEI Program is expected to 
decrease China™s dependency upon external technology 

and boost indigenous innovation capabilities, ultimately 

spurring economic growth and the formation of a new 
industrial cycle. It is expect
ed that the government will 
also work out financial and taxation policies to support, 

guide, and encourage capital investment, and establish 

special funds for the development of SEIs. 
Foreign-invested design subsidiaries of leading 
foreign semiconductor companies and global original 
equipment manufacturers (OEMs) play an important role 

in China™s chip design industry. Of the 472 design 

enterprises reported in China at the end of 2009, 
approximately 100 were the design units or activities of 
foreign-invested or subsidiary multinational 
                                                 22See Alan Wm. Wolff, ﬁChina™s Drive Toward Innovation,ﬂ 
Issues Online
, Spring 2007.  Available at http://www.issues.org/ 
23.3/index.html.  Last 
accessed August 21, 2012. 
23SEIs include the following: Energy-saving and environmental 
protection, new generation of 
IT, biotechnology, and high-end 
equipment manufacturing industrie
s; new energy, new materials, 
and new energy automobile indu
stries. State Council of China, 
2010, Decisions of State Council on 
Accelerating the Cultivation 
and Development of Emerging Strategic Industries
, G.F. No.32, 
October 29 [USITO Draft Translation]. 
24On October 18, 2010, the Stat
e Council issued a ﬁDecision on 
the Acceleration of Nurturing and 
Developing Strategic Emerging 
Industries,ﬂ formally launching the SEIs. The 12th Five-Year Plan 
for National Economic and Social Development (2011Œ2015), 
released in 2011, includes SEIs
 as one of its important compo-
nents. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  companies.
25 These foreign-invested design subsidiaries 
engage in a variety of activities that range from the 
simple to the complex, including adapting parent 

company product standards for the China market, 

providing lower-cost capacity for standardized back-end 
design functions that are integrated in the parent 
company™s design flow, but they
 also include integrated 
design projects for system-on-a-chip (SoC) designs. 
In addition to multinational partnerships, long-term 
investments in the IT and advanced computing industries 
are now beginning to yield competitive, indigenous 

microprocessors, designed wholly in China. Over the last 

decade, the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) has 

been developing and prototyping their line of Loongson 
and Godson processors.
26,27
 During this time, each 
generation of Loongson or Godson processor has 

become more capable and is now rivaling leading-edge 

microprocessors in performance. Similarly, the ShenWei 
series of microprocessors,
28 developed by the Jinan 
Institute of Computing Technology (affiliated with the 

People™s Liberation Army) since 2006, has found its way 

into the first home-grown supercomputer in China, 
called BlueLight. As of November 2011, BlueLight 
includes 8,704 ShenWei chips and achieves Linpack 

performance of 795 TFlops,
29 while being one of the 
most energy-efficient computers in the world. 
While neither of these programs has shown any 
commercial success either inside or outside of China, the 

investment period is long and ongoing. One would 

expect that such programs as
pire to serve the Chinese 
domestic market, at least for high-end technical 
computing. As these, and other, systems diverge from 
the x86 and ARM ecosystems, they will have different 

sets of innovation and performance optimization 

challenges. It is likely that national innovation policies, 
                                                 25PwC, 2011, 
Continued growth: China™s impact on the 
semiconductor industry Œ 2011 update
. Available at www.pwc. 
com/gx/en/technology/assets/c
hina-semiconductor-report-2011. 
pdf. Last accessed January 27, 2012. 
26Godson 3B is an 8-core processo
r with vector extensions im-
plemented in a 65 nm technology. 
It employs a MIPS instruction 
set (originally developed in the United States), runs at 1 GHz, and 
has a peak performance of 128 GF. 
27The Loongson and Godson processors were developed under 
the leadership of U.S.-trained computer scientist Li Guojie at the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences™ In
stitute of Computing Technol-
ogy, CAS. 
28The ShenWei 3 chip contains 16 cores, is implemented in 
65nm and runs at 1.1GHz. 29There are two other Chinese HPC installations above 
BlueLight (no. 14) in the November 2011 TOP500 List. However, 
both of these are built from Intel CPUs and NVIDIA graphics-
processing units, delivering 2.566 
PFlops (no. 2) and 1.271 PFlops 
(no. 4). The BlueLight cluster is ranked no. 39 on the Green500 
List of the most efficien
t supercomputer clusters. 
both in China and in the United States, will have to be 
iteratively redefined to meet 
these challenges. This is 
also the case should Chinese-designed computing 

systems begin to have any commercial success inside or 

outside of China. 
It is worth noting that China does not have any 
representation among the largest semiconductor 

companies, nor does it have any mass commercial 

processors or architectures. China does, however, have a 
seat at the six-seat World Semiconductor Council. This 
seat may reflect both China™s growing potential as a 

semiconductor market and its increasing capabilities in 

semiconductor design.  China™s increasing share of 

worldwide patents focused on semiconductor 
technology, from 13 percent to 22 percent  in 2009, also 
suggests improvements in
 China™s semiconductor 
innovative capacity. More significantly, China™s share of 

semiconductor patents that are first issued in China has 
grown from 0 percent in 2005 to ~24 percent in 2009. 
 
3.2.2 Impacts of Government Policy Efforts 

 It is unclear to what degree the MLP will enhance 
China™s indigenous innovation capability. However, 

international technical and business communities have 

already expressed concern over Chinese efforts to 
support the indigenous innovation efforts. For example, 
government policies, which gave preference for 

procuring domestic technologies and products in the 

name of supporting indigenous innovation, were 

abolished, at least temporarily, due to extreme pressure 
from foreign governments and companies.
 In addition, 
some studies
30 have characterized China™s innovation 
policies as a threat to global intellectual property rights; 

a recent report by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce has 
even claimed that Chinese innovation policy is ﬁa 
blueprint for technology theft on a scale the world has 

never seen before.ﬂ
31 Lastly, the committee believes, growth in China™s 
homegrown industrial capacity, plus China™s massive 
urbanization, has nurtured an increasingly large domestic 

market in different manufacturingŠand increasingly 

R&DŠsectors.  It is not clear to what degree other key 
                                                 30U.S. International Trade Commission, 2010, 
China: Intellec-
tual Property Infringement, Indi
genous Innovation Policies, and 
Frameworks for Measuring th
e Effects on the U.S. Economy
, No-
vember. 31James McGregor, 2010, 
China™s Drive for ﬁIndigenous 
Innovationﬂ: A Web of Industrial Policies
, Global Intellectual 
Property Center and Global Regu
latory Cooperation Project under 
the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, and APCO Worldwide, 
Washington, D.C. Available at
 http://www.apcoworldwide.com/ 
content/PDFs/Chinas_Drive_for_Indigenous_Innovation.pdf. Last 
accessed on August 7, 2011. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
39   industries will follow similar trends, in particular, those 
SEIs related to the advanced computing technologies and 
products.  In overall growth, the added value of SEIs has 

been estimated to reach U.S. ~$682 billion in 2015 and 

U.S. ~$1.8 trillion in 2020, with projected annual growth 
rates of 24.1 percent between 2011 and 2015 and 21.3 
percent between 2016 and 2020.
32  
3.2.3 Transition Toward Economic Outcomes-driven 
S&T Programs 
 Unlike most previous government-led science and 
technology (S&T) programs, where the Ministry of 
Science and Technology (MOST) was the only or 

biggest stakeholder, SEI program development efforts 
have primarily been led by the National Development 
and Reform Commission and Ministry of Industry and 

Information Technology (MIIT), two superministries 

with strong economic missions in China™s bureaucracy.
33 In contrast to MOST, these agencies are expected to 
increase industry participation in the program (as 

opposed to primary participation by universities and 

research institutes). As such, it is likely that future S&T 

programs will require strong economic components and 
targets and cannot be assessed by publications and 
patents alone. The fact that economic instead of science 

agencies are deeply
 involved in the SEI Program reveals 
a long-standing issueŠthe separation between research 
and the economyŠthat China has tried to solve when it 
started to reform its S&T management system in the 

mid-1980s. Regardless, the successful transformation of 

the Chinese economy will depend upon the successful 
coordination among different government ministries, 
each with a unique mission. Achieving this will be 
difficult, if not impossible. 
 3.3 Taiwan Œ Low-cost and Fast Innovation 
 In the last several decades, Taiwan has experienced 
incredible economic growthŠparticularly in its IT 
industry, which now accounts for 70 percent of Taiwan™s 
total manufacturing R&D.
34 To date, a defining 
                                                 32Zhou Zhizue, chief economist on MIIT projections. Available 
at http://tech.sin
a.com.cn/it/2011-08-04/07185880063.shtml. Last 
accessed on November 7, 2011. 
33Barry Naughton, 2009, ﬁChina™s Emergence from Economic 
Crisis,ﬂ China Leadership Monitor
, No. 29. Available at 
http://media.hoover.org/sites/default/files/documents/CLM29BN. 
pdf. Last accessed on November 7, 2011. 
34Between 2001 and 2006, almost 90 percent of the R&D 
investment of Taiwan™s private 
sector was concentrated on two 
sectors, electronics components (56 percent) and computers and 
electronic and optoelectronic 
products (32 percent). See 
http://eng.stat.go
v.tw/ct.asp?xItem=6503&CtNode=2202&mp=5. 
characteristic of Taiwan™s IT industry has been its deep 
integration into diverse and global corporate networks of 
production and innovation. In addition to facilitating the 

role of Taiwanese firms as fast followers, this network 

integration also en
couraged IT firms to focus their R&D 
efforts on incremental innovation. Today, there is a 
growing recognition that Taiwanese firms must now 

increase and broaden R&D in order to avoid diminishing 

returns of network integration. Thus, new policies are 
needed to spur domestic capabilities for low-cost 
innovation in IT. 
While Taiwan™s new innovation strategy is still a 
ﬁwork in progress,ﬂ some major policy building blocks, 

which combine market-led innovation and public policy 
coordination of multiple layers of private and public 
innovation stakeholders, are taking shape. Due to its 

pragmatism and openness to new forms of public policy 

and private-public partnerships, Taiwan™s innovation 
policy may in fact shed new light on the opportunities 
and challenges for strength
ening America™s innovation 
capabilities in advanced computing. 

 3.3.1 Taiwan™s ﬁGlobal Factoryﬂ Innovation Model
35  Early on, Taiwan™s IT industry depended heavily on 
international markets and access to foreign technology, 
tools, and ideas to overcome substantial entry barriers to 
network participation, namely, a lack of domestic market 

and limited resources and infrastructure. From the 

beginning, the key to Taiwan™s success has been an early 

integration into diverse and constantly evolving network 
arrangements that include both formal corporate and 
informal knowledge networks. Formal
 corporate 
production networks link Taiwanese firms to large global 

brand leaders (the customers), investors, technology 
suppliers, and strategic part
ners through foreign direct 
investment as well as through venture capital, private 

equity investment, and contr
act-based alliances. Equally 
important are informal
 global knowledge networks that 
link Taiwan to more developed overseas innovation 
systems and knowledge communities, primarily in the 

United States, through the international circulation of 

students and knowledge workers.
36 Finally, domestic 
interorganizational linkages with large Taiwanese 
                                                 35Sections 2.3.1- 2.3.4 rely heavily on Dieter Ernst, ﬁUpgrading 
through innovation in a small network economy: insights from 
Taiwan™s IT industryﬂ, 
Economics of Innovation and New Tech-
nology, June, 2010 Volume 19, No. 
4pp. 295-324.  
Last accessed 
August 21, 2012. 
36Between 1987 and 2003, this sma
ll island has been the fifth 
largest nation of origin of international students in the United 
States. (Guo, 2005: 142). 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  business groups complement these international 
linkages.
37 Progressive integration into these diverse 
production, knowledge, and innovation networks has 

enabled Taiwanese firms to combine the speed and 
flexibility of smaller firms with the advantages of scale 
and scope that normally only large firms can reap, as 

well as to tap into the world™s leading markets, 

especially in the United States. Network participation 
has also multiplied conduits for knowledge transfers to 
Taiwanese IT firms, broadening their scope for learning 

and capability development. This, in turn, has created 

new opportunities, pressures, and incentives for 

Taiwanese IT firms to upgra
de their technological and 
management capabilities and the skill levels of workers. 
Today, Taiwan has established itself as an important 
ﬁglobal high-tech factoryﬂ for PC-related products, 

handsets, wireless equipment, integrated circuits, and flat 
panel displays.
38 For global IT industry leaders, 
Taiwanese firms have become preferred OEM and ODM 

(original design manufacturing) suppliers.
39 In addition, 
Taiwanese firms have made 
considerable progress in 
product development, especially in electronic design. 
Beginning in the 1980s, Taiwan™s leading PC firms 

established R&D laboratories in Silicon Valley to gain 

early access to the product and technology road maps of 
the global industry leaders and to improve their product-
development capabilities. By the mid-1980s, Taiwan™s 

semiconductor firms became in
volved in board-level and 
application-specific integrated circuit design,
40 giving 
rise to a broad portfolio of design implementation 
capabilities. This enable
d Taiwanese semiconductor 
firms to compete on the speed, cost, flexibility, and 

quality of providing these services. 
                                                 37D. Ernst, 2001, ﬁSmall Firms 
Competing in Globalized High 
Tech Industries: The Co-Evolution 
of Domestic and International 
Knowledge Linkages in Taiwan™s
 Computer Industry,ﬂ in P. 
Guerrieri, S. Lammarino, and C. Pietrobelli (eds.), 
The Global Challenge to Industrial Districts: Small and Medium-Sized 
Enterprises in Italy and Taiwan
, Edward Elgar, Aldershot, U.K. 
38D. Ernst, 
Upgrading through innovation in a small network 
economy: insights from Taiwan™s IT industry
, Economics of Inno-
vation and New Technology, Vol. 
19, No. 4, June 2010, pp. 295Œ
324. 39An OEM contract refers to arrangements between a brand-
name company (the customer) and 
the contractor (the supplier), 
where the customer provides deta
iled technical blueprints and 
most of the components to allow the contractors to produce 
according to specifications. In ODM arrangements, the contractor 
is responsible for design and most
 of the component procurement, 
with the brand-name company retaining exclusive control over 
marketing. 40D. Ernst and D. O™Connor, 1992, 
Competing in the Electron-
ics Industry. The Experience of
 Newly Industrialising Economies
, Development Centre Studie
s, OECD, Paris, 303 pp. 
However, over the last decade, the globalization of 
S&T and of the economy has placed pressures on 
Taiwan™s IT industry. Investments necessary for radical 

innovations that can compete with global technology 

leaders are beyond the reach of many Taiwanese IT 
companies. Even TSMC (Taiwan Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Company), the world™s leading IC 

foundry, has had to stretch its resources to the limit to 

sustain its leadership position.
 In addition, Taiwanese IT 
firms are establishing low-cost supply bases in China 
and Southeast Asia to reduce production costs. To 

expand their position as ne
twork supplier
s, Taiwanese 
firms are also moving beyond the provision of 

manufacturing services, and developing integrated 
service packages that include logistics and product 
development. However, the downturn in the global 

electronics industry since late 2000 has exposed several 

challenges for Taiwan™s innovation model. 
 3.3.2 Negative Effects of Network Integration 

 Taiwan™s focus on the provision of OEM and ODM 
services has severely constrained the capacity of 
Taiwanese firms to invest in ﬁupgrading through low-

cost innovationﬂ strategies.
41 This problem is 
exacerbated by relentless pressure from global brand 
marketers to reduce cost and time-to-market for 
commodity-type products with low profit margins that 

are apt to penetrate mass markets. As a result, Taiwanese 

firms are stuck in a ﬁcommodity price trap,ﬂ with 

insufficient profit margins to support investment in new 
R&D, intellectual property creation and branding. 
Furthermore, as specialized OEM and ODM suppliers, 

Taiwanese firms typically co
ncentrate on incremental 
innovations within existing product architectures that are 
predefined by global brand leaders charging hefty patent-
licensing fees. This structure 
constrains their capacity to 
develop new products and to shape technology road 

maps and standards. 
Since 2003, many Taiwanese handset makers have 
attempted to increase profits 
by increasing their branded 
handset sales relative to their OEM or ODM business. 

However, with the possible exception of ASUS and 

HTC,42 most of these attempts seem to have failed, 
causing Taiwanese handset makers to switch back to the 
OEM-ODM model. The most spectacular failure has 
                                                 41D. Ernst, 
Upgrading through innovation in a small network 
economy: insights from Taiwan™s IT industry
, Economics of Inno-
vation and New Technology, Vol. 
19, No. 4, June 2010, pp. 295Œ
324. 42HTC has successfully develo
ped own-brand touch-screen 
smartphones, initially based on Microsoft™s Windows Mobile 
operating system, but now also on Google™s open-source Android 
platform. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
41   been the attempt by the BenQ Group (a spin-off of the 
Acer Group) to accelerate its global branding strategy by 
acquiring the mobile handset business of Siemens and its 

intellectual property.
43  3.3.3 Constraints to Developing Indigenous Intellectual 
Property 

 While Taiwan™s patent filings at the U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office (USPTO) have grown rapidly (in ﬁall 
patentsﬂ per million of its population and in ﬁutility 

patentsﬂ
44), its patent counts ar
e highly concentrated, 
both in terms of products (technology classes) and patent 

holders (assignees). In 2010 the largest number of 
Taiwan™s U.S. patents
45 were in semiconductor 
manufacturing, and these patents were dominated by 

TSMC (Taiwan™s third-largest patent filer, with 405 
patents), followed by MediaTek (no. 5), Macronix (no. 
6), United Microelectronics Corporation (no. 7), and Via 
Technologies (no. 9, with 108 patents). Hon Hai 

(Taiwan™s largest patent filer, with 572 patents), the 

world™s largest maker of electronic components, has 
pursued an aggressive strategy to file protective patents 
(especially for its connector technology), primarily 

against China.
46 In addition, Taiwan™s patent quality 
remains low (in patent citation, ﬁscience linkages,ﬂ and 
technological capabilities),
47 and its most influential 
patents are highly conc
entrated with TSMC. 
                                                 43Less than 1 year after the acquisition, the German subsidiary, 
BenQ MobileGmbH & Co OHG, 
was closed amid continuing 
huge losses at the subsidiary. BenQ
™s share of the Taiwan handset 
market now languishes around 8 pe
rcent. BenQ now outsources 
handset production to Taiwan
ese contract manufacturers. 
44A utility patent protects any new invention or functional 
improvements on existing inventions (such as going from light-
emitting diode [LED] technology to organic LED technology), 
while a design patent protects th
e ornamental design, configura-
tion, improved decorative appearance, or shape of an invention. 
China™s utility model patents
 protect any new technical solution 
relating to the shape and/or structure of a product, which is fit for 
practical use. Utility patents, which offer the same protection 
(albeit for a shorter time span) as invention patents, are quicker 
and cheaper to obtain, because they only receive a preliminary 
examination rather than the full substantive examination of an 
invention application. 
45See http://www.uspto.gov/web/o
ffices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/asgstc /twx_ror.htm. Last accessed on January 12, 2012. 
46Hon Hai has been expanding its USPTO patent portfolio, 
more than doubling its USPTO patent filings between 2006 and 
2010. Since 1995, 61 percent of H
on Hai™s patents were filed in 
China, against less than 18 percent in the United States. 
47Xin-Wu Lin, 2005, 
An Analysis of Taiwan™s Technological 
Innovation Œ On the Basis of USPTO Patent Data Analysis
, slide 
presentation, Taiwan Institute of
 Economic Research, Taipei, July 
27. For instance, Taiwan™s patents are less ﬁoriginalﬂ and have less 
ﬁimpactﬂ than Korea™s, that is, they are less frequently cited within 
a technology class and in other t
echnology classes. As for science 
Taiwan™s IC design industry provides a telling 
example of the substantial 
challenges of developing 
indigenous intellectual property. As specialized suppliers 

to global semiconductor and system companies, 

Taiwanese chip design firms have limited resources and 
incentives to close the technology gap relative to 
industry leadersŠand as a result, they are typically not 

active at the leading edge of
 process technology and IC 
complexity.
48 In addition, Taiwanese design houses have 
not been able to develop in-house complete solution 
packages. For instance, in the important cellular chipset 

market, only one Taiwanese design house (MediaTek) 

offers a complete cellular chipset solution. All other 

Taiwanese companies competing in this market, such as 
Sunplus and Airoha, have focused on specific building 
blocks and niche markets. Given the rapid change and 

unpredictability of these markets, such a focused 

approach is a high-risk strategy. 
 3.3.4 Hollowing-out Through Offshoring to China 

 To retain its position as OEM and ODM suppliers to 
global brand marketers, Taiwan has established low-cost 
supply basesŠand more recently, R&D centersŠin 

China and Southeast Asia. The increasingly common 

practice of Taiwanese IT ma
nufacturers receiving orders 
in Taiwan and shipping ma
nufactured goods from China 
has given rise to ﬁa new cross-Strait division of labor 

along the lines of pilot run vs. mass production.ﬂ; 

however, this offshore outsourcing now imposes severe 

pressures on Taiwan™s IT industry, as reflected by a 
declining domestic value-added ratio
 that is much lower 
than for the United States and Japan.
 49,50
 Another important concern is the continuing 
relocation of wafer fabrication capacity. Although 
China™s current wafer fabrication capacity represents 
about 9.4 percent of worldwide wafer fabrication 

capability,
51 as of May 2011, 28 new wafer fabrication 
facilities were under constr
uction in Greater China. Once 
these begin production, it is
 estimated that China and 
                                                                                  linkages, Taiwan™s patents, even
 for semiconductors, are less fre-
quently cited in scientific journals than Korea™s patents. 
48Joy Teng, 2006, IC Design House Survey 2006: Taiwan, 
courtesy of 
Electronic Engineering Times Taiwan
 (available at 
www.eettaiwan.com). 
49This hollowing-out effect, and th
e resultant job displacements, may have been reduced by the gr
owth of Taiwanese exports to 
Asia (especially China) of incr
easingly sophisticated production 
equipment. 50S.-H. Chen, M.-C. Liu, and 
K.-H. Lin, 2005, ﬁIndustrial 
Development Models and Economi
c Outputs: A Reflection on the 
‚High Tech, High Value-Added™ Propositionﬂ, manuscript, 
Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research, Taipei: p. 25. 
51SEMI Wafer Fab Watch, May 2010. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  Taiwan together will have a 29 percent share of total 
worldwide wafer fabrication capacity. As Taiwanese offshoring extends beyond 
manufacturing into product development, the 

competitive advantages previously afforded by Taiwan™s 
high-tech cluster (i.e., combination of flexibility, low 
cost, and timely service) have begun to erode. For 

example, as production of computer, communications, 

and consumer products moves to China, Taiwan™s IC 
design houses are forced to follow suit to sustain close 
interaction with their customers. Once in China, 

Taiwanese design houses f
ace intense competition from 
lower-cost Chinese competitors,
 and they lose their most 
fundamental competitive adva
ntage: access to a pool of 
highly trained and experienced lower-cost engineers and 
managers from diverse sources
. Even worse, Chinese IC 
design firms can now draw on Chinese returnees who 

have studied and worked in the United States, as well as 
recruit former employees of Taiwanese companies to 
train China™s growing pool of local engineering 

graduates. 

 3.3.5 Government Policies to Support Low-Cost and 
Fast Innovation 

 There is a growing consensus in Taiwan that an 
exclusive focus on hardware manufacturing is no longer 
sufficient to guarantee sustai
nable growth. Taiwan™s new 
innovation strategies now seek to build on its capacity 

for low-cost and fast manufacturing by complementing 

its contract manufacturing and component production 
excellence with knowledge-intensive support services 
and a capacity to provide ﬁintegrated solutions.ﬂ In 

addition, Taiwan has a long-t
erm objective to strengthen 
its software capabilities, especially for the design of 
complex system software and for cloud-computing 
applications.
52 To implement this strategy, Taiwan™s 
innovation policies seek to strengthen further the 

linkages and interactions among industry, academia, and 
public and private R&D organizations. 
A defining characteristic of Taiwan™s innovation 
policy is its openness to foreign strategic advice and 

knowledge sharing, distinguishing it from Japan, Korea, 

and China
53 with their much more closed systems of 
innovation policy. 
                                                 52Interview with Dr. Tzi-cker Chiueh, General Director, ITRI-
CCCMA, April 25, 2011. As is typi
cal for Taiwan™s leading inno-
vation actors, Dr. Chiueh™s edu
cation and employment history 
shows strong links with the United 
States. See also Ministry of 
Economic Affairs (MOEA), 2011, 
Taiwan™s ICT industry devel-
opment and outlook, as reported in 
DigiTimes, August 29. 53While China has, to some degree, followed the Taiwanese 
low-cost and fast innovation model,
 the Chinese model differs in 
that it has not leveraged domestic 
and, to a lesser extent, global 
In addition to providing aggressive tax incentives,
54 Taiwan™s innovation policy seeks to strengthen the lead 
role of the private sector by generating new public-

private partnerships and by coordinating their 

interactions.
55 In particular, government initiatives, such 
as Taiwan™s Technology Development Programs, 
Hsinchu Science Park, and Industrial Technology 

Research Institute (ITRI), are intended to foster 

industrial upgrading through low-cost and fast 
innovation. Today, Hsinchu Science Park is the world™s 
leading cluster for semiconductor manufacturing. ITRI 

also continues to play a significant role in Taiwan™s IT 

and semiconductor industries. ITRI™s recent Cloud 

Computing Center for Mobile Application (CCCMA)
 seeks to promote
 Internet-based, on-demand computing 
(cloud computing) as a catalyst for strengthening 

Taiwan™s software capabilities, building on Taiwan™s 

strengths in lower-cost ha
rdware, such as memory, 
chipsets, server, and storage network equipment. 
 
3.3.6 U.S.-Taiwan-China Linkages 

 Since its inception, Taiwan™s IT industry has greatly 
benefited from its deep integration with America™s 

innovation system, especially Silicon Valley. As a 

byproduct, the United States and Taiwan have developed 
a strong mutual dependence on each other™s IT and 
semiconductor industries. U.S. IT companies remain the 

most important buyers of Taiwanese ODM and OEM 

services, and Taiwan™s silicon foundries are a critical 

supplier of process technol
ogy as well as manufacturing 
and design services to U.S. fabless design companies. In 
addition, Taiwan exploits a first-tier supplier advantage 

due to the establishment of leading U.S. R&D centers in 

Taiwan and to the acceleration of its ﬁupgrading through 
innovationﬂ strategy. 
However, these relationships have been complicated 
by the emergence of China as both a partner and 

competitor with Taiwan. In the last decade, China has 
become not only the most important production site for 
Taiwan™s IT companies, but also a major growth market. 

Not only are Taiwan™s foundries, IC design houses, and 

ODM suppliers well placed to exploit China™s rapid-
                                                                                  innovation networks (see 
Run of the Red Queen: Government, 
Innovation, Globalization, and Economic Growth in China
 by D. 
Breznitz and M. Murphree, 2001). 
54Taiwan™s Statute for Industr
ial Innovation has lowered the 
business tax from 25 percent to 17 percent in 2010 (which com-
pares to China™s 25 percent rate, Korea™s 22 percent rate, and 
Singapore™s 17 percent rate). 
55H.-S. Chu, 2007, ﬁThe Taiw
anese Model: Cooperation and 
Growth,ﬂ in C. W. Wessner, ed., 
Innovation Policies for the 21st 
Century. Report of a Symposium
, The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., p. 120. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
43   demand growth for IT products and services, but 
Taiwan™s government is convinced that China is 
gradually becoming a regional technology leader. This 

reliance has resulted in new initiatives for cross-strait 

cooperation in industrial standards, for broader bilateral 
economic cooperation, especi
ally through the Economic 
Cooperation Framewor
k Agreement (ECFA),
56 and for 
deregulation of Chinese investment in Taiwan. On the 

other hand, continuous penetration of the Chinese market 
will require that Taiwanese firms also redeploy new 
product development and research to China. By 

providing critical inputs (through training, technology 

transfer, and joint product development) to Chinese 

firms, Taiwan accelerates Ch
ina™s ability to catch up. 
As Taiwan™s IT industry becomes increasingly 
integrated with China™s economy and its innovation 

system, it is unclear how and to what degree Taiwan will 

strike a balance between cooperation with China and 
cooperation with the United States. If the sheer weight of 
China forces Taiwanese firms 
to give priority to their 
links with China, how will th
is affect America™s access 
to the semiconductor global value chain? It is too early 
for a conclusive answer to these questions. So far, 
however, Taiwan™s economic di
plomacy related to the IT 
industry remains closely aligned with the U.S. position.
57  3.3.7 Summary 
 If Taiwan is to survive intensifying technology-
based global competition, it must move beyond its 

traditional ﬁglobal factoryﬂ innovation model, which will 
require quick access to radical 
innovations, especially in 
generic technologies. While Taiwan has significant 

policy initiatives in each of the above areas,
58 the risk of 
failure remains high, implying that an exclusive focus on 
technology leadership strategies is unlikely to support a 
broad-based upgrading through innovation strategy. 

These risks explain why Ta
iwan™s new innovation 
strategy emphasizes
 low-cost and fast innovation 
                                                 56ECFA is a special free-trade agreement between Taiwan and 
China, which was concluded in September 2010. 
57For instance, during the November 2011 Asia-Pacific Eco-
nomic Cooperation meeting in H
onolulu, Taiwan supported U.S. 
proposals to extend the Informati
on Technology Agreement and to 
establish an Environmental 
Goods and Services Program. 
58On SoC design, the government has initiated a National SoC 
Research Program. On nanotechnology R&D, the government has 
committed substantial funds, while ITRI and the National Science 
Council have signed an agreement 
to conduct joint research with 
the National Research Council of Canada. And Sha et al. (ﬁITRI™s 
Role in Developing the Access Network Industry in Taiwanﬂ in H. 
S. Rowen, M. G. Hancock, 
and W. F. Miller (eds.), 2008, 
Greater China™s Quest for Innovation, Shorenstein APARC, Stanford, CA) 
describe ITRI™s role in the industry-level upgrading of Taiwan™s 
access network industry. 
through domestic and global innovation networks. 
Recent policies suggest that China is following suit with 
Taiwan™s innovation model and will focus in the future 

on low-cost mass adoption of new technologies and 

innovation. 
 3.4 Korea Œ Coevolution of International and 
Domestic Knowledge Linkages
59  Countries with emerging economies must rely 
primarily on foreign sources of knowledge as the main 

vehicle of learning and capability formation. 

International linkages are needed to pave the way for an 
effective exploitation of latecomer advantages. Empirical 
research has shown that, as a developing country 

progresses in its industrial transformation, its reliance on 

international technology sourcing and knowledge 
linkages substantially increases.
60 The Korean 
innovation system in the electronics industry is 

emblematic for a heavy reliance on international 

linkages, combined with the development of 
complementary domestic linkages.
61 Early on, as a part of its innovation strategy, the 
Korean ﬁgovernment encouraged some of the leading 

chaebol
62 to focus on learning and knowledge 
accumulation through a variety of links with foreign 
equipment and component suppliers, technology 
licensing partners, OEM clients, and minority joint-

venture partners.ﬂ
63 In addition, much of Korea™s success 
lay in its firms™ abilities to develop the knowledge and 
                                                 59This section heavily relies on 
Dieter Ernst, ﬁGlobal Production 
Networks and the Changing Geography of Innovation Systems: 
Implications for developing Countries.ﬂ 
East-West Center 
Working Papers, No. 9, November 2000.  
Available at 
http://scholarspace.manoa.ha
waii.edu/bitstream/handle/10125/607
4/ECONwp009.pdf?sequence=1.  Last
 accessed August 21, 2012.   
60For instance, Ernst, Ganiatso
s, and Mytelka (eds.), 1998, 
Technological Capabilities and Export Success - Lessons from 
East Asia, Routledge, London and New York. 
61D. Ernst, 2000, ﬁCatching-Up 
and Post-Crisis Industrial Up-
grading. Searching for New Sources of Growth in Korea™s Elec-
tronics Industry,ﬂ in F. Deyo, R.
 Doner, and E Hershberg (eds.), 
Economic Governance and Flexible Production in East Asia
, Rowman and Littlefield Publishe
rs. Taiwan provides another, 
albeit very different, approach 
to the development of network 
integration services through international linkages. 
62Chaebol refers to South Korean business conglomerates that 
are global multinationals owni
ng numerous international enter-
prises. 63D. Ernst, 2000, ﬁCatching-Up 
and Post-Crisis Industrial Up-
grading. Searching for New Sources of Growth in Korea™s Elec-
tronics Industry,ﬂ in F. Deyo, R.
 Doner, and E Hershberg (eds.), 
Economic Governance and Flexible Production in East Asia
, Rowman and Littlefield Publishe
rs. Taiwan provides another, 
albeit very different, approach 
to the development of network 
integration services through international linkages. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  skills necessary to monito
r, unpackage, absorb, and 
upgrade foreign technology. Equally important was a 
capacity to mobilize the substantial funds for paying 

technology licensing fees and for importing best-practice 

production equipment and leading-edge components. 
Most Korean producers arguably would have hesitated to 
pursue such high-cost, high-risk strategies had they not 

been induced to do so by a variety of selective policy 

interventions by the Korean state. By providing critical 
externalities such as information, training, maintenance 
and other support services, and finance, the Korean 

government has fostered the growth of firms large 

enough to overcome high entry barriers. 
It is this coevolution of international and domestic 
knowledge linkages that expl
ains Korea™s extraordinary 
success. It has enabled Korean firms to reverse the 

sequence of technological capability formation. Rather 

than proceeding from innovation to investment to 
production, they focused on the ability to operate 
production facilities according to competitive cost and 

quality standards.
64 Through reverse engineering and other forms of 
copying and imitating foreign technology, as well as 
integrating into the increasingly complex global 

production networks of American, Japanese, and some 

European global flagship corporations, Korean firms 
were able to avoid the huge cost burdens and risks 
involved in R&D and in developing international 

distribution channels. 
For Korea, international linkages provided an 
important initial catalyst for the development of a 
sufficiently broad portfolio of domestic capabilities that 
are needed to reap potential benefits of latecomer 

advantages. 

 3.5 Europe Œ Integrated EU-wide Innovation Policy 
Coordination  3.5.1 The Seventh Framework Program for Research 
and Technological Development (FP7) 
 The 2007Œ2013 Seventh Framework Program (FP7) 
for research and technological development is the 
European Union™s main instrument for funding research 
in Europe.
65 With a total budget of •53.2 billion, the FP7 
aims to increase Europe™s growth, competitiveness, and 

employment through initiatives and existing programs 
that finance grants to research actors all over Europe, 
usually through cofinancing research, technological 

development, and demonstration projects. However, 
                                                 64Ibid. 65See http://ec.europa.eu/research/fp7/index_en.cfm. Last ac-
cessed on January 7, 2012. 
access to funding is restricted to organizations based in 
the European Union. This restrictive approach to 
international cooperation in science and technology is 

further emphasized in the 
European Commission™s (EC) 
2010 policy document 
Innovation Union
 to
 ﬁensure that 
leading academics, researchers and innovators reside and 
work in Europe and to attract a sufficient number of 

highly skilled third country nationals to stay in 

Europe.ﬂ66 The 2012 FP7 Work Program is the EC™s largest 
funding package (about •7 billion) under the FP7 so far 

and will provide funding to EU-based universities, 

research organizations, and industries, with special 

attention given to small and medium enterprises. In 
addition, it is expected to 
create around 174,000 jobs in 
the short term and nearly 450,000 jobs and •80 billion 

growth in gross domestic product (GDP) over 15 years. 

Since the initiation of the FP7 Program, investment in 
industrial R&D by the European Union™s top 1,000 
companies has grown by ~10 percent. Between 2010 and 

2011, industrial R&D in the European Union grew by 

almost 6 percent, compared with higher growth reported 
for the United States (~
10 percent), Taiwan (~18 
percent), Korea (~21 percent), Hong Kong (~29 percent), 

and China (~30 percent), and lower reported growth in 

Japan (-10 percent). These industrial R&D investments 
can also be broken down by industry classificationŠof 
specific interest to this study are the R&D contributions 

from the telecommunications, software, computer 

science, semiconductors, and 
electronics industry. These 
sectors make up ~23 percent of the European Union™s
67 and of Japan™s industrial R&D investments, compared 
with ~35 percent for Hong Kong, ~39 percent for China, 

~41 percent for the United States, ~41 percent for 

India,
68 ~70 percent for Korea, ~77 percent for 
Singapore, and a staggering ~94 percent for Taiwan.
69,70
 In R&D intensity, however, the European Union 
continues to lag behind Japan and the United States. At 
                                                 66EC, 2010, 
Europe 2020 Flagship Initia
tive Innovation Union. 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parlia-
ment, the Council, the Europe
an Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions.
 Available at http://ec.europa.eu 
/research/innovation-union/pdf/i
nnovation-union-communication_ 
en.pdf, page 27. Last accessed on January 7, 2012. 
67Among the European Union member states, Germany, France, 
and Finland made the larges
t R&D investments in the 
telecommunications, software, computer science, 
semiconductors, 
and electronics industry sectors (
16.1 percent, 22.4 percent, and 
82.8 percent, respectively). 
68India™s R&D investment sector
s consist primarily software 
and computer services. 
69See http://iri.jrc.es/researc
h/scoreboard_2011.htm. Last ac-
cessed on January 7, 2012. 
70See http://iri.jrc.ec.europa.e
u/research/scoreboard_2008.htm. 
Last accessed on January 7, 2012. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
45   1.6 percent, the European Union™s 2010 share of R&D 
expenditure in GDP trails both Japan and the United 
States by a considerable margin, with 3.3 percent and 2.7 

percent shares, respectively.
71 Among the member states, 
Germany dominatesŠat 2.5 percent, its share of R&D 
expenditures in GDP is much larger than the European 
Union share. More importantly, however, Germany was 

deemed to have the highest propensity to innovate.
72,73
 Hence, it is important to emphasize that national 
innovation policies differ quite substantially across 
Europe, both in their overall strategic vision, and in their 

effectiveness. 

 
3.5.2. Toward an Integrated EU-wide Innovation 
Strategy 
 Germany™s move toward an integrated innovation 
strategy74 is emblematic for a growing trend within the 
European Union to adopt a much more centralized 
approach to innovation. In 2000 the European Union 

established the European 
Research Area (ERA) to 
promote a ﬁsingle innovation market.ﬂ One of its main 
objectives was to optimize and open European, national, 
and regional research programs to support the best 

research throughout Europe and to coordinate these 

programs to address major challenges together.
75 In December 2008 the Competitiveness Council 
adopted a 2020 ERA vision, which seeks to increase the 

Europe-wide mobility of innovation capabilities by 

promoting the free circulation of researchers, knowledge, 

and technology. In 2010 the EC developed an integrated 
innovation strategy entitled ﬁInnovation Unionﬂ to tackle 
three main challenges for EU innovation policy: (1) 

underinvestment in knowledge foundation (e.g., the 

United States and Japan are out-investing Europe and 
China is rapidly catching up); (2) unsatisfactory 
framework conditions, ranging from poor access to 

finance, high costs of intellectual property rights (IPR) to 
                                                 71Battelle, 2010, ﬁGlobal R&D Funding Forecastﬂ in 
R&D 
Magazine, December 2009. Available 
at http://www.rdmag.com/ 
uploadedFiles/RD/Featured_A
rticles/2009/12/GFF2010_ads_small
.pdf. Last accessed on August 11, 2012. 
72An innovation, here, is defined 
as a new or significantly im-
proved product (good or service) introduced to the market or the 
introduction within an enterprise 
of a new or significantly im-
proved process. 73Eurostat, 
2010 Yearbook
, p. 606. Available at 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.
eu/cache/ITY_OFFPUB/KS-CD-10-
220/EN/KS-CD-10-220-EN.PDF. Last accessed on August 15, 
2012. 74Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) (2011) 
High-Tech Strategy. Av
ailable at http://www.
hightech-strategie. de/en/350.php. Last acce
ssed on January 12, 2012. 
75See http://ec.europa.eu/research/era/index_en.htm. Last ac-
cessed on January 12, 2012. 
slow standardization and ineffective use of public 
procurement; and (3) too much fragmentation and costly 
duplication.
76  
3.5.3 The European Union™s Key Enabling Technologies 
(KET) program  
 An interesting attempt to operationalize Europe™s 
integrated innovation strategy is the European Union™s 
Key Enabling Technologies (KET) Program.
77 The EC™s 
six KETsŠnanotechnology, micro- and nanoelectronics, 

advanced materials, photonics, industrial biotechnology, 

and advanced manufacturing systems
78Šwere selected 
based on their economic potential, their value-adding 
and enabling role, and their technology and capital 
intensity with R&D and initial investment costs. KETs 

are defined as ﬁknowledge and capital-intensive 

technologies associated 
with high research and 
development (R&D) intensity, rapid and integrated 
innovation cycles, high capital expenditure and highly-

skilled employment.ﬂ
79 KETs are also embedded in 
advanced products and they underpin innovation chains. 
Advanced computing products, such as multicore 
processors and parallel software developments, are 

examples of technologies that are consistent with the 

KET definition. Like other KETs, advanced computing 
technologies provide potential first-mover advantages, 
and enable the owner of relevant intellectual property 

rights to create new lead markets as new technologies 

replace old technologies with few or no other players. 

One of the key goals of the European Union™s KET 
Program is to reduce the deeply ingrained barriers to 
industrial innovation. In other words: Why are 

breakthrough ideas, inventions, and discoveries (that 
                                                 76EC, 2010, 
Europe 2020 Flagship Initia
tive Innovation Union. 
Communication from the Commission to the European Parlia-
ment, the Council, the Europe
an Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions, 
Commission Communication 
(COM(2010)546). Available 
at http://ec.europa. 
eu/research/innovation-union
/pdf/innovation-union-communica-
tion_en.pdf, page 27. Last 
accessed on January 7, 2012. 
77EC, 2011, High-Level Expert Group on Key Enabling 
Technologies. Final Report
, June. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/ 
enterprise/sectors/ict/files/kets/hlg_report_final_en.pdf. Last ac-
cessed on August 15, 2012. 
78EC, 2009, Preparing for our future: Developing a common 
strategy for key enabling technologies in the EU, 
Commission 
Communication (COM(2009)512). Avai
lable at http
://ec.europa. 
eu/enterprise/sectors/ict/file
s/communication_key_enabling_techn
ologies_en.pdf. Last accessed on August 15, 2012. 
79EC, 2010, Current situation of key enabling technologies in 
Europe, Commission Staff Working Document (SEC(2009)1257). 
Available at http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/ict/files/staff_ 
working_document_sec512_key_ena
bling_technologies_en.pdf. 
Last accessed on August 15, 2012.
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  were developed with public R&D funds) not transformed 
into commercially successful innovations within 
reasonably short time frames? 

 
3.5.4 Policy Options 
 To overcome the abov
e deeply entrenched 
innovation barriers, the European Union™s KET Program 

proposes a
 broad range of coordinated support policies 
that cover the following stages of the ﬁinnovation chain,ﬂ 
from the transformation of fundamental research into 

globally competitive technologies, through product 

development to make innovative and cost-effective 

product development and prototyping, to globally 
competitive manufacturing. 
Specifically, the EC KET Program identifies the 
following five priority areas for Europe™s evolving EU-

wide innovation strategy: (1) sustain a critical mass in 
knowledge and funding through effective use of 
economies of scale and scope; (2) increase market focus 

of R&D projects; (3) invest in large-scale demonstrators 

and pilot test facilities; (4) provide post-R&D 
commercialization support; and (5) practice trade 
diplomacy, that is, reduce unfair subsidies and protect 

domestic companies from unfair trade practices.
80 This 
last policy priority is of particular concern from a U.S. 
perspective. In fact, the Eu
ropean Union™s KET Program 
culminates in a fairly ﬁtechno-nationalistﬂ notion of IPR 

protection and states that ﬁthe EU should clearly promote 

an ‚in Europe first™ IP policyﬂ and that proposals require 

clear IP plans for ﬁfirst exploitation of IPﬂ and rules that 
ﬁfavour the EU exploitation of the results of projects.ﬂ
81  3.5.5 Summary 
 The European Union has experienced a fundamental 
change in its innovation policy from government-

centered national strategies to attempts to combine 

market-led innovation and public policy coordination 
across Europe. While government initiatives, such as the 
KET Program, attempted to bridge the perennial gaps 

that stymie Europe™s industrial innovation ecosystem, 

significant challenges remain. To a large degree, 

however, this transformation is
 still a work in progress, 
as European IT innovation and commercialization 
continue to lag. 
In addition, there are signs th
at Europe™s fiscal crisis 
and increasingly severe austerity policies might slow 
down Europe™s move towards greater openness and 
internationalization of its innovation system.
                                                   80EC, 2011 KET, p. 33. 
81EC, 2011 KET, p. 37. 
3.6 Conclusions and Policy Implications
  The diversity of economic and IT innovation 
policies across the United States, China, Taiwan, and 

Europe reflect th
eir differing cultures and history, 
economic status and technical capabilities. The U.S. 

approach rests on government support for basic 
academic research and a vi
brant capital market and 
private enterprise ecosystem for product innovation. The 

other countries and regions blend elements of private 

enterprise and central planning. Each is unique and not 
directly transferrable to another region. Nevertheless, 
there are some general principles that can be gleaned 

from this survey of policies, coupled with technical 

insights regarding semiconductor device fabrication, 
chip architecture, and software. 
Some of the largest computing companies in the 
United States have internal multidimensional 

technological capabilities in chip design, process 

development, wafer manufacturing, and software and 
have demonstrated success tapping into foreign talent 
pools and markets. However, IT talent, capabilities, and 

facilities are increasingly di
stributed globally. Although 
research prowess is correlated with industry success, 
information flows globally via many sources. The lesson 
of basic research, both in industry and academia, has 

been that the discoverers are not always those who 

convert the ideas into econom
ically successful products. 
Oftentimes, the likelihood that an idea can be 
successfully commercialized and implemented depends 

on a nation™s or region™s innovation policies and 

entrepreneurial climate. 
Second, the cost of semiconductor fabrication 
facilities is rising exponentially, placing their 
construction beyond the economic reach of small- and 

mid-sized companies. Only the largest multinational 

companies and nation-states can
 fund their construction 
and operation. This suggests that the United States must 
be mindful of its global dependence on fabrication 

supply chains and that it develop realistic models that 

balance the need for the latest process technology versus 
multiaxis innovation and that combine reliability and 
resilience, programmability, and functionality. Although 

financial investment in fabrication facilities by a small 

number of U.S. companies, primarily by Intel, provides 
some domestic sourcing, most of the chips contained in 
devices sold in the United States are fabricated offshore. 

IBM does produce some chips in the United States, both 

for U.S. defense needs and its own products, but the 

volume is relatively small. 
Third, there is no assurance that historical U.S. 
dominance in computing will transfer to new and 

emerging domains. The need for architectural and 

software innovation to deliver new features and greater 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INNOVATION POLICY LANDSCAPE 
Œ COMPARATIVE ANALYSIS 
47   performance via parallelism creates opportunities for 
new ecosystems to emerge and evolve. With licensable 
components and global access to fabrication facilities, it 

is possible for this innovation to occur almost anywhere. 

In addition to performance 
as measured by computing 
speed (clock speed, bandwidth, interconnect, and so on), 
it may be that other measuresŠsuch as reliability and 

resilience, programmability, security, and efficiencyŠ

become equally, or potentially more, important. For 
example, efforts to improve programmability and 
efficiency of base processors might yield significant 

improvements in software quality, software development 

times, and (ultimately) application performance. 
Fourth, global policy makers see information 
technology in general and consumer computing in 
particular as major economic forces to be harnessed for 
local and regional benefit. They are investing in the 
future, hoping to position their region for success. Which 
of the myriad approaches being pursued will be most 

successful is difficult to predict. 
Today is an inflection point, when the virtuous cycle 
of faster sequential processors has broken down and 
when new devices and services are emerging to reshape 

the computing landscape. An intense global competition 

for IT hegemony is under way. No company, country, or 
region will reap all of the economic benefits, as the 
global value chain is too intertwined for that. However, 

there will be economic winners and losers, just as there 

always are whenever techno
logy shifts occur. U.S. 
policy makers would be wise to think carefully and 
deeply about the shifts under way and their implications 
for economic competitiveness and national security. 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 49 4   Implications of Changes in the Global Advanced 
Computing Landscape for U.S. National Security 
  
 
 he viability, efficiency, an
d, ultimately, success of 
the global economic ecosystem depend in part on 

the flow of goods and services throughout the 
global value chain, from design through fabrication to 
consumption. In computing and information technology, 
the locus of innovation, influence, and early access can 

and has shifted throughout the history of the modern 

information technology (IT) 
era. These shifts can have 
significant implications for U.S. competitiveness and 
national security. 
In the committee™s view, the United States currently 
enjoys a technological advantage in advanced computing 
hardware and software capabilities but that technological 
gap is narrowing, not only due to the technical 

challenges described in Chapter 1, but also because other 

global economic competitors (e.g., China) are making a 

concerted effort to develop their own indigenous 
computing design and manufacturing capabilities. 
Moreover, the design and fabrication of such 

technologies are increasingly globally distributed. 

Market success, of course, is only partially correlated 
with technological preemine
nce, as the ecosystem of 
producers and consumers and market size, together with 

network effects, are also key determinants. 
In the committee™s view, national security concerns 
for the United States related to anticipated long-term 
developments in advanced computing come not just from 

potential threats to U.S. technological superiority, but 

also from changes to the nature and structure of technical 

innovation and to the marketplace for computing and 
information technology. Intensifying competition will 
affect the global supply chain and reshape the numbers 

and types of commercial players that survive in a rapidly 

evolving marketplace. The diminishing performance 
returns from traditional silicon advances that have helped 
existing software systems run 
ever faster (described in 
Chapter 1) and the rise of the post-personal computer 
(PC) ecosystem of smart devices, coupled with cloud-

computing capabilities, further complicate the landscape. 

This chapter discusses severa
l emerging changes in the 
global advanced computing landscape that have 
implications for U.S. national security, including 

parallelism in hardware and 
software (Section 4.1), the 
integrity and reliability of the global supply chain 
(Section 4.2), the decline of custom production (Section 
4.3), convergence of civilian and defense technological 

capabilities (Section 4.4), the rise of a new post-PC 

paradigm driven by mass information and 
communications technology (ICT) consumerization 
(Section 4.5), new market-driven innovation centers 

(Section 4.6), the future educational and research 

landscape on advanced computing (Section 4.7), 

cybersecurity and software (Section 4.8), and possible 
defense ICT outcomes (Section 4.9). 
 4.1 Parallelism in Hardware and Software 
 In U.S. defense and national security, one element of 
the U.S. advantage in defense ICT has accrued from 
rapid increases in application performance, which in turn 
has depended on rapid increases in single-processor 

performance. As the latter ends, continued application 

performance increases will likely only be possible if 
there is a shift to the development of applications that 
can take advantage of parallel hardware. The inability of 

defense software to make this transition faster than 

competitors in the global market or our potential 
adversaries has significant implications for U.S. 
competitiveness and national security. 
The slowdown in performance increases for single-
core processors is a matter of physical (e.g., power 

density and dissipation and quantum barriers) and 
TThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  technological (e.g., gate length, lithography, power 
dissipation, wire scaling, and materials) limits. Thus, 
even if resources were plentiful, it would not be possible 

to simply buy or make appropriately targeted 

investments that would result in continuing exponential 
speed-ups for single-core processors. An additional 
matter of physics is the power constraints that are driving 

the industry from homogeneous multicore chips to 

heterogeneous parallelism, for example, using graphics 
processing units, accelerat
ors, and reconfigurable 
fabrics. Once again, national security processes and 

deployments will need to adapt to use heterogeneous 

parallelism to maintain advantage.  
Exponentially increasing processor speed has 
traditionally served as a pr
oxy for higher-performing, 
more capable, and more innovative systems. Absent this 

traditional metric of continually increasing performance 

(whether from sequential or parallel systems), focusing 
on other metrics will likely come to the fore. In many 
cases, design and innovation efforts will focus on 

combinations of improvements in diverse dimensions, 

such as cost, energy, weight
, robustness, and security. 
Traditional performance improvements would help to 
achieve these, but if such improvements are not 

forthcoming, other means of achieving these 

improvements will be needed. 
Developing, verifying, and deploying software to 
complement advanced hardware is fraught with 

challenges. Moves to homogeneous and then 

heterogeneous parallelism will amplify these 

challenges.
1 These challenges are especially prevalent in 
defense and national security systems. Moreover, 
defense is notable for its relatively slow adoption of 

innovative hardware and software that now emerge from 

the commercial rather than the military sector. New and 
faster-moving threats with fewer legacy concerns may 
make this status quo untenable.
2,3
                                                  1The 2009 National Research Council (NRC) report 
Critical 
Code: Software Producibility for Defense assesses the growing 
importance of software for nationa
l security and examines how the 
U.S. DOD can most effectively meet
 its future software needs. 
2The 2009 NRC report, Achieving Effective Acquisition of Information Technology in the Department of Defense 
calls for the 
DOD to acquire information tec
hnology systems using a funda-
mentally different acquisition pro
cess based on iterative, incre-
mental development practices. 
3This is reminiscent of the 20th 
century U.S. automobile sector. 
The U.S. auto industry moved from being the best in the world to 
being high cost and slow to adopt
 new processes a
nd technologies. 
This decline was masked for years by the lack of credible compe-
tition. The arrival of Japanese and other foreign automakers 
changed the competitive landscape two ways. First, the Japanese 
focus on manufacturing efficiency exposed U.S. companies™ pro-
cess problems and eroded near-term profits. Second, sustained 
long-term Japanese i
nvestments (e.g., on energy efficiency) con-
U.S. national security has long relied on an 
information technology advantage. Given the dramatic 
shift to multicore chips and explicit parallelism, defense 

ICT will need to transition to tools, techniques, and 

processes that can meet defense needs through effective 
use of new parallel software models and emerging 
hardware approaches. Such a transition will be difficult, 

and even if this transition is made successfullyŠa 

challenge not just for defense, but for even the most 
advanced commercial interests as wellŠthe growth rate 
of computing performance is expected to continue to 

slow, making it easier for the re
st of the world, including 
adversaries, to catch up. 

 4.2 Integrity and Reliability of the Global Supply 
Chain  Maintaining the integrity of the global supply chain 
is a serious challenge. The supply chain for integrated 

circuits (computer chips) is of particular interest given 

that they are key components of all computing systems. 
Some fabrication facilities are still present in the United 
States. For instance, Intel is the primary operator of 

large-scale, state-of-the-art
 semiconductor fabrication 
facilities in the United States, though it also has such 

facilities outside the United States. IBM and other 
companies operate facilities in the United States that 
target more specialized markets and national security 

needs.
4 However, the United States is increasingly 
dependent on foreign sources of microchip production 
and on device assembly and testing capabilities that are 
concentrated in a handful of countries. 
Developing secure sources of production is also 
challenging. A global supply chain increases the 
likelihood that compromised and counterfeit products 
can be introduced in mission-critical infrastructure.
5                                                                                   trasted with U.S. companies™ more near-term focus. Too much of a 
short-term focus cuts into long-term success. Moreover, once the 
former made less money available, addressing the latter became 
more difficult. 
4See http://www.nsa.gov/business/
programs/tapo.shtml. Last 
accessed on July 2, 2012. 5Indeed, an immediate challenge for U.S. access to the global 
semiconductor value chain is that 
some U.S. defe
nse contractors 
have been deceived into using c
ounterfeit electronics parts. At a 
November 2011 hearing, the Senate Armed Services Committee 
noted that such fake parts could 
have disastrous consequences for 
the performance of U.S. defense equipment such as helicopter 
night-vision systems and aircraft
 video display units. See U.S. 
Senate Committee on Armed Services, 
Hearing to receive testi-
mony on the Committee™s investigation into counterfeit electronic 
parts in the Department of
 Defense supply chain, 
November 8, 
2011. See also DOD™s TRUST in Integrated Circuits Program 
(available at (http://www.darpa.mil/Our_Work/MTO/Programs/ 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY 
51   Developing ways to ascertain and monitor the 
provenance of semiconductor products will become ever 
more important. Related issues of hardware and software 
verification and validation will continue to be critical 

issues, particularly as th
e complexity of systems 
continues to rise. 
In addition to challenges related to integrity and 
security, the global interdependence of design, 

component fabrication, and assembly means that risks of 

disruption due to natural disasters, political conflict, or 
constrained access to raw materials become greater. A 
single event, such as the March 2011 earthquake-tsunami 

in Japan or the more recent floods in Thailand, can 

disrupt global product deliveries for months.
6 Similarly, 
restrictions on shipments of rare earths, key elements of 
chip fabrication, can stall production lines. The 
globalization of science and technology (S&T) and of 

the computing marketplace in combination with 

specialization (only a few suppliers of a particular 
component) and just-in-time inventory practices all add 
to the risk as well. More generally, a disaster or a well-

targeted action from an adversary could constrain or 

interrupt global supplies, potentially placing the United 
States in a defensive position due to competing demands 
between U.S. defense needs, commercial production 

requirements, and the producing region™s own needs. 

 4.3 Decline of Custom Production 
 A decrease in the number of specialized companies 
able to make custom products for defense needs is also 

relevant to national security. Although commercial off-

the-shelf (COTS) products ar
e widely used in defense 
materials, there are specialized components and products 
that are not commodity products. 
This reduction is driven in part by the exponentially 
rising cost of state-of-the-art fabrication facilities, which 

places a premium on volume production. In turn, this 
limits the economic incentive for any company to 
respond to the defense needs for specialized devicesŠ

for example, the capacity to design and fabricate 

radiation-resistant integrated 
circuits (ICs). Further, the 
concentration of design and production to a small group 
                                                                                  Trusted_Integrated_Circuits_%28
TRUST%29.aspx, last accessed 
on February 7, 2012) that seeks to ﬁprovide trust in the absence of 
a ‚trusted foundry™.ﬂ 
6As an example, the shortages of disk drives and flash memory 
resulting from the Japan and Thailand natural disasters affected 
many devices and vendors. 
See http://www.isuppli.com/ 
Home-and-Consumer-Electronics/News/Pages/IHS-iSuppli-News-Flash-Thailand-Flood-Spurs-Nearly-4-Million-Unit-Shortfall-in-
PC-Shipments-in-Q1-2012.aspx Last accessed on February 7, 
2012. of dominant market players that make commoditized 
products may significantly increase costs. 
 4.4 Convergence of Civilian and Defense Technological Capabilities 
 The convergence of civilian and defense 
technologies is accelerating, driven by rapid and cost-

effective technological progress in a highly competitive 

commercial marketplace, especially as compared with 
the often lengthy and rigid procurement processes in the 
defense sector. Convergence is most evident in 

electronics, where a growing proportion of U.S. defense 

needs are being met by COTS technologies. At the same 
time, the U.S. defense establishment™s ability to 
influence the development of the global semiconductor 

industry, similarly to what happened with 

supercomputers (which create the chip components of 
COTS products) through sheer volume has been reduced. 
For instance, the U.S. military accounted for a large 

proportion of sales from the global semiconductor 

industry in that industry™s formative years, but that 
proportion had fallen to just 1 percent of global 
microcircuit sales by the late 2000s.
7 The convergence between civilian and defense 
hardware capabilities and ease of access to openly 

available technological products that may be just as good 
or even more advanced than equivalent defense 
technologies has implications for U.S. defense.
8 In 
particular, such convergence allows greater opportunity 

for adversaries to narrow the technological gap with the 
United States. In such an environment, time to 
integration and time to deployment will be the primary 

factors that determine technical superiority, rather than 

who is the first to develop a particular technology. 
This suggests that deeper awareness of the differing 
processes and timescales fo
r hardware and software 
development must be part of the design and procurement 

process. Semiconductor design and fabrication, as well 

as subsequent integration of fabricated chips, have a 
substantial lead time. Although it is possible to develop 
portions of new software sy
stems with simulators and 
emulators, integration and complete testing is dependent 

on hardware availability. Thus, the overall time to 
deployment of new hardware and software systems will 
be especially critical when the software requirements for 
                                                 7Annual Industrial Capabilities Report to Congress, 2008
 (Washington D.C.: Office of Under 
Secretary of Defense Acquisi-
tion, Technology and Logistics I
ndustrial Policy, February 2008).  
8An ongoing NRC study, 
Ethical and Societal Implications of 
Advances in Militar
ily Significant Technologies that are Rapidly 
Changing and Increasingly Globally Accessible
 is exploring these 
issues. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  defense missions must be developed based on predicted, 
rather than current hardware
. This further emphasizes the 
importance of hardware-software co-design and rapid 

testing and of drawing lessons from consumer device 

deployment. 
The expected length of th
e life cycle for consumer 
devices continues to decrease; for instance, the 

replacement time for smartphones is now less than a 

year. Comparatively slow and cumbersome Department 
of Defense (DOD) procurement and deployment cycles 
mean that units may lack access to current-generation 

technology. Defense organizations must balance rapid 

adoption for commodity technologies against more 

measured and careful integration and deployment of 
devices and technologies that are unique to defense 
needs. Risks increase when 
applying the same process 
and evaluation to both without distinguishing the risks 

and benefits.
9 At the same time, proven technologyŠ
even if it is not the most currentŠmay provide better 
results with cost-effective performance. Managing these 

tensions suggests that requirements and designs should 

be based not just on current technology but on 
projections of technology available two or even three 
generations ahead. 

 4.5 Rise of a New Post-PC Paradigm Driven by 
Mass ICT Consumerization 
 One area in which COTS has become the principal 
technological driver is in the ongoing consumerization of 
ICT and the emergence of what might be called a post-
PC technological paradigm. Smartphones, tablets, cloud-

computing capabilities, and other related commercial 

technologies are the hallmarks for this new era. Industry 
projections
10 suggest there could be as many as 50 
billion devices connected to th
e Internet within a decade. 
Global sales of mobile phones now exceed those of PCs, 

and the Chinese phon
e market alone exceeds that of the 
United States or Europe.
11 For much of the world™s 
population, a phone is the primary computing device. 
More generally, low-power designs, based on 
licensable components and created by semiconductor 
                                                 9A 2009 NRC report, 
Achieving Effective Acquisition of Infor-
mation Technology in the Department of Defense 
calls for the 
DOD to acquire information tec
hnology systems using a funda-
mentally different acquisition pro
cess based on iterative, incre-
mental development practices. 
10CISCO White Paper, 2011, 
The Internet of Things: How the 
Next Evolution of the Inte
rnet is Changing Everything
. Available 
at http://www.cisco.com/web/
about/ac79/docs/innov/IoT_IBSG_ 
0411FINAL.pdf. Last accessed on February 7, 2012. 
11See http://www.strategyanalyt
ics.com/defaul
t.aspx?mod= 
reportabstractviewer&a0=6871. Last accessed on February 7, 
2012. design firms without fabrication capabilities, along with 
the rise of system-on-a-chip (SoC) ecosystems are 
increasingly enabling new companies and enterprises to 

offer devices that compete with the traditional x86-

oriented PC ecosystem. 
In both the x86 and ARM SoC ecosystems, some 
elements of each SoC are likely to be common (for 

example, general-purpose cores); others will be tailored 

to specific applications (for example, cryptography 
blocks, media encoders and decoders, digital signal 
processors, or network in
terfaces) and drawn from an 
array of internationally available and licensable silicon 

design blocks. This mix-and-match model, now 

prevalent in the mobile device space, challenges the 
traditional software development and maintenance 
model, where legacy software could execute unchanged 

(often without reco
mpilation) as described in Chapter 1. 
A DOD shift to application-tail
ored classes of chips will 
require software refactorin
g and optimization for each 
new class of chips, each with different functionality, 

adding complexity to the software design and 

maintenance life cycle. Unless the software design 
process and toolset for distinctive defense software is 
adapted to this shift, the useful lifetime of the chips will 

be determined by software availability, not hardware. 
In addition to the rise of a new and complementary 
COTS ecosystem, the consumerization of ICT has 
profound implications for how organizations manage 

their own ICT. The proliferation and popularity of new 

device functionality challenges traditional approaches to 

organizational technology uptake. Consumers drive 
adoption of technology in large organizations by forcing 
central ICT organizations to respond to consumer 

acquisition outside the organization. This socially 

activated disruption changes the planning and 
deployment of software and services. The DOD is not 
immune to this effect. As the perceived and actual 

differences between commodity technology availability 

and centrally mandated deployments rises, individuals 
and groups may circumvent best policies and practices in 
system security and informa
tion flow in order to access 
improvements in functionality.
12 In addition, the 
proliferation of mobile devices with personally 

identifiable data and institutional data brings information 
leakage risks due to the possibilities of device loss and 
theft. 
                                                 12A recent NRC report, 
Toward Better Usability, Security, and 
Privacy of Information Technology,
 examines some of the com-
peting motivations for users of technology and identifies research 
opportunities and ways to embed 
usability considerations in de-
sign and development related to s
ecurity and privacy, and vice 
versa. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IMPLICATIONS FOR U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY 
53   Similarly, the rise of big data and rich data analytics, 
made possible by the proliferation of these inexpensive 
networked devices and by massive cloud data centers, 
are challenging traditional notions of computing. The 

balance of value is shifting from isolated devices and 

software to capabilities embodied by an integrated 
system of devices, data, and services. A data-rich, 
consumer-driven world where data is ubiquitous and 

often accessible has profound implications for U.S. DOD 

notions of information superiority, privacy, and security. 
The increasing diversity and independence of global 
supply chains for new generations of COTS devices will 

challenge existing approach
es to system security. 
Demand for software verification of diverse components 

with multiparty provenance will increasingly be the 
norm, but thus far verification of even existing systems 
remains a challenging research problem. When coupled 

with device heterogeneity and specialization for 

performance, verifying functionality and the absence of 
implicit or explicit security backdoors will require new 
organizational and softwa
re security approaches. 
 4.6 New Market-Driven Innovation Centers 
 The emergence of foreign markets that are larger, 
are potentially more lucrative, and have better long-term 
growth potential than in the United States and other 

developed countries also has significant implications for 

the ability of the United States to shape technological 
directions. A shift in the global commercial center of 
gravity (either as the result of a new development or of 

decreased public or private research investments) may 

lead to a shift in the global research and development 

(R&D) center of gravity. For example, this could occur if 
international firms are required to locate in these markets 
to remain competitive, to meet the requirements of 

government regulations in the target markets, and to 

better understand those mark
ets. The availability of 
trained and talented researchers and developers, 
particularly in parallel computing, will also affect these 

placements, as today™s devices are dependent on parallel 

applications and system software to meet performance 
and functional targets. 
 4.7 The Future Educational and Research Landscape in Advanced Computing  In the committee™s view, the United States became 
the leader in advanced computing because of its 

significant and sustained investment in long-term basic 
research, especially its combination of risky, big bets, 
some of which had significant financial returns, and 
curiosity-driven, smaller-scale research.
13 A diverse 
portfolio of research was supported by multiple agencies 
in the Networking and Information Technology Research 
and Development (NITRD) Program over many years. 

This era of diverse funding has undergone changes in 

recent years. There is now an increasing monoculture of 
research funding for computing research, centered on the 
funding model of the National Science Foundation 

(NSF). Because NSF emphasizes single-investigator and 

small-group research, it has not historically supported 
long-term, large-scale infrastructure for either chip and 
system fabrication or compiler and tool infrastructure. 
In contrast, China, for example, has been increasing 
its R&D investment in advanced computing over the past 

decade and appears willing to 
invest in research aimed at 
both incremental and higher-end computer innovation. 
At the same time, China is investing heavily in the 

training of advanced scien
tists and engineers at the 
undergraduate and postgraduate level both at home and 
abroad. If these trends continue, the still-wide gulf in the 
educational and R&D capabilities between China and the 

United States will narrow. 

 4.8 Cybersecurity and Software 
 The growing R&D competitiveness of other 
countries has potentially fa
r-reaching ramifications for 
the United States in cybersecurity. The DOD and the 

U.S. government cybersecurity strategy depends upon 
the U.S. commercial information technology sector 
remaining as the world leader.
14 Software development 
is an increasingly centr
al driver of computing 
innovation, whether it is parallel tools and applications 

for new devices or advanced software services and data 
analytics running atop massive, highly parallel cloud 
data centers. 
The interconnected nature of globally designed and 
manufactured consumer devices
 contributes to increased 
risk of data and software security breaches and makes 
clean separation of functionsŠa traditional tenet of good 

securityŠever more difficult. The globalization of this 

software development, as well as state-sponsored cyber-
espionage, raises important software and cybersecurity 
questions.
15 Cybersecurity may well become a pivotal 
long-term area of competition between the United States 
                                                 13NRC, 1999, 
Funding a Revolution: Government Support for 
Computing Research, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press (available online at http://books.nap.edu/catalog.php?record 
_id=6323). 14Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for 
Industrial Policy, 2010, DoD Cyberstrategy: Leveraging the In-
dustrial Base, December. 
15The NRC has a deep portfolio of work on cybersecurity: 
http://www.nas.e
du/cybersecurity. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  and foreign competitors with fast-growing software 
industries, most notably India and China.
16  4.9 Possible Defense IT Outcomes 
 The slowdown in the growth of single-processor 
computing performance described in Chapter 1 brought 
an end to the virtuous cycl
e of ever-faster sequential 
processors coupled with 
increasingly feature-rich 
software built atop a sequential model. Explicit 

parallelism in both hardware and software is now 
required to realize greater performance and desired 
functionality. The consequences of this shift are deep 

and profound for computing and for the sectors of the 

economy that depend on and assume, implicitly or 
explicitly, ever-increasing performance. From a 
technology standpoint, this has lead to heterogeneous 

multicore chips and a shift to new innovation axes that 

include but are not limited to chip performance. In turn, 

these technical shifts are reshaping the computing 
industry, with global consequences. 
Today, global equilibration, access to standard 
hardware Internet protocol (IP) blocks, and open 

foundries have lowered the barrier to entry for 
international competitors, particularly in Asia. As a 
result, it is possible that the locus of innovation may shift 

further from the United States. Technology limitations 

are forcing a new ecosystem of mix-and-match IP blocks 
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
                                                  16N. Gregory, S. Nollen,
 and S. Tenev, 2009, 
New Industries 
from New Places: The Emergence of the Software and Hardware 
Industries in China and India
, Stanford University Press and 
World Bank, Washington, D.C. 
and heterogeneous multicore SoCs on all computer 
systems. This trend and the proliferation of device types 
present daunting challenges
, especially given the 
historical hegemony of the United States in mainstream 

computing. Barring concerted action involving major 
technology breakthroughs and a major shift in U.S. 
industrial competitive policy, this accelerating 

innovation shift may open the door to a latecomer 

innovation advantage (discussed in Chapter 3). 
The challenges and the opportunities for the United 
States are in capitalizing on its historical strengths in 

systems design, engineering, and integration. Defense 

systems and their informa
tion technology components 
are often large and complex, with interconnected and 
often redundant components. Advanced computing is a 
critical element of such systems, but only one element. If 

the United States focuses on nimble and rapid system 

integration, with designs that emphasize reliability and 
verification, it can continue to build effective defense 
systems. 
Otherwise, the DOD could find itself with deployed 
computing technology that is no better than, or even 
inferior, to its adversaries.
17 Such technical parity (or 
even inferiority) could occur due to either a loss of U.S. 

technological capabilities or the inability to deploy the 

appropriate new technologies sufficiently rapidly to 
maintain a competitive advantage.
                                                   17Further, computing technologies
 could also potentially be 
manufactured by adversaries. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 55    Appendixes    
 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 57 A   Committee Member Biographies
    
 
 ANIEL REED is Vice President for Research 
and Economic Development at the University of 

Iowa, where he holds the University 
Computational Science and Bioinformatics Chair, with 
joint appointments in Computer Science, Electrical and 
Computing Engineering and Medicine. Previously, he 

was Microsoft™s corporate vi
ce president for technology 
policy. Prior to that, he was Chancellor™s Eminent 
Professor at the University of North Carolina (UNC) at 
Chapel Hill, as well as the director of the Renaissance 

Computing Institute (RENCI) and the Chancellor™s 

Senior Advisor for Strategy and Innovation for UNC 
Chapel Hill. 
Dr. Reed has served as a member of the U.S. 
President™s Council of Advisors on Science and 

Technology (PCAST) and 
as a member of the 
President™s Information Technology Advisory 
Committee (PITAC). As chair of PITAC™s 
computational science subcommittee, he was lead author 

of the report 
Computational Science: Ensuring 
America™s Competitiveness
. On PCAST, he cochaired 
the Subcommittee on Networking and Information 
Technology (with George Scalise of the Semiconductor 

Industry Association) and coauthored a report on the 

National Coordination Office™s Networking and 
Information Technology Research and Development 
(NITRD) Program called 
Leadership Under Challenge: 
Information Technology R&D in a Competitive World
. In June 2009 he completed two terms of service as chair 

of the board of directors 
of the Computing Research 
Association, which represents the research interests of 
Ph.D.-granting university departments, industrial 

research groups and national laboratories. 
He was previously head of the Department of 
Computer Science at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC), where the held the Edward William 
and Jane Marr Gutgsell Profe
ssorship. He has also been 
director of the National Center for Supercomputing 

Applications (NCSA) at UIUC, where he also led the 

National Computational Science Alliance, a 50-
institution partnership devoted to creating the next 
generation of computational science tools. He was also 

one of the principal investigators and chief architect for 

the National Science Found
ation (NSF) TeraGrid. He 
received his B.S. from Missouri University of Science 
and Technology and his M.S. and Ph.D. in computer 

science in 1983 from Purdue University. He is a fellow 

of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), 
and the American Association for the Advancement of 

Science (AAAS). 

 
 CONG CAO
 is one of the leading scholars in the 
study of science, technology, and innovation in China. 

He is currently an associate professor and reader at the 

School of Contemporary Chinese Studies, University of 
Nottingham. Having studied in both China and the 
United States and in both natural and social science, he 

received his Ph.D. in sociology from Columbia 

University in 1997 and has worked at the University of 
Oregon, the National University of Singapore, and the 
State University of New York. 
Dr. Cao is interested in th
e social studies of science 
and technology with a focus on China. He is the author 

of China™s Scientific Elite
 (London and New York: 
RoutledgeCurzon, 2004), a study of the Chinese 
scientists holding honorific membership in the Chinese 

Academy of Sciences, and 
China™s Emerging 
Technological Edge: Assessing the Role of High-End 
Talent (with Denis Fred Simon, Cambridge and New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2009). His journal 
DThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  publications have appeared in 
Science
, China Quarterly
, Asian Survey
, and Minerva
, among others. 
 
 TAI MING CHEUNG 
is an associate research 
scientist at the University of California Institute on 
Global Conflict and Coopera
tion (IGCC) located at the 
University of California, San Diego (UCSD), in La Jolla. 

He directs the Minerva program on Chinese security and 
technology, a multiyear academic
 research and training 
project funded by the U.S. Defense Department to 

explore China™s technological potential. His 

responsibilities include managing the institute's Track II 

Program: the Northeast Asia Cooperation Dialogue, 
which brings together senior foreign ministry and 
defense officials as well as academics from the United 

States, China, Japan, South Korea, North Korea, and 

Russia for informed discussi
ons on regional security 
issues. Dr. Cheung is also an asso
ciate adjunct professor at 
UCSD™s Graduate School of International Relations and 

Pacific Studies (IR/PS), where he teaches courses on 
Asian security, Chinese secu
rity and technology, and 
Chinese politics. 
Dr. Cheung is a long-time analyst of Chinese and 
East Asian defense and national security affairs, 
especially defense economic, industrial, and science and 
technological issues. His latest book, 
Fortifying China: 
The Struggle to Build a Modern Defense Economy
, was 
published by Cornell University Press in 2009. The book 

examines the economic, commercial, and technological 
foundations of China™s long-term defense modernization 
that examines the development of the defense industrial 

complex, the role and prospects for civilian-military 

integration, and the military dimensions of science and 
technology policies. He was based in Northeast Asia 
(Hong Kong, China, and Japan) from the mid-1980s to 

2002 covering political, economic, and strategic 

developments in Greater China and East Asia as a 
journalist for the 
Far Eastern Economic Review
 from 
1988Œ1993 and subsequently as a political and business 

risk consultant for a number of companies, including 

PricewaterhouseCoopers. Dr. 
Cheung received his Ph.D. 
in war studies from King™s College London in 2007. 
  JOHN CRAWFORD 
is an Intel fellow, Digital 
Enterprise Group, and sets the architectural direction for 
emerging power and reliability technologies for future 
Intel processor server platfo
rms. When Crawford joined 
Intel as a new college graduate in 1977, he worked as a 

software engineer developing software tools for Intel™s 
8086 processor including the 
code-generation phase of 
Intel™s Pascal compiler for th
e 8086. In 1982 he became 
the chief architect for the Intel386 microprocessor. He 
was responsible for defining the company™s 32-bit 
architectural extensions 
to the already successful 
8086/186/286 16-bit product line. In this capacity, he set 

the architectural direction and later participated in the 
design of the processor by leading the microprogram 
development and test program generation. Mr. Crawford 

made similar contributions as chief architect of the 

Intel486 processor. He comanaged the design of the 
Pentium processor from inception through a successful 
product launch in 1993. Mr. Crawford headed the joint 

architecture research w
ith Hewlett-Packard that 
developed the Itanium family architecture, Intel™s 64-bit 

Enterprise product line. He has been involved with the 
Itanium family of products since its inception in 1994. In 
1995, he received the AC
M/IEEE Eckert-Mauchly 
Award for contributions to computer and digital systems 

architecture, and in June 1997 he received the IEEE 
Ernst Weber Engineering Leadership Recognition. Mr 
Crawford was elected to the National Academy of 

Engineering in 2002. 
Mr. Crawford received a 
bachelor's degree in 
computer science from Brown University in 1975, and a 
master™s degree in computer science from the University 

of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1977. He holds 23 

patents. 
  DIETER ERNST (
senior East-West Center fellow 
at the full professional level) is an authority on global 

production networks and research and development 
(R&D) internationalization in high-tech industries and 
on industrial and innovation policies in China, the United 

States and emerging economies, with a focus on 

standards and intellectual property rights. Earlier 
positions include senior advisor to the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 

Paris; research director of the Berkeley Roundtable on 

the International Economy (BRIE) at the University of 
California, Berkeley; and professor of international 
business at the Copenh
agen Business School. 
Dr. Ernst has cochaired an
 advisory committee of 
the U.S. Social Science Research Council to develop a 

program on innovation, business institutions and 
governance in Asia. He has served as scientific advisor 
to governments, private companies, and international 

institutions, such as World Bank, the Organization of 

Economic Cooperation and Development, the UN 
Conference on Trade and Development and the UN 
Industrial Development Organization. In the United 

Sates, Dr. Ernst has served as advisor to the National 

Science Foundation, Social 
Science Research Council, 
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 
Council on Foreign Relations, the National Bureau for 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE MEMBER BIOGRAPHIES 
59 
  Asian Research, U.S. Department of Commerce, the 
Deloitte Center for the Edge, and the Frontier Strategy 
Group. 
Relevant publications include 
Indigenous Innovation 
and Globalization: The Challenge for China™s 
Standardization Strategy
 (2011) [now published in 
Chinese]; 
China™s Innovation Policy Is a Wake-Up Call 
for America
 (2011); 
A New Geography of Knowledge in 
the Electronics Industry? Asia™s Role in Global 
Innovation Networks
 (2009); 
Can Chinese IT Firms 
Develop Innovative Capabilities within Global 

Knowledge Networks?
 (2008); 
China™s Emerging 
Industrial Economy-Insights from the IT Industry
 (with 
Barry Naughton) (2007); 
Innovation Offshoring-Asia™s 
Emerging Role in Global Innovation Networks
 (2006); 
ﬁComplexity and Internationalization of Innovation: 

Why is Chip Design Moving to Asia?", 
International 
Journal of Innovation Management
, 2005; ﬁLimits to 
Modularity: Reflections on Recent Developments in 
Chip Designﬂ, 
Industry and Innovation
, 2005; 
International Production Networks in Asia: Rivalry or 

Riches? (2000); and 
Technological Capabilities and 
Export Success: Lessons from East Asia
 (1998). 
 
 MARK D. HILL 
is a professor of computer science 
and electrical and computer en
gineering at the University 
of WisconsinŒMadison. Dr. Hill™s research targets 

computer design and evaluation. He has made 

contributions to parallel computer system design (e.g., 

memory-consistency models and cache coherence), 
memory-system design (caches and translation buffers), 
computer simulation (parallel systems and memory 

systems), software (e.g., page tables and cache-conscious 

optimizations for databases and pointer-based codes), 
and transactional memory. For example, he is the 
inventor of the widely used
 3C model of cache behavior 
(compulsory, capacity, and conflict misses). 
Dr. Hill's current research is mostly part of the 
Wisconsin Multifacet Project that seeks to improve the 
multiprocessor servers that form the computational 

infrastructure for Internet Web servers, databases, and 
other demanding applications. The Multifacet work 

focuses on using the transistor bounty provided by 
Moore™s Law to improve multiprocessor performance, 
cost, and fault tolerance, while also making these 

systems easier to design and program. 
Dr. Hill was named an ACM fellow (2004) for 
contributions to memory consistency models and 
memory system design, elevated to a fellow of the IEEE 

(2000) for contributions to cache memory design and 

analysis, and was awarded the ACM SIGARCH 
Distinguished Service Award in 2009. He has won three 
important University of Wisconsin awards: Kellett Mid-
Career in 2010, Vilas Asso
ciate in 2006, and Romnes 
Faculty Fellowship in 1997. He co-edited 
Readings in 
Computer Architecture
 in 2000, is coinventor of more 
than 30 U.S. patents (several of which have been 

coissued in the European Union and Japan), was an 
ACM SIGARCH director (1993Œ2007), and won a 
National Science Foundation Presidential Young 

Investigator award in 1989. He is coauthor of five papers 

selected by IEEE 
Micro
 Top Picks and co-won the best 
paper award at the 
International Conference on Very 
Large Databases (VLDB) in 2001. He has held visiting 
positions at Advanced Micro Devices (2011), University 

of Washington (2011), Columbia University (2010), 

Polytechnic University of Catalonia (2002Œ2003) and 
Sun Microsystems (1995Œ1996). Dr. Hill earned a Ph.D. 
in computer science from the University of California, 

Berkeley, in 1987, an M.S. in computer science from UC 

Berkeley in 1983, and a B.S.E. in computer engineering 
from the University of MichiganŒAnn Arbor in 1981. 
 
 STEPHEN W. KECKLER 
is the senior director of 
architecture research at NVIDIA and professor of both 
computer science and electrical and computer 

engineering at the University
 of Texas (UT) at Austin, 
where he has served on the faculty since 1998. His 
research interests include pa
rallel computer architecture, 
technology-scalable archite
ctures, very-large-scale 
integration (VLSI) design, high-performance computing, 

energy-efficient computing, and on-chip interconnection 

networks. He has developed both commercial chips at 
Intel and parallel computing prototype chips at MIT and 
UT Austin. At MIT, he was the principal architect of the 

M-Machine multicomputer, a research machine that was 

one of the first multicore processors and included 
extremely efficient inter-thread communication and 
synchronization mechanisms. His research team at UT 

Austin developed scalable parallel processor and 

memory system architectures, including nonuniform 
cache architectures; explicit data graph execution 
processors, which merge dataflow execution with 

sequential memory semantics; and micro-interconnection 

networks to implement distributed processor protocols. 

His research team at NVIDIA is developing extreme 
energy-efficient computing technologies for massively 
parallel chips and systems. 
Dr. Keckler was named fellow of the ACM (2011) 
for contributions to computer architectures and 
technology modeling, and was elevated to a fellow of the 
IEEE for contributions to co
mputer architectures and 
memory systems. He received the 2003 ACM Grace 

Murray Hopper Award for ground-breaking analysis of 
technology scaling for high-performance processors that 
sheds new light on the methods required to maintain 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  performance improvement trends in computer 
architecture, and on the design implications for future 
high-performance processors and systems. He won an 

NSF CAREER award (2000), was selected as an Alfred 

P. Sloan research fellow (2002), won the Edith and Peter 
O™Donnell Award for Engineering (2010), and won six 
IBM Faculty Partnership awards. Dr. Keckler is coauthor 

of four papers selected by IEEE Micro Top Picks and co-
won best paper awards at the 2009 
International 
Symposium on Architectural Support for Programming 
Languages and Operating Systems
 (ASPLOS) and the 
2011 
International Symposium on Performance Analysis 
of Systems and Software
 (ISPASS). He has also won top 
teaching awards at the University of Texas at Austin, 
including the College of Natural Sciences Teaching 
Excellence Award (2001) and the President™s Associates 

Teaching Excellence Award (2007). Dr. Keckler also 

served as a member of the Defense Science Study 
Group, sponsored by the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA), 
(2008Œ2009). Dr. Keckler 
earned a B.S. in electrical engineering from Stanford 

University (1990), and an M.S. (1992) and a Ph.D. 
(1998) in computer science from the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology. 

 
 DAVID LIDDLE 
has been a partner at U.S. 
Venture Partners, a Silicon ValleyŒbased venture capital 

firm, since 2000. He cofounded, and between 1992 and 

1999, he served as president and CEO of, Interval 

Research Corporation, a Sili
con ValleyŒbased laboratory 
and incubator for new businesses focusing on broadband, 
consumer devices, interaction design, and advanced 

technologies. Prior to cofounding Interval with Paul 

Allen, Dr. Liddle founded Metaphor, which was 
acquired by IBM in 1991, which named him vice 
president of business development for IBM Personal 

Systems. Dr. Liddle™s extensive experience in research 

and development has focused largely on human-
computer interactions and in
cludes 10 years at Xerox 
Palo Alto Research Center
 (PARC), from 1972 to 1982. 
He has been a director of Sybase, Broderbund Software, 

Borland International, and Ti
cketmaster, and is currently 
on the board of the New York Times Company. His 
board involvement at U.S. Venture Partners includes 
Electric Cloud, Instantis, Klocwork, MaxLinear, and 

Optichron. Dr. Liddle has served on the DARPA 

Information Science and Technology Committee, and as 
chair of the National Academy of Sciences Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board. 
Dr. Liddle earned a B.S. in electrical engineering at 
the University of Michigan and a Ph.D. in electrical and 
engineering and computer scie
nce at the University of 
Toledo, where his dissertation focused on reconfigurable 
computing machines and theories of encryption, 
encoding, and signal recovery. His contributions to 
human-computer interaction design earned him the 

distinction of senior fellow at the Royal College of Art. 

  KATHRYN MCKINLEY 
is principal researcher at 
Microsoft Research and holds an Endowed Professorship 

of Computer Science at the University of Texas at 
Austin. She previously was a 
professor at the University 
of Massachusetts, Amherst. 
Dr. McKinley™s research interests include 
programming language implementation, compilers, 

memory management, runtime systems, security, 
reliability, and architecture
. Her research group has 
produced numerous tools, algorithms, and methodologies 

that are in wide research and industrial use, such as the 

DaCapo Java Benchmarks, the TRIPS compiler, the 
Hoard memory manager, the Memory Management 
Toolkit (MMTk), and the Immix mark-region garbage 

collector. For example, the Apple operating system uses 

the Hoard memory management algorithm, the TRIPS 
compiler was the first demonstration of a compiling 
general-purpose programming language to execute on a 

dataflow architecture, and the DaCapo Benchmarks are 

the most widely used Java benchmarks for performance 
and verification in both research and testing. 
Dr. McKinley was named an ACM fellow (2008) for 
contributions to compilers and memory management and 

an IEEE fellow (2011) fo
r contributions to compiler 
technologies. She was awarded the 2011 ACM 
SIGPLAN Distinguished Service Award. She has served 
as the technical program chair for ASPLOS, PACT, 

PLDI, ISMM, and CGO (ACM and IEEE conferences). 

She was coeditor-in-chief of ACM™s 
Transactions on 
Programming Language Systems
 (or TOPLAS) (2007Œ
2010). She was a Computer Research Association™s 

Committee on the Status of Women in Computer 

Science (CRA-W) board member (2009Œ2011) and is 
currently a cochair of CRA-W (2011Œpresent), which 
seeks to improve the participation of women in 

computing research nationwide. Her research awards 

include two CACM Research Highlights Invited Papers 

(2012, 2008), IEEE 
Micro
 Top Picks (2012), Best Paper 
at ASPLOS (2009), David Bruton Jr. Centennial 
Fellowship (2005Œ2006), six IBM Faculty Fellowship 

Awards (2003Œ2008), and an NSF CAREER Award 

(1996Œ2000). She is a recipient of the 2011 ACM 
SIGPLAN Software Award. Dr
. McKinley has graduated 
fourteen Ph.D. students. She 
received a B.A., M.S., and 
Ph.D. from Rice University. 

  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 61 B   Identifying Hubs of Research Activity in Key Areas of S&T Critical to this Study 
  
 
 s a data-gathering experiment, the committee 
solicited input from experts on their sense of 

where innovation and engagement are taking 
place related to the power and performance challenges 
for sustaining growth in computing performance. In 
particular, the committee asked experts to identify 

leading researchers around the globe focused on the 

challenges of sustaining growth in computer 
performance in (1) semiconductor device scaling, (2) 
power efficiency in computing hardware, (3) parallel 

programming and models to leverage multicore and 

other novel architecture, (4) chip architectures, and (5) 
runtime and software infrast
ructure for power-efficient and scalable computing. 
Approximately 170 leading researchers were 
identified, based on input solicited from a dozen 

computer scientists, engineers, and recommendations by 
the committee.
1 Approximately three-quarters of those 
identified were based in the United States. Individuals 

who were identified by at least three people were 

deemed to be ﬁhubsﬂ of concentrated research activity 
for the purposes of the committee™s analysis. Publication 
data (for the years 2001Œ2011) for each of these 

individuals, or hubs, was collected using SciVerse 

Scopus
2 (resulting in a total number of 1,081 
publications and 5,685 authors, 1,368 of which are 
unique authors). 
Using this publication data, the committee generated 
a coauthor publication network map that includes all 
                                                 1The following noncommittee members contributed to this data-
collection exercise: Alex Aiken (Stanford University), Mark Bohr 
(Intel), Robert Colwell (DARPA), Bob Doering (Texas In-
struments), Bryan Ford (Yale Univ
ersity), David Patterson (Uni-
versity of California-Berkeley);
 David Srolovitz (A*STAR), and 
Dennis Sylvester (University of Michigan). 
2See www.scopus.com. Last 
accessed on August 11, 2012. 
identified hubs of research activity in semiconductor 
scaling, architecture, and parallel programming.
3,4
 A 
visualization of the publication network for these 

advanced research areas critical to the computing 
performance challenge is shown in Figure B-1. The goal 
of this exercise is not to highlight individually-identified 

researchers, but rather to present a methodology that 

allows gleaning, at least in a rough, qualitative sense, of 
potential insights from the connectedness between the 
hubs of research activity, as well as between U.S. and 

international research communities. 
Figure B-1 shows a map of highly connected circles. 
Each circle represents an individual researcher, and each 
line between two circles re
presents a coauthored 
publication. The size
5 of each circle corresponds 
approximately to the total number of papers that 

researcher has authored, a
nd the width of each line 
corresponds to the number of coauthored papers shared 
between two research
ers. Hubs of research activity are 
colored in yellow and labeled with letters corresponding 

to their institutional affiliation.
6 All other circles are  
                                                  3Coauthor publication network maps are not shown for ad-
vanced research in power efficien
cy in computing hardware or in 
runtime and software infrastructu
re for power-efficient and scala-
ble computing due to limited overlap in researcher nominations. 
4Coauthor publication network ma
ps were generated using the 
Science of Science (Sci
2) Tool, available at ht
tp://sci2.cns.iu.edu. 5The size of each node is calcula
ted as a fraction of the largest 
number of papers authored and/or coauthored by a single individ-
ual. 6Affiliations associated with each
 hotspot are as follows: (A) The 
University of California, Berkeley; (B) Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology; (C) Stanford University; (D) University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign; and (E) Ad
vanced Micro Devices, Inc. 
AThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  FIGURE B-1 Coauthorship networks of hubs of research act
ivity in three areas of advanced computing research. 
  
 
colored according to the geographic location of that 

researcher, as indicated in the figure.
7 Three large circles 
marked by dotted lines are used to bin the hubs of 
research activity by each of
 their associated areas of 
                                                 7Color coding by region (e.g., U.S., Asia, Europe, Other) was 
determined by using each authors™ geographic location listed on 
his or her conference publicati
on. Addresses were not mapped 
using Sci2 software. 
research (e.g., semiconductor scaling, architecture, and 
parallel programming). 
It is worth noting that this mapping approach differs 
from traditional bibliometric
 analyses of coauthored 
publication data because the primary nodes (hubs) 

examined were identified based on the committee™s data 
input solicitations (as opposed to selecting hubs on the 
basis of total number of publications or of most cited 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.HUBS OF RESEARCH ACTIVITY 
63 
  publications). While the sampling size of the data 
solicitations is small, Figure B-1 reveals several 
interesting features that may be useful for subsequent 

analysis. 
For example, all hubs are located in the United 
States, and all but one of th
ese hubs are U.S. research 
universities. The coauthorship network maps show that 

some areas of research (and some researchers 

specifically) tend to collaborate on a nation- or region-
specific basis or both. For example, chip architecture and 
parallel programming networks are primarily U.S. based 

with limited participation by Europe and Asia. In 

contrast, semiconductor device-scaling networks show a 

significant number of collaborations with Asia. In 
particular, Taiwan holds the vast majority share of Asia™s 
representation, followed by Singapore and Japan (data 

not shown). 
While the individual hubs do not generally show a 
significant degree of connectivity with one another (with 
exception to two hubs in the semiconductor scaling 

networks), the semiconductor scaling and chip 

architecture networks appear to be highly interconnected. 
In fact, both of these networks share a common hub. In 
contrast, researchers within the parallel programming 

networks display much less connectivity. 
Increasing circle size, increasing connectedness 
between researchers, and widening lines between 
researchers may all be useful indicators for identifying 

emerging hubs of research activity. For instance, a small 

circle with many connections might suggest an 
individual who publishes less but collaborates frequently 
and is thereby more intimately connected to the global 

knowledge network. In addition, a wide line between a 

small circle and an established research hub might 
suggest a promising early-car
eer researcher who hails 
from a strong research lineage.
 This analysis could also 
be extended by observing how coauthored publication 

networks change over time. 
In summary, this methodology presents a unique 
approach for identifying emerging, as well as 
established, hubs of research
 activity in three areas of 
science and technology. However, given the small 

sampling size of the data solicitations, this experiment is 
not intended to provide any assessment or interpretation 
of the hubs themselves (or of trends apparent in the 

network maps). Rather, the goal of this experiment is to 

demonstrate an approach that could be extended and/or 
modified (e.g., to include statistically valid data-
gathering methodologies) for subsequent in-depth 

exploration in any number of research areas. 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 65 C   Contributors to the Study 
   
 
 lthough the briefers listed below provided much useful information of various kinds to the Committee 
on Global Approaches to Advanced Computing, they were not asked to endorse the content of this 

study, nor did they see the final draft of this report before its release. 
 BRIEFERS AND PRESENTERS TO THE COMMITTEE 
SEPTEMBER 19Œ20, 2011 
WASHINGTON, DC 
 Connie Chang, Independent Consultant 
Krisztian Flautner, ARM Limited 

David Jakubek, Department of Defense 

Luc Soete, United Nations University Œ Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on Innovation and 
Technology (UNU-MERIT) 
Gregory Tassey, National Institute of Standards and Technology 

  AThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 67 D   Findings and Recommendations from 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next Level?   
 
 he following findings and recommendations are 
repeated from the National Research Council™s 

report, The Future of Computing Performance: 
Game Over or Next Level?
1 Findings: 
 The information technology sector itself and most 
other sectors of societyŠfor example, manufacturing, 
financial and other services, science, engineering, 

education, defense and other government services, and 
entertainmentŠhave grown dependent on continued 
growth in computing performance. 
 After many decades of dram
atic exponential growth, 
single processor performance is increasing at a much 
lower rate, and this situation is not expected to 

improve in the foreseeable future. 
 The growth in the performance of computing 
systemsŠeven if they are multiple-processor parallel 
systemsŠwill become limited by power consumption 
within a decade. 
 There is no known alternative to parallel systems for 
sustaining growth in computing performance; 
however, no compelling programming paradigms for 

general parallel systems have yet emerged. 
 Recommendations: 
 Invest in research in and development of algorithms 
that can exploit parallel processing. 
 Invest in research in and development of programming 
methods that will enable efficient use of parallel 
                                                 1NRC, 2011, 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game 
Over or Next Level?
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press (available online at http
://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_ 
id=12980). systems not only by parallel-systems experts but also 
by typical programmers. 
 Focus long-term efforts on rethinking of the canonical 
computing ﬁstackﬂŠapplications, programming 
language, compiler, runtime, virtual machine, 

operating system, hypervisor, and architectureŠin 
light of parallelism and resource-management 
challenges. 
 Invest in research on and development of parallel 
architectures driven by applications, including 
enhancements of chip multiprocessor systems and 

conventional data-parallel architectures, cost-effective 
designs for application-specific architectures, and 
support for radically different approaches. 
 Invest in research and development to make computer 
systems more power-efficien
t at all levels of the 
system, including software, application-specific 

approaches, and alternative devices. Such efforts 
should address ways in which software and system 
architectures can improve power efficiency, such as by 

exploiting locality and the use of domain-specific 

execution units. R&D should also be aimed at making 
logic gates more power-effici
ent. Such efforts should 
address alternative physical devices beyond 

incremental improvements in today™s CMOS circuits. 
 To promote cooperation and innovation by sharing, 
encourage development of open interface standards for 
parallel programming rather than proliferating 

proprietary programming environments. 
 Invest in the development of tools and methods to 
transform legacy applications to parallel systems. 
 Incorporate in computer science education an 
increased emphasis on parallelism, and use a variety of 
methods and approaches to better prepare students for 

the types of computing resources that they will 

encounter in their careers. 
TThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.     The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 69 E   Dennard Scaling and Implications 
   
 
  he following description was taken from the 2010 
National Research Council Computer Science and 

Telecommunications Board (CSTB) report 
The Future of Computing Performance: Game Over or Next 
Level?
1  ﬁIn a classic 1974 paper, reprinted in Appendix D, 
Robert Dennard et al. showed that the MOS 
transistor has a set of very convenient scaling 
properties.
10 The scaling properties are shown in 
Table 3.1, taken from that paper. If all the voltages 

in a MOS device are scaled down with the physical 

dimensions, the operation of the device scales in a 
particularly favorable way. The gates clearly become 
smaller because linear dimensions are scaled. That 

scaling also causes gates to become faster with 

lower energy per transition. If all dimensions and 
voltages are scaled by
 the scaling factor 
 ( has 
typically been 1.4), after scaling the gates become 

(1/)2 their previous size, and 
2 more gates can be 
placed on a chip of roughly the same size and cost as 
before. The delay of the gate also decreases by 1/
, and, most importantly, the energy dissipated each 

time the gate switches decreases by (1/
)3. To 
understand why the energy drops so rapidly, note 
that the energy that the gate dissipates is 
proportional to the energy that is stored at the output 

of the gate. That energy is proportional to a quantity 

called capacitance
11 and the square of the supply 
voltage. The load capacitance of the wiring 
                                                 1NRC, 2011, 
The Future of Computing Performance:
 Game Over or Next Level?
, Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press (available online at http
://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_ 
id=12980). decreases by 1/
 because the smaller gates make all the 
wires shorter and capacitance is proportional to length. 

Therefore, the power requirements per unit of space on 

the chip (mm
2), or energy per second per mm
2, remain 
constant: 
Power = (number of gates)(C
Load/gate
)(Clock Rate)(Vsupply
2) Power density = N
gCload
Fclk
Vdd2 Ng = CMOS gates per unit area 
Cload
 = capacitive load per CMOS gate 
Fclk = clock frequency 
Vdd = supply voltage 
Power density = (
2)(1/)()(1/)2 = 1 
 
That the power density (power requirements per unit 
space on the chip, even when each unit space contains 
many, many more gates) can remain constant across 

generations of CMOS scaling has been a critical property 

underlying progress in microprocessors and in ICs in 
general. In every technology generation, ICs can double 
in complexity and increase in clock frequency while 

consuming the same power and not increasing in cost. 

Given that description of classic CMOS scaling, one 

would expect the power of processors to have remained 
constant since the CMOS transition, but this has not been 
the case. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, supply 

voltages were stuck at 5 V for system reasons. So power 

density would have been expected to increase as 
technology scaled from 2 mm to 0.5 mm. However, until 
recently supply voltage has s
caled with technology, but 
power densities continued to increase.ﬂ 
  TThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 71 
F   Pilot Study of Papers at Top Technical Conferences in Advanced Computing   
 
 he committee found it challenging to identify 
reliable and robust nontra
ditional indicators for 
assessing a nation™s t
echnological research 
capabilities specific to the computing performance 
challenges outlined in Chapter 1. After significant 
methodological consideration and debate, the committee 

conducted a pilot study to determine whether a 

bibliometric analysis of papers at select prestigious 
conferences in advanced computing could provide a 
useful snapshot of a nation™s capabilities in specific 

technology areas critical
 to the study™s charge. 
The committee noted the strengths and challenges of 
a methodology that is both objective (e.g., conference 
publication data) and subjective (e.g., using committee 

expertise to identify specific 
conferences for analysis). 
By excluding traditional journal publicationsŠas well as 

papers from conferences not considered to be 
representative of the most relevant and leading 
researchŠsome relevant research may have been 

excluded; alternative samplings of conferences could 

also yield different 
results. On the other hand, a selective 
sampling of conferences may better support a more 
focused assessment of rese
arch efforts across specific 
technology areas (i.e., semiconductors and nanoscale 

devices and circuits, architecture, programming systems, 
and applications). 
An ideal analysis would include all papers relevant 
to the computing performance challenges outlined in 

Chapter 1, whether published at conferences or in 

traditional journals, weighted by citations and impact 
factors, as well as expert judgment.
1 Given limitations in 
                                                 1Council of Canadian Academies, 2012, 
Informing Research 
Choices: Indicators and Judgment Œ The Report of the Expert 
Panel on Science Performance and Research Funding
 (available 
at http://www.scie
nceadvice.ca/upload
s/eng/assessments% 
time and resources, however, this was simply not 
feasible. Further, the comm
ittee™s analysis represents 
only one of likely many different and potentially useful 

measures of a nation™s research capabilities and 
innovativeness. These factors considered, the 
committee™s methodological approach and insights from 

its assessment are presented he
re as a pilot effort that 
will, no doubt, benefit from deeper, subsequent 
exploration by others. 
 F.1 Methodological Overview of Conference 
Paper Authorship Analysis  To assess a nations™ technology-specific research 
capabilities, the committee analyzed paper authorshipŠ

specifically, the geographical locations of authorsŠin 
many of the top technical conferences in four research 
areas most closely related to the technological challenges 

outlined in Chapter 1. These relate to the computing 

performance challenge and the shift to multicore 
processors: semiconductor devices and circuits, computer 
architecture, programming systems, and applications. 

 
F.1.1 Rationale for Conferences as a Preferred Venue 

 In the computing communityŠunlike many other 
science and engineering disciplinesŠconference papers 

are often the publication venue of choice rather than 

journals.
2 In fact, highly selective computer science 
                                                                                  20and%20publications%20and%20news
%20releases/Science%20
performance/SciencePerformance_FullReport_EN_Web.pdf). 
2David Patterson, Lawrence Snyd
er, and Jeffrey Ullman, 1999, 
ﬁBest Practices Memo: Evaluating Computer Scientists and Engi-
neers for Promotion and Tenureﬂ in 
Computing Research News
, June. Available at h
ttp://www.cra.org/upload
s/documents/resourc- es/bpmemos/tenure_review.pdf. Last accessed on August 15, 2012. 
TThe New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  conferences often have higher citation indices and greater 
venue impact compared to related computing journals.
3,4
 The importance of conference publications within this 

community is consistent with a 2011 NRC report, 
A Data-Based Assessment of
 Research-Doctorate 
Programs in the United States
,5 which indicates that ﬁfor 
the field of computer science, refereed conference papers 

are an important form of scholarship.ﬂ 
In this report, conferences
 are the preferred venue 
over journals for the computer science-focused areas 
described in Sections F.1.3ŒF.1.6 for several reasons. 

First, these conferences tend to have a much shorter time 

from submission to publication than journals in the area, 

resulting in the most recent, significant innovations 
appearing at the conferences first.
6 Second, conferences 
provide a larger sample size than journals of highly 

recognized recent top-qua
lity research. Third, the 
conferences identified by the committee often have more 
focused research interests compared to journals that 
would publish related (albeit less recent and possibly less 

regarded), but broader works.
7 For example, in advanced architecture research, 
relevant to the challenges described in Chapter 1, 
architecture papers appear in a wider range of 

journals that include more than just computer 

architecture (e.g., 
IEEE Transactions on Computers
,                                                  3It is worth noting that industry participation in these confer-
ences may be limited by the demise of central research labs, less 
emphasis on outside presentations 
and publications, and reluctance 
to report on the most important research that companies are per-
forming. 4As one example, CiteSeer, whic
h keeps statistics about com-
puter science publications, reports
 a venue impact of 0.14, 0.08, 
and 0.6 for three architecture research conferences analyzed in this 
report (High-Performance Computer Architecture
, International 
Symposium on Computer Architecture
, and the 
International Sym-
posium on Microarchitecture, respectively) compared to 0.02 and 
0.01 for two related architec
ture research journals: 
IEEE Transac-
tions on Computers
 and 
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Dis-
tributed Systems
, respectively. See http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/stats/ 
venues. Last accesse
d on August 15, 2012. 
5NRC, 2011, 
A Data-Based Assessment of Research-Doctorate 
Programs in the United States
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (available online 
at https://download.nap.edu/ 
rdp/index.html?) 
6This is particularly relevant to the analysis of recent conference 
papers in Appendix F.2. 
7One exception of a journal that is
 equally regarded with a simi-
larly themed premier conference is the 
IEEE Journal of Solid-State 
Circuits (JSSC). JSSC publishes a
pproximately 200 papers per 
year, with the papers typically being 10-15 pages long. By com-
parison, the 
International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC)
 typically publishes the same number of papers, but each paper is 3 
pages long. As both venues are hi
ghly regarded and may represent 
a similar sample of annual papers
, a more in-depth analysis of 
contributions in this area would 
benefit by addressing both ISSCC 
and JSSC. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems
, and IEEE 
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems
). Achieving the same level of topical focus would 

require disaggregation of the journal data on a 

paper-by-paper basis. This is simply not feasible for 
the wide range of conferences selected and papers 
analyzed for this report. Thus, analysis of conference 

papers allows a more focused assessment of the 

research areas identified by the committee as critical 
for sustaining computing performance and the shift 
to multicore processors, as opposed to computer 

science generally. 
Similar to prestigious journals, premier 
conferences in each of the targeted hardware, 
architecture, and software research areas are highly 
competitive and conference submissions are 

rigorously peer-reviewed. Conferences 
are also competitive publishing venues because 
representation is professionally beneficial. 
Conferences provide an opportunity for researchers 

to share new research, to learn from others, and to 

gain exposure to recent and significant research 
efforts.8,9  
F.1.2 Determination of a Nation™s Paper Contributions 

at Conferences 
 As a proxy indicator for a nation™s technology-
specific research capabilities, the committee analyzed the 

weighted distribution of authors for research papers given 

at the conferences listed and described in Sections F.1.3Œ
F.1.6. To do this, the committee noted the home nation 
for each author (defined as the geographic location of 

that author™s affiliation listed on each paper™s title page) 

and computed each nation™s weighted authorship 
contribution to each conference paper. It is important to 
note that this analysis does not distinguish between a 

U.S.-based author who is a U.S. citizen and a U.S.-based 

author who is not a U.S. citizen (and may eventually 
return to his or her home country),
 which may, in some 
cases, diminish a nation™s research representation at the 

sampled conferences.
10                                                  8David Patterson, Lawrence Sn
yder, and Jeffrey Ullman, 1999, 
ﬁBest Practices Memo: Evaluating Computer Scientists and Engi-
neers for Promotion and Tenureﬂ in 
Computing Research News
, June. Available at http://www.
cra.org/uploads/documents/ 
resources/bpmemos/tenure_review.pdf. Last accessed on August 
15, 2012. 
9NRC, 1994, 
Academic Careers for Experimental Computer 
Scientists and Engineers
, Washington, D.C.: The National 
Academies Press (available online at http://www.nap.edu/open 
book.php?record_id=2236). 
102010 National Science Foundation data show that the share of 
non-U.S. citizens receiving U.S. doctoral degrees in natural sci-
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
73 
  A nation™s weighted
11 contribution to each 
conference paper is merely the number of authors 
geographically located in (or professionally affiliated 

with) that particular nation divided by the total number 

of authors of the paper. Thus, the weighted contributions 
for a given paper always sum to one. To compute the 
weighted percentage of papers contributed by a nation at 

a given conference, each nation™s weighted contributions 

to each conference paper are summed and then divided 
by the total number of papers given at that conference. 
The committee believes this
 measurementŠas opposed 
to total papers or total authorsŠbetter reflects a nation™s 

authorship contribution.
12 This measure also has the 
distinct advantage that it is public information
13 and can 
be extended and reproduced by others. 
Based on the technical challenges outlined in 
Chapter 1, the committee iden
tified four research areas 
critical to addressing the computing performance 
challenge and the shift to multicore processors: 
semiconductor devices and circuits, computer 

architecture, programming systems, and applications. To 

compute the weighted percentage of papers contributed 
by a nation in each of these 
research areas, each nation™s 
weighted contributions to each conference paper are 

summed across all conferences assigned to a particular 

research area (discussed in Sections F.1.3ŒF.1.6) and 
then divided by the total number of papers given at those 
conferences.
14 All but three of the 
conferences analyzed 
                                                                                  ences and engineering is high and increasing at a higher rate than 
for U.S. citizens (a
vailable at http://
www.nsf.gov/statistics/ seind10/pdf/overview.pdf; last 
accessed on September 2, 2012). 
Additionally, a 2007 report by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science 
and Education, 
Stay Rates of Foreign Do
ctorate Recipients from 
U.S. Universities
 (available at http://orise.orau.gov/files/sep/stay-
rates-foreign-doctorate-recipients-2007.pdf) found that two-thirds 
of foreign citizens who received science or engineering doctorates 
from U.S. universities in 2005 con
tinued to live in the United 
States in 2007. 
11In an unweighted analysis, tw
o countries will receive 50 per-
cent of a particular paper™s contribution to the conference, even if 
nine coauthors are located in one country and one coauthor is lo-
cated in the other country. 
12Examination of the country of origin of members of confer-
ence programming committees may be 
a useful future activity and 
provide additional insight for 
assessing a nation™s interest and 
capabilities in a particular technological field. 
13While bibliometric databases, 
such as SciVerse Scopus and 
Web of Science, provide some c
onference publication and citation 
data, comprehensive and consistent data for each conference 
across the time periods analyzed in the report do not exist. For 
example, Scopus includes only limited or no coverage of ECOOP, 
Eurographics, OSDI, SC, SOSP, VLDB, and WWW, and large 
gaps in annual coverage ex
ist for ISCA, MICRO, POPL, and PPoPP. 
14This allows all amassed papers in each research area to be 
weighted equally. In contrast, by first calculating a nation™s 
weighted percentage of contributed
 papers for each conference (as 
by the committee are sponsored or published by either 
(or both) the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE) or the A
ssociation for Computing 
Machinery (ACM), the two preeminent international 

technical societies in electrical engineering and 
computing. Based on committee members™ opinions and 
knowledge of the fields, the following sections identify a 

limited number of top conferences that make available 

new and interesting research germane to the study™s 
charge. 
 
F.1.3 Semiconductor Devices and Circuits Conferences 

 As described in Chapter 1, the end of Dennard 
scaling has placed greater pressure on innovative devices 
and circuits to deliver more 
energy-efficient technologies 
for building microprocessors. To explore the research 

capabilities in these areas, the committee analyzed 
papers from three conferencesŠtwo in semiconductor 
and nanoscale devices and one in semiconductor circuits 

following the methodology described earlier in Section 

F.1.2. These conferences are described below. 
 International Electron Devices Meeting
 (IEDM). 
As stated on the conference Web site, IEDM is 
ﬁthe world™s pre-eminen
t forum for reporting 
technological breakthroug
hs in the areas of 
semiconductor and electronic device technology, 
design, manufacturing, physics, and modeling. 
IEDM is the flagship conference for nanometer-

scale CMOS (complementary-symmetry metal-

oxide-semiconductor) transistor technology, 
advanced memory, displays, sensors, MEMS 
(microelectromechanical systems) devices, novel 

quantum and nano-scale devices and 

phenomenology, optoelectronics, devices for 
power and energy harvesting, high-speed devices, 
as well as process technology and device 

modeling and simulation. The conference scope 

not only encompasses devices in silicon, 

compound and organic semiconductors, but also in 
emerging material systems. IEDM is truly an 
international conference, with strong 

representation from speakers from around the 

globe.ﬂ
15 In 2011, IEDM included 36 sessions 
encompassing more than 200 papers. IEDM is 
sponsored by the IEEE. 
                                                                                  reported in Appendix G) and then averaging across all conferences 
assigned to a particular research area, a bias is introduced that 
could skew the overall average in favor of those conferences with 
larger numbers of 
presented papers. 
15See http://www.his.com/~iedm/. Last accessed on January 9, 
2012. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
   International Conference on Nanotechnology
 (NANO). From the conference Web site: ﬁNANO 
is the flagship IEEE conference in 
Nanotechnology, which makes it a must for 
students, educators, researchers, scientists and 

engineers alike, working at the interface of 

nanotechnology and the many fields of electronic 
materials, photonics, bio- and medical devices, 
alternative energy, enviro
nmental protection, and 
multiple areas of current and future electrical and 

electronic applications. 
In each of these areas, 
NANO is the conference where practitioners will 
see nanotechnologies at work in both their own 

and related fields, from basic research and theory 

to industrial applications.ﬂ
16 In 2011, NANO 
included more than 400 papers. NANO is 
sponsored by the IEEE. 
 International Solid-State Circuits Conference 
(ISSCC). As stated on the conference Web site, 
ISSCC is ﬁthe premier forum for the presentation 

of advances in solid-state circuits and systems-on-

a-chip.ﬂ
17 ISSCC topics include advanced memory 
circuits, low-power circuits, high-speed signaling, 
and microprocessors, among many others. In 

2011, ISSCC included 28 sessions encompassing 

more than 200 papers. ISSCC is sponsored by the 
IEEE.  
F.1.4 Computer Architecture Conferences 

 Computer architecture includ
es the design and study 
of computer hardware implementations and computer 

design at the hardware-software boundary. Computer 

architects seek to make computers faster, lower power, 
cheaper, more reliable, and easier to program. Many 
computer architecture researchers focus on parallel and 

multicore systems. The committee analyzed conference 

papers from four top-flight conferences, described 

below. 
 International Symposium on Architectural Support 
for Programming Languages and Operating 
Systems
 (ASPLOS). ASPLOS ﬁis the premier 
forum for multidisciplinary systems research, 

spanning hardware, computer architecture, 
compilers, languages, operating systems, 
networking, and applications,ﬂ 
18 and includes 
papers on parallel hardware and software. In 2011, 
                                                 16See http://ieeenano2011.
org/. Last accessed on January 9, 
2012. 17See http://isscc.org/. Last 
accessed on January 9, 2012. 
18See research.microsoft.com/e
n-us/um/Cambridge/events/ 
asplos_2012. Last accessed on January 9, 2012. 
ASPLOS included 14 sessions with 32 papers. 
ASPLOS is sponsored by the ACM. 
 International Symposium on High Performance 
Computer Architecture
 (HPCA). HPCA covers 
many of the same topics as ISCA and MICRO.
19 In 2011, HPCA included 14 sessions and 46 

papers. HPCA is sponsored by the IEEE. 
 International Symposium on Computer 
Architecture
 (ISCA). As stated on the conference 
Web site, ISCA is ﬁthe premier forum for new 
ideas and experimental results in computer 

architecture,ﬂ
20 including parallel architecture and 
multicore systems. In 2011, ISCA included 14 
sessions with 40 papers. ISCA is sponsored by 
ACM and the IEEE. 
 International Symposium on Microarchitecture
 (MICRO). As stated on 
the conference Web site, 
MICRO ﬁbrings together 
researchers in fields 
related to microarchitecture, compilers, chips, and 
systems for technical exchange on traditional 
microarchitecture topics and emerging research 

areas.ﬂ21 In 2011, MICRO included 13 sessions 
with 44 papers. MICRO is sponsored by ACM and 
the IEEE.
  Roughly, the same community of researchers 
publishes in and attends the conferences described 

above, although ASPLOS includes additional research 
areas on the boundary betw
een computer architecture, 
programming languages, and operating systems. 

 
F.1.5 Programming Systems Conferences 
 In this report, the committee focuses on (1) 
programming systems that encompass programming 

language design and implementation, and (2) 
programming tools, including programming models, 
languages, compilers, runtime systems, and virtual 

machines for parallel systems that are necessary to 

enable applications to exploit emerging silicon trends 

and chip architectures. The following five top 
conferences were analyzed, which collectively cover a 
range of programming system technologies: 

  European Conference on Object-Oriented 
Programming (ECOOP).
 ECOOP covers ﬁtopics 
on object-oriented tech
nologies, software development, systems, languages and 
                                                 19See www.ece.lsu.edu/hpca-
18/. Last accesse
d on January 9, 
2012. 20See Isca2012.ittc.
ku.edu. Last accessed on January 9, 2012. 
21See www.microarch.org/micro44/
. Last accessed on January 
9, 2012. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
75 
  applications.ﬂ
22 ECOOP was established in 1987. 
ECOOP and OOPSLA are peer conferences, were 
established within 1 year of each other, and have 

followed the same historical trends on topics. 

Whereas many of the 
other conferences the 
committee sampled are often hosted in the United 
States or Canada, ECOOP has only ventured 

outside of Europe twice (1990, 2012). In 2011, 

ECOOP included 9 sessions and 26 papers. Since 
2007, ECOOP has been sponsored by ACM. 
 Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, 
Languages, and Applications (OOPSLA)
. OOPSLA ﬁembraces all aspects of software 

construction and deliveryﬂ and is ﬁa premier 

forum for software innovation.ﬂ
23 OOPSLA 
started in 1986 when object-oriented programming 
systems were emerging to be a forum for 

researchers and practitioners to explore this new 

paradigm. Object-oriented programming 

subsequently became a dominant paradigm. Now 
OOPSLA is much broader and covers the same 
topics as PLDI and POPL. In 2011, OOPSLA 

included 17 sessions with 61 papers (the most in 

its history). OOPSLA is sponsored by the ACM. 
 Programming Language Design and 
Implementation (PLDI).
 PLDI focuses ﬁon the 
design, implementation, development, and use of 
programming languages. [It] emphasizes 

innovative and creative approaches to compile-

time and runtime technology; novel language 
designs and features; and results from 
implementations.ﬂ
24 Parallel programming 
systems are a significant component of PLDI. In 

2011, PLDI included 20 sessions with 55 papers. 
PLDI is sponsored by the ACM. 
 Symposium on Principles of Programming 
Languages (POPL)
. POPL is the leading ﬁforum 
for the discussion of all aspects of programming 

languages and systems, with emphasis on how 

principles underpin practice.ﬂ
25 POPL includes 
research on the principles of parallel programming 
systems. In 2011, POPL included 16 sessions with 
49 papers. POPL is sponsored by the ACM. 
 Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel 
Programming (PPoPP)
. ﬁPPoPP is a forum for 
leading work on all aspects of parallel 
                                                 22See http://ecoop12.cs.purdue.ed
u/. Last accessed on January 
12, 2012. 
23See http://researchr.org/conf
erence/oopsla-2012. Last acces-
sed on January 12, 2012. 
24See pldi12.cs.purdue.edu. Last 
accessed on January 9, 2012. 
25See www.cse.psu.edu/popl/12. La
st accessed on January 9, 
2012. programming, including foundational and 
theoretical aspects, techni
ques, tools, and practical 
experiences.ﬂ
26 Conference topics include work on 
concurrent and parallel (e.g., multicore, 

heterogeneous, and distributed) systems. In 2011, 
PPoPP included 8 sessions with 26 papers. PPoPP 
is sponsored by the ACM. 
 
F.1.6 Applications Conferences 
 Computer applications ar
e a tremendously broad 
area encompassing topics such as scientific computing, 

security, distributed and cloud computing, databases, and 

artificial intelligence. Representing the full range of 
these areas is beyond the scope of this report. However, 
since parallel application development is central to the 

success of multicore systems, the committee sampled 

seven conferences that have a strong focus on 
computational application needs and historically have 
depended on parallel and multicore systems, described 

below. 
 Annual Conference of the European Association 
for Computer Graphics (Eurographics)
. Eurographics is a ﬁEurope-wide professional 
Computer Graphics Association. . . that supports 

its members in advancing the state of the art in 

Computer Graphics and related fields such as 
Multimedia, Scientific Visualization, and Human 
Computer Interfaces.ﬂ
27 In 2011, Eurographics 
included 14 sessions and 35 papers. 
 Symposium on Operating Systems Design and 
Implementation (OSDI).
 OSDI ﬁbrings together 
professionals from academic and industrial 
backgrounds. . . [to discuss] the design, 
implementation, and implications of systems 

software.ﬂ28 In 2010, OSDI included 11 sessions 
with 32 papers. OSDI is sponsored by USENIX, 
the Advanced Computing Systems Association. 
 International Conference on Computer Graphics 
and Interactive Techniques (SIGGRAPH)
. SIGGRAPH is the ﬁpremier international forum 

for disseminating new scholarly work in computer 

graphics and interactive techniques.ﬂ
29 Graphics 
has a huge computational demand that has long 
been satisfied by parallel hardware, including both 
                                                 26See Dynopt.org/ppopp-2012/. Last accessed on January 9, 
2012. 27See http://www.eg.org/index.php/about-eg/about-eg. Last ac-
cessed on June 29, 2012. 
28See http://static.usenix.org/event/osdi10/cfp/. Last accessed on 
June 29, 2012. 29See www.siggraph.org/s2011/. Last
 accessed on January 9, 
2012. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  graphics processors and multicore processors. In 
2011, SIGGRAPH included 28 sessions with 115 
papers. SIGGRAPH is sponsored by the ACM. 
 International Conference for High Performance 
Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis 
(SC).
 The SC conference engages ﬁthe 
international community in high performance 
computing, networking, storage, and analysis.ﬂ
30 SC is the premier conference on supercomputing 

applications and systems, and has been a leading 

venue focusing on parallel systems ranging from 
traditional supercomputers to many-cabinet 
machines to multicore to systems built from 

multicore hardware. In 2011, SC included 74 

papers. SC is sponsored by the ACM and the 
IEEE.  Symposium on Operating Systems Principles 
(SOSP).
 The SOSP conference focuses on 
ﬁresearch related to the design, implementation, 

analysis, evaluation, and deployment of computer 

systems software. . . [taking] a broad view of the 

systems area and solicits contributions from many 
fields of systems practice, including, but not 
limited to, operating systems, file and storage 

systems, distributed syst
ems, mobility, security, 
embedded systems, dependability, system 
management, peer-to-peer systems, and 
virtualization.ﬂ
31 In 2011, SOSP included 9 
sessions and 28 papers. SOSP is sponsored by the 

ACM.  International Conference on Very Large 
Databases (VLDB).
 The VLDB conference covers 
ﬁcurrent issues in data management, database and 
information systems research.ﬂ
32 Database 
applications are particularly instructive in this 

setting, because the database community has 
developed and matured parallel algorithms and 
technologies that exploit parallel hardware. In 

2011, VLDB included 30 sessions and 104 papers 

(18.1 percent acceptance rate). VLDB is 

sponsored by the nonprofit organization Very 
Large Data Base Endowment Inc. 
 International World Wide Web Conference 
(WWW).
 The WWW conference ﬁ
aims to provide 
the world a premier forum for discussion and 

debate about the evolution of the Web, the 

standardization of its associated technologies, and 
the impact of those tech
nologies on society and 
                                                 30See www.Sc11.supercomputing.org.
 Last accessed on January 
9, 2012. 
31See www.sosp.org and www.sigops.org/sosp/sosp11/current. 
Last accessed on June 19, 2012. 
32See www.vldb.org/2011. Last ac
cessed on June 19, 2012. 
culture.ﬂ
33 The explosive growth in the numbers of 
these applications and their scale and parallelism 
make them well suited to this study. In 2011, 

WWW included 27 sessions and 81 papers (12.5 

percent acceptance rate).
 Conference proceedings 
are published by the ACM. 
 In total, the analyses of 
conference data presented in 
Sections F.2 and F.3 represent aggregated results from 19 
conference series (i.e., A
SPLOS, ECOOP, Eurographics, 
HPCA, IEDM, ISCA, ISSCC, MICRO, NANO, 

OOPSLA, OSDI, PLDI, POPL, PPoPP, SIGGRAPH, SC, 

SOSP, VLDB, and WWW). Four time points (1996, 

2001, 2006, and 2011)
34 were analyzed for each 
conference series, with exception to NANO that had only 
one time point, resulting in a total of 73 individual 

conferences comprising 4,719 papers and 23,859 authors. 

 F.1.7 Global Reach and Rationale for Conferences 
and Other Methodological Considerations 

 U.S. scientists did dominate many of the early 
innovations, creating the international technical societies 
and initiating most of the publication venues in the 

technology areas described in Sections F.1.3ŒF.1.6. The 

following data provide a starting point to examine the 
relationship between this historical U.S. advantage, as 
well as the location of many of the conference sites in 

the United States, and intern
ational research activity in 
these areas. 
While proceedings of the selected conferences are 
all published in English and the conferences themselves 
are often held in the United 
States (with the exception of 
ECOOP, Eurographics, and 
WWW which were always 
held outside the United States for all years analyzed), 
more than one-third of the 73 specific conference venues 
analyzed by the committee were held outside the United 

States. As with any conference, whether held in the 

United States, Europe, or Asia, the location of the 
meeting has the potential to introduce travel biases for 
U.S.- and non-U.S.-based researchers. For example, 

insufficient travel funds or
 restrictive government 
policies could prevent qualified researchers from 

participating in conferences in other countries. 
As one means of exploring potential travel biases 
due to the location of a top technical conference, the 
                                                 33See www.www.2011india.com. La
st accessed on June 19, 
2012. 34In cases where conference proceedings authorship data was 
not available or where conferences were held in alternating years 
and thus not available for the committee™s selected time points, 
conferences held in adjacent years were analyzed as specified in 
Appendix G. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
77 
  committee compared regional researcher participation at 
2008Œ2011 SIGGRAPH conferences (held in the United 
States) and SIGGRAPH Asia conferences, based on 

publication data using the methodology described in 

F.1.2 (see Figure F-1). While Asian participation was 
higher at the SIGGRAPH Asia conference than at the 
SIGGRAPH conference in the United States (except in 

2010, when Asian participation rates were similar at both 

conferences), U.S. and European participation at both 
conferences was similar, 
regardless of whether the 
conference was held in the United States or Asia. 
As an additional data point, the committee 
investigated the relationship between conference location 

and the average fraction of conference papers 
contributed by the United States. For all years combined, 
the United States contributed ~ 69 percent of papers at 

conferences located in the United States compared to 

~62 percent when located elsewhere, as shown in Table 
F-1. This table also shows the U.S. share of conference 
papers for each of the time points analyzed in Sections 

F.2 and F.3, as well as the number of U.S.-located and 

non-U.S.-located conferences included in the 
committee™s analysis. Table F-2 compares the average 
U.S. share of conference papers at U.S.- and non-U.S.-

located conferences on a co
nference-by-conference 
basis. As shown in the table, U.S. paper contributions at 
HPCA, ISCA, MICRO, OSDI, SOSP, and VLDB, were 
similar or higher when the conference was located 

outside the United States. 
These data, along with the SIGGRAPH and 
SIGGRAPH Asia results, suggest that for the analyses 
presented in this report, conference location does not 
induce a significant travel bias for U.S. researchers. 

However, as the full impact of all potential travel biases 

for every nation across all conferences and location 
cannot be measured, the above findings should be taken 
into consideration when in
terpreting the conference 
analyses presented in Sections F.2 and F.3. 
Assessing objectively the influence of a conference 
is difficult because of the lack of easily comparable 
criteria. One starting point for this information is the 

Microsoft Academic Search database,
35 a publicly 
available Web resource that indexes publication data for 

some of the conferences the committee considered and 
mines publication and venue citations for publications 
and authors. 36
 Table F-3 shows publication statistics, 
                                                 35See http://academic.research.microsoft.com/. Last accessed on 
June 26, 2012. 36In considering conference citati
on analysis, it is important to 
recognize that citation counts are influenced by several different 
factors, including differences in 
database coverage, differences in 
citation practices among research 
fields, and the age distribution 
of the (cited) articles. 
including the number of papers published and number of 
citations to those published papers for all of the 
conferences the committee selected that appear in the 

Microsoft database, along with a selection of European 

and Asian conferences that might be considered 
competitors. The purpose of these data is not to justify 
the subset of conferences id
entified by the committee in 
Sections F.1.3ŒF.1.6, but rather to provide an objective 

measure of venue impact. 
In general, the papers in the international 
conferences the committee selected have significantly 

higher citations per paper th
an the regional conferences 
found in the Microsoft database.
37 The two exceptions to 
this are for NANO and for ECOOP. According to the 
Microsoft data, ECOOP has a relatively high citation rate 
compared with other programming system conferences, 

such as OOPSLA and PPoPP. The Microsoft data for 

OOPSLA does not reflect the expert opinion of the 
committee, and more careful examination of the data 
revealed that the number of papers reported for 

OOPSLA was more than twice the hand-counted 

technical papers.
38 This bias was corrected in the Table. 
CiteSeer
39 provides another objective view of 
programming conference impact, ranking the following 

venues from highest to lowest: POPL, 0.45; PLDI, 0.4; 

OOPSLA, 0.16; and ECOOP, 0.14. Regardless, the 
Microsoft data shows all the programming system 
venues as highly cited and, along with CiteSeer, are 

consistent with the committee™s selection of leading 

technical conferences in 
the four research areas 
described in Sections F.1.3ŒF.1.6. 
As an additional measure, attendance at the three 
circuits and devices conferences selected by the 

committee (ISSCC, IEDM, and NANO) can be 

compared with three notable regional conferences in 
these areas [IEEE 
Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference
 (A-SSCC), IEEE European Solid-State Devices 
                                                  37For example, the IEEE ﬁarchitectureﬂ™ (ISCA, MICRO, 
HPCA, and ASPLOS) conferences selected for analysis report 
25.6Œ34.9 citations per paper, compared with the non-IEEE or 
non-ACM European Conference on High Performance and Em-
bedded Architecture and Compilation
 (HiPEAC) (4.2 citations per 
paper) and Asia-Pacific Computer Systems Architecture Confer-
ence (ASCAC) (2.2 citations per paper). 
38The automated system count of 
publications appears to have 
included all non-research track pape
rs, such as poster abstracts and 
workshop papers, which are rarely cited. 
39http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/stat
s/venues. Last 
accessed on June 26, 2012. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
 78 
Figure F-1 Comparison of researcher participation (via publi
cation authorship) at two conference venues: SIGGRAPH (U.S.-
based) and SIGGRAPH Asia (non-U.S.-based). Data co
mpiled from SIGGRAPH and SIGGRAPH Asia between 2008 and 
2011 (~600 papers and ~1300 authors). 
  TABLE F-1 Comparison of U.S. Paper Contributions at U.S.-located and Non-U.S.-located Conferences 
          
  Average U.S. % Share of Conference Papers 
1996 2001 2006 2011 All years 
U.S.-located conferences (64% of total conferences analyzed) 
71 66.3 75.3 64.4 69.2 no. of conferences analyzed: 12 10 13 12 
Non-U.S.-located conferences 
(36% of total conferences analyzed) 
58.6 66.8 53.4 69.6 62.1 no. of conferences analyzed: 6 8 5 7 
  TABLE F-2 Comparison of U.S. Paper Contributions at U.S.-located and Non-U.S.-located Conferences (By Individual 
Conferences) 
U.S. % Share of Conference Papers 
  HPCA 
ISCA MICRO 
OSDI POPL PLDI SIGGRAPH 
SOSP 
VLDB Average U.S. % Share of Papers 
 When U.S.-located 
81.8 88.3 87.3 90.2 52.1 63.1 71.4 96.2 53.8 76.0 When located elsewhere 
83.7 93.1 86.5 86.8 44.2 79.0 52.7 87.7 58.3 74.7 * Conferences located in the United States for all years analyzed include: ASPLOS, IEDM, ISSCC, NANO, 

OOPSLA, PPoPP, and SC. Conferences located outside the United States for all years analyzed by the 

committee include: ECOOP, Eurographics, and WWW
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
79 
   TABLE F-3 Conference Citation Analysis from Microsoft Scholar, June 2012 
Semiconductor Devices and Circuits Papers Citations Citations/paper 
ISSCC 7,271 40,221 5.5 
IEDM 9,886 47,925 4.8 ESSCIRC 1,498 5,090 3.4 
A-SSCC 676 1,324 2.0 ESSDERC 1,553 2,511 1.6 
NANO 
2,028 2,266 1.1 Architectures    
Micro 905 31,607 34.9 
ASPLOS 
355 11,255 31.7 HPCA 661 17,891 27.1 
ISCA 1,334 34,094 25.6 HiPEAC (Europe) 137 570 4.2 
ACSAC (Asia) 
339 750 2.2 Programming Systems       
POPL 1,267 68,945 54.4 
PLDI 519 18,550 35.7 ECOOP (Europe) 783 26,054 33.3 
OOPSLA* 835 14,712 17.9 PPoPP 319 5,641 17.7 
Applications       
OSDI 255 20,373 79.9 
SOSP 
349 23,845 68.3 VLDB 2,739 12,2095 44.6 
WWW 
2,927 60,153 20.6 SIGGRAPH 3,492 100,567 28.8 
Eurographics (Europe) 228 3,823 16.8 Supercomputing (SC) 2,994 36,868 12.3 
PARLE (Europe) 416 3,804 9.1 * OOPSLA citation data was corrected by hand counting technical papers that exclude non-research track 
papers, which are rarely cited. Data co
mpiled from Microsoft Scholar June 2012. 
  
   
Research Conference
 (ESSDERC), and IEEE 
European 
Solid-State Circuits Conference
 (ESSCIRC)]. In 2011, 
ISSCC, IEDM, and NANO had significant historical 
attendance (according to the IEEE): 3,
000, 1,500, and 
400, respectfully. In contrast, 2011 attendance at A-

SSCC, ESSDERC, and ESSCIRC was between 300 and 
350. While conference attendance statistics do not 
directly correlate with quality or influence, they indicate 

the level of interest in the technologies and ideas found 
in the conference. 
The committee expects that an analysis including too 
many (and thus a higher proportion of lower quality) 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  conferences would underestimate the quality of leading 
research efforts and obscure
 authorship trends for 
leading research papers. On the other hand, too limited a 

sampling that overprescribes measures of conference 

quality and impact would also skew the assessment. 
Lastly, the breadth of res
earch topics covered by a 
particular conference (and the same for journals that are 

oftentimes broader) should also be considered to avoid 

too broad a sweep of the technological field. In 
balancing these factors, th
e committee has identified a 
limited number of top techni
cal conferences across four 
technology-specific research areas that, based on its 
expertise and deep domain knowledge of the field, are 

most critical to addressing the computing performance 
challenge described in Chapter 1. 
 
F.1.8 Methodological Summary
  In summary, the committee believes that high 
quality conferences attract leading researchers and 

showcase significant, recent research contributions to the 

field. In Sections F.2 and F.3, geographic distributions of 
conference authorship ar
e quantified to provide a 
technology-specific assessment of national and regional 

research capabilities.
40,41
 The committee™s analysis is not intended to be 
representative of all scientific outputs across the four 
specified research areas; for example, it does not 

presume that all relevant technologies presented in 

journal publications are implicitly represented in the 

selected conferences. The co
mmittee also recognizes the 
significant and ongoing progress in bibliometric and 
scientometric approaches to assess the quantity, quality, 

and impact of scientific output. The assessment provided 

in subsequent sections is provided as an important first 
step toward new approaches to
 assess the global research 
landscape in specific advanced computing technologies. 

 
                                                    40This approach is consistent
 with a 2010 National Research 
Council (NRC) report, 
S&T Strategies of Si
x Countries: Implica-
tions for the United States
, in which conference publication analy-
sis was described as a ﬁtechnology-s
pecific indicator [that] gives a 
relatively accurate picture of [n
ational] S&T standing.ﬂ Available 
at http://www.nap.edu/cat
alog.php?record_id=12920. 
41A related analysis was also conducted in a 2000 NRC report, 
Experiments in International Be
nchmarking of U.S. Research 
Fields, which used U.S. contributions
 of papers at the annual Con-
ference on Magnetism and Magnetic Materials as a measure of 
U.S. participation in magnetic materials research. See 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=9784. 
F.2 Current National and Regional Advanced 
Research Capabilities in Four Key Technology 

Areas 
 In this section, conference 
representation is used as a 
proxy indicator of a nation™s current (2011) advanced 
research capabilities in each of the following key 
technology areas: semiconductor devices and circuits, 

computer architecture, programming systems, and 

applications. For each technology area, all nations with 
at least 1 percent conference 
representation are ranked 
based on their weighted authorship contributions 

(following the methodology described in Section F.1.2) 

in the targeted conferences previously described in 

Sections F.1.3ŒF.1.6. In addition, regional research 
capabilities are also provided for comparison. 
As previously discussed, conference papers tend to 
have a much shorter time from submission to publication 

than computing journals in related areas, resulting in the 
most recent, significant innovation appearing at 
conferences first. Thus, an assessment of current 

conference research efforts is particularly relevant given 

the increasing rate at which scientific discoveries are 
made and then disseminated via the Web. Time series 
analyses of national and regional research capabilities 

are shown in Section F.3. 

 F.2.1 Advanced Semiconductor Devices and Circuit 
Research 
 Table F-4 shows national capabilities in advanced 
semiconductor and nanoscale devices (IEDM and 
NANO) research, as well as semiconductor circuits 
(ISSCC) research in 2011. The table shows all countries 

with at least 1 percent representation. The United States 

has a strong competitive position in both of these areas 
(50 percent in devices and 36 percent in circuits) 
followed by Japan, Taiwan, and Korea. China has only 

token representation in these conferences at this time. 

Figures F-2 and F-3 show the same data broken down by 
region. In semiconductor devices, the United States has the 
highest representation with half of the papers, followed 

by Asia with less than one-third of the papers and 

Europe with even fewer.42 In circuits, the United States, 
Asia, and Europe all share approximately one third of the 
papers. NANO represents res
earch that typically is 
targeted further in the future than those published in 

IEDM. At NANO the United States represents over 60  
                                                 42U.S. representation in semicon
ductor devices is reduced from 
~50 percent to ~38 percent when
 only IEDM publications are con-
sidered (see Figure F-7 and Table 
F-8). Despite this reduction, the 
United States remains well ahead of Japan (~17 percent). 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
81 
  TABLE F-4 Current (2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Semiconductor and Nanoscale Devices and 
Circuits Research (Measured by Percent Share of 

Conference Papers) 
Advanced Semiconductor Circuits Research 
1 USA 36.4 
2 Japan 
12.4 3 Korea 10.4 
4 Netherlands 
7.3 5 Taiwan 6.7 
6 Germany 
5.3 7 Belgium 3.5 
8 France 
3.4 9 Italy 2.9 
10 UK 
2.3 11 China 2.0 
12 Canada 
1.8 13 Switzerland 1.6 
14 Austria 
1.0 Advanced Semiconductor and  
Nanoscale Devices Research 
1 USA 50.2 
2 Japan 
10.4 3 Taiwan 6.8 
4 Korea 
5.7 5 UK 3.1 
6 Germany 
2.9 7 Canada 2.7 
8 France 
2.5 9 Belgium 2.2 
10 Italy 2.1 11 China 1.9 
12 India 1.8 13 Singapore 1.1 

14 UAE 1.1 
Data compiled from IEDM and NANO (semiconductor and 
nanoscale devices) and ISSCC (semiconductor circuits). 
 FIGURE F-2 Current (2011) regional capabilities in advanced 

semiconductor and nanoscale devices research (measured by 

percent share of conference papers). Data compiled from 

IEDM and NANO. 
  
  FIGURE F-3 Current (2011) regional capabilities in advanced 
semiconductor circuits research (measured by percent share of 

conference papers). Data compiled from ISSCC.
     percent of all papers, while Asia and Europe represent 
less than 20 percent and 10 percent respectively. 

 
F.2.2 Advanced Architecture Research 
 Table F-5 shows national and regional capabilities in 
advanced architecture research based on aggregated data 
from ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, and MICRO in 2011. This 
table includes all countries with at least 1 percent 

representation. Figure F-4 shows the same data broken 

down by region. U.S. research dominates that of any 
other nation or region and has a weighted average 
representation of more than 85 percent of the papers. No 

other nation or region contributes more than 3 percent or 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  7 percent of the papers, respectively. This result is 
perhaps not surprising, given the U.S. historical 
dominance in commercial microprocessors, including 

Intel, AMD, and IBM, as well as former commercial 

microprocessors from DEC, HP, and others. That Japan 
is not represented on this list suggests that Japanese 
universities and industry research institutions are not 

focused on mainstream computer architectures. While 

Japan has activity and expertise in the area, notably the 
custom processors from Fujitsu that are in the K 
supercomputer, their national research focus generally 

lies elsewhere. 
 
 TABLE F-5 Current (2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Architecture Research (Measured by Percent 

Share of Conference Papers) 
Advanced Architecture Research 
1 USA 85.7 
2 Korea 
2.5 3 France 2.2 
4 China 
1.7 5 Canada 1.6 
6 Switzerland 
1.4 7 Australia 1.0 
Data compiled from ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, and MICRO. 
   FIGURE F-4 Current (2011) regional capabilities in advanced 
architecture research (measured 
by percent share of conference 
papers). Data compiled fro
m ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, and 
Micro.
    F.2.3 Advanced Programming Systems Research 
 Table F-6 shows national capabilities in advanced 
programming systems research based on aggregated data 

from ECOOP, OOPSLA, PLDI, POPL, and PPoPP. This 
table includes all countries with at least 1 percent 
representation. Figure F-5 shows the same data broken 

down by region. In programming systems research, the 

United States dominates with approximately 60 percent 
of the papers. The national breakdown in Table F-6 
shows that aside from the United States, the national 

distribution of papers is diverse. 
Figure F-5 shows that in programming systems, 
Europe is a distant second to the United States with 
about 25 percent representation, while all of Asia 
accounts for less than 10 percent. Disaggregating the 

data (see Appendix G), the United States has an even 

stronger position in PPoPP 
and PLDI, accounting for 
about 75 percent representation in each of them. These 
conferences are practical in nature, with papers 

presenting prototype software systems and applications 

running on real hardware platforms. In POPL, a more 
theoretical conference, the United States has a little less 
than 45 percent of the papers, on par with European 

presentation. Asia has less than 10 percent of the papers, 

with greater representati
on in applications than 
programming systems. 
In ECOOP, the United States 
accounted for about 30 percen
t representation, putting it 
15 percentage points behind Europe.
   TABLE F-6 Current (2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Programming Systems Research (Measured 
by Percent Share of Conference Papers) 
Advanced Programming Systems Research 
1 USA 36.4 
2 Germany 
12.4 3 UK 10.4 
4 Switzerland 
7.3 5 Israel 6.7 
6 France 
5.3 7 Canada 3.5 
8 India 3.4 9 Japan 2.9 
10 China 
2.3 11 Denmark 2.0 
12 Chile 1.8 13 Korea 1.6 
Data compiled from ECOOP, OOPSLA, PLDI, POPL, and 
PPoPP.  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
83 
     FIGURE F-5 Current (2011) regional capabilities in advanced 
programming systems research (measured by percent share of 

conference papers). Data compiled from ECOOP, OOPSLA, 

PLDI, POPL, and PPoPP.   
 2.2.4 Advanced Applications Research 
 Table F-7 shows national capabilities in 
advanced applications research based on aggregated data 
from Eurographics, OSDI, SIGGRAPH, SC, SOSP, 
VLDB, and WWW in 2011. Figur
e F-6 shows this data 
broken down into regions. In
 applications research, the 
U.S. accounted for almost 64 percent of papers, followed 
by Germany, Canada, and China, with 5-6 percent 
representation each. 
Disaggregated data show that the United States is 
also the lead paper contributor in SOSP (~92 percent 

compared with ~4 percent 
in Asia), SC (~80 percent 
compared with 9 percent for both Asia and Europe), and 
WWW (~72 percent compared
 with ~13 percent in 
Europe and ~8 percent in Asia) and very strong leads in 

SIGGRAPH and VLDB (~53 percent, putting the United 
States ahead of Europe by approximately 30 points in 
both conferences), suggesting the United States 

maintains strong core competencies in parallel 

applications. 
  
 
 
   
 
   TABLE F-7 Current (2011) National Capabilities in 

Advanced Applications Res
earch (Measured by Percent 
Share of Conference Papers) 
Advanced Applications Research 
1 USA 63.9 
2 Germany 
6.0 3 Canada 4.7 
4 China 
4.3 5 France 2.4 
6 Israel 
2.3 7 UK 2.2 
8 Hong Kong 
1.9 9 Italy 1.5 
10 Switzerland 
1.5 11 Japan 1.2 
12 Korea 
1.0 Data compiled from Eurographics, OSDI, SIGGRAPH, SC, 
SOSP, VLDB, and WWW.     FIGURE F-6 Current (2011) regional capabilities in advanced 
applications research (measured by percent share of conference 
papers). Data compiled from Eurographics, OSDI, 

SIGGRAPH, SC, SOSP, VLDB, and WWW.
   
 
   
 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  F.2.5 Summary of Current National Technological 
Leadership 
 In each of the four key technical areas, the United 
States holds the lead, with particularly strong 
representation in architecture research ~85 percent 
(compared to ~5 and 7 percent representation by Asia 

and Europe, respectfully).
 In programming systems 
research, the United States maintains the lead at ~36 
percent followed by Europe at ~29 percent and Asia at 
~8 percent. The strongest Eu
ropean paper contributors 
were Germany and the UK at ~12 and 10 percent, 

respectfully. In applications research, the United States 

leads paper contributions at ~64 percent followed by 
Europe at ~17 percent and Asia
 at ~11 percent. This data 
suggests that the U.S. is particularly strong in design and 

systems engineering. While the United States maintains 

a strong lead in semiconductor and nanoscale devices 
(~50 percent) compared to Asia (~28 percent) and 
Europe (~16 percent), its contributions in semiconductor 

circuits research are compar
able to Europe and Asia 
(each separated by ~7 percentage points). 
 F.3 Longitudinal Changes in the Global Research 
Landscape  To assess how the competitive research landscape 
has changed over time, the committee examined the 

competitive metrics (described in Section F.1) for the 

same set of conferences in the previous section in 5-year 
increments over a 15-year span from 1996 to 2011. 
Tables F-8 through F-11 show the relative 
representation of different nations in each of the 

technical areas of advanced computing research from 
1996 to 2011 in 5-year increments, ranked by position in 
2011. Each of the tables includes only those nations that 

have at least a 1 percent representation for at least one of 

the years. Countries that are not represented in 2011, but 

have at least 1 percent representation for any increment, 
are marked in italicized text
. Figures F-7 through F-11 
show the aggregate regional re
presentation for each area 
of advanced research over the same time span. For the 

time-series data, the semiconductor devices area includes 
only IEDM, because histori
cal data for NANO was not 
easily available. 
In semiconductor devices research, U.S. 
representation has remained relatively stable with the 
largest gains made by Taiwan and Belgium (~ 5-6 
percentage point increases each). In semiconductor 

circuits research, the United States shows a moderate 

decline, in tandem with an overall broadening in  
  TABLE F-8 (1996Œ2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Semiconductor and Devices and Circuits 
Research (Measured by Percent Share of Conference 

Papers) Semiconductors & Nanoscale Devices
  1996 2001 2006 2011 
USA 39.3 40.6 34.2 37.9 
Japan 
34.4 24.5 21.1 16.9 Taiwan 2.3 5.0 4.5 8.2 
Korea 
6.3 8.1 9.4 7.5 Belgium 1.5 3.0 6.4 6.4 
France 
3.4 2.3 4.4 6.0 Italy 3.9 3.4 2.8 3.7 
Singapore 
- 1.7 4.5 3.0 China 0.5 0.5 0.6 2.6 
UK 
- - 1.7 1.9 Germany 3.0 5.4 3.7 1.7 
Austria 
- 0.4 0.6 1.1 Canada 0.5 1.0 0.4 0.1 
Netherlands 
1.9 1.7 1.7 0.7 Switzerland 2.1 0.8 2.2 0.6 
Semiconductor Circuits
  1996 2001 2006 2011 
USA 46.6 51.1 45.2 36.4 
Japan 
27.7 18.6 15.8 12.4 Korea 3.9 4.7 6.1 10.4 
Netherlands 
2.0 4.0 3.1 7.3 Taiwan 0.6 0.1 7.0 6.7 
Germany 
4.2 4.4 5.3 5.3 Belgium 1.0 5.5 1.5 3.5 
France 
0.9 0.8 1.0 3.4 Italy 2.9 - 3.4 2.9 
UK 
0.8 0.8 0.6 2.3 China - - 1.5 2.0 
Canada 
3.4 2.2 1.4 1.8 Switzerland 4.3 2.7 1.9 1.6 
Austria 
- - 2.3 1.0 Finland - 1.2 0.1 - 
Hong Kong 
- 1.2 - - Sweden 0.7 - 1.0 0.4 
Data compiled from IEDM (semiconductor and nanoscale 
devices) and ISSCC (semiconductor circuits). 
  
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
85 
  international representation. In this area largest leaps 
were made by Korea, Taiwan, and the Netherlands with 
5Œ6 percentage point increases each. At the same time, 

Japan has dropped significantly in both semiconductor 

devices and in semiconductor circuits (~17 and 15 
percent, respectfully). 
In architecture research, the United States has 
maintained a significant lead, with no major advances by 

any other nation or region. In programming systems, the 
U.S. lead has been challenged somewhat by increases in 
Europe by small but steady 
gains by Israel, Switzerland, 
and the UK (as well as China, India, and Korea to a 

lesser degree). In the application areas, U.S. representation has 
retained a stable lead over the 15-year period with no 
other nation ever contributing more than 8 percent 

(France, which contributed ~8 percent in 1996, has since 

dropped to ~2 percent in 2011). While representing only 
a small percentage of applications papers, China made a 
notable move from no representation in 1996 to ~4 

percent in 2011. 

   
  TABLE F-10 (1996Œ2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Programming Systems Research (Measured 
by Percent Share of Conference Papers) 
  1996 2001 2006 2011 
USA 62.2 63.8 67.1 56.5 
Germany 
8.0 3.0 2.3 7.9 UK 5.2 4.3 7.1 7.2 
Switzerland 
1.9 2.9 1.8 4.5 Israel 1.7 5.1 2.0 3.2 
France 
7.5 4.8 3.1 3.0 India - - - 2.1 
Japan 
2.7 5.2 2.3 2.0 Canada 2.4 1.0 1.7 2.2 
China 
- - 1.2 1.4 Denmark 2.4 2.3 0.9 1.4 
Chile - - 0.2 1.1 Korea - - 0.4 1.0 
Australia 
0.4 0.6 1.8 0.7 Italy 1.1 2.5 0.2 0.9 Netherlands 
2.3 2.1 0.8 0.9 Sweden 
0.5 - 1.7 0.2 Data compiled from ECOOP, OOPSLA, PLDI, 
POPL, and PPoPP.  TABLE F-9 (1996Œ2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Architecture Research (Measured by Percent 
Share of Conference Papers) 
  1996 2001 2006 2011 
USA 79.9 89.2 90.7 85.7 
Korea 
- 0.2 - 2.5 France 3.1 1.0 0.7 2.2 
China 
- - - 1.7 Canada 5.5 1.2 1.9 1.6 
Switzerland 
- - - 1.4 Australia 0.4 - - 1.0 
Belgium 
- 1.0 0.3 - India - - 1.9 0.6 
Israel 
- - 1.2 - Japan 2.1 2.0 1.2 - 
Spain 
2.4 5.5 0.8 0.6 Sweden 1.8 - - - 
UK 2.0 - 0.3 0.7 Data compiled from ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, 
and Micro. 
  
TABLE F-11 (1996Œ2011) National Capabilities in 
Advanced Applications
 Systems Research 
(Measured by Percent Shar
e of Conference Papers) 
  1996 2001 2006 2011 
USA 64.3 57.5 64.0 63.9 
Germany 
4.2 7.3 7.9 6.0 Canada 3.5 3.7 3.5 4.7 
China 
- 0.5 3.0 4.3 France 8.3 3.5 1.9 2.4 
Israel 
1.5 2.1 1.4 2.3 UK 1.8 3.0 3.9 2.2 
Hong Kong 
- 0.3 1.7 1.9 Italy 1.8 1.7 1.3 1.5 
Switzerland 
1.4 1.9 0.7 1.5 Japan 3.7 5.6 3.0 1.2 
Korea 
0.4 1.1 0.7 1.0 Australia 0.7 1.0 0.4 0.4 
Austria 
1.3 1.5 0.5 0.7 India 0.7 0.8 1.7 0.6 Singapore 
0.3 1.4 0.6 0.9 Spain 
1.0 1.5 0.5 0.4 Taiwan 
1.0 0.9 0.8 0.6 Data compiled from Eurographics, OSDI, SIGGRAPH, SC, 
SOSP, VLDB, and WWW. The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
    FIGURE F-7 (1996Œ2011) Regional capabilities in advanced semiconductor and nanoscale devices 
research (measured by percent share of conference papers). Data compiled from IEDM. 
   FIGURE F-8 (1996Œ2011) Regional capabilities in advanced semiconductor circuits research (measured 
by percent share of conference papers). Data compiled from ISSCC. 
   FIGURE F-9 (1996Œ2011) Regional capabilities in advanced architecture research (measured by percent 
share of conference papers). Data compil
ed from ASPLOS, HPCA, ISCA, and MICRO. 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PILOT STUDY OF PAPERS AT TOP TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
87 
   FIGURE F-10 (1996Œ2011) Regional capabilities in advanced programming systems research (measured 
by percent share of conference papers). Data co
mpiled from ECOOP, OOPSLA, PLDI, POPL, and PPoPP. 
   FIGURE F-11 (1996Œ2011) Regional capabilities in advanced applications research (measured by percent 
share of conference papers). Data compiled fro
m Eurographics, OSDI, SC, SIGGRAPH, SOSP, VLDB, 
and WWW.
   
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 89 
G   Conference Bibliometric Data    
  TABLE G-1 Conference Statistics 
 Papers Authors 
 1996 2001 2006 2011 1996 2001 2006 2011 
ASPLOS 25 24
# 41 32 99 82 169 152 
ECOOP 
21 18 25 26 47 48 64 86 Eurographics 43 52 44 35 112 145 151 140 
HPCA 
29 26 29 46 79 89 107 182 ISCA 28 23 31 40 94 74 124 181 
IEDM 206 220# 226 219 1135 
1921 
2391 
2020 
ISSCC 155 165 253 211 1078 1237 1691 1622 
MICRO 
30 29 42 44 81 98 181 177 NANO - - - 409 - - - 1488 
OOPSLA 26 27 26 61 75 78 96 216 OSDI 19 22
* 27 32
 62 83 127 152 
PLDI 28 30 36 55 73 80 127 216 POPL 34 26 36 49 67 45 93 149 
PPoPP 25+ 14 26 26 68 40 97 104 SC 54 58 54 74 180 208 273 370 
SIGGRAPH 
58 64 87 115 163 213 322 447 SOSP 23
+ 17 25
± 28 99 58 123 154 
VLDB 48 59 78 104 141 109 266 386 WWW 58 78 84 81 136 247 276 295 
         
4,719 Papers Analyzed 23,859 Authors Analyzed 
 Conferences analyzed in adjacen
t years are marked as follows: 
+ held in 1997; * held in 2000; # held in 2002; 
± held in 2007; and 
 held in 2010    
 
   
 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  TABLE G-2 Advanced Semiconductor and Nanoscale Devices and Circuits Conferences (Weighted Percent Share of Papers) 
ISSCC 1996 2001 2006 2011 
 IEDM 
1996 2002 2006 2011 
 NANO 
2011 
held in: USA USA USA USA  held in: USA USA USA USA  held in: USA 
USA 
46.6 51.1 45.2 36.4  USA 39.3 40.6 34.2 37.9  
USA 
56.8 China - - 1.5 2.0  
China 
0.5 0.5 0.6 2.6  China 1.5 
Hong Kong 
- 1.2 - -  Hong Kong 0.6 0.5 - 0.8  
Hong Kong 
0.1 India - - - 0.9  
India 0.2 0.2 0.6 -  India 2.7 
Japan 
27.7 18.6 15.8 12.4  Japan 34.4 24.5 21.1 16.9  
Japan 
6.9 Korea 3.9 4.7 6.1 10.4  
Korea 
6.3 8.1 9.4 7.5  Korea 4.7 
Singapore 
- 0.5 0.8 0.2  Singapore - 1.7 4.5 3.0  
Malaysia 
0.2 Taiwan 0.6 0.1 7.0 6.7  
Taiwan 2.4 5.0 4.5 8.2  Taiwan 6.1 
Austria 
- - 2.3 1.0  Austria - 0.4 0.6 1.1  
France 
0.6 Belgium 1.0 5.5 1.5 3.5  
Belgium 
1.5 3.0 6.4 6.4  Germany 3.6 
Denmark 
- 0.6 0.6 0.1  Finland - 0.1 - -  
Italy 1.2 Finland - 1.2 0.1 -  
France 
3.4 2.3 4.4 6.0  Netherlands 0.6 
France 
0.9 0.8 1.0 3.4  Germany 3.0 5.4 3.7 1.7  
Norway 
1.0 Germany 4.2 4.4 5.3 5.3  
Ireland - 0.5 - -  Poland 0.9 
Greece 
- 0.1 0.4 -  Italy 3.9 3.4 2.8 3.7  
Russia 
0.5 Ireland 0.6 - - 0.2  
Liechtenstein 
- 0.1 - -  Spain 0.5 
Italy 2.9 - 3.4 2.9  Netherlands 1.9 1.7 1.7 0.7  
Switzerland 
0.2 Netherlands 2.0 4.0 3.1 7.3  
Poland 
- - 0.1 -  Turkey 0.1 
Norway 
- 0.1 - 0.2  Spain - 0.4 0.5 0.5  
UK 
3.7 Portugal - - 0.7 0.3  
Sweden 
- - 0.5 0.5  Iran 0.2 
Spain 
0.3 - - -  Switzerland 2.1 0.8 2.2 0.6  
Lebanon 
0.2 Sweden 0.7 - 1.0 0.4  
UK 
- - 1.7 1.9  Pakistan 0.1 
Switzerland 
4.3 2.7 1.9 1.6  Israel - - .1 -  
UAE 1.6 Turkey - 0.1 - -  
Canada 
0.5 1.0 0.4 0.1  S. Africa 0.5 
UK 
0.8 0.8 0.6 2.3        
Australia 0.7 Israel - 0.6 0.2 0.6   Regional Distribution  Brazil 0.2 
Canada 
3.4 2.2 1.4 1.8  USA 39.3 40.6 34.2 37.9  
Colombia 
0.2 Australia - 0.6 - -  Asia 44.4 40.5 40.6 39.0  Canada 4.2 
      Europe 15.8 17.9 24.6 23.0    
 Regional Distribution  Other 0.5 1.0 0.6 0.1   Regional 
USA 46.6 51.1 45.2 36.4         Distribution 
Asia 32.2 25.1 31.2 32.6        USA 56.8 
Europe 17.8 20.4 21.9 28.5        Asia 22.4 
Other 3.4 3.4 1.7 2.5        Europe 12.8 
            Other 8.1 
  
   
 
   
 
   
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONFERENCE BIBLIOMETRIC DATA 91 
  TABLE G-3 Advanced Architecture Conferences (Weighted Percent Share of Papers)
 ASPLOS 
1996 2002 2006 2011 
 HPCA  1996 2001 2006 2011 
held in: USA USA USA USA  held in: USA Mexico USA USA 
USA 
79.5 95.1 90.7 83.3  USA 67.4 83.7 89.5 88.5 
Japan 1.6 4.2 2.4 -  
China 
- - - 2.4 Korea 
- - - 1.6  Hong Kong 3.4 - - - 
Belgium - - 1.2 -  
India - - 5.2 1.4 Denmark 
- - - 0.5  Japan 3.4 - - - 
France 6.0 - - 2.6  
Belgium 
- 3.8 - - Germany 
- - 2.4 3.1  France - 3.8 - 2.7 
Norway 0.8 - - -  
Germany 
0.7 - - - Spain 
- 0.7 - -  Greece 3.4 - - - 
Switzerland - - - 3.1  
Spain 
3.4 7.7 2.8 1.3 UK 
- - 0.3 -  Sweden 6.9 - - - 
Australia - - - 5.0  
Switzerland 
- - - 1.4 Brazil 
3.3 - - -  UK 4.1 - - - 
Canada 8.8 - 2.4 0.8  
Australia 1.4 - - - Jordan 
- - 0.5 -  Canada 5.7 1.0 - 2.2 
      
Israel 
- - 2.6 -  Regional Distribution       
USA 79.5 95.1 90.7 83.3   Regional Distribution 
Asia 1.6 4.2 2.4 1.6 
 USA 67.4 83.7 89.5 88.5 
Europe 6.8 0.7 4.0 9.4  Asia 6.9 - 5.2 3.9 
Other 12.1 - 2.9 5.8  Europe 18.6 15.4 2.8 5.4 
      Other 7.1 1.0 2.6 2.2 
           
           
MICRO  
1996 2001 2006 2011 
 ISCA  
1996 2001 2006 2011 
held in: France USA USA Brazil  held in: USA Sweden USA USA 
USA 90.0 86.2 88.3 83.0  
USA 
82.4 93.1 94.9 87.6 India - - 2.9 -  China - - - 4.2 
Japan - 3.4 - -  
India - - - 0.8 Korea 
- - - 5.3  Japan 3.6 - 2.4 - 
Singapore - - - 0.6  
Korea 
- 0.7 - 2.9 France 
- - 2.4 2.3  France 7.1 - - 1.3 
Greece - - - 1.4  
Italy - - - 2.5 Spain 
3.3 6.9 0.8 0.9  Spain 2.4 6.2 - - 
Switzerland - - - 1.5  
UK 
- - 1.2 - UK 
3.3 - - 2.7  Canada 4.5 - 1.5 0.8 
Canada 3.3 3.4 3.2 2.3       
Israel 
- - 2.4 -   Regional Distribution 
      USA 82.4 93.1 94.9 87.6 
 Regional Distribution  Asia 3.6 0.7 2.4 7.9 
USA 90.0 86.2 88.3 83.0  Eu
rope 9.5 6.2 1.2 3.8 
Asia - 3.4 2.9 6.0  Other 4.5 - 1.5 0.8 
Europe 6.7 6.9 3.2 8.8       
Other 3.3 3.4 5.6 2.3       
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   TABLE G-4 Advanced Programming Systems Conferences (Weighted Percent Share of Papers) 
ECOOP 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
  OOPSLA 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
  PLDI 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
held in: Austria Hungary France UK  held in: USA USA USA USA  held in: USA USA Canada USA 
USA 
26.2 38.0 56.3 30.3  USA 56.4 58.6 52.1 53.1  
USA 
86.3 93.3 79.0 75.1 China - - - 3.1  
China 
- - - 0.8  China - - 0.6 1.2 
India - - - 3.8  Hong Kong - - 3.8 -  
India - - - 3.9 Japan 4.8 5.6 4.0 -  
India - - - 2.0  Japan - - 4.2 3.6 
Belgium 
- 3.7 8.0 -  Japan 3.8 11.1 3.8 3.3  
Singapore 
- - - 1.8 Denmark 7.1 5.6 4.0 3.8  
Korea 
- - - 1.1  Austria - - 0.9 - 
France 
14.3 16.7 - -  Singapore - - 3.8 1.6  
Denmark 
- 3.3 - - Germany 23.8 - - 19.2  
Austria 
- - - 0.7  France - - - 2.2 
Ireland - - - 2.2  Belgium - - 3.8 -  
Germany 
5.4 - 2.4 1.8 Italy - 7.4 1.0 -  
Czech Republic 
3.8 - - -  Ireland - - 1.9 - 
Netherlands 
6.3 3.7 - -  Denmark - 1.2 - 0.9  
Italy 1.8 - - 1.8 Norway - 5.6 - -  
Estonia 
- - - 0.4  Spain - - 0.6 - 
Sweden 
3.2 - - -  France 11.5 - - 0.8  
UK 
3.6 - 2.0 4.9 Switzerland 7.1 - 3.0 13.5  
Germany 
7.7 7.4 8.5 7.4  Australia - - 1.9 - 
UK 
- - 13.0 7.7  Italy - 3.7 - 1.6  
Canada 
3.0 - 1.1 1.5 Australia 2.4 1.9 4.0 -  
Netherlands 
6.7 - 3.8 3.3  Israel - 3.3 5.6 2.0 
Canada 
- 0.9 1.3 5.1  Portugal - - - 0.3       
Chile - - - 8.7  
Romania 
1.0 - - -   Regional Distribution 
Israel 
4.8 5.6 - -  Switzerland - 8.6 - 9.9  USA 86.3 93.3 79.0 75.1 
New Zealand - 5.6 5.3 2.6  
UK 
3.8 - 14.7 4.7  Asia - - 4.7 10.6 
      Australia - - 0.2 1.0  Europe 12.3 3.3 7.8 10.7 
 Regional Distribution  
Brazil 
1.3 - - -  Other 3.0 3.3 8.5 3.5 
USA 26.2 38.0 56.3 30.3  Canada - 3.7 - 1.6       
Asia 4.8 5.6 4.0 6.9  
Chile - - 1.3 0.3       
Europe 61.9 42.6 29.0 46.4  Israel
 3.8 5.6 3.8 5.2       
Other 7.1 13.9 10.7 16.3             
       Regional Distribution       
      USA 56.4 58.6 52.1 53.1       
      Asia 3.8 11.1 11.5 8.8       
      Europe 34.6 21.0 31.0 30.0       
      Other 5.1 9.3 5.4 8.1       
92              
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONFERENCE BIBLIOMETRIC DATA 93 
  TABLE G-4 Advanced Programming Systems Conferences (continued) 
POPL 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
 PPoPP 
1997 2001 2006 2011 
held in: USA UK USA USA  held in: USA USA USA USA 
USA 
54.4 44.2 58.3 43.5  USA 82.1 80.0 88.3 75.9 
China - - 2.4 -  
China 
- - 2.6 3.8 Japan 
2.0 3.8 - 0.5  India - - - 0.8 
Korea - - 1.9 1.0  
Japan 
4.0 7.1 - - Austria 
- - - 1.0  Korea - - - 3.8 
Belgium - - - 2.0  
France 
8.0 - 1.0 - Denmark 
4.9 1.3 0.9 3.1  Germany 1.6 - - 3.8 
France 5.9 9.6 12.0 9.9  
Greece 
- - 1.0 3.8 Germany 
5.4 5.8 0.9 11.6  Netherlands - 12.9 - - 
Italy 2.9 1.9 - -  
Portugal 
- - - 3.8 Netherlands 
- - 0.5 -  Spain - - 0.5 - 
Sweden - - 6.9 1.0  
Brazil 
2.7 - - - Switzerland 
2.9 3.8 5.6 0.3  Canada 1.6 - 6.7 - 
Turkey - - - 0.5  
Israel 
- - - 3.8 UK 
14.7 19.2 7.9 16.6  Saudi Arabia - - - 0.3 
Israel 1.0 9.0 - 3.4       
Australia - 1.3 2.8 2.0   Regional Distribution 
Canada 5.9 - - 3.4  USA 82.1 80.0 88.3 75.9 
      Asia 4.0 7.1 2.6 8.5 
 Regional Distribution  Europe 9.6 12.9 2.4 11.5 
USA 54.4 44.2 58.3 43.5  Other 4.3 - 6.7 4.1 
Asia 2.0 3.8 4.2 1.5       
Europe 36.8 41.7 34.7 46.1       
Other 6.9 10.3 2.8 8.8       
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING
   TABLE G-5 Advanced Applications Conferen
ces (Weighted Percent Share of Papers) 
Eurographics 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
  OSDI 1996 2000 2006 2010 
held in: UK UK Austria UK   held in: USA USA USA Canada 
USA 
12.4 14.9 23.2 32.3  USA 89.5 86.4 94.8 86.8 
China - - 4.5 7.6  
Japan 
- - - 0.9 Hong Kong 
- - - 2.3  Korea - 4.5 - - 
Japan 4.7 15.4 6.8 1.0  
France 
- 4.5 - - Korea 
- 1.9 3.8 2.9  Germany - - - 2.8 
Taiwan 2.3 1.9 2.3 -  
Portugal 
5.3 - 0.7 - Austria 
9.3 5.8 - 2.1  Spain - 4.5 - - 
Denmark 2.3 - - -  
UK 
- - - 0.8 Finland 
2.3 - 2.3 -  Australia - - - 3.1 
France 32.6 9.6 10.2 6.3  
Canada 
5.3 - 3.7 3.1 Germany 
8.1 18.9 28.0 24.0  Israel - - 0.7 2.4 
Hungary - 1.9 - 2.9       
Italy - 1.9 - -   Regional Distribution 
Netherlands 1.7 - - -  USA 89.5 86.4 94.8 86.8 
Poland 
- - - 0.6  Asia - 4.5 - 0.9 
Russia - 3.2 - -  Europe 5.3 9.1 0.7 3.6 
Spain 
2.3 1.4 - 2.4  Other 5.3 - 4.4 8.7 
Sweden - - - 1.0       
Switzerland 
2.3 8.7 - 1.9       
UK 4.7 3.8 8.7 1.9  
SC 1996 2001 2006 2011 
Australia - - 0.8 -  held in: USA USA USA USA 
Brazil - - 0.5 -  
USA 
84.4 73.1 88.7 80.4 Canada 
4.7 2.9 7.6 8.1  China - - 1.9 2.3 
Israel 7.9 5.8 1.4 2.9  
India - - 1.9 0.3 S. Africa 2.3 1.9 - -  Japan 6.2 7.2 1.4 4.7 
      
Korea 
2.0 - - 0.6  Regional Distribution  Taiwan - 1.7 - 1.0 
USA 12.4 14.9 23.2 32.3  
Austria 
- 2.9 - 1.9 Asia 7.0 19.2 17.4 13.7  Belgium - - - 1.4 
Europe 65.7 55.3 49.2 43.0  
Czech Republic 
- 0.6 - - Other 14.9 10.6 10.2 11.0  France - - 1.9 3.3 
      
Germany 
1.2 2.5 1.9 0.7       Ireland - - - 0.2 
      
Italy 1.9 1.7 - -       Netherlands - - - 0.5 
      
Spain 
3.7 4.0 1.9 0.5       Sweden - 1.7 - - 
      
Switzerland 
0.6 - - 0.8       UK - 3.3 0.6 - 
      
Australia 
- 1.3 - -       Saudi Arabia - - - 1.4 
           
       Regional Distribution 
      USA 84.4 73.1 88.7 80.4 
      Asia 8.2 8.9 5.1 9.0 
      Europe 7.4 16.7 6.2 9.2 
      Other - 1.3 - 1.4 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONFERENCE BIBLIOMETRIC DATA 95 
  TABLE G-5 Advanced Applications Conferences (continued) 
SIGGRAPH 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
 SOSP 1997 2001 2007 2011 
 held in: USA USA USA Canada  held in: France Canada USA Portugal 
USA 83.6 63.8 66.8 52.7  
USA 
96.5 94.4 87.7 92.2 China 
- 1.6 5.8 5.0  China - - - 4.2 
Hong Kong - - 2.3 2.1  
Germany 
- - 9.1 - Japan 
5.2 7.8 3.6 1.3  Switzerland 3.5 - 3.2 0.9 
Korea - - 1.1 1.6  
UK 
 5.6   Singapore 
- - - 0.8  Canada - - - 2.0 
Taiwan 1.7 - 1.1 0.9  Israel - - - 0.7 
Austria 
- - 0.9 -    
Belgium - - 0.6 0.4   Regional Distribution 
Finland 
- - 1.1 -  USA 96.5 94.4 87.7 92.2 
France - 3.6 1.1 4.7  Asia - - - 4.2 
Germany 
0.9 8.6 7.2 10.0  Europe 3.5 5.6 12.3 0.9 
Greece - - - 0.1  Other - - - 2.8 
Spain 
- - - 0.2       
Sweden - - 1.1 1.6       
Switzerland 
1.7 - 1.1 2.0       
UK - 0.9 1.8 4.1       
Australia - 0.7 - -       
Brazil - 0.5 - 1.1       
Canada 
6.9 12.5 2.0 5.5       
Israel - - 2.1 5.3       
Saudi Arabia 
- - - 0.5       
           
 Regional Distribution       
USA 83.6 63.8 66.8 52.7       
Asia 6.9 9.4 14.0 11.8       
Europe 2.6 13.1 15.1 23.2       
Other 6.9 13.7 4.1 12.4       
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING
   TABLE G-5 Advanced Applications Conferences (continued) 
VLDB 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
 WWW 
1996 2001 2006 2011 
held in: India Italy Korea USA  held in: France China UK India 
USA 
57.6 54.4 62.8 53.8  USA 49.1 54.0 50.9 72.5 
China - - - 4.3  
China 
- 0.9 4.7 5.4 Hong Kong 
- 1.7 3.8 5.4  Hong Kong - - 2.0 0.2 
India 4.2 1.7 2.8 0.9  
India - 2.3 4.5 2.2 Japan 
4.2 3.4 1.3 -  Japan 1.7 0.4 4.8 - 
Korea - 3.4 - 1.5  
Singapore 
- 1.3 0.4 0.2 Taiwan - - 1.3 0.7  Taiwan 1.7 1.3 - - 
Singapore 2.1 6.4 2.6 2.9  
Austria 
- - 1.2 1.4 Austria 
- 1.1 - -  Belgium - - 1.2 - 
Belgium - - 0.6 -  
Czech Repub 
1.7 - 1.2 - Denmark 
0.7 - - 1.8  Denmark - 1.3 - - 
Finland 2.1 - - -  
France 
12.1 0.6 - - France 
8.3 5.9 1.3 1.0  Germany 7.8 4.5 5.9 2.2 
Germany 7.3 8.8 5.9 4.8  
Greece 
3.4 1.3 - 1.0 Greece 
- 1.7 1.3 1.3  Hungary - - 1.2 - 
Italy 4.2 1.7 2.6 3.4  
Ireland - - 1.2 - Netherlands 
2.1 - 0.3 -  Italy 4.3 3.8 3.9 4.5 
Norway - 1.7 - 1.0  
Netherlands 
1.7 4.1 0.3 - Sweden 
- - - 1.0  Portugal - - 0.2 - 
Switzerland 2.1 1.7 1.3 2.0  
Russia 
- 1.3 - - UK 
- 1.7 2.9 3.1  Spain - 1.3 1.2 0.2 
Australia 2.1 - 0.3 0.7  
Sweden 
1.7 2.1 - - Brazil 
- - - 1.0  Switzerland - 1.3 - 1.6 
Canada 3.1 3.1 7.7 7.5  
UK 
6.0 6.3 8.9 1.5 Israel 
- 1.7 1.3 1.6  Australia 1.7 3.0 1.2 - 
Qatar - - - 0.2  
Argentina 
- 0.4 - -       Brazil - 1.1 0.5 - 
 Regional Distribution  
Canada 
3.4 2.0 2.4 4.5 USA 57.6 54.4 62.8 53.8  Chile - - - 0.8 
Asia 10.4 16.5 11.8 15.8  
S. Africa - 1.3 - - Europe 26.7 24.3 16.1 19.3  
Israel 1.7 4.2 2.4 1.5 
Other 5.2 4.7 9.3 11.0  
New Zealand 
1.7 - - -            
       Regional Distribution 
      USA 49.1 54.0 50.9 72.5 
      Asia 3.4 6.2 16.3 8.0 
      Europe 38.8 27.8 26.4 12.6 
      Other 8.6 12.0 6.4 6.9 
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 97 H   Top 20 Largest Hardware and Software Companies 
   
 
 Table H-1 World™s 20 Largest Hardware and Software Companies in 2010 (in U.S. $ Millions) 
Rank 
Hardware Companies 
(Country) 
Hardware Revenue 
Total Revenue 
 Rank 
Software Companies 
(Country) 
Software Revenue 
Total Revenues 
1 Samsung (S. Korea) 
77,865 120,119  
1 Microsoft (USA) 
49,090 61,159 2 HP (USA) 73,729 116,245  2 
IBM (USA) 21,396 95,758 
3 Foxconn (Taiwan) 
44,411 44,411  3 Oracle (USA) 
18,582 22,734 4 LG Electronics (S Korea) 42,029 63,043  4 SAP (Germany) 11,386 15,373 
5 Nokia (Finland) 
40,108 59,042  5 Ericsson (Sweden) 
7,595 29,014 6 Toshiba (Japan) 40,057 69,778  6 Nintendo (Japan) 6,799 17,726 
7 Dell (USA) 38,395 53,585  7 HP (USA) 6,183 116,245 
8 Intel (USA) 34,026 35,172  8 Symantec (USA) 5,565 5,992 
9 Apple (USA) 
31,772 43,086  9 Nokia Siemens Networks 
(Finland) 4,529 18,114 10 Cisco (USA) 29,510 36,633  10 Activision Blizzard (USA) 4,279 4,279 
11 Quanta Computer 
(Taiwan) 24,755 24,755  11 CA (USA) 
4,012 4,318 12 Fujitsu (Japan) 23,056 50,662  12 EMC (USA) 3,960 14,026 
13 Canon (Japan) 
22,567 34,719  13 Electronic Arts (USA) 3,728 3,728 14 Ricoh (Japan) 19,484 22,018  14 Adobe (USA) 2,796 2,987 
15 Asus (Taiwan) 
19,074 19,074  15 Cisco (USA) 
2,137 36,663 16 Acer (Taiwan) 17,944 17,944  16 SunGard (USA) 1,996 5,508 
17 Compal Electronics 
(Taiwan) 16,923 19,909  17 Sony (Japan) 
1,914 79,441 18 IBM (USA) 16,190 95,758  18 BMC (USA) 1,758 1,888 
19 Lenovo (China) 
16,132 16,132  19 Alcatel-Lucent (USA) 1,635 21,835 20 NEC (Japan) 16,127 40,475  20 Konami (Japan) 1,594 2,887 
Adopted from www.hardwaretop100.org
  Adopted from www.softwaretop100.org
 The methodology employed in creating these tables is avai
lable at http://www.hardwaretop100.org/methodology.php. Last 
accessed on June 16, 2012. While many of the companies on the list are global in nature, the table lists each company™s nation 
of origin.   
 The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 99 I   China™s Medium- and Long-Term Plan 
   
 
 Table I-1 Key Areas, Technologies, and Programs Iden
tified in China™s Medium- and Long-Term Plan for 
Development of Science and Technology 
Key Areas (11): 
 Agriculture  Energy  Environment 
 Information technology industry and modern services 
 Manufacturing 
 National defense 
 Population and health 
 Public securities  Transportation 
 Urbanization and urban development 
 Water and mineral resources 
Frontier Technologies (8): 
 Advanced energy 
 Advanced manufacturing 
 Aerospace and aeronautics 
 Biotechnology 
 Information 
 Laser 
 New materials 
 Ocean 
Engineering Megaprojects
* (16):  Advanced numeric-controlled machinery and basic manufacturing 
technology 
 Control and treatment of AIDS, hepatitis, and other major diseases 
 Core electronic components, high-end generic chips, and basic software 
 Drug innovation and development 
 Extra- large-scale integrated circuit manufacturing and technique 
 Genetically modified new-organism variety breeding 
 High-definition Earth observation systems 
 Large advanced nuclear reactors 
 Large aircraft  Large-scale oil and gas exploration 
 Manned aerospace and Moon exploration 
 New-generation broadband wireless mobile telecommunications 
 Water pollution control and treatment 
Science Megaprojects (4): 
 Development and 
reproductive biology 
 Nanotechnology 
 Protein science 
 Quantum research 
* The MLP only marks 13 megaengineering programs. 
The rest are presumably military-related programs.
 Adapted from C. Cao et al., 2006, Chin
a™s 15-year science and technology plan, 
Physics Today
, p. 38. 
  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 101
 J   List of Abbreviations    
 
 AC   Advanced Computing 
ACM   Association for Computing Machinery 

ACSAC   Asia-Pacific Computer 
Systems Architecture Conference 
ASPLOS International Symposium on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating 
Systems 
A-SSCC  Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference 

ATP   Advanced Technology Products 

CAGR   Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAS   Chinese Academy of Sciences 
CCMA   Cloud Computing Center for Mobile Application 

CMOS   Complementary-Symmetry Metal-Oxide Semiconductors 

Code 4   Information and Communica
tions Advanced T
echnology Products 
Code 5   Electronics Advanced Technology Products 
COTS   Commercial-Off-the-Shelf 

CPU   Central Processing Unit 

DARPA   Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 

DOD   Department of Defense 
EC   European Commission 
ECFA   Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement 

ECOOP   European Conference on Object-Oriented Programming 

ESSCIRC  European Solid-Sta
te Circuits Conference 
ESSDERC  European Solid-State Device Research Conference 
Eurographics  Conference of the European Association for Computer Graphics 

FGCS   Fifth Generation Computer Systems (project) 

FP7   Seventh Framework Program (2007Œ2013) 
FPGA   Field-Programmable Gate Arrays 
GDP   Gross Domestic Product 

GPU   Graphics Processing Unit 

GP-GPU  General Purpose Gr
aphics Processing Unit 
HiPEAC European Network of Excellence on Hi
gh-Performance and Embedded Architectures and 
Compilers 
HPC   High-Performance Computing 

HPCA   International Symposium on Hi
gh Performance Computer Architecture 
IC   Integrated Circuits 
ICT   Information and Communications Technology 
IDM   Integrated Device Manufacturer 
The New Global Ecosystem in Advanced Computing: Implications for U.S. Competitiveness and National SecurityCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102 
THE GLOBAL ECOSYSTEM IN ADVANCED COMPUTING 
  IEDM   International Electron Devices Meeting 
IEEE   Institute of Electrica
l and Electronics Engineers 
ILP   Instruction-Level Parallelism 

IP   Internet Protocol 

IPC   Instructions per Clock Cycle 
IPR   Intellectual Property Rights 
ISA   Instruction 
Set Architecture 
ISC   International Symposium on Computer Architecture 

ISSCC   International Solid-State Circuits Conference 
IT   Information Technology 
ITRI   Industrial Technology Research Institute 

KET   Key Enabling Technologies 

LED   Light-emitting Diode 

MCC   Microelectronics and Computer Technology Consortium 
MEMS   Microelectromechanical Systems 
MICRO   International Symposium on Microarchitecture 

MIIT   Ministry of Industry and Information Technology 

MLP   Medium- and Long-Term Plan (2006Œ2020) 
MOST   Ministry of Science and Technology 
NANO   International Conference on Nanotechnology 

NNIN   National Nanofabrication Infrastructure Network 

NRC   National Research Council 
NSF   National Science Foundation 
ODM   Original Device Manufacturer 

OEM   Original Equipment Manufacturer 

OOPSLA  Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications 
O-S-D   Optoelectronics-Sensor-Discrete 
OSDI   Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation 

PARLE   Parallel Architectures and Languages Europe 

PC   Personal Computer 

PLDI   Programming Language Design and Implementation 
POPL   Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages 
PPoPP  Symposium on Principles 
and Practice of Parallel Programming 
PwC  PricewaterhouseCoopers 

R&D  Research and Development 
S&T  Science and Technology 
SC International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis 

Sci2  Science of Science Tool 
SEI  Strategic Emerging Industries 
SEMATECH  Semiconductor Manufacturing Technology 
SIA  Semiconductor Industry Association 

SIGGRAPH International Conference on Comput
er Graphics and Interactive Techniques 
SoC   System-on-a-Chip 

SOSP   Symposium on Operating Systems Principles 
SPA&T   Semiconductor Packaging, Assembly, and Test 
SPERC   Secure, Parallel, Evolvable,
 Reliable and Correct (software) 
SRC   Semiconductor Research Corporation 

TSMC   Taiwan Semiconduc
tor Manufacturing Company 
VLDB   International Conferen
ce on Very Large Databases 
WWW   International Worl
d Wide Web Conference 
 
 