DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/13540Summary of a Workshop on the Future of Antennas29 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-26683-3 | DOI 10.17226/13540Norm Haller, Rapporteur; Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; NationalResearch CouncilSummary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   
  
 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of Antennas 
  
 
 Norm Haller, Rapporteur      
 
 Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences   
 
 
     
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS Washington, D.C. 
www.nap.edu  Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS   500 FIFTH STREET, NW   Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE:  The project that is the subject of this re
port was approved by the Governing Board of the National 
Research Council, whose members ar
e drawn from the councils of the 
National Academy of Sciences, the 
National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the committee responsible 

for the report were chosen for their special comp
etences and with regard 
for appropriate balance. 
 This study was supported by Contract HHM402-10-D-
0036 between the Defense Intelligence Agency and the 
National Academy of Sciences.  Any views or observations expressed in this publication are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily re
flect the views of the agency that
 provided support for the project. 
 International Standard Book Number:  13: 978-0-309-26683-3 
International Standard Book Number:  10: 0-309-26683-1 
 
Limited copies of this report are available from the Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences, National 
Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001; (202) 334-2400. 
 
Additional copies of this report are available from th
e National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 
360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu. 
 
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy of Sciences.  All rights reserved. 
 Printed in the United States of America 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged 
in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furt
herance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare.  Upon the authority of
 the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate 
that requires it to advise the federal gover
nment on scientific and technical matters.
  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president 
of the National Academy of Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of 
Sciences, as a parallel organi
zation of outstanding engineers.  It is autonom
ous in its administration and in the selection 
of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Scien
ces the responsibility for advising the federal government.  
The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors e
ngineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and recognizes the superi
or achievements of engineers.
  Dr. Charles M. Vest is 
president of the National Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academ
y of Sciences to secure the services of 
eminent members of appropriate professions in the examinati
on of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public.  
The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the Nationa
l Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be 
an adviser to the federal government and, upon its own initia
tive, to identify issues of medical care, research, and 
education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad 
community of science and technology with the Academy™
s purposes of furthering knowle
dge and advising the federal 
government.  Functioning in accordance w
ith general policies determined by th
e Academy, the Council has become the 
principal operating agency of both the National Academy of
 Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the sc
ientific and engineering communities.  The Council is 
administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of 
Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicer
one and Dr. Charles M. Vest 
are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council 

 www.national-academies.org 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. iv COMMITTEE FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY  
CHALLENGES TO U.S. NATIONAL SECURITY INTERESTS
  J. JEROME HOLTON,* Tauri Group, 
Chair EDWARD M. GREITZER, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Vice Chair  BRIAN BALLARD,* APX Labs 
KENNETH I. BERNS, University of Florida College of Medicine 
ANN N. CAMPBELL,* Sandia National Laboratories 
DEAN R. COLLINS, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (retired) 

SHARON C. GLOTZER, University of Michigan 

J.C. HERZ, Batchtags, LLC 
KENNETH A. KRESS,* KBK Consulting, Inc. 
DARRELL LONG, University of California, Santa Cruz 

JULIE J.C.H. RYAN,* George Washington University  

JANET K. THERIANOS, Independent Consultant (USAF, retired) 
ELIAS TOWE, Carnegie Mellon University 

ALFONSO VELOSA III,* Gartner, Inc. 
ELI YABLONOVITCH,* University of California, Berkeley 
 Staff 
 TERRY JAGGERS, Lead DEPS Board Director DANIEL E.J. TALMAGE, JR., Study Director 
SARAH CAPOTE, Research Associate 

MARGUERITE SCHNEIDER, Administrative Coordinator 

DIONNA ALI, Senior Program Assistant 

CHRIS JONES, Financial Associate 

   
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
___________________________ 
*Planned or attended the workshop. 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. v   
 
 
 Preface   
 
The workshop described in this report is the 
second in a series of three workshops, held 
in early 2012 to further the ongoing engagement 
among the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) 
Technology InsightŠGauge, Evaluate, and Review
 (TIGER) Standing Committee, the scientific 
and technical intelligence (S&TI) community, and th
e consumers of S&TI products. A restricted 
version of this report is available by contacting 
the Public Affairs Office of the sponsoring agency 
(Defense Intelligence Agency) directly. 
We express our appreciation to the me
mbers of the Committee for Science and 
Technology Challenges to U.S. National Security In
terests for their contributions to the planning 
of this workshop. We are also grateful for 
the active participation of many members of the 
technology community in the workshop, as well as 
to the sponsor for its support. The committee 
also expresses sincere appreciation for the suppor
t and assistance of the NRC staff, including 
Terry Jaggers, Daniel Talmage, Sarah Capote, 
Marguerite Schneider, Ze
ida Patmon, and Dionna 
Ali. Finally, we would like to thank the rapporte
ur for this report, Norm Haller, a consultant. 
 
 J. Jerome Holton, 
Chair  Edward M. Greitzer, 
Vice Chair  Committee for Science and Technology 
    Challenges to U.S. National Security Interests 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi 
     
   Acknowledgment of Reviewers  
 
 This report has been reviewed in draft form
 by individuals chosen for their diverse 
perspectives and technical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures approved by the National 
Research Council™s (NRC™s) Report Review Committ
ee. The purpose of this independent review 
is to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its published 

report as sound as possible and to ensure that 
the report meets institutional standards for 
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the 
study charge. The review comments and draft 
manuscript remain confidential to protect the inte
grity of the deliberative process. We wish to 
thank the following individuals for their review of this report: 
 James Armitage, Potomac In
stitute for Policy Studies, 
Lawrence J. Delaney, Independent Cons
ultant (Titan Corporation, retired), 
Gilman Louie, Alsop Louie Partners, and 

Al Romig, NAE, Lockheed Martin Aeronautics Company. 
 Although the reviewers listed above have 
provided many constructive comments and 
suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the vi
ews of individual participants, nor did they see 
the final draft of the report before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Lou 

Lanzerotti (NAE), New Jersey Institute of T
echnology. Appointed by the NRC, he was 
responsible for making certain that an independent
 examination of this report was carried out in 
accordance with institutional proce
dures and that all review comments were carefully considered. 
Responsibility for the final content of this report r
ests entirely with the author and the institution. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii 
  
 
 
 
 
 Contents  
  1 INTRODUCTION 1 

 
2 FIRST DAY (OPEN) 3 
Future of Antennas, 3 
 Discussion After Presentation, 3 

Commercial State of the Art of Wireless Communications and Control, 4 

 Discussion After Presentation, 4 

 General Discussion on Several Topics by Attendees, 5 
Military State of the Art of Wireless Communications and Control, 5 
 Discussion After Presentation, 6 

Future Trends in Antenna Design and 
Wireless Communications and Control, 6 
 Questions and General Discussion, 7 
 
3 SECOND DAY (CLOSED) 8 
 APPENDIXES 
A Committee Biographies 11 

B Workshop Agenda and Participants 17 

C Speaker Biographies 19 
  Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1   
   1 Introduction
    The Workshop on the Future of Antennas was the second of three workshops conducted by the 
National Research Council™s Comm
ittee for Science and Technology Challenges to U.S. National 
Security Interests. The statement of task can be 
found in Box 1-1. The workshop objectives were to: 
  Review trends in advanced antenna research and design.  
 Review trends in commercial and military use 
of advanced antennas that enable improved 
communication, data transfer, soldier health m
onitoring, and other overt and covert methods 
of standoff data collection. 
 The first day™s sessions, consisting of five presenta
tions and discussions on antennas and wireless 
communications and control, were open to committee 
members, staff, guests, and members of the public. 
The second day was a data-gathering session addressing 
vulnerabilities, indicators, and observables; 
presentations and discussions during this session include
d classified material and were not open to the 
public. Appendix A contains biographies of the comm
ittee members. The workshop agenda and a list of 
participants are given in Appendix B. Appe
ndix C gives the biographies of the presenters. 
This report has been prepared by the workshop rapp
orteur as a factual summary of what occurred at 
the workshop. The committ
ee™s role was limited to planning and convening the workshop. The views 
contained in the report are those of individual work
shop participants and do not necessarily represent the 
views of all workshop participants, the committee, 
or the National Research Council. The workshop was 
not intended to provide a comprehensive review of the state of antenna technology. 
This report is organized by topic in the order of presentation and discussion at the workshop. For 
Day 1 the topics were Future of Antennas, Commercia
l State of the Art of Wireless Communications and 
Control, Military State of the Art of Wireless 
Communications and Control, and Future Trends in 
Antenna Design and Wireless Communications and Control. For Day 2 the topics were Vulnerabilities of 

Ubiquitous Antennas, and Indicators and Ob
servables, followed by a wrap-up discussion. 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
    
     
   
    BOX 1-1 Statement of Task  
An ad hoc committee will plan and conduct three workshops on the science and technology 
(S&T) fields noted below that have potential impact on U.S. national security. 
  Ł Big DataŠThe workshop will review emergi
ng capabilities in large computational data to 
include speed, data fusion, use, and commodification 
of data used in decision making. The workshop 
will also review the subsequent increase in vul
nerabilities over the capabilities gained and the 
significance to national security. 
Ł Future of AntennasŠThe workshop will review 
trends in advanced 
antenna research and 
design. The workshop will also review trends in 
commercial and military use of advanced antennas 
that enable improved communication, data transfer
, soldier health monitoring, and other overt and 
covert methods of standoff data collection.  
Ł Future Battlespace Situati
onal AwarenessŠThe workshop will review the technologies that 
enable battlespace situational awareness 10-20 years in
to the future for both red and blue forces. The 
workshop will emphasize the capabilities within 
air, land, sea, space, and cyberspace.  
 The committee will design the workshops to a
ddress U.S. and foreign research, why S&T 
applications of technologies in development are im
portant in the context of military capabilities, and 
what critical scientific breakthroughs
 are needed to achieve advan
ces in the fields of interestŠ
focusing detailed attention on specific developments in
 the foregoing fields that might have national 
security implications for the United States. The 
workshops will each also consider methodology to 
track the relevant technology landscape for the future. Each of the three workshops will feature i
nvited presentations and 
panelists and include 
discussions on a selected topic including themes re
lating to defense warning and surprise. The 
committee will plan the agenda for the workshops, 
select and invite speakers and discussants, and 
moderate the discussions. Each event will result in
 a workshop summary that will be subject to 
appropriate institutional review prior to release.  
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3   
   2 First Day (Open)
    The presentations were followed by discussion periods during which questions were posed and 
answered and ideas were exchanged among the partic
ipants. Summaries of these discussions sometimes 
do not follow their specific order of occurrence during the meeting, thus allowing like topics to be 

synthesized (e.g., discussions of entities engaged 
in antenna design activities). The first three 
presentations had one speaker each. The last topic was covered by two speakers. 
 FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
Lon Pringle, director of the Signature Technolog
y Laboratory at Georgia Tech Research Institute, 
was the speaker. His key point was that the ﬁfut
ure of antennas is nowﬂ and that several enabling 
technologies, most notably the increase in computational power, are combining to make the present an era 

of dramatic improvements in antenna performance.ﬂ
 Signatures dominated 20 years ago, and then 
technology really started to accelerate. Apertures ar
e solved, but the electronics are still maturing to 
enable utilization of the future capability of the an
tenna. Everyone likes low frequency, but big antennas 
are needed, in his view.  Pringle reemphasized a major element of his ke
y point as follows: the ability to predict the 
performance of antennas by calculation has taken over
 the prior slow process of building (by intuition) 
and testing. The fact that the United States can now 
model how an antenna is going to perform is really 
significant and a great breakthrough. Enabling technologies include electromagnetic modeling, speed of 
computation, and micro-electronics; he affirmed that these tools are enabling design and discovery. He 

further amplified the importance of computation by noti
ng that the future of antenna design is in a person 
who understands electromagnetics and works with a com
puter to design a new antenna (i.e., person plus 
computer). In 5 to 8 years, fast commercial 
codes will give most radar houses this capability.  
His many other comments included that (1) a comput
er can tell what values of resistive sheets to 
place in cavities; (2) some connected arrays have coup
ling that works for them rather than against them; 
(3) challenges include getting rid of heat, packag
ing, wide-band electronics, and beam-formers; (4) 
optical switches can optimize performance (e.g., switc
h bands, steer antenna, use several beams or 
combine them into a more powerful one); and (5) 
there is a revolution in ground-plane structuresŠ
hopefully, with these and active meta-materials, one ca
n build an adaptable antenna, which actually reacts 
to the environment (e.g., a missile is also the antenna).  
 
 Discussion After Presentation
1 Q: What kind antennas for UAVs? A: Low gain. Sm
all UAVs just can™t carry a heavy dish antenna. 
Larger UAVs have dish antennas. 
Q: Will better materials come into play? A: Magne
tic and meta-materials. But we must have area, 
which some say we can get along withoutŠbe skeptical. 
                                                     
 1Unless specifically stated otherwise, the speaker answered all questions. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
Q: How about advances in other countries or areas, su
ch as Europe or China? A: If need is there, 
then the Chinese will go for it. Right now, they n
eed to work on building 
the infrastructure (e.g., foundries) to support the technology. Regarding ultr
a-wideband phased arrays, ultra-thin low-frequency 
antennas, reconfigurable ground planes for low-frequen
cy applications, and reconfigurable antennas, the 
Europeans are working in these areas. 
This information is also publishe
d, and so we can research where 
Europeans are going. Q: Are you seeing really interesting publications
 and new innovative concepts outside the United 
States? A (by James Armitage, attendee): When it come
s to who is producing the most, then it is China. 
However, although quantity is high, quality is not there yet. At the same time, the Chinese are catching up 
and will eventually be at the same level as we are; 
many Chinese working in this field went to school in 
the United States. They are going home and applyi
ng in China what they learned here. Don™t 
underestimate computing resources outside the Unite
d States. The Chinese ar
e building foundries like 
crazy to feed the auto industry wo
rldwide. It is all money driven and requires large investments.  
Q: What countries around the world are doing this type of workŠChina, India, Russia, Israel, 
France, Germany? A (by James Armitage and Gilman
 Louie): We need to watch where the money is 
going. We have been spending more money, by orders
 of magnitude, than other countries in developing 
these types of technologies. Now, when we are not spending as much, and other countries decide to make 

heavy investments, they will catch up quickly. Most of 
the professors in China received their PhDs in the 
United States. Now they are going back to China to t
each the next generation of engineers. This also 
applies to other regions of the world (e.g., Europe and India). 
 COMMERCIAL STATE OF THE ART OF WI
RELESS                                               
COMMUNICATIONS AND CONTROL 
Sebastian Rowson, chief scientist at Ethertronics,
 was the speaker. His privately held company 
manufactures million of antennas per week (e.g., for 
cell phones, laptops, medical devices). They have 
moved from simple designs and manufacturing challe
nges to active, reconfigurable antenna systems 
defined and optimized for commercial applications. 
ﬁActive antenna systems technology applies to any 
wireless device. Mobile device data throughput incr
eased (46 percent increase de
monstrated in an access 
point).ﬂ Challenges are numbers of applications
 supported and very small volumes (e.g., 2 cubic 
centimeters with active antennas). Ideally, active and r
econfigurable antennas can adjust automatically to 
changes in the environment enveloping the 
device (e.g., when a hand is on a phone).  For the future, Rowson noted that a goal is to in
tegrate everything inside the phone; the antenna is 
the link to outside signals. If switching from different 
base stations can be minimized by optimizing for 
only one base station, effort and resources can be fr
eed up. Associated challenges involve development of 
new software to support the antenna. Again, the aim is
 to design everything together and have elements 
that adjust ﬁon the flyﬂ so as to achie
ve more capability with these systems. 
 Discussion After Presentation
2 Q: Where have you seen more gain in technology a
dvances? A: Probably in filters. Already a lot of 
work has been done on power amplifiers, but there are still opportunities for improvement. 
Q: How transparent to the user is a change in mod
es? A: It is very fast; the user does not know it is 
happening. 
Q: Are any of these things dependent on materials? 
A: Mostly on design, but in some cases they are 
dependent on new semiconductor technology. 
Q: How about jamming? A: The hope is that the 
FCC is keeping others off these frequencies. We™re 
not looking closely at jamming. 
                                                     
 2Unless specifically stated otherwise, the speaker answered all questions. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIRST DAY (OPEN)  5 
Q: Are there safeguards to limit power coming from an
tennas? A: The only way to solve this issue is 
to reduce power. 
Q: What™s next, most interesting? A: Innovative 
research and development is done at Ethertronics 
(e.g., switching) to anticipate what the market is going 
to look like. However, it is customer driven when 
it comes to producing new designs for antennasŠapproximately 200 new designs each year. Medical 

device drawers (metal) were challenging; each had to have six antennas. 
Q: Does Ethertronics have a single point of failure in
 its process, such as raw materials? A: Not that 
we can see. The belief is that nothing will really 
stump Ethertronics; it has such a wide variety of 
resources. 
Q: How about hiring the right engineers to work fo
r Ethertronics; has that been difficult? A: Yes. 
Now the company hires graduate students and trains
 them, enabling new employees to fit well into the 
company environment. Grants help fund these trai
ning sessions. There is also recruiting from local 
colleges (e.g., San Diego State University). 
Q: How much does Ethertronics work with intern
ational companies? A. The company shows some 
current and advanced designs to companies in vari
ous countries. Technology shared with each country 
depends on the relationship and on 
the amount of cooperation that has occurred with that company. 
Samsung and Ethertronics have a good relationship ba
sed on design cooperation and past experience. 
 General Discussion on Several Topics by Attendees 
Individual attendees and speakers then generall
y discussed several topics and questions. Some 
participants noted that the future 
is driven largely by fancier algor
ithms but that other frequency bands 
will be needed. NATICK (U.S. Army) is interested 
in battlefield monitoring. Commercial is going Blue-
Tooth (for heart-rate, breathing, skin temperatur
e monitoring). When it comes to physiological 
monitoring, some participants wanted ubiquity and ease
 of use. Some participants suggested a need to 
figure out how to move the data and store it effec
tively for easy analysis. Some challenges facing the 
industry: Should data all be on the same network or 
on different networks? Wher
e should we leverage the 
infrastructure that exists? 
 MILITARY STATE OF THE ART OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS AND CONTROL 
Robert Newgard, director of Advanced Radi
o Systems, Rockwell Collins, was the speaker. 
Rockwell Collins serves two marketsŠcommercial a
nd military. A publicly traded company, it is 
there for shareholder value; the commercial side 
is becoming an early adapter of new technologies. 
Newgard opened with military radio objectives (i.e
., cost-effective capabilities, support for operational 
needs). More specifically, today™s 
military requires multi-mode, multi-
channel, upgradable, networked, 
remotely configurable, actionable information; br
oadband; low power, high performance; geo-location 
(for blue- and red-force tracking); and ultimately, an
y waveform, any time, any place. He also addressed 
software-defined radios, noting th
at any waveform can be loaded. 
Newgard also pointed out that an array of techni
cal challenges exist for military systems: today™s 
fielded radios use large radio frequency (RF) front 
ends and components that can accommodate the worst-
case requirements (ﬁcornerﬂ cases are difficult). Future
 designs need adaptable and reconfigurable RF 
front ends; flexible and dynamic RF performance; real-time optimization and performance; low 

observability; and the characteristic of being capab
ilities driven, not requirements driven. He explained 
how to do more with less. More capability with fewe
r assets (e.g., we have a lot of capability, but we 
cannot fix all issues by throwing more hardware at th
e problem). If one throws ha
rdware or software at a 
problem, the solution could become too expens
ive (especially in the software realm). 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
Discussion After Presentation
3 Q: Is the point solution going to be cheaper and 
better than software-defined radio? A: Yes. 
Q: Does the manufacturer reconfigure, or does the 
operator do that? A: The radio does it by itself. 
Q: How much red force or outside threats do you factor into your research and development? A: 
Quite a bit; we try to vector threats into our prod
uction and technolog
y and regularly consult with people 
in the field (engineers in the battle-space) for design.
 We also have cleared staff that can work on 
classified projects. 
Q: Is there an opportunity for photonics in the front end? A: Yes, small power. 

Q: What fraction of radios are software defined? 
A: Somewhere in the 25 percent range are software 
defined, and it is not growing fast. 
Q: How far behind Android and iPhone are the military? A: Not that far.  
Q: What is U.S. technology vulnerability in your field? A: The biggest concern is what the 
Department of Defense (DoD) is doing to deve
lop requirements. DoD ac
quisition managers are 
developing requirements that may not be realistic. In
stead of engineers, there are people who lack the 
technology expertise to develop proper requirements.
 They have business majors instead of engineers 
working on this, people who do not have the necessary
 expertise. People need intuition, knowledge, and 
experience to create effective requirements. 
Q: What percentage of Rockwell Collins engineer
s are foreign nationals? A: It has no foreign 
nationals; most of the engineers have projects that involve work requiring a clearance.  
Prompted by questions and exchanges among partic
ipants, Newgard made the following general 
comments: Our biggest concern going forward is the sk
ill set, not the technology. It is more about having 
the engineers who are capable of doing what needs 
doing, and being passionate about it. Yes, Rockwell 
Collins is having problems hiring qualified candidates,
 and now tends to grow its
 own people (e.g., hire 
engineers while they are going through college, use inte
rnships, and then train them). Also, a large portion 
of the Rockwell Collins engineering design team is goi
ng to retire in the next decade. We need capable 
engineers who are ﬁcommitted experts.ﬂ Regarding th
e Federal Acquisition Regulatory (FAR) process, 
there are many problems that involve one hand not talk
ing to another. F-22s don™t talk well to legacy 
systems. The Navy builds systems that do not talk 
to the Army™s. On top of that, the FAR process does 
not allow a lot of critical thinking to determine 
effective tradeoffs (make 
tough calls with limited 
resources). And when the requirement developers lack engineering experience, it creates a somewhat 

confusing environment that inhibits innovative thinking. 
 FUTURE TRENDS IN ANTENNA DESIGN AND WI
RELESS                                        
COMMUNICATIONS AND CONTROL 
Timothy Hancock, assistant group leader, Analog 
Device Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, MIT, 
was the first speaker. He was followed by Ya
hya Ramat-Samii, Northrop Grumman Chair in 
Electromagnetics at UCLA, who spoke by phone. 
Hancock reviewed trends in the use of antennas th
at enable improved communications, data transfer, 
soldier health monitoring, and methods of data coll
ection. He briefly described techniques for overt and 
covert methods of standoff data collection (e.g., re
duce transmitted power and energy per bit, mitigate or 
exploit in-band interference), noting that it would be
 good to get away from the concept of ﬁthat™s my 
band, so don™t use it.ﬂ Turning to multiple-input, mutip
le-output (MIMO) wireless systems, he introduced 
the approaches of spatial multiplexing, diversity co
ding, and pre-coding and then pointed out several 
advantages of MIMO (e.g., improved data transfer fro
m or to a disadvantaged transmitter or receiver and 
mitigating interference). Challenges in implementing 
MIMO systems include the design of antennas, 
receivers, and transmitters; much computing power and math are involved. 
                                                     
 3Unless specifically stated otherwise, the speaker answered all questions. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIRST DAY (OPEN)  7 
Rahmat-Samii (using nearly three dozen slides)
 described novel outside-of-the-box concepts for 
antennasŠfrom tiny ingestibles to large space ante
nnas. UCLA™s antenna research, analysis, and 
measurement laboratory is organized in five fi
elds: personal communications; medical RFID (RF 
identification); remote sensing; electromagnetic band
 gap (EBG), photonic ba
nd gap (PBG), nano, and 
MEMS (microelectromechanical systems); and analyzi
ng, optimizing, and measuring. The laboratory (in 
cooperation with other institutions) 
is advancing miniature antenna concepts as well as large antenna 
concepts. One of his key points was that ﬁw
e can optimize antennas for almost any need!ﬂ 
Rahmat-Samii highlighted the many conflicting cha
llenges of miniaturization (e.g., low profile or 
low volume, with or without ground plane, single 
frequency or multifrequency,
 narrow or broad band, 
single or multiple elements, low or high cost). Appr
oaches for miniaturization included low profiles using 
EGB, folding structures, incorporating switches, hybrid
ization of the above, and stored energy utilization. 
He mentioned advances in RFID, including platform
-tolerant tag designs, medicine-monitoring RFID 
systems, and medical diagnostics and sensing. He al
so covered advances in meta-materials, including 
double-negative materials, EBG structures, and artificial complex ground planes. 
 Questions and General Discussion
4 Q: For wearable textile antennas, where do you see th
is research going? A: Two fronts, embroidery 
machines and wearable designs (e.g., communica
tions on clothing, such as for firemen).  
Q: In medical applications, are you looking at 
RFID tags embedded inside the body for medical 
scans? A: Designing these types of chips, which create
 the communication link, is a challenge. However, 
this area of study is emerging, and the UCLA
 team is examining this application.  
Q: International work? A: Europeans are doing 
interesting work (e.g., research on antennas and 
establishing a school of antenna engineering for 
worldwide Ph.D. students). The Far East (e.g., 
Singapore) is working in areas of miniaturizati
on and multi-band design plus medical applications 
(biotelemetry). The Japanese are trying to reduce 
the cost of arrays and are also harvesting 
electromagnetic energy (e.g., charging cell phones from 
energy in the environment). Finally, China is 
doing research and producing various products. 
                                                      
 4Unless specifically stated otherwise, the speaker answered all questions. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 8   
   3 Second Day (Closed) 
   This day included the availabilit
y of classified materials. The presentations were followed by 
discussion periods during which questions were pos
ed and answered. At times during the discussion 
periods there were also exchanges of ideas among
 the participants. Again, summaries of these 
discussions sometimes do not follow their specific 
order of occurrence during the meeting, thus 
allowing like topics to be synthesized. The first tw
o topics had three speakers. The last topic was a 
general wrap-up discussion moderated by a committee member. 
Mark Schrote, senior consulting engineer, Nort
hrop Grumman Electronic Systems, was the first 
speaker. He was followed by Luke Feldner, principa
l member of the technical staff, Sandia National 
Laboratories. Schrote discussed technology trends in active 
electronically steered antennas (AESAs). He 
opened by describing the advantages of AESAs (e
.g., more power output, higher sensitivity, much 
faster steering without gimbals) and their heritage from the 1970s. AESAs are used for air, ship, 

ground, and space applications, and new designs have
 been appearing about once per year. Trends are 
moving to more functionality, applications beyo
nd radar (e.g., communications), open architectures, 
scalability, and digital beam-formingŠoverall, providi
ng rapidly growing capability and lower cost. 
Better design tools, also discussed on Day 1, are ve
ry helpful as the future multi-mission applications 
for AESAs evolve and mature.  
James Armitage, senior fellow, Po
tomac Institute for Policy Studies, was the principal speaker. 
Luke Feldner™s material, originally scheduled for 
this session, was covered in the session summarized 
above. Committee member Kenneth Kress, 
senior scientist for KBK Consulting, Inc., and consultant for 
Booz Allen Hamilton, moderated the wrap-up discussi
on. Participants commented about the merits of 
this kind of workshop and offered 
statements about key issues. The statements are not necessarily 
consensus correlations of views expressed at the 
workshop, but rather were the comments of 
individuals. 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendixes 
 Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 11 
  
   
 Appendix A 
Committee Biographies    J. Jerome Holton
, Chair, is a senior systems engineer with the Tauri Group, where he supports 
the BioWatch Systems Program Office within th
e Office of Health Affairs, Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS). He provides analys
is, advice, and counsel to senior government 
decision makers on policy, technology, and oper
ations issues related to weapons of mass 
destruction and their effects on civilian infrastructure, first responders, military forces, and 
tactical operations. Prior to this, he served in a 
variety of leadership positions for private-sector 
companies, spanning the gamut from scientific research start-up to large management consulting 

firm. Past clients include the Office of the De
puty Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for 
Counterproliferation and Chemical/Biological 
Defense, the Chemical Biological Defense 
Directorate of the Defense Threat Reduction Ag
ency, the Chemical Biological National Security 
Program of the Department of Energy, and the DHS Science and Technology Directorate. His 

work extends broadly across the chemical/biologi
cal/radiological/nuclear/conventional explosives 
detection and countermeasures arena. For several ye
ars, he focused on the counterproliferation of, 
counterterrorism/domestic preparedness issues fo
r, and the detection, identification, and 
decontamination of chemical and biological we
apons. Recent accomplishm
ents include fielding 
information operations tools a
nd enhancing the intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
capabilities to detect and defeat improvised e
xplosive devices as well as the development of 
applique armor solutions to counter explosively 
formed penetrators. Holton previously served on 
the NRC™s Standing Committee on Defense In
telligence Agency Technology Forecasts and 
Reviews (TIGER), the Committee for the Sym
posium on Avoiding Technology Surprise for 
Tomorrow™s Warfighter, and the Committee on 
Alternative Technologies to Replace 
Antipersonnel Landmines. He earned his B.S. in 
physics from Mississippi State University and 
holds M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in experi
mental physics from Duke University. 
 
Edward M. Greitzer (NAE)
, Vice Chair
, is the H.N. Slater Professor, Department of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics at Massachusetts In
stitute of Technology. He received his A.B., 
S.M., and Ph.D. from Harvard University. Prior 
to joining MIT in 1977, he was with United 
Technologies Corporation, and, more recently, 
he was on leave at United Technologies Research 
Center as director, Aeromechanical, Chemical, and Fluid Systems. From 1984 to 1996 he was the 

director of MIT™s Gas Turbine Laboratory, and 
from 1996 to 2002 was associate head, and from 
2006 to 2008 deputy head, of the Department of
 Aeronautics and Astronautics. His research 
interests have spanned a range of topics in gas 
turbines, internal flow, turbomachinery, active 
control of fluid systems, university-industry colla
boration, and robust gas turbine engine design; 
he was the MIT lead for the Cambridge-MIT Ins
titute Silent Aircraft Initiative. He teaches 
graduate and undergraduate courses in the fields 
of propulsion, fluid mechanics, thermodynamics, 
and energy conversion, as well as the department
™s undergraduate project course. Greitzer is a 
three-time recipient of the American Society 
of Mechanical Engineer
s Gas Turbine Award for 
outstanding gas turbine paper of the year; in 
addition, he received the ASME Freeman Scholar 
Award in Fluids Engineering, the Internati
onal Gas Turbine Institute Scholar Award, and 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
publication awards from the American Institute
 of Aeronautics and Astronautics and the 
Institution of Mechanical Engineer
s. He has also received the Aircraft Engine Technology Award 
from the ASME International Gas Turbine Ins
titute, the U.S. Air Force Exceptional Civilian 
Service Award, and the ASME R. Tom Sawyer Awa
rd. He has been a member of the U.S. Air 
Force Scientific Advisory Board and the NASA Ae
ronautics Advisory Committee, and he is an 
Honorary Professor at Beihang University (Beijing)
. Greitzer has published more than 70 papers 
and is lead author of the book 
Internal Flow: Concepts and Applications
, published by 
Cambridge University Press. He is a fellow of AIAA and ASME, a member of the National 
Academy of Engineering, and an International 
Fellow of the Royal Academy of Engineering.  
 
Brian Ballard founded and currently serves as the CE
O of APX Labs, a software company 
focused on leading development into wearable 
augmented reality products at the nexus of 
computer vision, user experience, and see-through displays. Previously he served as the director 

of product development and vice president at Battlefield Telecommunication Systems (BTS), 
where he led the development of defense-orient
ed augmented reality and biometric data fusion 

applications. As part of his portfolio, he was al
so heavily engaged in developing mobile 3G and 
4G networks, devices, and applications for tactical military employments. Prior to joining BTS, 
Ballard served as the CTO at Mav6, where he wa
s involved in the development of emerging 
networking and embedded systems technologies for 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance 
(ISR) systems and applications in government and military. He is a highly experienced 

professional in the field of national intelligence systems and computer engineering. Employed for 

more than 10 years with the National Security 
Agency, he has dealt with all forms of data 
collection, dissemination, processing, and visuali
zation. Ballard holds an M.S. and a B.S. in electrical and computer engineering from Carn
egie Mellon University, and a master™s of 
technology management from the University of Ma
ryland. He is currently working on an MBA at 
the University of Maryland.  

 
Kenneth I. Berns
 (NAS/IOM) is director of the Univer
sity of Florida Genetics Institute and 
Distinguished Professor of Molecular Genetics a
nd Microbiology, Medicine. He has served as a 

member of the Composite Committee of the Unit
ed States Medical Licensing Examination, 
chairman of the Association of American Medi
cal Colleges, president of the Association of 
Medical School Microbiology and Immunology Chairs, president of the American Society for 

Virology, president of the American Society for Microbiology, and vice-president of the 

International Union of Microbiological Societies.
 He is a member of the National Academy of 
Sciences and the Institute of Medicine. Bern
s™s research examines the molecular basis of 

replication of the human parvovirus, adeno-asso
ciated virus, and the ability of an adeno-
associated virus to establish latent infections and 
be reactivated. His work has helped provide the 
basis for use of this virus as a vector for ge
ne therapy. Berns™s M.D. and his Ph.D. in 
biochemistry are from the Johns Hopkins University.  

 
Ann N. Campbell
 is director, Information Solutions and Services, at Sandia National 
Laboratories. Her organization develops and stewards a broad range of soft
ware applications and information systems for both internal (enterprise) 
and external customers to facilitate the delivery 
of effective national security technologies. At 
Sandia, she previously served as senior manager 
and deputy to the chief technology officer for 
cybersecurity science and technology (S&T). In 
that role she was responsible for developing and implementing an institutional strategy for cyber 
S&T. She was recently acting director for Sandia™
s Cyber Security Strategic Thrust, leading the 
lab™s activities to expand Sandia™s cyber workforce 
and infrastructure, and strategies to provide 
increased support for Sandia™s national security sponsors™ cyber missions. Campbell has also 

served as deputy for technical programs for th
e Defense Systems and Assessments Strategic 

Management Unit (DSA SMU). In that role sh
e advised the DSA vice president regarding the Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A  13 
 unit™s national security programs, was responsib
le for strategic planning and the investment 
strategy for the DSA, and assisted with implemen
tation of the laboratory™s cyber strategy. From 
2003 to 2007, Campbell led the Assessment 
Technologies Group in Sandia™s Information 
Systems Analysis Center. She was responsible fo
r development, coordina
tion, and oversight of 
programs focusing on vulnerability assessments and de
velopment of national security solutions in 
information technologies for multiple government sp
onsors. From 1999 to 2003 she was manager 
of the Microsystems Partnerships Department, which assessed and addressed microelectronics 

vulnerabilities for a variety of government sponsors.
 In that role Campbell led Sandia™s program 
to support the DoD Anti-Tamper In
itiative. She joined the technical
 staff at Sandia in 1985 and 
had assignments in the Materials and Process Center
 and the Microsystems Science, Technology, 
and Components Center. She conducted research on th
e microstructure and physical properties of 
advanced materials, the physics of microelectr
onics failures, and the development of advanced 
microelectronics failure analysis techniques. Campbell serves on the National Academies™ 

Standing Committee on Technology 
InsightŒGauge, Evaluate and Review (TIGER). She is a 
senior member of IEEE and served as vice president of membership for the IEEE Reliability 
Society and on the Management Committee and boa
rd of directors for the IEEE International 
Reliability Physics Symposium. She has more than 
20 publications and several patents. She holds 
a B.S. degree in materials engineering from Rens
selaer Polytechnic Institute and M.S. and Ph.D. 
degrees in applied physics (materials scien
ce concentration) from Harvard University
.  Dean R. Collins
 recently retired as a deputy director
 of DARPA™s Microsystems Technology 
Office (MTO); as a chief scientist he was responsib
le for the monitoring, analysis, and evaluation 
of research projects directed by MTO program ma
nagers and also participated in the concept 
planning for leading MTO into new programs beyo
nd the current state of the art in electronics, 
photonics, microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), component architectures, and algorithms. 

He managed the MTO program on integrated ci
rcuit cybersecurity. Prior to joining DARPA, 
Collins was director for the Advanced Resear
ch and Development Activity (ARDA) in 
information technology. ARDA functioned as a jo
int activity of the intelligence community and 
the Department of Defense, addressing high-ri
sk/high-payoff information technology problems 
that had broad impact across both supporting 
communities. Collins initiated ARDA™s key cyber 
security effort. He was also a member of th
e intelligence community Advanced Research and 
Development Committee and managed the ARDA qua
ntum information science effort. Prior to 
joining ARDA, Collins was with the National In
stitute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST), 
where he was chief of the High Performance Systems and Services Division, the largest division 

at NIST. This position focused on information technology with a strong commercial bias, and the 

topics investigated ranged from biometrics to electronic books. Previously, Collins was with 

Texas Instruments, as director of the System
 Components Lab, which 
was responsible for all 
research on III-V devices, nanoelectronics, photonics,
 and neural networks. Prior to that, he was 
director of the Interface Technology Lab, whic
h was responsible for all sensor and display 
research, including LCDs, DLPs, and CCDs. Collin
s is a fellow of the IEEE, a member of the 
American Physical Society, and a registered professional engineer. He has published more than 

40 refereed articles and has 10 issued U.S. patents.  
 Sharon C. Glotzer
 is the Stuart W. Churchill Collegiate Professor of Chemical Engineering and 
a professor of materials science and engineering at
 the University of Michigan (UM), Ann Arbor, 
and is director of research computing in the UM
 College of Engineering. She also holds faculty 
appointments in physics, applied physics, and 
macromolecular science and engineering. She 
received a B.S. in physics from UCLA and a Ph.D
. in physics from Boston University. Prior to 
joining UM, she worked at th
e National Institute of Standards and Technology. Her research 
focuses on computational nanoscience and simulation of soft matter, self-assembly and materials 

design, and computational science and engineering 
and is sponsored by the DoD, DoE, NSF, and 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
the J.S. McDonnell Foundation. Glotzer is a fellow 
of the American Physical Society and of the 
National Security Science and Engineering Faculty, and she was elected to the American 
Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2011. She has 
served on the National Academies™ Solid State 
Sciences Committee; Technology Warning and 
Surprise study committee; Biomolecular 
Materials and Processes study committee; Modeling, Simulation, and Games study committee; 

and Technology InsightŒGauge, Evaluate, and Re
view (TIGER) Committee. She is involved in 
roadmapping activities for computational science and engineering, including chairing or co-

chairing several workshops, steering committees and pan-agency initiatives, and she serves on the 
advisory committees for the DOE Office of Adva
nced Scientific Computing and NSF Directorate 
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. Glotzer
 is also co-founding director of the Virtual 
School for Computational Science and Engineering under the auspices of the NSF-funded Blue 

Waters Petascale Computing Project at the Nati
onal Center for Supercomputing Applications.  
 J.C. Herz
 is chief executive officer at Batchtags,
 LLC. She is also a technologist with a 
background in biological systems and computer game design. Her specialty is massively 
multiplayer systems that leverage social network ef
fects, whether on the web, mobile devices, or 
more exotic high-end or grubby low-end hard
ware. She currently serves as a White House 
Special Consultant to the Office of the Secr
etary of Defense (Networks and Information 
Integration). Defense projects range from aerospace systems to a computer-game-derived 
interface for next-generation unmanned air systems. Hertz is one of the three co-authors of OSD™s 
Open Technology Development roadmap. She ser
ves on the Federal Advisory Committee for the 
National Science Foundation™s education directorate.
 In that capacity, she 
is helping NSF harness emerging technologies to drive U.S. competitiveness
 in math and science. Hertz was a member of 
the National Research Council™s Committee on IT and Creative Practice and is currently a fellow 

of Columbia University™s American Assembly, 
where she is on the leadership team of the 
Assembly™s Next Generation Project. In 2002, 
she was designated a Global Leader for Tomorrow 
by the World Economic Forum. She is a member
 of the Global Business Network; a founding 
member of the IEEE Task Force on Game Te
chnologies; a term member of the Council on 
Foreign Relations; and a member of the advisory
 board of Carnegie Mellon™s ETC Press. Hertz 
graduated from Harvard University with a B.A. in
 biology and environmental studies, magna cum 
laude. She is the author of two books, 
Surfing on the Internet
 (Little Brown, 1994), an 
ethnography of cyberspace before the web, and 
Joystick Nation: How Videogames Ate Our 

Quarters, Won Our Hearts, and Rewired Our Minds
 (Little Brown, 1997), a history of 
videogames which traces the cultural and technologi
cal evolution of the first medium that was 

born digital and how it shaped the minds of a 
generation weaned on Ni
ntendo. Her books have 
been translated into seven languages. As a 
New York Times
 columnist, Hertz published 100 
essays on the grammar and syntax of game 
design between 1998 and 2000. She has also 
contributed to Esther Dyson™s Release 1.0, 
Rolling Stone
, Wired, GQ, and the Calgary Philatelist
.   
Kenneth A. Kress
 is a senior scientist for KBK Consulting, Inc., an affilate of Montana State 

University™s Department of Physics, and a c
onsultant for Booz Allen Hamilton, where he specializes in quantum information science and othe
r technical evaluations and strategic planning for intelligence and defense applications. Some of his past clients include DARPA™s Microsytems 

Technology Office, Noblis, Georgia Tech Rese
arch Institute, Mitretek Systems Inc., and 
Lockheed Martin™s Special Programs Division. 
From 1971 to 1999 he worked in a series of 

positions at the Central Intelligence Agency™s Dir
ectorate of Operations, Office of Development 
and Engineering, and finally, Office of Research
 and Development (ORD); first as a research and 
development manager, later as a program manager,
 and finally as an ORD Office senior scientist 

responsible for management support, the developm
ent of technical and strategic plans, and DOD 
inter-agency coordination for advan
ced technology. He is the inventor of the solid-state neutron 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A  15 
 detector, for which he won an award in 1981. He
 holds a Ph.D. in physics from Montana State 
University.  

 Darrell D.E. Long
 is the Kumar Malavalli Professor of Computer Science at the University of 
California, Santa Cruz. He holds the Kumar 
Malavalli Endowed Chair of Storage Systems 
Research and is director of the Storage Syst
ems Research Center. He received his B.S. in 
computer science from San Diego State University and his M.S. and Ph.D. from the University of 

California, San Diego. His dissertation advisor w
as Jehan-François Pâris. He is a fellow of the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers and of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. He is a member of 
the IEEE Computer Society, the Association for 
Computing Machinery, the American Society for E
ngineering Education, the Usenix Association, 
Upsilon Pi Epsilon, and Sigma Xi. He has broad 
research interests in many areas of mathematics 
and science, and in the area of computer scien
ce including data storage systems, operating 
systems, distributed computing, reliability a
nd fault tolerance, and computer security. His 
research has been supported by the National Sc
ience Foundation; the Department of Energy 
(Office of Science and National Nuclear Security Administration); Lawrence Livermore, Los 

Alamos, and Sandia National Laboratories; the 
Office of Naval Research; and a number of 
industrial sponsors that include IBM, Micros
oft, NetApp, Symantec, LSI Logic, Samsung, 
Hewlett-Packard, and Data Domain. He served as th
e vice chair and then chair of the University 
of California Committee on Research Policy. He has served on the University of California 
President™s Council on the National Laboratories,
 and on the Science and Technology, National 
Security, and Intelligence committees. He cu
rrently serves on the Science and Technology 
committee for both Los Alamos and Lawrence Live
rmore National Laboratories. He previously 
served on the National Research Council Standi
ng Committee for Technology InsightŒGauge, 
Evaluate and Review. He continues to serve 
on numerous committees and advisory panels for 
various federal government agencies. 
 
Julie J.C.H. Ryan
 is an associate professor and chair of Engineering Management and Systems 
Engineering at George Washington University. She holds a B.S. degree in humanities from the 

U.S. Air Force Academy, an M.L.S. in tec
hnology from Eastern Michigan University, and a 
D.Sc. in engineering management from the George Washington University. Ryan began her 
career as an intelligence officer, serving the U.S.
 Air Force and the U.S. Defense Intelligence 
Agency. After leaving government service, she con
tinued to serve U.S. national security interests 
through positions in industry. Her areas of inte
rest are in information security and information 
warfare research. She was a member of the Na
tional Research Council™s Naval Studies Board 
from 1995 to 1998. She has conducted several res
earch projects and has written several articles 
and book chapters in her focus area. 
 
Janet A. Therianos
, a consultant, has 30 years of military experience. She is a U.S. Air Force 
Academy graduate with an underg
raduate degree in aeronautical engineering; an MBA from 
Harvard Business School; and a masters of arts in air and space power strategy. She was a 
National Defense fellow and has executive edu
cation from Harvard™s Kennedy School of 
government, the Center for Creative Leadership, 
and the Intelligence Community Senior Leader 
Program. Therianos has flown several military aircraft and has served as a command pilot, flight 

examiner, flight instructor, and functional check 
pilot. She also holds an FAA Airline Transport 
Pilot rating. Her military career was grounded in 
operations, but she also had extensive higher-
headquarters staff duties, including serving as senio
r military assistant to the Secretary of the Air 
Force. Her leadership experi
ences were threaded throughout her career, including several 
Commands. Her final military assignment was lead
ing the Air Mobility Command™s Directorate 
of Intelligence, where she was responsible for orga
nizing, training, and equipping the Air Force™s 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
global mobility intelligence units. Operationall
y she led the Command™s daily Threat Working 
Group, which assessed threat levels for all global mobility flight operations. 
 Elias Towe is currently a professor of electrical and computer engineering and the Albert and 
Ethel Grobstein Professor of Materials Science and Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University. 
He was educated at the Massac
husetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he received B.S, 
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. 
Towe was a Vinton Hayes Fellow at MIT. After leaving MIT he became a professor of electrical 
and computer engineering, and engineering physics 
at the University of Virginia. He also served 
as a program manager in the Microsystems Technol
ogy Office at the Defense Advanced Research 
Projects Agency (DARPA) while he was a professor 
at the University of Virginia. In 2001, he 
joined the faculty at Carnegie Mellon University
. Towe is a recipient of several awards and 
honors that include the National Science Foundation Young Investigator Award, the Young 
Faculty Teaching Award, and an Outstanding Achievement Award from the Office of the 
Secretary of Defense. He is a fellow of the In
stitute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Optical Society of America (OSA), the American Physical Society (APS), and the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). 

 
Alfonso Velosa III
 is research director for Gartner w
ith a focus on sustainability, business 
ecosystems, and smart cities. He is also agenda manager for electronic equipment research at 

Gartner, concentrating on electronics and semic
onductor supply chain research, with a particular 
focus on global trends for manufacturing, consumption, financing, and the key vendors in the 

market. Velosa has also written extensively about electronics, outsourcing of electronics 

manufacturing, electronic manufacturing services (EMS), original design manufacturing (ODM), 

and semiconductor consumption. He previously worked at or consulted for Intel Corporation, 
NASA Lewis Research Center and NASA Headquarters, Mars & Co
., and IBM Research. Velosa graduated from Columbia University with a B.
S. in materials science engineering; from 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute with an M.S. 
in materials science engineering; and from 
Thunderbird, the Garvin School of International 
Management, with an M.I.M. in international 
management.  
 Eli Yablonovitch (NAS/NAE) is an adjunct professor of electrical engineering at UCLA after 
having served as a full faculty member until 2007. 
He is currently a professor of electrical and 
computer engineering at University of California,
 Berkeley. He graduated with a Ph.D. in applied 

physics from Harvard University, worked for 2 years at Bell Telephone Laboratories, and then 

became a professor of applied physics at Harvar
d. In 1979 he joined Exxon to do research on 
photovoltaic solar energy; in 1984, joined 
Bell Communications Research, where he was a Distinguished Member of Staff and also director
 of Solid-State Physics Research; and in 1992, 
joined the University of California, Los Angel
es, where he became the Northrop Grumman Opto-
Electronics Chair and a professor of electrical engineering. Yablonovitch™s work has covered a 

broad variety of topics: nonlinear optics, laser-p
lasma interaction, infrared laser chemistry, 
photovoltaic energy conversion, strained-quant
um-well lasers, and chemical modification of 
semiconductor surfaces. Yablonovitch™s research 
focuses on optoelectronics, high-speed optical 
communications, high-efficiency light-emitting diodes and nanocavity lasers, photonic crystals at 

optical and microwave frequencies, and quantum computing and communication.  
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 17 
  
   Appendix B 
Workshop Agenda and Participants    AGENDA 
Workshop on the Future of Antennas May 8-9, 2012 
Battelle Charlottesville Operations Charlottesville, Virginia  Future of Antennas Lon Pringle, Director, Signature Technology La
boratory, Georgia Tech Research Institute 
 Commercial State of the Art of Wireless Communications and Control 
Sebastian Rowson, Chief Scientist, Ethertronics 
 Military State of the Art of Wireless Communications and Control 
Robert Newgard, Director, Advanced Radio Systems, Rockwell Collins 
 Future Trends in Antenna Design a
nd Wireless Communications and Control 
Timothy Hancock, Assistant Group Leader, An
alog Device Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, 
MIT Yahya Rahmat-Samii, Northrop Grumman Chair in Electromagnetics, University of California, 

Los Angeles 
 Vulnerabilities of Ubiquitous Antennas Mark Schrote, Senior Consulting Engineer, Northrop Grumman Electronic Systems 
Luke Feldner, Principal Member of Tec
hnical Staff, Sandia National Laboratories   Indicators and Observables 
James Armitage, Senior Fellow, Po
tomac Institute for Policy Studies 
Luke Feldner, Principal Member of Tec
hnical Staff, Sandia National Laboratories  PARTICIPANTS 
Committee 
Kenneth Berns, University of Florida College of Medicine 
Jerome Holton, Tauri Group 

Kenneth Kress, KBK Consulting, Inc. 

Julie Ryan, George Washington University 

Janet Therianos, Independent Consultant, (USAF, retired) 

Alfonso Velosa, Gartner, Inc. Eli Yablonovitch, University of California, Berkeley 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
  Staff Terry Jaggers, Lead DEPS Board Director 
Daniel Talmage, Study Director 

Sarah Capote, Research Associate 
Marguerite Schneider, Administrative Coordinator 
 Speakers James Armitage, Potomac In
stitute for Policy Studies 
Luke Feldner, Sandia National Laboratories 

Timothy Hancock, MIT Lincoln Laboratory 

Robert Newgard,  Rockwell Collins, Inc. 
Lon Pringle, Georgia Tech Research Institute 
Yahya Rahmat-Samii, University of California, Los Angeles 

Sebastian Rowson, Ethertronics 
Mark Schrote, Northrop Grumman Electronic Systems 
 Guest Affiliations 
Defense Intelligence Agency Department of Defense National Ground Intelligence Center 
United States Navy 
United States Army 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 19 
  
   Appendix C 
Speaker Biographies    James Armitage 
is a senior fellow at the Potomac Institute
 for Policy Studies. As a former vice 
president and sector chief technology officer for Northrop Grumman Electronic Systems, he was 

responsible for the sector™s overall technology stra
tegy and development plans. Armitage™s career 
began as a design engineer in the Antenna and 
Microwave Department at Westinghouse, where 
he pioneered the development of low observa
ble apertures and active electronically scanned 
arrays. His technical leadership led to a numbe
r of roles in business development and program 
management. During his 36 years with Westingho
use and Northrop Grumman, he served in a 
variety of executive and leadership roles. In
 1984, Armitage received the IEEE Aerospace 
Electronic Systems Society Centennial Key to
 the Future Award as the outstanding young 
engineer. He also served on the Defense Science 
Board Global Surveillance Task Force and is a 
member of the IEEE International Radar Conf
erence Board, having served as treasurer in 1995 
and as general chairman for the 2010 Conference. 
In 1998, he completed the Harvard University 
General Manager Program. 
Armitage earned his B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Ohio 
State University in 1975 and an M.S. in applied physics from Johns Hopkins University in 1980. 

 Luke Feldner 
is a principal member of the technical staff at Sandia National Laboratories in the 
Special Technologies Department of the System
s Assessment and Research Center, where he 
manages several research and development program
s related to U.S. national security interests. 
As a member of the Department of Energy™s 
Field Intelligence Element at Sandia, he lends 
technical, analytical, and research support to th
e federal law enforcement, intelligence, and 
defense communities. From 2001 to 2006, Feldner worked in Sandia™s Electronics Systems 
Center as an RF/microwave circuit and antenna
 designer in the Advanced Radar Development 
Group. He has been actively involved in the an
alysis, measurement, and design of advanced 
antenna and RF systems for more than a dozen
 years and has developed and conducted multiple 
training exercises for government and military fiel
d officers. Feldner is a member of the IEEE 
Antennas and Propagation, Microwave Theory and 
Techniques, and Communications Societies, 
as well as the Center for Strategic and International Studies project on Nuclear Issues. He 
received a B.S. degree in electrical engineering 
from the Milwaukee School of Engineering, and 
the Dipl.-Ing. (FH) degree in electrical engi
neering from the Lübeck University of Applied 
Sciences, Lübeck, Germany, in 1999; an M.
S. degree in electrical engineering from the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison in 2001; and a Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the 
University of New Mexico in 2006. 
 
Timothy M. Hancock 
received a B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the Rose-Hulman 
Institute of Technology and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees 
in electrical engineering from the University 
of Michigan, where he was involved with the 
development of SiGe integrated microwave 
components from 6 to 77 GHz. In the past he worked for Conexant Systems on a single-chip GPS 
receiver and at M/A-COM on a Silicon Germaniu
m 24 GHz automotive radar solution. For 6 
years he was a staff member in the Analog Device Technology Group at MIT Lincoln 

Laboratory, where he was involved with the 
development of low-power, small-form-factor 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 SUMMARY OF A WORKSHOP ON THE FUTURE OF ANTENNAS 
 wireless devices and reconfigurable and multip
le-input-multiple-output (MIMO) communication 
systems in work focused on integrated circuit 
design and wireless system design. As assistant 
leader of the same group since 2011, he has con
tinued to develop programs in the area of MIMO 
communications and small-form-factor wireless devices as well as technology for radar and 
ELINT systems. 

 
Robert Newgard 
is the director of the Advanced 
Radio Systems within the Advanced 
Technology Center at Rockwell Collins, Inc. Hi
s principal technical responsibilities are in the 
design and development of airborne communi
cation systems and technologies. Newgard has 
performed as principal investigator on numerous
 Defense Advanced Research Program Agency 
(DARPA)-funded research programs, including th
e Chip-Scale Atomic Clock (CSAC), Next 
Generation Spectral Sensor (XG), Analog Spectral Processors (ASP), Dynamics-Enabled 

Frequency Source (DEFYS), and Chip-Scale Spectrum Analyzers (CSSA). Newgard™s 

department is focused on the development of
 technologies and systems focused on the high-
performance radio frequency (RF) fr
ont ends. Included in this 
focus are antennas, receivers, 
transmitters, synthesizers, photonics, and frequency standards. 
 Lon Pringle is the principal research scientist at Geor
gia Tech Research Institute and is the 
director of the Signature Technology Laborat
ory. Pringle™s research encompasses infrared 
phenomenology, advanced infrared measurements 
and simulations, the detection and tracking of 
low observable targets in clutter, the management
 and control of optical energy by active and 
passive techniques, radiative energy transfer pr
ocesses in optical color tr
ansparencies and prints, adaptive signature control technologies, radio 
frequency (RF) and infrared (IR) seeker and fuze 
designs, advanced RF beam forming using phase-onl
y control (as contrasted with amplitude and 
phase control), and recently a revolutionary ne
w methodology for the design of wideband, multi-
function, reconfigurable apertures. This research
 led to more than 25 technical publications, and 
two patents and was supported by approximatel
y $18 million in sponsorship, for $9.5 million of 
which Pringle has served as project director/princip
al investigator. Of special note has been his 
successful direction of the DARPA-sponsored reconf
igurable aperture program and its follow-on 
application in the Future Combat System program. 

 Yahya Rahmat-Samii (NAE) received M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and 
a B.S. degree, with highest distinction, in 
electrical engineering from the University of Tehr
an, Iran. Before joining UCLA in 1989, he was 
a senior research scientist at NASA's Jet Pr
opulsion Laboratory/California Institute of 
Technology and was a guest professor at the Technical University of Denmark (TUD) in the 
summer of 1986. He has also been a consultant 
to many aerospace companies. He served as chair 
of UCLA's Electrical Engineering Department from April 2000 through June 2005. Since 2007, 

he has held the Northrop Grumman Chair in 
Electromagnetics at UCLA. Rahmat-Samii has 
authored and co-authored more than 750 techni
cal journal articles and conference papers, has 
written 25 book chapters, is the co-author of three 
books, and holds several patents. He has made 
pioneering research contributions in diverse ar
eas of electromagnetics, antennas, measurement 
and diagnostics techniques, numerical a
nd asymptotic methods, satellite and personal 
communications, antennas for remote sensing an
d astronomical applications, human/antenna 
interactions, frequency selective surfaces, electro
magnetic and photonic band gap structures, and 
the applications of genetic algorithms and par
ticle swarm optimization. On several occasions, 
Rahmat-Samii's work has been featured on journal 
covers and in magazines,
 as well as in several 
TV newscasts. 
 Sebastian Rowson is one of the founders and also the chief scientist at Ethertronics, a privately 
held antenna design and manufacturing company 
that manufactures primarily embedded antennas 
Summary of a Workshop on the Future of AntennasCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C  21 
 for personal and industrial wireless devices. Et
hertronics has annual shipments of about 100 
million units to clients that include Samsung, 
LG Electronics, and Motorola. Ethertronics co-
founders Laurent Desclos and Se
bastian Rowson started the company in 2000 to commercialize 
new antenna technology known as IMD (isolated 
magnetic dipole). Rowson has filed 49 patents 
with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, and 
30 of those have currently been issued. He has 
also served as the director of technology transf
er and as a senior engineer at Ethertronics. 
Previously, Rowson was a research engineer at th
e University of California, Los Angeles. He 
earned his M.S. and a Ph.D. at the University of 
Paris-Sud. Rowson is a member of the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. 

 Mark Schrote 
is a senior consulting engineer with No
rthrop Grumman Electronic Systems. He 
received his BSEE, MSEE, and Ph.D. in elect
rical engineering in 1978, 1980, and 1983, 
respectively from Ohio State University. Schrote 
has more than 28 years of experience in active 
electronically scanned array design, focusing on advanced development systems. 
