DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/14686Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for Policy102 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-27895-9 | DOI 10.17226/14686Stephen A. Merrill and William J. Raduchel, Editors; Committee on the Impact ofCopyright Policy on Innovation in the Digital Era; Board on Science,Technology, and Economic Policy; Policy and Global Affairs; National ResearchCouncilCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Com
mittee on the Impact of Copyright Policy on  Innovation in the Digital EraBoard on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy
Policy and Global AffairsStephen A. Merrill and William J. Raduchel, 
EditorsCOPYRIGHTIN THE DIGITAL ERABuilding Evidence for PolicyCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
This study was supported by Contract/Grant No. 2009-10-15 between the 
National Academy of Sciences and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation; Contract/
Grant No. ll05-0789 between the National Academy of Sciences and the Ford 
Foundation; Contract/Grant No. LG-00-10-0247 between the National Academy 
of Sciences and the Institute of Museum and Library Sciences; and Contract/Grant 
No. SMA-l014801 between the National Academy of Sciences and the National 
Science Foundation. Additional funding provided by the American Chemical 
Society; the Business Software Alliance; the Entertainment Software Association; 
Google Inc.-Tides Foundation; Intel; Microsoft; the Motion Picture Association; 
and Pamela Samuelson and Robert J. Gulshko. Any opinions, ˜ndings, conclu
-sions, or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of the authors 
and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations or agencies that 
provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number 13:
 978-0-309-27895-9
International Standard Book Number 10:
 0-309-27895-3
Limited copies are available from
 Board on Science, Technology, and Economic 
Policy, National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, W547, Washington, DC 
20001; 202-334-2200.
Additional copies of this report are available for sale from the National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or 
(202) 334-3313; http://www.nap.edu/. 
Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the fed
-eral government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined 
by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both 
the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineer
-ing communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMITTEE ON THE IMPACT OF COPYRIGHT 
POLICY ON INNOVATION IN THE DIGITAL ERA
William J. Raduchel,
 Chair, 
Independent Director and Investor 
Peter S. Menell,
 Vice Chair, 
Robert L. Bridges Professor of Law and 
Director, Berkeley Center for Law and Technology University of 
California at Berkeley, School of Law 
Michael A. Keller, 
Ida M. Green University Librarian and Director of 
Academic Information Resources, Stanford University
Christopher M. Kelly, 
Independent Consultant
Ruth Okediji, 
William L. Prosser Professor of Law, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis
Marilyn Hall Patel, 
Judge (retired), U.S. District Court for the Northern 
District of California
Mitch Singer, 
Chief Digital Strategy Of˜cer, Executive Vice President, 
New Media and Technology, Sony Pictures Entertainment, Inc.
Christopher Sprigman
, Class of 1963 Research Professor in Honor of 
Graham C. Lilly and Peter W. Low, University of Virginia School of 
Law
Scott Stern, 
Professor of Technological Innovation, Entrepreneurship, 
and Strategic Management, Sloan School of Management, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Molly S. Van Houweling, 
Professor of Law and Faculty Director, 
Berkeley Center for Law and Technology, University of California at 
Berkeley, School of Law
Paul Vidich, 
Independent Director and Consultant
Joel Waldfogel, 
Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics, 
Carlston School of Management, University of Minnesota 
Project Staff
Stephen A. Merrill, 
Study Director
Aqila Coulthurst
, Program Coordinator
Cynthia Getner
, Financial Of˜cer
Daniel Mullins, 
Program Associate (through 2011)
vCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOARD ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, 
 AND ECONOMIC POLICY (STEP)
For the National Research Council (NRC), this project was overseen 
by the Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP), a 
standing board of the NRC established by the National Academies of 
Sciences and Engineering and the Institute of Medicine in 1991. The man
-date of the STEP Board is to advise federal, state, and local governments 
and inform the public about economic and related public policies to 
promote the creation, diffusion, and application of new scienti˜c and 
technical knowledge to enhance the
 productivity and competitiveness of 
the U.S. economy and foster economic prosperity for all Americans. The 
STEP Board and its committees marshal research and the expertise of 
scholars, industrial managers, investors, and former public of˜cials in a 
wide range of policy areas that affect the speed and direction of scienti˜c 
and technological change and their contributions to the growth of the 
U.S. and global economies. Results are communicated through reports, 
conferences, workshops, brie˜ngs, and electronic media subject to the 
procedures of the National Academies to ensure their authoritativeness, 
independence, and objectivity. The members of the STEP Board and the 
NRC staff are listed below:
Paul Joskow, 
Chair
, President, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
Ernst Berndt, 
Louis E. Seley Professor in Applied Economics, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Ralph J. Cicerone (ex-of˜cio), 
President, National Academy of Sciences
John Donovan,
 Senior Executive Vice President, AT&T Inc.
Harvey V. Fineberg (ex-of˜cio),
 President, Institute of Medicine
Alan Garber, 
Provost, Harvard University
Ralph Gomory,
 Research Professor, Stern School of Business, New York 
University
William H. Janeway,
 Partner, Warburg Pincus
Richard Lester,
 Japan Steel Industry Professor, Department of Nuclear 
Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
David Morgenthaler, 
Founding Partner, Morgenthaler Ventures
Luis M. Proenza,
 President and Chief Executive Of˜cer, University of 
Akron
William J. Raduchel,
 Independent Director and Investor
Kathryn L. Shaw,
 Ernest C. Arbuckle Professor of Economics, Graduate 
School of Business, Stanford University 
Laura D™Andrea Tyson,
 S.K. and Angela Chan Professor of Global 
Management, Haas School of Business, University of California at 
Berkeley
Hal Varian,
 Chief Economist, Google, Inc.
vi
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Charles M. Vest (ex-of˜cio), 
President, National Academy of 
Engineering
Alan Wm. Wolff, 
Senior Counsel, McKenna, Long & Aldridge LLP
Staff
Stephen A. Merrill, 
Executive Director
Charles W. Wessner, 
Program Director
Sujai Shivakumar, 
Senior Program Of˜cer
David Dierksheide,
 Program Of˜cer
McAlister Clabaugh,
 Program Of˜cer
Paul Beaton, 
Program Of˜cer
Aqila Coulthurst, 
Program Coordinator
David Dawson, 
Senior Program Assistant
Cynthia Getner,
 Financial Associate
vii
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Preface
After 10 years studying the economic and research impacts of the pat
-ent system, it was apparent to members of the National Academies™ Board 
on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP) that another intel
-lectual property regime, copyright, exhibited similar characteristics. Over 
the course of several decades, copyright protection has been extended 
and strengthened through legislative changes occasioned by national and 
international developments. The domestic industries reliant on copyright 
and its exceptions, and in some cases balancing the two, have become 
more important economically as sources of growth, high-paying jobs, 
and exports. And these industries have undergone a technological revolu
-tion that raises questions about the feasibility of some types of copyright 
protection, how incentives for content creation, distribution, and use are 
changing, and the copyright system™s impact on technological innovation. Unlike the patent system, however, copyright has not historically 
attracted the same level of research interest and effort that helps inform  
public policy choices. As a result, copyright debates are poorly informed 
by objective data and empirical research. The STEP Board concluded that 
in these circumstances a useful step would be to develop an agenda for 
empirical research on copyright in the digital era, explore its feasibility 
primarily in terms of data requirements, and encourage public and pri
-vate research funders to pursue it.
The STEP Board is not the ˜rst Academy committee to recognize the 
need for empirical research on the effects of copyright. In its 2000 report, 
ix
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information Age, 
the Com
-puter Science and Telecommunications Board recommended that:
Research should be conducted to characterize the economic impacts of 
copyright. Such research might consider, among other things, the impact 
of network effects in information industries and how digital networks 
are changing transaction costs. 
 And further, 
Research should be initiated to better assess the social and economic im
-pacts of illegal commercial copying and how they interact with private 
noncommercial copying for personal use. 
Despite this call, in the intervening 13 years, only very modest progress 
has been made.
The Academies sought diverse and balanced public and private fund
-ing for the project. Two federal government agencies, two philanthropic 
institutions, a scienti˜c society publisher, three industry trade associa
-tions, three corporations, and two individuals responded generously. The 
Academies are grateful for support from the following:
National Science Foundation
Institute of Museum and Library Services
Alfred P. Sloan Foundation
Ford Foundation
American Chemical Society
Business Software Alliance
Entertainment Software Association
Motion Picture Association of America 
Google Inc.-Tides Foundation
Intel
Microsoft 
Pamela Samuelson and Robert J. Glushko
The Chairman of the National Research Council appointed a commit
-tee including economists, legal scholars, individuals with expertise in the 
˜lm, music, publishing, software, and social networking industries, an 
author, a university librarian and publisher, and a Federal District Court 
judge. The Research Council™s Governing Board Executive Committee 
presented the committee with the following charge:
An ad hoc committee under the auspices of the National Academies™ 
Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP) will evalu
-ate and propose how to expand and improve research on the impacts of 
copyright policy, particularly on innovation in the digital environment. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xiFirst, the organizing committee will identify key issues for and methods 
of investigation and the experts best able to address them. The commit
-tee will also commission a small number of background papers. Second, 
the committee will convene a multi-disciplinary workshop with experts 
in the ˜eld. Third, following the workshop, additional experts will be 
invited to comment on
 the ideas and proposals discussed at the work
-shop via the project™s public website. Fourth, the committee will prepare 
a ˜nal report assessing the current state of the research ˜eld, identifying 
policy-relevant research questions that need attention, suggesting how 
to approach these topic and recommending how public agencies and 
private institutions might support such work.
In the course of preparing this report, the committee met three times. 
At two of these meetings, presentations were made by individuals from 
government and the private sector. The committee commissioned four 
original background papers that are summarized in this report. These 
papers were discussed in an online forum and with invited participants 
in a public workshop in Washington, DC, on June 8, 2011, at which the 
newly appointed Register of Copyrights, Maria Pallente, made opening 
remarks. The June 2011 workshop consisted of two parts: a facilitated 
discussion with approximately forty invited legal scholars, economists, 
government of˜cials, and representatives of content owners and civil soci
-ety organizations; and a more unstructured discussion with a larger group 
of respondents to a public announcement. The ˜rst part of the workshop 
was instrumental in helping to formulate the framework of research ques
-tions and data needs described in this report, both of which were further 
elaborated in the broader exchange and in the committee™s deliberations. 
For logistical reasons the online discussion preceded rather than followed 
the workshop and focused entirely on the commissioned paper drafts. 
 One other observation about the committee™s statement of work is 
in order. In addition to suggesting research topics and methods, we offer 
research funding organizations guidance about coordinating their efforts, 
consulting with investigators on data priorities, and assisting in data 
acquisition. We make no recommendations about the process of awarding 
research grants nor about the scale of investment needed. 
The papers listed below were commissioned by the committee and 
are available on the Academy website at 
http://sites.nationalacademies.
org/PGA/step/copyrightpolicy/index.htm#papers
:ﬁThe Impact of Digitization on Business Models in Copyright-Driven 
Industries: A Review of the Economic Issuesﬂ by Lisa Cameron 
and Coleman Bazelon, The Brattle Group
ﬁEconomic Effect of Copyright: The Empirical Evidence So Farﬂ by 
Christian Handke, Erasmus University, The Netherlands
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii PREFACE
ﬁOnline Access and the Scienti˜c Journal Market: An Economist™s 
Perspectiveﬂ by Mark J. McCabe, University of Michigan
ﬁCopyright-Protected Assets in the National Accountsﬂ by Rachel 
Soloveichik and David Wasshausen, Bureau of Economic Analy
-sis, U.S. Department of Commerce
A ˜fth paper, by committee member Joel Waldfogel, University of Min
-nesota, was not commissioned by the committee but was presented and 
discussed along with the four papers listed above and is available on the 
website: 
ﬁBye, Bye Miss American Pie? The Supply of New Recorded Music 
Since Napsterﬂ 
The committee is grateful to these authors, whose backgrounds are 
described in Appendix B, and their supportive organizations for greatly 
contributing to our understanding of the copyright system, its economic 
and technological context and effects, and the limits of our knowledge 
about these phenomena.
The committee discussed its conclusions and prepared its recom
-mendations at a ˜nal meeting hosted by the Berkeley Center for Law and 
Technology. We appreciate the assistance of the Center™s executive direc
-tor, Robert Barr, and staff.
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Academies™ Report Review Com
-mittee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid and 
critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 published 
report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets institu
-tional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study 
charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain con˜dential 
to protect the integrity of the process. 
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of 
this report: Jonathan Band, Georgetown University; Rob Chandhok, 
Qualcomm; Carol Corrado, The Conference Board; Peter DiCola, North
-western University; Daniel Edelstein, IBM; Joan Feigenbaum, Yale Uni
-versity; Shane Greenstein, Northwestern University; Christian Handke, 
Erasmus University, Rotterdam; Ian Hargreaves, Cardiff University, 
Wales; Joe Karaganis, American Assembly of Columbia University; Stan 
Liebowitz, University of Texas-Dallas; Michael Nelson, Georgetown Uni
-versity; Marybeth Peters, Oblon, Spivak, McClelland, Maier & Neustadt, 
L.L.P.; Charles Phelps, University of Rochester; Dan Rubinfeld, University 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 xiiiof California, Berkeley; Scott Teissler, Turner Networks, Inc.; Don Waters, 
The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. 
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Joe Cecil, 
Federal Judicial Center, and William Press, University of Texas at Austin. 
Appointed by the National Academies, they were responsible for making 
certain that an independent examination of this report was carried out in 
accordance with institutional procedures and that all review comments 
were carefully considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this 
report rests entirely with the authoring committee and the institution.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents
Summary 
 11 Introduction
 7 Research in Public Discourse on Intellectual Property, 7
 International Context, 10
 Copyright Research Questions, 10
 The Overriding Need for Data, 13
2 Copyright Law and Economics in the Digital Era 
 15
 Copyright Law™s Accommodation to Digital Technology, 15
 The Economic Value of Copyright-Affected Industries and 
   
Copyrighted Works, 18
 The Impact of Digital Technologies on Content Creation, 
   
Distribution, and Use in Selected Industries, 21
 The Limits of Our Knowledge about the Economics of Copyright, 31
 Conclusion, 33
3 Research Directions 
 35
 Changing Incentives, 36
 Enablers of and Impediments to Voluntary Transactions, 38
 Enforcement Costs and Bene˜ts, 40
 Exceptions, Limitations, and Balanced Copyright Design, 42
 Principles to Guide Research, 43
xv
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xvi CONTENTS4  
Data Infrastructure for an Empirical Approach to Copyright 
Policy Research
 45
 Opportunities and Challenges Arising From Digital Technology, 47
 What Data Are Needed and Available or Accessible?, 52
 Closing the Gap 
References
 63
Appendixes
A A Copyright Primer
 65
B Commissioned Paper Authors
 73
C Committee Members and Staff
 77
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Summary
Over the course of several decades, copyright protection has been 
expanded and extended through legislative changes occasioned by 
national and international developments. The content and technology 
industries affected by copyright and its exceptions, and in some cases 
balancing the two, have become increasingly important as sources of 
economic growth, relatively high-paying jobs, and exports. Since the 
expansion of digital technology in the mid-1990s, they have undergone 
a technological revolution that has disrupted long-established modes of 
creating, distributing, and using works ranging from literature and news 
to ˜lm and music to scienti˜c publications and computer software. 
In the United States and internationally, these disruptive changes 
have given rise to a strident debate
1 over copyright™s proper scope and 
terms and means of its enforcementŠa debate between those who believe 
the digital revolution is progressively undermining the copyright protec
-tion essential to encourage the funding, creation, and distribution of new 
works and those who believe that enhancements to copyright, are inhibit
-ing technological innovation and free expression. 
This debate is poorly informed by independent empirical research. 
1The recent report of an informal group of copyright legal scholars and private practitio
-ners used much stronger language, characterizing public discussion of copyright as exhib
-iting ﬁrhetorical excess,ﬂ a ﬁclimate of recrimination,ﬂ and ﬁan unwillingness to engage in 
rational discourse.ﬂ Pamela Samuelson, ﬁThe Copyright Principles Project: Directions for 
Reform,ﬂ Berkeley Technology Law Journal
 25: 2010, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1851857.
11Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Although copyright law™s ef˜cacy and second order effects are largely 
empirical questions amenable to systematically collected data subject to 
transparent analytical methods, this type of analysis is too rarely con
-ducted. Instead of asking, ﬁWhat is the research-based evidence?ﬂ parti
-sans tend to rely on claims of and evidence marshaled by stakeholders. 
This situation contrasts with the emerging pattern in patent policy discus
-sions, where empirical research has begun to play an important role in the 
genesis and resolution of important policy changes and whose support is 
becoming institutionalized.
Not all copyright policy questions are amenable to economic analy
-sis. In some cases, it may be possible to determine only the direction of 
the effect of policy changes, not the magnitude. Nevertheless, a robust 
research enterprise, supported by public and private funders and using a 
variety of methodsŠcase studies, international and sectoral comparisons, 
and experiments and surveysŠcan inform copyright policy by addressing 
a range of questions. The research we call for is especially critical in light 
of digital age developments that may, for example, change the 
incentive
 calculus for various actors in the copyright system, impact the 
costs of 
voluntary copyright transactions, pose new enforcement challenges, and change the optimal balance between copyright protection and exceptions.
With respect to changing 
incentives for creators, distributors, and 
users, research could help determine
˜˚
how the expenses involved in creative expression and distribu
-tion differ across sectors and the role of copyright in generating 
revenues to offset those expenses; 
˜˚
under what circumstances sources of monetary and/or non-mon
-etary motivation outside of that provided by copyright are effec
-tive in motivating creative activity; 
˜˚
the motivations of various types of users and potential users of 
creative works, including both infringers and lawful users; the 
effects of enhanced enforcement remedies on promoting creativ
-ity, technological innovation, and freedom of expression; and  
˜˚
how the costs of distributing creative content are affected by 
social media and other new technologies.
With respect to the enablers of and impediments to 
voluntary licensing
 transactions
 in copyrighted works, research would help determine
˜˚
the signi˜cance of transaction costs as barriers to utilization of 
copyrighted works; 
˜˚
the extent of problems involving orphan works (whose owners 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 3cannot be identi˜ed), user-generated content, and collaborative 
and iterative works;
˜˚
what are successful arrangements for managing transaction costs; 
˜˚
the roles of public and private institutions in facilitating licensing; 
˜˚
the relationship of transaction costs to legal rules such as compul
-sory licenses; and
˜˚
changes in transaction costs with new technological and business 
developments.
With respect to the 
enforcement challenges
, research could help 
determine
˜˚
how much is spent by governments and private parties on copy
-right enforcement;
˜˚
against whom enforcement efforts are targeted and what rem
-edies are sought and granted;
˜˚
the results of enforcement efforts in terms of compensation, pre
-vention, education, and deterrence;
˜˚
how the effectiveness of enforcement efforts is changing with the 
expansion of digital networks;
˜˚
the costs and bene˜ts of current enforcement methods vis-à-vis 
those associated with proposed new enforcement methods; 
˜˚
the relative vulnerability of different business models to infringe
-ment; and
˜˚
the costs and bene˜ts of fair use exceptions and the Digital Mil
-lennium Copyright Act (DMCA) safe harbors.
In assessing the 
balance
 between copyright protection and the statu
-tory exceptions and limitations to copyright research could help determine 
˜˚
the costs and bene˜ts of copyright exceptions and limitations in 
terms of the economic outputs and welfare effects of those indi
-viduals, businesses, educational institutions, and other entities 
that rely on them; 
˜˚
how copyright and the various categories of limits and exceptions 
interact with innovative and/or disruptive technologies and plat
-forms; and
˜˚
what adverse effects, if any, exceptions and limitations have on 
copyright holders and their potential to generate economic out
-puts and welfare effects.
Eventually, research will help inform decisions about key aspects of 
copyright policy, including
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
˜˚
the appropriate scope of copyright protection;
˜˚
the optimal duration of the copyright term;
˜˚
the best arrangements for correcting market imperfections that 
inhibit voluntary licensing; 
˜˚
appropriate safe harbors and fair use exceptions to copyright; 
˜˚
effective enforcement remedies for infringing use and the 
best arrangements for correcting de˜ciencies in enforcement 
mechanisms;
˜˚
the advisability of reintroducing a formal registration require
-ment; and
˜˚
the advantages and disadvantages of reshaping the copyright 
regime with different rules for different media.
A precondition of good empirical studies is the availability of data 
across the principal content media on such matters as the costs of produc
-tion, marketing, and distribution; prices of products and quantities sold; 
ancillary sources of revenue for creators; consumption behavior; patterns 
of access including unauthorized access to copyrighted works; licensing 
terms and the ef˜cacy of licensing arrangements; and the costs and ef˜
-cacy of anti-piracy technologies and legal enforcement areas. 
Collecting, organizing, and making such data amenable to system
-atic research represents a considerable challenge. Government-collected 
administrative data, although important and subject to improvement, are 
far more limited in the copyright than in the patent arena.
It is encouraging that the digital revolution, while transforming the 
conditions underlying the copyright system, also means that a wealth of 
information relevant to the functioning of the system is generated and 
stored routinely in the course of businessŠfor example, purchases, licens
-ing transactions, and website views among others. On the other hand, 
data about the creation, consumption and distribution of digital media 
reside largely in the hands of private entities whose incentives diverge 
from those of investigators. The ˜rst task of public and private grant-
making organizations should be to cooperate in building a copyright 
data infrastructure by negotiating access to privately held high priority 
datasets, and ˜nancing their acquisition costs, where necessary. 
The federal government can incrementally improve data collection 
from businesses and consumers by adding copyright-related questions 
to the regular surveys conducted by the Bureau of Labor Statistics and 
Census Bureau and by encouraging donations, for example to the Bureau 
of Economic Affairs, of private sector business data. But the committee 
recommends consideration of a more ambitious approach. These agencies, 
together with the National Science Foundation, U.S. Patent and Trade
-mark Of˜ce, and Copyright Of˜ce should study the advisability and fea
-Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY
 5sibility of a regular systematic survey of businesses™ acquisition and use 
of intellectual property of all typesŠcopyrights, patents, and trademarks. 
We also recommend consideration of a companion consumer survey to 
acquire information on user-generated digital content and consumption 
of digital goods. 
The robust empirical research undertaking envisioned by this report 
should identify both the costs and bene˜ts of different types and levels 
of copyright and other forms of intellectual property, and carefully dis
-tinguish the various impacts of policy options on different stakeholder 
groupsŠcreators, developers, distributors, and consumers.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IIntroduction
RESEARCH IN PUBLIC DISCOURSE ON 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY
Congress recently considered legislation, supported by producers 
of movies, music, software, publishers, and some groups of artists, to 
curb online piracy of copyright-protected materials by offshore websites 
located in territories lacking robust copyright enforcement mechanisms. 
As it neared action on the ˚oor of the House of Representatives, the Stop 
Online Piracy Act (SOPA) provoked a wave of protest from technology 
companies, public interest groups, and consumers who asserted that the 
anti-piracy measures would sti˚e domestic creativity, freedom of expres
-sion, entrepreneurial activity, and innovation. They also raised concerns 
about online privacy and security. Sponsors of SOPA and the Senate™s 
version of the legislation, the Protect Intellectual Property Act (PIPA), 
retreated from their support of the bills while still claiming that more 
effective copyright enforcement is necessary to protect industries vital to 
the nation™s culture and economy. A few weeks later, unrelated legislation, 
the Research Works Act, HR 3699, supported by commercial scienti˜c 
publishers, to bar federal research agencies from requiring open access to 
published research supported by federal funds, prompted similar opposi
-tion. Again, sponsors withdrew their support. 
The strident debate over the appropriate role of copyright regulation 
in the digital environment is not limited to the United States. Anti-piracy 
provisions in the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) and the 
7Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Trans-Paci˜c Partnership (TPP) Agreement are under close scrutiny and 
criticism in the European Union and other regions of the world. 
These controversies highlight a sharp division between those who 
believe the digital revolution is progressively undermining the copyright 
protection essential to encourage the funding, creation, and distribution 
of new works and those who believe that proposed enhanced enforcement 
measures could inhibit creativity, technological innovation, and freedom 
of expression.
Despite these legislative impasses, the past several years have wit
-nessed considerable activity in inter-industry compacts aimed at address
-ing the challenges of online copyright enforcement. In 2007, leading Inter
-net and media companies promulgated Principles for User Generated 
Content (UGC) Services that have fostered the development of Web 2.0 
services while combating infringing distribution of copyrighted works. 
Although Google did not formally sign on to this accord, the ContentID 
technology that it implemented in YouTube™s UGC portal re˚ects the 
UGC Principles. In June 2011, major credit card companies and pay
-ment processorsŠAmerican Express, Discover, MasterCard, PayPal, 
and VisaŠreached an agreement to develop voluntary best practices 
to withdraw payment services for sites selling counterfeit and pirated 
goods. The following month, a group of major Internet Service Providers 
(ISPs)ŠSBC, AT&T, Comcast, Verizon, CSC, and Time Warner CableŠand 
leading content industry organizationsŠthe Recording Industry Associa
-tion of America (RIAA) and the Motion Picture Association of America 
(MPAA)Šentered into a memorandum of understanding to implement a 
˚exible Copyright Alert System to discourage infringing distribution of 
copyrighted works. In May 2012, the Association of National Advertis
-ers and the American Association of Advertising Agencies issued a joint 
statement of best practices to address online copyright infringement. 
Although some may doubt the merits of these agreements, other privately 
negotiated arrangements will continue to emerge as new technologies 
make access, use, re-use, and distribution of content an inherent part of 
our culture and economy.
The scope and enforceability of copyright protection has substantial 
consequences for the nation™s culture, research enterprise, economy, trade 
balance, and international in˚uence. Although copyright law™s ef˜cacy 
and contours are amenable to empirical inquiry, systematically collected 
evidence using transparent analytical methods has not often been brought 
to bear. When data are marshaled and presented in copyright debates, it is 
usually by or on behalf of a certain set of stakeholders without opportuni-ties for critical reviewŠfor example, many of the estimates of economic 
losses from infringing use of copyrighted materials, as well as estimates 
of the economic value of fair use enterprises. And, unfortunately, support 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 9for independent analysis as well as public interest advocacy has declined 
as a number of philanthropic foundations have scaled down programs in 
the ˜eld of copyright.
This contrasts to a considerable degree with the emerging pattern in 
patent policy debates. Over the last 20 years, a fairly robust research enter
-prise has developed, aided by efforts to make patent applications, patent 
litigation, and related data available in a form usable by researchers. This 
body of work has examined how ˜rms in industries as different as semi
-conductors and biotechnology acquire and use patents, how government 
examiners in the patent of˜ce review and act on patent application claims, 
how the patent system affects different classes of patent users ranging 
from entrepreneurs to universities and large multinational businesses, 
and how patent validity and infringement disputes are handled by the 
courts and in post-grant challenge proceedings (Cohen and Merrill, 2003). 
Empirical research on patents, some of it cross-national as well as 
across industries, spans the social science disciplines, is increasingly com
-mon in legal scholarship, and in various ways is becoming institutional
-ized. It is a principal focus of the innovation and productivity program 
of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), which created 
and maintains the largest patent database tailored to research purposes 
(Griliches, 1990). Research projects related to patents have been among 
the portfolio supported by the National Science Foundation™s Science 
of Science and Innovation Policy Program (SciSIP) since its inception in 
2005. And in 2008 the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of˜ce (USPTO) created 
the Of˜ce of Chief Economist to promote and conduct a wide range of 
research on the management and effects of the patent system, following 
a recommendation of the National Academies and the examples of the 
European Patent Of˜ce (EPO) and World Intellectual Property Organiza
-tion (WIPO).
Research on the patent system has not eliminated controversy or 
accelerated the enactment of legislation. Passage of the America Invents 
Act, a set of sweeping reforms of U.S. patent law signed into law in 2011, 
was a protracted and contentious process. But evidence from research was 
regularly cited both in the genesis of many of the reform proposals and in 
their discussion and resolution (Federal Trade Commission, 2003; Merrill, 
et al., 2004). Likewise, research results have been cited in the legal briefs 
and decisions in several of the landmark federal appeals court decisions 
of the last decade. Most important, when new issues arise in patent law 
and policy, it is usually not long before parties to the debate ask, ﬁWhat 
is the research-based evidence?ﬂ rather than rely solely on the claims of 
practitioners and other stakeholders. We consider these positive devel
-opments and believe that copyright issues could bene˜t from a similar 
investment in research.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
Although our committee™s focus is informing copyright policy devel
-opment in the United States, the principle that policy should be shaped by 
research-based evidence applies as much to international as to domestic 
copyright frameworks, whether in bilateral relationships, multilateral 
negotiations such as ACTA and TPP, or global norm-setting institutional 
arrangements such as WIPO or the enforcement activities of the World 
Trade Organization (WTO).
Fortunately, there has been some productive thinking about an evi
-dence-based approach to intellectual property in the international con
-text to build upon. This is particularly true in the United KingdomŠfrom 
the Commission on Intellectual Property Rights and Development in 
2002, the Gowers Review (H.M. Treasury, 2006), the work of the National 
Endowment for Science, Technology, and the Arts (2009, 2011) on the 
economic context of copyright, to the Hargreaves Report to the U.K. Gov
-ernment in 2011. Investigators should also consult the recent vigorous 
copyright debates in several advanced and developing countriesŠfrom 
Canada and Brazil to Colombia
 
Šin framing research questions as well 
as in identifying opportunities for internationally comparative studies.
COPYRIGHT RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Copyright protection seeks to establish enforceable and transferable 
exclusive rights to exploit creative works in certain ways. These exclu
-sive rights coexist with various exceptions, limitations, and compulsory 
licenses. As a whole, this system aims to encourage creative expression 
and the dissemination and preservation of creative works without sti˚ing 
cumulative creativity, technological innovation, or free expression. In this 
report, we argue that the assumptions upon which these aspirations are 
built and the results that the law in fact achieves should be the subjects 
of robust ongoing research to inform copyright policy discussions. The 
research we call for is especially critical in light of digital age develop
-ments that may, for example, change the 
incentive
 calculus for various 
actors in the copyright system, impact the 
costs of voluntary copyright 
transactions
, pose new 
enforcement
 challenges, and change the optimal 
balance 
between copyright protection and exceptions.
With respect to changing 
incentives for creators, distributors, and 
users, research could help determine









-tion differ across sectors and the role of copyright in generating 
revenues to offset those expenses;
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 11˜˚
under what circumstances sources of monetary and/or non-mon
-etary motivation outside of that provided by copyright are effec
-tive in motivating creative activity; 
˜˚
the motivations of various types of users and potential users of 
creative works, including both infringers and lawful users; the 
effects of enhanced enforcement remedies on promoting creativ
-ity, technological innovation, and freedom of expression; and  
˜˚
how the costs of distributing creative content are affected by 
social media and other new technologies. 
With respect to 
the enablers of and impediments to voluntary licensing 
transactions in copyrighted works
, research would help determine
˜˚
the signi˜cance of transaction costs as barriers to utilization of 
copyrighted works;
˜˚
the extent of problems involving orphan works (whose owners 
cannot be identi˜ed), user-generated content, and collaborative 
and iterative works;
˜˚
what are successful arrangements for managing transaction costs; 
˜˚
the roles of public and private institutions in facilitating licensing; 
˜˚
the relationship of transaction costs to legal rules such as compul
-sory licenses; and
˜˚
changes in transaction costs with new technological and business 
developments.
With respect to the 
enforcement challenges
, research could help 
determine
˜˚
how much is spent by governments and private parties on copy
-right enforcement;
˜˚
against whom enforcement efforts are targeted and what rem
-edies are sought and granted;
˜˚
the results of enforcement efforts in terms of compensation, pre
-vention, education, and deterrence;
˜˚
how the effectiveness of enforcement efforts is changing with the 
expansion of digital networks;
˜˚
the costs and bene˜ts of current enforcement methods vis-à-vis 
proposed new enforcement methods; 
˜˚
the relative vulnerability of different business models to infringe
-ment; and
˜˚
the costs and bene˜ts of fair use exceptions and Digital Millen
-nium Copyright Act (DMCA) safe harbors.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
In assessing the balance between copyright protection and the statutory 
exceptions and limitations to copyright, research could help determine 
˜˚
the costs and bene˜ts of copyright exceptions and limitations in 
terms of the economic outputs and welfare effects of the public 
and those individuals, businesses, educational institutions, and 
other entities that rely on them; 
˜˚
how copyright and the various categories of limits and exceptions 
interact with innovative and/or disruptive technologies and plat
-forms; and
˜˚
what adverse effects, if any, exceptions and limitations have on 
copyright holders and their potential to generate economic out
-puts and welfare effects.
Eventually, research will help inform decisions about key aspects of 
copyright policy, including:
˜˚
the appropriate scope of copyright protection;
˜˚
the optimal duration of the copyright term;
˜˚
the best arrangements for correcting market imperfections if any 
that inhibit voluntary licensing; 
˜˚
appropriate safe harbors and the fair use exceptions to copyright; 
˜˚
effective or ineffective enforcement remedies for infringing use 
and the best arrangements for correcting de˜ciencies in enforce
-ment mechanisms;
˜˚
the advisability of reintroducing a formal registration require
-ment; and
˜˚
the advantages and disadvantages of reshaping the copyright 
regime with different rules for different media or types of work.
These questions are amenable to a variety of research approaches 
including:
˜˚
historical case studies
˜˚
international comparisons
˜˚
sectoral comparisons
˜˚
quantitative data analysis that is either descriptive or causal and
˜˚
experiments and surveys
The list of topics and methods is not exhaustive and is illustrative of a 
fairly directional research program based on assumptions about the cur
-rent state of technology and geared to incremental improvements in the 
market and social bene˜ts of copyright. A research program should also 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION 13provide some opportunities for more open-ended research into economic 
relationships among participants in a swiftly changing creative landscape 
with rapidly declining barriers to entry.
THE OVERRIDING NEED FOR DATA
A critical precondition of good empirical studies is the availability 
of data. One important type of economic data is administrative records 
maintained by government agencies. Although there are important infor
-mational gaps because there is no formal reporting requirement for patent 
licenses and changes in assignment or ownership, research on patents has 
the bene˜t of an almost complete set of data on what patents are applied 
for (at least within 18 months), what patents are issued, and initially to 
whom. Since formal copyright registration is not required to obtain pro
-tection, there is no comprehensive set of administrative data on copyright 
protection or ownership. Data on registrations with the Copyright Of˜ce 
of the Library of Congress provides useful information on many of the 
most important copyrighted works, but such records are incomplete and 
historical records are dif˜cult to access. On the other hand, as with patent 
litigation, the federal judicial system generates a complete set of data on 
who sues whom for what copyright violations and, with the important 
exception of out-of-court settlements, with what outcomes, as well as on 
criminal prosecutions and resulting penalties. Other important admin
-istrative data are collected in mandatory federal government surveys of 
businesses, employment, expenditures for research and development, and 
other business activities.
Unquestionably, the most crucial data for analyzing the impact of 
copyright and of digitization reside in the private sector. Fortunately, 
the digital revolution, while transforming the conditions underlying the 
copyright system, also means that a wealth of information relevant to the 
functioning of the copyright system is generated and stored routinely in 
the course of businessŠfor example, purchases, licensing transactions, 
and website views, among others. The challenge is that these data are in 
the hands of a multitude of private collectorsŠsellers, Internet service 
providers, and search engines. Much of that information is proprietary 
or subject to trade secrecy and privacy protections and thus is not subject 
to disclosure. Little of it is in a form readily usable by researchers. Even 
for the data that businesses may be willing to share, there are often very 
substantial hurdles in collection, aggregation, and transmission.
We devote a good deal of this report to enumerating these data sources, 
explaining their relevance to public policy concerns, exhorting collectors 
to make them available on reasonable terms to quali˜ed investigators, 
and demonstrating the importance of public and private investment in 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
overcoming these collective action problems. Without the data, empirical 
researchers will be frustrated in their efforts to illuminate the copyright 
system. On the other hand, making data available will enable the commu-nity of academic and industry investigators to propose, design, and carry 
out policy-relevant studies well beyond those we discuss in this report.
Drawing on work commissioned by the committee, the next part of 
this report presents the case for developing a broad empirically-based 
research agenda on copyright law and policy. It begins with an overview 
of the logic and evolution of copyright and then surveys the importance 
of copyright-impacted industries and copyrighted works to the nation™s 
economy and how they have been affected by digital technology. It con
-cludes by brie˚y reviewing how the existing literature reveals the limits 
of our knowledge about the ef˜cacy and intended and unintended effects 
of copyright protection. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Copyright Law and Economics 
in the Digital Era 
COPYRIGHT LAW™S ACCOMMODATION 
TO DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
 The principal justi˜cation for copyright is captured in the U.S. Con
-stitution (Article 1, Sec. 8), which grants Congress the power ‚‚to Promote 
the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times to 
Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings 
and Discoveries.ﬂ This language authorizes Congress to create 
private 
rights 
for authors and inventors for the 
public purpose
 of advancing social 
progress. As the Supreme Court has explained, ﬁ[t]he economic philoso
-phy behind the clause . . . is the conviction that the encouragement of 
individual effort by personal gain is the best way to advance public 
welfare through the talents of authors and inventors.ﬂ (
Mazer v. Stein
, 347 
U.S. 201, 219 (1954)). Under copyright law, that encouragement takes the 
form of ﬁvaluable, enforceable rightsﬂ that motivate the production of 
literary or artistic works ﬁof lasting bene˜t to the world.ﬂ (
Washington Co. 
v. Pearson
, 306 U.S. 30, 36 (1939)). Recognizing that progress in creativity 
depends critically on the freedom to build upon the ideas and expressions 
of others and that exclusive rights can at times impinge upon freedom 
of expression, the evolution of copyright law has required tailoring and 
balancing to ensure access, facilitate subsequent creativity and innovation, 
and promote knowledge, democracy, and social discourse. 
Although motivations to create and disseminate vary from indus
-try to industryŠas do the levels and types of investment required for 
various types of worksŠat least some individuals and organizations will 
15
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
likely forgo such investments if they are unlikely to recoup them due to 
infringing copying and distribution by others who seek to pro˜t with
-out compensating the copyright owners. The economic justi˜cation for 
copyrightŠand for most other forms of intellectual propertyŠthus lies 
in ensuring that creators have appropriate incentives to engage in creative 
activities by granting them a bundle of exclusive rights to use their works. Although copyrighted works can be commercial failures, this proprietary 
approach affords copyright owners the opportunity to charge a price 
above the cost of the mediumŠe.g., ˜lm, recording, screen, network, or 
printed pageŠon which the copyrighted work is distributed. Exclusive 
rights for authors can also impinge on subsequent creators and techno
-logical innovators, however. The key to ensuring that copyright serves the 
public welfare lies in balancing the social bene˜ts and costs of providing 
economic incentives for creation by limiting the duration of copyright, 
making exceptions, and ensuring that copyrights are mandatorily avail
-able for licensing in some circumstances. 
For those readers less familiar with the origins and evolution of copy
-right protection, an appendix to this report summarizes this history and 
compares copyright and patent law. In the remainder of this section, we 
focus on legal developments in the digital age.
Advances in the technologies for creating and distributing works of 
authorship have played a critical role in shaping copyright law through
-out its history. Although computer technology became a reality more 
than half a century ago, it is only in the past two decades that the digi
-tal age has begun to disrupt the foundations of the traditional content 
industriesŠpublishing, music, ˜lm, photography, and television. Their 
long-standing business modelsŠselling books, newspapers, magazines, 
and recordings, exhibiting ˜lms (and later selling and renting home 
videos and DVDs), and broadcasting music and television showsŠhad 
proven quite resilient to the early generations of computer technology. 
The relatively late onset of the digital piracy threat can be attributed to 
the sheer informational magnitude of music and ˜lm and the ability, only 
fairly recently, to bring to market affordable, high resolution means for 
listening to and viewing digital content. Even with the introduction and 
rapid popularity of digitally-encoded compact disks (CDs) and the prolif
-eration of microcomputers beginning in the early 1980s, content industries 
did not appreciate the dramatic changes that would be brought about by 
the emerging digital technologies. Availability of microprocessors, the 
low ˜delity of computer peripherals, and limitations of memory storage 
capacity prevented content from being stored, perceived, and reproduced 
ef˜ciently on computer devices until the mid-1990s. 
The rollout of the World Wide Web, with its unprecedented ability to 
distribute digital content instantly and broadly and at no additional or 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 17very little cost, marks the beginning of the digital age for many of the con-tent industries. The emergence of peer-to-peer and related decentralized 
content storage and distribution technologies disrupted the traditional 
functioning of many content industry business platforms. These technolo-gies have afforded Internet users a growing number of sources of content 
outside of the authorized distribution channels. Although copyright™s 
protections provided a theoretical means for enforcing rights to copy and 
distribute protected works, various features of the InternetŠsuch as the 
relative anonymity of ˜le sharersŠhave made copyright enforcement 
against end users dif˜cult in many contexts. 
As a result, copyright owners have sought to prevent infringing dis
-tribution higher up the distribution chain. This has brought into play 
the online service provider safe harbors that Congress introduced into 
copyright law in the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998. Subject 
to several exceptions and limitations, the DMCA afforded copyright own
-ers rights against those who circumvent copy protection technologies but 
insulated online service providers from liability for infringing acts of their 
subscribers.
The Supreme Court had already begun to address the issue of indirect 
or secondary liabilityŠthat is, the standards by which defendants can be 
held liable for infringing behavior by other people such as employees, ten-ants, or customers which were not clearly de˜ned in the 1976 Copyright 
Act. In 
Sony v. Universal City Studios
, 464 U.S. 417 (1984),
 the Court con
-sidered whether Sony should be held liable for manufacturing and mar
-keting video tape recorders for home use. The Supreme Court held that 
ﬁthe sale of copying equipment, like the sale of other articles of commerce, 
does not constitute contributory infringement if the product is widely 
used for legitimate, unobjectionable purposes. Indeed, it need merely 
be capable of substantial noninfringing uses.ﬂ The Court concluded that 
Sony™s Betamax device was ﬁcapable of substantial noninfringing uses,ﬂ 
including ﬁtime-shiftingﬂ of broadcast television programs for private 
home use, which the Court held to be noninfringing fair use.
The 
Sony 
decision represented an early attempt to grapple with the 
balance to be struck between protecting copyrights and technological 
innovation. The Court explained that the law should ﬁstrike a balance 
between a copyright holder™s legitimate demand for effectiveŠnot merely 
symbolicŠprotection of the statutory monopoly, and the rights of others 
freely to engage in substantially unrelated areas of commerce.ﬂ
The Supreme Court revisited this balance again in its 2005 opinion 
in 
MGM v. Grokster
, 545 U.S. 913 (2005), where it considered whether 
the operators of ˜le-sharing networks could be held indirectly liable for 
infringing distribution of copyrighted works by users of their services. 
Notwithstanding the potential noninfringing uses of such services, the 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Court rejected the lower court™s holding that the 
Sony 
rule insulated the 
defendants from liability. The Court held that the defendants™ intent to 
cause and bene˜t from infringement, demonstrated in part by internal 
communications, could expose them to liability for inducing infringement 
even if the defendants™ service were capable of non-infringing use. The 
Grokster
 decision held that ﬁ[o]ne who distributes a device with the object 
of promoting its use to infringe copyright, as shown by clear expression 
or other af˜rmative steps taken to foster infringement, is liable for the 
resulting acts of infringement by third parties.ﬂ 
In reaching this conclusion, the Court stated that ﬁ[t]he more artistic 
protection is favored, the more technological innovation may be discour
-aged; the administration of copyright law is an exercise in managing 
the trade-off.ﬂ The Court concluded that imposing inducement liability 
maintains a proper balance, while emphasizing that ﬁmere knowledge 
of infringing potential or of actual infringing uses would not be enough 
here to subject a distributor to liability. Nor would ordinary acts incident 
to product distribution, such as offering customers technical support or 
product updates, support liability in themselves. The inducement rule, 
instead, premises liability on purposeful, culpable expression and con
-duct, and thus does nothing to compromise legitimate commerce or dis
-courage innovation having a lawful promise.ﬂ
In the wake of 
Grokster
 and continuing rapid advancement in digital 
technology, the doctrine of indirect liability is among the most critical, 
subtle, and important features of digital copyright protection. Other key 
areas affecting the balance among technological advance, freedom of 
expression, and copyright protection include fair use and the DMCA™s 
online service provider safe harbor provisions, where statutory ambiguity 
and the challenge of applying even recently adopted law to unanticipated 
technological advances leave signi˜cant leeway for judicial interpretation. 
THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF COPYRIGHT-AFFECTED 
INDUSTRIES AND COPYRIGHTED WORKS
In recent decades there have been several industry-led efforts to quan
-tify the economic scope of copyright and its exceptions, following meth
-ods recommended by WIPO (2003, 2012). Two principal sponsors of these 
studies are the International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA) (Siwek, 
2011), representing the recording, motion picture and television, computer 
software, and publishing industries reliant on copyright, and the Com
-puter and Communications Industry Association (CCIA) (Rogers and 
Szamosszegi, 2010), representing Internet publishing and broadcasting, 
Internet service producers and search engines, data services, computer 
equipment and components, computer services, telecommunications, and Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 19other industry segments that ﬁwould not exist, or be much smaller, but for 
the limitations and exceptions to copyright law.ﬂ Both trade associations 

have documented their members™ large contributions to gross domestic 

product, exports, and employment and their high growth and labor com
-pensation rates. The U.S. Commerce Department recently used a similar 

methodology to estimate the contributions of all types of intellectual 

property protection to the U.S. economy (U.S. Department of Commerce, 

2012).
 These analyses provide some insight into the scale of economic activ
-ity in the United States affected by copyright, although none addresses 

the contribution of the copyright legal framework to these industries™ 

economic performance as distinct from many other factors. Nor do they 

tell us what the creative economy would look like under different copy
-right rules. The committee considered another approach to measuring the 

economic impact of copyright protectionŠthe value of the capital stock 

of copyrighted works themselves in relation to other so-called intangible 

or intellectual capital assets such as research and development, work
-force skills, organizational competence of business enterprises, and other 

components. A 2006 analysis by the staff members of the Federal Reserve 

Board, since expanded and extended to other advanced economies, esti
-mated that private and public investments in intangible assets exceed 

investments in physical capital and are a major driver of economic growth 

and productivity but have been under-represented in national economic 

accounting because traditionally they have been treated as immediate 

expenses of businesses and government rather than investments with 

payoffs over a long term (Corrado et al., 2006a, 2006b). 
For more than a decade the Commerce Department™s Bureau of Eco
-nomic Analysis (BEA) has been addressing the challenge of treating long-

lived intellectual capital as investments and incorporating estimates of 

their value with an appropriate depreciation rate in the National Income 

and Product Accounts (NIPA). Treating computer software in this fash
-ion was the ˜rst major step (Parker and Grimm, 2000). An accounting of 

research and development has been developed as a so-called ﬁsatelliteﬂ 

account and is scheduled to be incorporated in the NIPAs in 2013 (Lee and 

Schmidt, 2010). And recently, BEA staff members have been developing 

estimates of long-lived copyrighted ﬁentertainment originals,ﬂ including 

books and movies.
The committee asked the BEA to bring together their estimates of the 
revenue and capital value of copyrighted works and compare them with 

other categories of intellectual capital, and the BEA agreed, incorporat
-ing estimates of prepackaged, custom, and own-account software, video 

games (included in software estimates), movies, television programs, 

music, books, commercial photography, and playscripts. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Some of the key ˜ndings are presented below, but a few caveats 
should be noted. Excluded from their analysis are short-lived (less than 
one year) copyrighted works such as newspaper and magazine articles, 

some television and radio programs, and amateur artwork and software, 

which may have considerable cultural and personal importance but not 

high market value and therefore are not easy candidates for inclusion in 

the national economic accounts. Included is federal government gener
-ated software not covered by copyright. BEA also includes many works 

that are subject to other forms of protection (e.g., patent and trade secret) 

in addition to copyright. For these and other reasons, it would be unwise 

to conclude that all of the value of the works counted by the BEA can be 

attributed to copyright protection. It is nevertheless the case that changes 

in the value of copyrighted works might re˚ect changes in the effective
-ness of copyright law more directly than would total industry revenues, 

employment, or other factors captured in the IIPA and CCIA studies 

described above.
Among the BEA ˜ndings:
˜˚
In 2007 U.S. businesses and governments invested $278 billion 
in software (approximately $83 billion prepackaged, $93 billion 

custom, and $102 billion own-account) and U.S. artists produced 

$71 billion worth of long-lived entertainment originals. These 
assets yield returns over varying periods of time, roughly 15 to 50 

years for artworks and 3 to 5 years for shorter-lived software. The 

accumulated capital stocks of these assets in 2007 are estimated to 

have been $486 billion for software and $536 billion for entertain
-ment originals.
˜˚
The same year, software accounted for 2 percent of nominal GDP 

(rising from zero in 1959), treating it as an asset rather than an 

expense raises GDP. Entertainment investment has accounted for 

roughly the same share of GDP, 0.4 percent, since the 1920s and 

therefore does not affect GDP growth when treated as a capital 

asset.
˜˚
In addition to the long-lived entertainment originals, approxi
-mately $96 billion of short-lived artistic productsŠtelevision, 

radio and Internet programming, and magazines and newspapers 

were produced in 2007. With a lifespan of less than one year, these 

are not candidates for capitalization in the NIPAs.
˜˚
The shares of different categories of artwork have changed dra
-matically over time with technological change such as the advent 

of television and the Internet and the decline of newspapers and 

magazines.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 21˜˚
The software and artistic original values compare with the 
Corrado et al., 2000 estimates for other intangible capital: $200 
billion for all U.S. scienti˜c research and development, $140 bil
-lion for advertising contributing to brand equity, and $365 billion 
for spending on ˜rm-speci˜c worker training and business orga
-nizational change.
Without question, copyright-affected industries contribute signi˜
-cantly to GDP employment, especially higher payment employment, and 
trade. Some copyrighted works, especially software, contribute as well to 
innovation and higher economic and productivity growth. These data do 
not tell us anything speci˜c about the role that copyright plays in generat
-ing these assets nor about the impact of any particular copyright policy 
choices, but they encourage us to pursue better answers to those ques
-tions. In the absence of copyright, not all of the value of creative works 
would disappear. Firms would be and are coming up with other means 
of protecting their investment in creative activities.
THE IMPACT OF DIGITAL TECHNOLOGIES 
ON CONTENT CREATION, DISTRIBUTION, 
AND USE IN SELECTED INDUSTRIES
1The relatively recent onset of the digital piracy threat can be attrib
-uted to the sheer informational magnitude of music and ˜lm and the 
inability, until about two decades ago, to bring to market affordable, high 
resolution means for listening to and viewing digital content. Even with 
the introduction and rapid popularity of digitally-encoded compact disks 
(CDs) and the proliferation of microcomputers beginning in the early 
1980s, the record industry did not appreciate the dramatic changes that 
would be brought about by the emerging digital technologies. Available 
microprocessors, the low ˜delity of computer peripherals, and limita
-tions of memory storage capacity prevented music from being stored, 
perceived, and reproduced ef˜ciently on computer devices until the mid-
1990s. The proliferation of ˜le-sharing technologies and unauthorized 
streaming services such as cyberlockers, in conjunction with advances in 
data compression and broadband penetration during the past 15 years, 
have dramatically shifted the market for many copyrighted works. 
1The sections below on music, ˜lms, and book publishing draw upon a commissioned 
paper by Lisa Cameron and Cameron Bazelon, ﬁThe Impact of Digitization on Business 
Models in Copyright-Driven Industries: A Review of the Economic Issues,ﬂ 2013. The sec
-tion on scienti˜c publishing draws on a commissioned paper by Michael McCabe, ﬁOnline 
Access and the Scienti˜c Journal Market: An Economist™s Perspective,ﬂ 2013.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Technological advances associated with the Internet and digitization 
have had profound effects on both the rewards available to creators and 
the costs they face in bringing works to market. The ease of infringing 
digital copying and distribution often weakens sales and reduces the rev
-enue available to creators for a given level of legal copyright protection. 
On the other hand, marginal manufacturing and distribution costs have 
fallen drastically and in some circumstances shifted to intermediaries as 
digital products come to replace physical goods. The Internet enables near 
instantaneous and free distribution to mass audiences in conjunction with 
robust advertising networks. The costs of creating and promoting new 
works may also have fallen in some cases and risen in others. 
The results have been complex. Authors can more easily create and 
distribute works of authorship using digital technology and networks, yet 
they and their distributors have substantially lost the ability to prevent or 
pursue infringing distribution of copyrighted works. The magnitude of 
these effects on different creative sectors are dif˜cult to quantify, but dis
-ruptive changes in traditional supply chains and the destruction of some 
older business models and enablement of new ones are easy to identify. 
And they have had profound consequences not only for intermediaries 
and consumers but also in some cases for content creators. That is not to 
say that all industries based on copyrighted materials have experienced 
disruptive change. Architectural designs and certain specialized engineer
-ing products have likely been much less affected by the Internet. Nor on 
the other hand is the digital revolution con˜ned to the copyright pro
-tected industries. Online retailing has had profound effects on brick and 
mortar retail stores that specialize in non-content based goods.
The committee commissioned efforts (Appendix B) to summarize 
qualitatively the changes in ˜ve large content industriesŠmusic recording, 
˜lm production and distribution, book publishing, scienti˜c publishing, 
and softwareŠand supplemented the analysis with committee members™ 
own direct experiences in those industries. The following descriptions, 
which draw on these papers, are meant to be illustrative, not exhaustive. 
Other ˜elds such as still photography have faced unusual challenges in 
the digital era that are very much worth exploring in research.
Music
Digital technologies and Internet distribution have profoundly 
affected the creation, marketing, and distribution of sound recordings 
in the global music business. These technologies enabled distribution 
of sound recordings as digital ˜les separate from the physical media on 
which they were ˜xed, which enabled the unbundling of the song from 
the industry™s dominant consumer product, the album-length CD. Con
-Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 23sumer preference for downloading of individual songs further dimin
-ished the importance of the industry™s previously most lucrative product. 
Supply of sound recordings has also greatly expanded in the digital age. 
Low cost audio and video production tools have lowered musicians™ 
costs to create musical works, adding to supply, and online retailers™ 
low marginal cost of digital storage has allowed these retailers to offer 
for sale millions of sound recordings, whereas ˚oor space constraints of 
brick and mortar retailers limited inventory carried to fewer than 10,000-
15,000 albums. 
Digital technologies have also changed the ways that consumers dis
-cover music and this, in turn, has altered the industry™s marketing and 
promotion strategies. Traditional mass market promotion channels, such 
as radio, that focused on a fewer number of songs, have been augmented 
by targeted, user-user driven social marketing that is available to all 
recording artists whether or not they are signed to a record label. Social 
networks are used to create digital word-of-mouth among communities 
of fans and these services (Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and others) can be 
used with equal effectiveness by record company-˜nanced celebrity musi
-cians and self-˜nanced amateur bands. Digital streaming technologies in 
conjunction with a statutory license created by the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act, has allowed customers to receive highly customized Inter
-net radio channels. Finally, the continuing wide availability of infringing 
music on the Internet has forced legitimate Internet music services to 
expand other servicesŠplayback on mobile devices, library management, and navigationŠto make it more attractive for consumers to listen to 
legally obtained sound recordings than illegal substitutes.
New business models in music include:
˜˚
Digital music stores, such as iTunes and Amazon, selling online 
the works of musicians and record companies, but competing 
with ˜le-sharing and other unauthorized versions of the same 
music;
˜˚
Ad-supported Internet radio services, such as Pandora, enabled 
by statutory compulsory licenses of the underlying copyrighted 
content;
˜˚
Paid music subscription services, such as Spotify, that do not con
-vey the full rights of music ownership and provide greater rev
-enue to copyright owners than ad-supported streaming services;
˜˚
Music video plays on YouTube providing the copyright owner a 
portion of advertising collected on each video view;
˜˚
Social networks enabling major label recording artists and 
unsigned bands to organize fans to purchase downloads, watch 
videos, and attend concerts;
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
˜˚
Do-it-yourself distribution and marketing platforms, such as 
ReverbNation, providing emerging and established bands new 
tools to market, promote, and monetize their copyrights at a grass 
roots level;
˜˚
Crowd-sourcing funding platforms, such as Kickstarter, enabling 
musicians to solicit voluntary contributions to fund studio record
-ings, video production, and tours;
˜˚
Software authoring tools, such as ePub3, enabling musicians to 
create digital boxed sets that include text, video, photos, Internet 
links, potentially bundled with sale of concert tickets.
To preserve as much as possible of the traditional industry model 
and revenues associated with copyright, major record companies have 
looked to legal enforcement and various rights management software 
that prevents consumers from accessing music outside of their rights. 
For example, paid subscription services limit copying music and prevent 
access after the subscription period ends. Pro˜ts from record companies™ 
incumbent business models have been a disincentive to embrace disrup
-tive innovation. However, the industry did adapt to the pressures of the 
digital revolution with both 99 cent downloads and ultimately unpro
-tected downloads.
It is unclear whether traditional recorded music companies will con
-tinue to dominate the industry as they have in the past, having lost much 
of their distribution function to increasingly powerful online retailers, 
˜le-sharing, and do-it-yourself marketing platforms. Functions such as 
discovering new talent, promoting and marketing musicians, all mainly 
the preserve of the record companies in the past, remain critical, but are 
now contested by a variety of new players that give artists a greater share 
of revenues.
It is not certain how music composers, performers, and consumers 
fare under the new business models compared to how they fared under 
the previous system. Broadcast performances account for a smaller share 
of composers™ earnings, and they are relatively unaffected by changes 
in distribution; but the lion™s share of their earnings are associated with 
mechanical licenses, which are affected by changes in distribution. Like
-wise, some performers make signi˜cant income from concerts, which are 
not affected by digital business models. Moreover, artists are not homo
-geneous. The smaller number of superstars fare very differently in supply 
chains than do unknown or emerging musicians.
We also do not know how the baseline for determining the optimal 
supply of new music has been changed by the digital age. It could be the 
case that artists™ incomes and consumer welfare could rise under a better 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 25functioning music copyright system, particularly one more accommodat
-ing of innovation enabled by technological change. On the other hand, it 
would be that better enforcement could result in lower consumer surplus 
and artist income, with more pro˜t reaped by intermediaries.
Film
The motion picture supply chain is comprised of multiple stagesŠ
development, ˜nancing and production, distribution and marketing, 
exhibition in theaters, and post-theatrical releaseŠhome entertainment 
sales and rentals, television, and cable. Although digitization has affected 
all stages of the motion picture supply chain, from a revenue perspective, 
its greatest impact has been on post-theatrical release. Online distribution 
is becoming more important as broadband and 4G wireless increases and 
more consumer electronic devices such as televisions and Blu-ray play
-ers are integrated with Internet connectivity. Sales of tablets and smart- 
phones also contribute to the growth of online services. Consumers now 
have the choice to download or stream from dozens of online services 
using subscription, rental, sell-through or advertiser-based business mod
-els. Content now available through third party applications is available 
across many platforms including Android, iOS, and Windows. Prominent 
examples include
˜˚
Subscription online video services previously dominated by 
Net˚ix are now being offered by a variety of online service 
providers such as Amazon Prime, Microsoft Xbox, HBO Go, 
X˜nity, and Hulu Plus. In November 2002 Hollywood studios 
launched the ˜rst online video rental service. Since then, as 
broadband penetration increased, additional online services 
have launchedŠiTunes, Amazon, PlayStation, Xbox, Walmart/
VUDU, Blockbuster, Comcast, DirectTV, AT&T, Verizon, and 
many others.
˜˚
Digital sell-through has also ˚ourished. Consumers can now col
-lect content in their own personal cloud service, called Ultravio
-let, and watch their movies and TV shows anytime and anywhere 
on any Internet-enabled device. Consumers no longer need to be 
locked into to a proprietary service and/or device. 
˜˚
The advertising-based model uses the same technology as the 
online video store but relies on advertising revenues rather than 
subscriptions or pay-per-view. This has attracted a large number 
of entrants, Hulu and Crackle being the most successful, although 
it is moving toward a subscription business model.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
˜˚
Cable and satellite and telephone companies provide additional 
˜lm distribution outlets.
˜˚
Major studios have also launched new online services offering 
movies and television shows directly to consumers, competing 
with traditional intermediaries.
Digital distribution through Blu-ray, DVD, and cloud services such 
as Ultraviolet, and authorized online services described above provide a 
promising opportunity for motion picture distributors to offer consumers 
the ability to access movies on the platform of their choice but also for 
independent and niche ˜lmmakers lacking access to theatrical distribu
-tion to reach a broader audience. However, the persistence of Bittorrent 
˜le-sharing platforms and ad-supported cyberlockers continue to have 
a signi˜cant destabilizing effect on this market. Although copyright law 
and other remedies under the DMCA remain an effective tool against 
infringing services located in the United States, most, if not all illegal 
services have moved off shore to territories that lack effective enforce
-ment mechanisms making it nearly impossible to slow the proliferation 
of infringing download and streaming services. While the motion picture 
industry has embraced more distribution channels than ever before, the 
greatest threat facing the industry is the illegal distribution of movies 
while still in theaters. This has had the greatest impact on independent 
˜lmmakers that have struggled to achieve ˜nancial success and reliable 
˜nancing. 
Book Publishing
In the traditional supply chain model, authors seek out publishing 
houses that pay them an advance and royalties, sometimes ˜nd and 
groom authors, and ˜nance the editing, reviewing, printing, marketing, 
and distribution of the book. Despite slim pro˜t margins, this model 
persisted more or less unchanged since the introduction of large-scale 
production of low cost printing technologies, until the appearance of 
e-books, which began to increase market share in 2007 and are likely to 
surpass physical book sales within a few years.
Following the example of Apple, which marketed its iPod as the 
device on which consumers could enjoy music purchased from the iTunes 
store, book retailers adapted to digital technology by marketing e-readers, 
Amazon™s Kindle and Barnes and Noble™s Nook, as well as e-books with 
lower prices but higher pro˜t margins than physical books. Apple fol
-lowed in 2010 with the iBooks app on the iPad, followed now by Google 
on Android devices. E-books eliminated a publisher™s physical produc
-tion and distribution costs. Moreover, digital distribution enables authors 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 27to create and distribute their works cheaply or freely through online book
-stores without the intermediary publisher. ﬁSelf-publishingﬂ has been 
highly successful for some authors but is unlikely to be the most advanta-geous path for all. Major publishers continue to provide marketing and 
promotion that an individual author cannot do alone or as ef˜ciently. But 
e-books and other digital materials have led to con˚icts between book 
publishers and libraries, with charges of price-gouging, limiting the num
-ber of readers of an e-book copy before a new license must be purchased, 
and withholding titles.
Scienti˜c Publication
The impact of copyright extends well beyond what are tradition
-ally regarded as the creative domainŠmusic, ˜lm, art, literature, and 
photography. We illustrate this impact here with two examples: software 
(discussed in the next section), and the publication of scienti˜c research 
results. This is far from an exhaustive treatment of copyright™s reach out
-side of the traditional creative realms. Indeed, with the advent of research 
tools such as text and data mining, copyright can reach into the conduct 
of scienti˜c and medical research itself. 
Scientists increasingly use automated tools to mine and recombine 
vast amounts of data and literature. The capacity to link collections of 
articles and data to integrate research results across several scienti˜c 
disciplines and to develop data-mining tools for application across vari
-ous ˜elds offers immense new opportunities for science in the digital era, 
including opportunities to build ˜eld-speci˜c repositories to advance 
new research directions. In short, the digitization of scienti˜c information 
offers unprecedented opportunity to signi˜cantly enhance the speed of 
dissemination of research results, facilitate development of highly effec
-tive research engines that diminish search time for publications, and for 
automated cross-linking, text mining, and data aggregation. The role of 
copyright law in this growing digital infrastructure is contested, and it is 
unclear whether the existing framework is suf˜ciently aligned to enable 
maximization of these opportunities to enhance and facilitate new direc
-tions for scienti˜c research.
The role of copyright in the dissemination of scienti˜c information is 
also debated in the wake of digital publishing and associated disruptions 
of the classic publishing model that has dominated the sciences since the 
17th century when scienti˜c journals emerged to perform the important 
functions of establishing scienti˜c priority, certifying quality through peer 
review, communicating results, and providing archival records. It is rare 
that publishers compensate scienti˜c publication authors, who are moti
-vated, in part, by their employers™ criteria for selection, promotion, and 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
tenure decisions. In some sectors, publishers charge both author fees and 
reader fees, although the latter are generally paid by institutions through 
subscriptions. A variety of factors affect pricing on both the author and 
the reader side of the publishing ﬁplatform.ﬂ Many journals are published 
by ˜rms that own or manage multiple titles; a few large ˜rms control 
portfolios numbering in the hundreds or thousands. The modern print 
era has been characterized by rapidly rising subscription prices in excess 
of in˚ation and straining library budgets.
The shift to electronic distribution of content that began in 1995 low
-ered distribution costs and enabled the emergence of commercial and 
non-pro˜t open access (OA) journals that can be accessed at no charge 
and that recover their costs through a combination of author fees, grant 
monies, and government subsidies. The Social Science Research Network 
(SSRN) was founded in 1994 and distributes over two million academic 
papers. The Public Library of Science (PLoS), founded in 2001, is the best 
known online scienti˜c publishing platform based entirely upon the open 
access business model. The Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) 
currently lists more than 6,000 titles. Many research universities and fund
-ing organizationsŠnotably, the National Institutes of Health under a con
-gressional mandateŠhave adopted open access mandates; and Google 
Scholar, introduced in 2004, quickly became a powerful complement to 
online access. The OA journal movement has grown rapidly in the past 
decade. 
Earlier, commercial publishers adopted a strategy of bundling mul
-tiple titles in large deals negotiated with each institution. This strategy 
took advantage of the fact that although online distribution lowered dis
-tribution costs, it did not change the basic inelastic demand conditions of 
the market. Annual price increases from the major, for-pro˜t publishers 
of scienti˜c, technical, and medical journals have been running at mul
-tiples of the U.S. consumer price index for several years. Although open 
access journals continue to proliferate, their long-term viability in the 
absence of subsidized author fees is uncertain unless additional contractu
-ally imposed access conditions become integrated into funders™ research 
grants.
Open access has the potential to expand the dissemination and impact 
of the scienti˜c literature, bene˜ting scientists and society. Early stud
-ies of this question showed large positive bene˜ts, generally in terms 
of increased citations and downloads. More recent studies taking into 
account the differences between open access and traditional journals ˜nd 
little or no impact of open access on citations. Citation rates do not nec
-essarily fully re˚ect the impact of open access, however, which might 
include wider readership, use of results in therapeutic settings, and other 
developments. These are important questions for further study.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 29Desktop publishing techniques and online digital transmission have 
reduced costs and enabled new publication and licensing models allow
-ing for more differentiated approaches to formal and informal peer pro
-duction of scienti˜c information. In this environment there is a need for 
data-driven research to inform policy choices that will take advantage of 
these new opportunities for scienti˜c research, aggregation, and dissemi
-nation, avoid fostering monopolies over non-substitutable, non-replicable 
scienti˜c information, and preserve the most useful functions that inter
-mediaries provide.
Software
An arcane ˜eld 50 years ago, software has become an integral part of 
almost every process, product, and service we use both directly and indi
-rectly. Often it is the principal differentiator of one product or service from 
another. Software represents a growing share of the intangible assets that 
account for the wide gap between the book value and the market value 
of many public corporations. 
Although patent protection for computer software has gained 
salience during the past decade, copyright has long been the principal 
form of protection for computer software products. Even open source 
software relies upon copyright as the means to enforce compliance with 
the terms of the open source license. As is true with other types of copy
-righted content, software comes in a variety of forms sold under a variety 
of business models. Consumer software is actually licensed and not sold, 
but to the consumer the transaction is much like that for a book, movie, 
or song, so parallels are easily drawn. This was a $21 billion industry in 
2010 including personal computer games. Just as with music, books, and 
video, more and more software of this sort is licensed and delivered via 
electronic download, and the optical media historically used for this is 
fading away. 
Gaming, a particular class of consumer software, is a huge industry 
in its own right. Starting with simple video arcade games, gaming has 
evolved to cover a wide spectrum from simple games to pass the time 
or facilitate social interaction to ˜rst-person action games such as 
Call 
of Duty
 or massively multiplayer online games such as 
World of War
-craft. Nintendo, Sony, Microsoft, and others have created multibillion 
dollar businesses around specialized game-playing computer consoles, 
but games can and are played on any computer including smartphones 
and tablets. Whether online or on a device, copyright is the basic legal 
protection for games. Vendors have resorted to numerous proprietary 
mechanisms to further secure their games to prevent infringing use with 
varying degrees of success. One great advantage of gaming consoles is 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
that a game designed for a particular console can only be played on that 
console, and the vendor is able to fully control that device to inhibit any 
illegal use. Online games are operated as a service with different issues 
around uncompensated use.
Another rapidly growing consumer software market consists of apps 
(applications) for mobile devices. Vendors, except for devices running 
Android software, have made unauthorized copying of apps dif˜cult by 
requiring that all packaged software be acquired through a single autho
-rized store. This trend is now moving to personal computers. Consumers 
lose choice but gain convenience and, arguably, security. 
Enterprise packaged software is also vulnerable to infringing copying 
but is more dependent on specialized skills, installation and maintenance. 
The total market was estimated at $267 billion in 2011. Platform packaged 
software is more dif˜cult to measure because its value is intertwined 
with the hardware with which it is coupled. Microsoft Windows has long 
experienced massive copying in some international markets, but in most 
developed markets the software is either bundled with the hardware or 
licensed on an enterprise basis. Unlicensed use remains signi˜cant, and 
most major business software vendors rely upon periodic audits of their 
customers to enforce their licensing terms. Notwithstanding these audits, 
unlicensed use of business software is by far the most economically dam
-aging infringement problem facing the business software sector today. 
The emergence of the ﬁcloud,ﬂ however, has made all of these tradi
-tional methods much more complex to operate. Instead of having a small 
number of computers each running a designated set of applications with 
licensing tied to something with a physical serial number, a ﬁcomputerﬂ 
today is an ﬁinstanceﬂ running somewhere in a massive complex and 
never really existing in a physical form. Moreover, because contemporary 
systems often use hundreds or thousands of computers running for very 
short periods of time, the challenges of licensing enforcement are large. 
Valuing custom software is dif˜cult. Use of the cost of the labor to 
produce it as a metric, is incomplete, inasmuch as the costs of testing and 
implementing software usually greatly exceed the costs of development. 
While copyright, trade secret, and contractual protections are used to 
protect custom software, the value of this work may lie in the algorithms 
the software implements and not in the code itself. These algorithms can 
potentially be protected by patent or trade secret law but valuing them is 
extremely dif˜cult. Developing methods of accurately valuing in-house 
and customized software across different types of organizations, and 
evaluating the role of copyright, relative to patenting, in shaping invest
-ment in and the productivity of such software is an important area for 
future research. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 31THE LIMITS OF OUR KNOWLEDGE ABOUT 
THE ECONOMICS OF COPYRIGHT
2The ˜nal and most important project commissioned by the commit
-tee is an evaluation of the existing empirical research literature on the 
economics of copyright. The evaluation draws upon an earlier survey by 
the same author sponsored by the United Kingdom™s Strategic Advisory 
Board for Intellectual Property Policy (Handke, 2010). The work was 
intended to be comprehensive up to the time of its completion, taking into 
account studies conducted and published in the English language. Here 
we summarize only the key ˜ndings.
The Effects of Infringing Copying
The effects of Internet-enabled infringing use have received con
-siderable attention from empirically-oriented economists, most of them 
addressing the phenomenon in speci˜c content industries, mainly com
-puter software and recorded music and more recently ˜lm. Studies of 
the extent of infringing digital copying of software focus on the ratios 
of legitimate users to users of pirated software but do not quantify the 
likely effects on rights holders™ revenues. Although the software industry 
thrives in spite of infringing digital copying, the advent of digital copying 
coincides with a sharp drop in revenues in the primary market for sound 
recordings over the last decade. As a result, infringing copying of music, 
especially via ˜le-sharing of 
MP3
 ˜les, has received much attention. 
As simple as the question seemsŠthe extent to which unpaid con
-sumption of recorded music cannibalizes paid consumptionŠthe answer 
is rather dif˜cult to establish empirically, for two reasons. First, data, 
especially data on unpaid consumption, are dif˜cult to obtain. Second, 
even with good data on consumption patterns, it is dif˜cult to draw 
causal inferences. For example, an observation that a song with a high 
volume of unpaid consumption is also purchased frequently could mean 
that unpaid consumption stimulates sales or, more likely, that the song is 
simply popular and that its popularity manifests itself in high volumes 
of both paid and unpaid consumption. 
Against the backdrop of this research challenge, empirical studies 
provide a range of estimates of the impact of unpaid on paid consump
-tion. But the majority of empirical studies of the effect of unpaid music 
consumption on paid music consumption show a depressing impact and 
it is likely that infringing copying contributed signi˜cantly to the down
-2This section draws upon a commissioned literature review by Christian Handke, ﬁEco
-nomic Effects of Copyright: The Empirical Evidence So Far,ﬂ 2011.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
turn in recorded music sales since Napster. Studies of paid versus unpaid 
consumption of movies are not as numerous but also tend to ˜nd results 
consistent with a depressing effect of unpaid consumption. It remains to 
be seen if studies of other industriesŠbooks, newspapers, video games, 
and photographsŠalso reveal this pattern. On the other hand, some of 
this work takes an overly simplistic view of substitution effects, assuming 
that consumption of unlicensed works displaces 
only 
the consumption of 
licensed works and not other activities. Hence, there is a need for further 
research to determine the nature and magnitude of sales displacement 
caused by infringing distribution across the range of copyrighted works.
In any case, it is hard for academic studies to keep up with swift 
technological change. In the past two years, the emergence of cyberlock
-ers has rapidly changed access to copyrighted works. Thus, the growing 
number of studies of peer-to-peer technology do not adequately address 
the economic realities currently facing content industries. Furthermore, 
the rapid rollout of tablet computing will undoubtedly affect the publish
-ing market. 
A variety of factors, data limitations foremost among them, compli
-cate the analysis of revenue impacts on intermediaries and creators in the 
digital environment and how that changes with technology. But even if 
there were a more conclusive answer, it would be only one consideration 
in framing copyright policy. User welfare effects, especially bene˜ts and 
costs to end-consumers, also deserve attention as does the distribution of 
rewards to artists and other creators. 
Determinants of Infringing Copying
To determine the desirable scope and intensity of copyright protection 
it would be useful to know what factors in˚uence the extent of infringing 
copying. Again, with only a few exceptions, the studies have focused on 
single industryŠsoftware, music, or ˜lms. In software, the practice has 
been found to vary inversely with level of economic development and 
income, the strength of the legal and judicial system, and retail prices 
of authorized products, although not consistently with education. Sev
-eral empirical studies ˜nd that the perceived probability and severity 
of penalties have a strong effect on ˜le-sharing. Moral considerations 
also play a role in the sense that concern for rights holders and artists 
reduces the propensity to engage in ˜le-sharing, and this varies by coun
-try. Most studies conclude that students, young adults, and young males 
in particular are more likely to engage in infringing copying than other 
demographic groups.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COPYRIGHT LAW AND ECONOMICS IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 33Effects of Copyright Law
Empirical research has mainly focused on infringing copying and 
distribution, but effects of key aspects of copyright law are also of inter
-est, including what aspects of creative works are protected, the type 
and intensity of enforcement measures, the duration of rights, the scope 
of copyright exceptions and limitations, the liability standards imposed 
on intermediaries and third-parties, the availability of easily accessible 
and affordable legal copies, and the role of digital rights management 
techniques. 
Despite the fact that promotion of innovation and the creation and 
distribution of new works are the principal rationale for intellectual prop
-erty protection, very few empirical studies address the effects of changes 
in the copyright system on their supply of creative works. The handful 
of studies of copyright term extensions have found no signi˜cant effect, 
although the complexities of isolating such effects are formidable. In any 
case, such studies are of relatively little signi˜cance to the policy debate 
over online enforcement because such behavior most prominently affects 
newly released works.
Costs of the Copyright System
The costs of administering the copyright system also need to be con
-sidered in designing appropriate copyright policy, but neither these nor 
the costs of transacting or enforcing rights have been studied directly. 
This would be useful in evaluating alternative voluntary collective rights 
administration schemes and proposed changes to enforcement systems. In 
view of the likelihood that the effects of infringing copying and distribu
-tion are not evenly distributed across the population of artists, we need to 
understand better the impact of copyright arrangements on the markets 
for artistic works as well as on innovation in distribution and other activi-ties downstream from creation.
Conclusions
Overall, the picture that emerges from research is still ambiguous, 
patchy, and in some respects contradictory. There is inconclusive evidence 
of how infringing copying and distribution affects social welfare or what 
kind of copyright regime would redress the problem without excessive 
unintended consequences. In addition to the characteristics of the litera
-ture noted above, the following gaps and limitations, many of them the 
result of or exacerbated by data limitations, are particularly pronounced:
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
˜˚
In studies of some copyright sectors, the principal focus is on 
intermediaries™ revenues rather than the impact on creators, pro
-fessional and amateur, and consumers of content.
˜˚
There has been uneven industry coverage, with a great deal of 
attention to music, moderate attention to scienti˜c publishing 
and ˜lm, much less attention to news and book publishing and 
software.
˜˚
Variations across industries, countries, and time are poorly 
understood.
˜˚
There has been very little emphasis placed on the ease or dif˜
-culty of transactions to obtain use rights.
˜˚
Little consideration has been given to the relative costs and effec
-tiveness of legal remedies (injunctions, civil damages, notice and 
take down, and criminal penalties) vis-
à-
vis technical protections 
(digital rights management and ˜ltering).
˜˚
There has been little analysis of the incidence and cost of litigation 
and what impact litigation costs have on willingness to bring or 
settle complaints.
˜˚
Despite continuing rapid technological change, rendering even 
some recent ˜ndings obsolete, very little work has been moti
-vated by hypotheses about future developments. 
˜˚
Studies lack a historical perspective on how the copyright system 
has adapted to technological change in the past.
˜˚
Alternative enforcement mechanisms, such as, graduated response 
and ˜ltering, have received little attention. 
˜˚
There have been few transnational studies of enforcement mecha
-nisms and their impact on local production.
˜˚
There is little understanding of how copyright protection tech
-nologies affect the deployment of new general purpose technolo
-gies (e.g., cloud computing).
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Research Directions 
In this chapter we propose four sets of research questions that re˚ect 
the issues raised repeatedly in the committee™s meetings and workshop 
and relate directly to policy debates playing out in domestic political, 
legal, academic, and social as well as international venues. These ques
-tions have a bearing on pattern and scope of creative expression as well as 
the structure and pro˜tability of copyright-affected industries. The ques
-tions are not exhaustive, but the committee believes that they should form 
the core agenda of a well-funded, long-term empirical research enterprise.
1.
 Impact of digitization on incentives to make, develop, promote, 
distribute, consume, and maintain the integrity of creative works
 
By assigning creators limited rights, copyright aims to incentivize 
the creation development and dissemination of creative work and 
to preserve its integrity. How have these incentives been affected by 
digitization? Similarly, how have copyright and digital technology 
affected the incentives of other participants in the copyright environ
-ment, including consumers?
2.
 Enablers of and impediments to voluntary transactions 
 
Although granting rights initially to creators, copyright law allows 
creators to assign or license those rights to othersŠpotentially 
enhancing the value and public bene˜t of the copyrighted works by 
permitting broader use, dissemination, and subsequent creative activ
-ity. What are the costs associated with such copyright transactions, 
and what mechanisms help to overcome these costs? How have trans
-actional impediments and enablers changed with digital technology?
35
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
3.
 Enforcement costs and bene˜ts
 
Copyright enforcement mechanisms include civil penalties, crimi
-nal sanctions, technical requirements, and intermediary obligations. 
What are the costs and bene˜ts of these and alternative mechanisms? 
How well do they address new challenges in the digital age, includ
-ing those posed by unauthorized access to copyrighted works ema
-nating from non-U.S. jurisdictions that lack effective enforcement 
mechanisms? 
4.
 Exceptions, limitations, and balanced copyright design
 
Copyright law attempts to balance competing interests of creators 
and downstream users of copyrighted works through a variety of 
mechanismsŠterm limits after which works enter the public domain, 
enumerated exceptions to address speci˜c policy objectives, general 
exceptions such as fair use, and compulsory licensing provisions. 
What is the role and effectiveness of these measures in different copy
-right domains and what impact do they have on creativity? 
The following sections expand on these research topics along with some 
suggestions of research approaches appropriate for exploring them. 
CHANGING INCENTIVES
As explained above, the leading justi˜cation for copyright in the 
United States has always been to motivate and disseminate creative 
expression for the public bene˜t by providing creators and/or their 
agents with a degree of market power they would not otherwise enjoy. 
Although this market power can translate into supra-competitive prices 
for consumers of copyrighted works and into constraints on those who 
use them as the basis for subsequent creativity, copyright strives to limit 
these costs to those necessary to generate and disseminate the works 
upon which subsequent creativity depends. This conventional theory of 
copyright has been explored in generations of copyright scholarship. But 
empirical research documenting the actual impact of copyright on incen
-tives of creators, distributors, and
 consumers is quite limited and thus a 
key direction for future investigation.
Creator Incentives
The digital age appears to have profoundly affected creator incentives 
in at least two ways. First, advances in technologies for producing and 
disseminating expressive works have reduced the barriers to entry and 
the costs of creation and distribution for some categories of works. On the 
other hand, the ease with which works can be distributed over the Inter
-Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 37net without authorization or compensation threatens to diminish invest
-ment in some creative activities, especially those involving substantial 
production costs. It is important to know how these changes have affected 
the spectrum of creators and enterprises engaged in the generation and 
distribution of creative works.
For example, it would be valuable to know more about the expenses 
involved in different aspects of creative productivity, including both ini
-tial authorship and subsequent dissemination to the public, across differ
-ent sectors, and the different business models by which those expenses 
might be recouped. Studies along these lines might document that some 
types of creative production remain quite expensive in the digital age. 
It seems likely, however, that digital tools make other types of creativity 
and dissemination much less costly. These costs should in turn be under
-stood in relation to better understandings of the copyright- and non-
copyright-dependent sources of motivation for creative production. Some 
types of creative production may require investments that are dif˜cult to 
recoup other than by exploiting copyright protection. Other creators may 
be motivated by alternative sources of monetary and/or non-monetary 
compensationŠranging from sales of ancillary products and services, 
such as live concert performances, to reputational bene˜ts to the simple 
pleasure that so many Internet uses seem to derive from creating and 
sharing their own creative expression online without any apparent expec
-tation of exploiting their exclusive rights for monetary gain.
We do not mean by these suggestions to prejudge the results of stud
-ies of the costs and motivations of creative expression and dissemination 
but merely to indicate how such studies would enrich our understanding 
of the factual basis for the assumptions built into the theoretical justi˜
-cation for copyright and of how those facts may be changing as digital 
technology affects both the costs of creative production and the power of 
non-copyright-dependent motivations. Information about creator moti
-vations and costs would not only illuminate theoretical justi˜cations for 
copyright. It might reveal differences in incentives and costs among types 
of works such as works for entertainment and scholarly and educational 
works. Such data would be critical to informed judgments about the 
merits of differentiated copyright protectionŠwhether, for example, the 
duration of copyright protection should vary from one type of creative 
work product to another. 
User Incentives
Another set of motivations is highly relevant to copyright policy: 
the motivations of various types of users and potential users of creative 
works. Users include people who currently pay to purchase copies or 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
otherwise acquire authorized access to copyrighted works for purposes 
of consuming and/or creatively building upon those works; people who 
undertake these activities in lawful accord with a copyright limitation or 
exceptions; people who undertake these activities in violation of copy
-right law; people who forgo these activities because of the risks and bur
-dens that copyright law imposes; and people who use copyrighted works 
in ways that fall within areas of legal uncertainty. By ﬁusersﬂ we do not 
only mean end-users but also commercial ˜rms that make use of copy
-righted works in the process of supplying other goods and services. With 
the data called for below regarding patterns of consumption of creative 
works, studies could be designed to better understand who falls in these 
various categories and why, and whether and how copyright in˚uences 
their behavior. For example, it would be valuable to know more about 
how user motivations and behavior are affected by enforcement effortsŠ
including the extent to which effective enforcement encourages users of 
infringing copies to turn to legal alternatives.
ENABLERS OF AND IMPEDIMENTS TO 
VOLUNTARY TRANSACTIONS
The exclusive rights that copyright law bestows on creators may 
be voluntarily transferred from creators to others through licenses on 
either exclusive or non-exclusive terms. This transferability is consistent 
with copyright™s purpose of promoting creativity for the public bene˜t. 
It allows creators to derive revenue from their investments in creativity 
while permitting others to use, disseminate, and build upon their works. 
Digital technology promises to expand authorized access and iterative 
creativity, but not if rights are not easily transferred because of transaction 
costs and other barriers to voluntary exchange. Where such impediments 
are signi˜cant, they may justify policy interventions aimed at facilitating 
transactions or adjusting aspects of copyright law. Successful examples 
of voluntary transactions, by contrast, might provide lessons about what 
works well in the current legal environment. 
Questions about the extent and persistence of copyright-related trans
-action costs and related market failures have been raised and explored in 
both academic and policy analysis relying on case studies, interviews, and 
other types of qualitative evidence illustrating both copyright exchange 
failures and successes. To date, however, there have been few efforts at 
broad and systematic data collection to support policymaking. 
Consider the transaction cost hurdles to voluntary exchange associ
-ated with ﬁorphan works,ﬂ works for which the copyright holder cannot 
be readily identi˜ed or located for the purpose of entering into a volun
-tary exchange agreement. Even if the author and publisher are found, 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 39rights to the content may be unclear. To assess the magnitude and policy 
implications of the orphan works problem, it would be useful to have 
data on the share of copyrighted works for which the owner cannot be 
located and how this share is changing over time. But such works are 
not comprehensively listed or collected anywhere. This data gap may 
be especially severe with regard to documentaries and other remixed or 
ﬁuser-generatedﬂ content.
Despite this dif˜culty, a number of promising research avenues seems 
worth pursuing. One approach is to focus on an identi˜able subset of 
copyrighted works and attempt to measure the percentage of dif˜cult-to-
license works within that corpus. If, for example, one could estimate the 
share of dif˜cult-to-license photos in the collections of cultural heritage 
institutions, that could inform an understanding of both the scope of the 
problem and the challenge of digitizing such collections for preservation 
and public education.
Another approach to studying enablers of copyright transactions is 
to survey participants in the copyright market about their experiences. 
Questions can probe the costs as well as the frequency of problems and 
can document and attempt to identify factors that have made some efforts 
to assemble large authorized collections of licensed works relatively suc
-cessful for some categories of copyright work. For example, retailers 
such as Amazon and Apple, among many others, offer digital storefronts 
featuring massive collections of digital works which they do not own, but 
have licensed. 
Especially valuable would be comparisons of U.S. experience with 
other countries, before and after policy changes aimed at solving orphan 
works problems or other challenges associated with works for which 
licensing is possible but practically dif˜cult. These include various forms 
of compulsory and/or collective licensing. 
Voluntary collective licensing organizations and other intermediaries 
that seek to help individuals overcome barriers to exchange are worthy 
of further study in their own right. Relevant intermediaries that are active 
in the United States include American Society of Composers, Authors, 
and Publishers (ASCAP) and other performance rights organizations. 
Other examples are promulgators of public licenses (e.g., Creative Com
-mons and the Free Software Foundation), universities that have adopted 
uniform practices for the licensing of faculty work, and funding entities 
that specify the terms on which the copyrighted scholarship they sponsor 
will be released and used. Some of these institutions and practices have 
foreign counterparts that may be illuminating.
A different approach to these questions would use the insights of 
experimental psychology, which have contributed to the study of transac
-tion cost economics and could be applied more extensively in the study 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
of copyright markets. This work is based not on observational data about 
actual market practices but on carefully designed experiments to illumi
-nate sources of bargaining breakdowns and strategies to overcome them 
or, on the other hand, circumstances in which creators are motivated to 
license their works in the interest of wider distribution or follow-on use.
These research approaches could advance understanding of a num
-ber of important policy-related questions: Are licensing markets more 
successful in some sectors than others and why? What if any special 
problems are encountered in books, photographs, scienti˜c research, 
user-generated content, mash-ups, and other derivative works? Where 
does inadequate notice of copyright status and rights-holder identity 
and preferences impede voluntary licensing? How has this changed with 
changes in government registration and the advent of private registries? 
How have transaction costs changed with new technological, business, 
and legal developments? How is technology being used and in what ways 
might it be improved to facilitate the tracing of copyright ownership and 
licensing terms? What roles can public and private institutions play in 
voluntary transactions? 
ENFORCEMENT COSTS AND BENEFITS
Many recent policy debates have focused on copyright enforcement, 
with advocates of enhanced penalties, new enforcement mechanisms, 
and enhanced international enforcement coordination citing the cost and 
ineffectiveness of enforcement mechanisms available under current law 
and, in particular, the dif˜culty of preventing the infringing distribu
-tion of copyrighted works from websites located in jurisdictions that 
lack effective enforcement mechanisms. Opponents in these debates raise 
concerns about the potential for zealous enforcement to discourage legiti
-mate activities and chill technological innovation. These disagreements 
highlight gaps in our knowledge about the effectiveness, costs, and unin
-tended consequences of different tools for copyright enforcement.
The debates raise a number of important research questions: How 
much money do governments, copyright owners, and intermediaries 
spend on copyright enforcement? How are resources focused on individ
-ual infringers versus intermediaries, domestic versus foreign infringers? 
What are the pro˜les of enforcement targets, including organized transna-tional criminal enterprises? What remedies are sought and applied? What 
are the effects of these efforts in terms of compensation, prevention, edu
-cation, and deterrence? How is the effectiveness of enforcement efforts 
changing with advances in technology and ever faster digital networks? 
Are better and more effective enforcement technologies available today 
than were available when the DMCA was enacted? What new forensic 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 41services and related vendors have entered the market? What are the costs 
and bene˜ts of new enforcement mechanisms introduced in some sectors 
and jurisdictions, including enhanced secondary liability, ﬁgraduated 
response,ﬂ ˜ltering, domain blocking, and targeting of ﬁrogueﬂ websites? 
How are these costs and bene˜ts distributed among copyright owners, 
developers and operators of platforms and technologies used for the dis
-semination of copyrighted works, public enforcement agencies, and other 
entities? How are distribution of costs and bene˜ts shaped by the safe har
-bor provisions of the DMCA and related legal standards regarding sec
-ondary liability? Are there new business models that are less vulnerable 
to infringement and therefore less reliant on enforcement efforts? What 
is the role of voluntary inter-industry arrangements to reduce infringe
-ment levels? What legal impediments do such arrangements encounter 
and how can these be removed, lowered, or accommodated? What have 
been public reactions to increased enforcement efforts? And what is the 
speed of enforcement, especially in cases where infringement is obvious? 
In other words, how long can a ˚agrant infringer operate and pro˜t?
Questions about enforcement overlap with questions described above 
regarding the motivations of copyright users and other participants in the 
copyright environment. Do enforcement efforts motivate users to acquire 
copies of works through authorized channels instead of via infringement? 
When do enforcement efforts hinder legitimate activities and techno
-logical innovation? Do enforcement limitations encourage enterprises 
that contribute to infringement to turn a blind eye to illegal activity they 
could help to prevent? To what extent should enterprises that facilitate 
consumer access to copyrighted content be held responsible for illegal 
activities carried out by users? Should this determination depend on their 
ability to control the activity in question?
Enforcement questions seem especially amenable to international 
comparative analysis. The international legal framework for copyright, 
consisting of treaties administered by the World Trade Organization 
(WTO), World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), and a mul
-titude of bi-party and multi-party agreements, sets broad parameters 
and minimum standards for national copyright enforcement efforts. But 
the agreements allow for local variation in practice and countries com
-ply with their terms differently. Although these characteristics represent 
opportunities for comparative analysis of enforcement regimes, to date 
there has been negligible comparative research assessing the cost and 
ef˜cacy of different approaches and their effects on economic output and 
investment. A ˜rst-order priority is to compare enforcement practices 
over time in jurisdictions that have been relatively successful in reducing 
the prevalence of high-volume copyright infringement and those in which 
the problem has been more intractable. Further research could study how 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
these enforcement differentials have impacted local creators and other 
participants in the creative environment. 
EXCEPTIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND 
BALANCED COPYRIGHT DESIGN
As explained above, the exclusive rights that copyright law grants 
to encourage creativity can impose costs in terms of reduced access and 
cumulative creativity. The exceptions and limitations to copyright can be 
understood as attempts to contain these costs and maintain an overall bal-ance in copyright policy. Fully evaluating copyright policy requires that 
we understand not only how well the law motivates creativity, and how 
well the rights it creates are enforced and transacted, but also how its lim
-its operate. Copyright needs to be seen as part of a larger policy environ
-ment related to creativity and innovation, an environment that includes 
other mechanisms that may serve as complements or even alternatives for copyright™s particular mechanism of promoting creativity.
One way copyright law balances competing interests is by term limi
-tations; another is by permitting certain uses of copyrighted works with
-out permission from their owners under various exceptions and limita
-tions. These include some narrow exceptions that allow very speci˜c uses 
of certain types of works by statutorily-identi˜ed classes of users. Other 
exceptionsŠincluding the fair use and ˜rst sale doctrinesŠare more gen
-erally applicable. 
Valuable research could build upon initial attempts to quantify the 
bene˜ts of exceptions and limitations in terms of the economic outputs 
and welfare effects of those individuals, businesses, educational institu
-tions and other entities that rely on them. These include search engines 
whose practices (e.g., embedding thumbnail versions of copyrighted 
images in search results) have survived copyright challenges on the basis 
of fair use, for example; used book sellers and movie rental businesses 
that rely on the ˜rst sale doctrine; libraries that rely on fair use; publishers 
of books for which copyright has expired; and a variety of music outlets 
that rely on the complex scheme of limitations and compulsory licenses 
applicable to music copyrights. A variety of practices in the education and 
library contexts are also shaped by fair use, ˜rst sale, and other excep
-tions. Assessing the effects of copyright limitations would also require 
studying how, if at all, they affect copyright holders. Research should also 
aim to understand these bene˜ts and costs dynamically, exploring how 
copyright and its limitations affect the emergence of innovative and/or 
disruptive technologies and platforms. 
Limitations may also be affected by developments in technology and 
business practices. Where the sales of books to libraries are replaced by 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 43limited grants of permission to access e-books, for example, limiting doc
-trines like ˜rst sale may be less effective than in the past. Research about 
how contractual practices are interacting with and perhaps displacing 
copyright™s limitations and exceptions would be valuable to better under-stand this and other developments. Harder to quantify but nonetheless 
critical are the effects of copyright exceptions and limitations on indi
-vidual welfare, autonomy, and freedom of expression, as well as the role 
of libraries and archives as cultural custodians, preserving digital books, 
journals, archives, datasets, music, and ˜lm for consultation, scholarship, 
and study.
PRINCIPLES TO GUIDE RESEARCH
Finally, we want to reiterate two guiding principles of research on 
copyright. First, irrespective of whether their research relies on quan
-titative data collection or survey or experimental methods, investiga-tors should consider undertaking studies that are comparative across 
countries, industries, and time. Cross-cultural comparisons should by no 
means be limited to enforcement questions. They should broadly explore 
how content is created, developed, disseminated, and used in countries 
with different copyright regimes as well as different levels of enforcement. 
Perhaps institutions such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD), United Nations Educational, Scienti˜c, and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and international scienti˜c organiza
-tions can help address data access issues which are no doubt different 
than but possibly as challenging as they are in the United States. Cross-
country comparisons pose a challenge to the researcher in understanding 
the political and social context of policy changes in each of the countries 
being studied. Likewise, cross-sectoral studies require an understanding 
of how each of the industries works. Neither challenge is insuperable and 
the reward is a richer understanding of the different policy choices and 
economic contexts.
A second principle that investigators as much as policy makers should 
bear in mind is that technological change will continue to drive changes in 
content creation, distribution, and consumption, including infringement. 
They should be attentive to technologies and trends that should prompt 
re-thinking of long-held assumptions about creativity and the logic on 
which copyright protection is based. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Data Infrastructure for an Empirical 
Approach to Copyright Policy Research
Although the empirical research described in the previous chapter 
suggests that independent research on the copyright system™s impact on 
creativity and innovation can provide signi˜cant insights for policy mak
-ers, the availability of such research is very limited; and for questions 
on which some research exists, it is clearly at an early stage of develop
-ment. The paucity of independent research can be explained by many 
factors, but the committee™s deliberations repeatedly returned to one key 
bottleneckŠthe quality and quantity of data across all of the principal 
content mediaŠbooks, movies, recorded music, newspapers, and soft
-ware. Categories include data on such matters as the costs of produc
-tion, marketing, and distribution; prices of products and quantities sold; 
ancillary sources of revenue for creators such as live performances; con
-sumption behavior; patterns of access, including unauthorized access, to 
copyrighted works; licensing terms and the ef˜cacy of licensing arrange
-ments; and the costs and ef˜cacy of anti-piracy technologies and legal 
enforcement measures. 
The situation with respect to copyright is analogous to discussions of 
the impact of the patent system some 15 years ago. There was no paucity 
of theory, but the dif˜culty of subjecting these theories to systematic and 
detailed empirical analysis meant that the debates went largely unre
-solved. There was even widespread skepticism that empirical research 
was feasible, let alone useful. This state of affairs has changed signi˜
-cantly over the past two decades. Most importantly, a number of key data 
sources were made available or created, spawning a diverse literature 
45
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
on the operation and impact of the patent system. An important early 
effort was the establishment at the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) of the ˜rst publicly available patent dataset that incorporated both 
accessible patent citation data and links to Compustat data on individual 
˜rms (Jaffe and Trajtenberg, 2002). Extensive surveys of corporate R&D 
managers by researchers ˜rst at Yale University (Levin et al., 1987) and 
later at Carnegie-Mellon University (Cohen et al., 2000) provided the ˜rst 
systematic data on how patents are used relative to other means of creat
-ing competitive advantage in different industries. Public agencies such 
as the National Science Foundation and, in recent years, the U.S. Patent 
and Trademark Of˜ce itself, have taken further steps to expand patent-
related data collection and analysis. A robust empirical research agenda 
in the copyright area will require data associated with the activities of 
very different stakeholdersŠoriginating artists, performers, companies 
that publish and disseminate copyrighted worksŠas well as much more 
detailed user data that capture patterns of digitized material consumption 
and distribution across population groups.
The availability of systematic data and the emergence of a community 
of investigators able to identify the strength and weaknesses of particular 
data sources for addressing particular issues were keys to an empirically 
oriented understanding of the patent system that has clearly in˚uenced 
policy making in the area. The committee believes that creating a similar 
data infrastructure platform around copyright and enabling a community of investigators to study and engage directly in policy debates in the area 
of copyright would be immensely valuable. 
Empirical copyright research has been undertaken in the past 
although not on a sustained basis. Issues similar to today™s debates about 
anti-piracy measures arose at the dawning of the digital age over two 
decades ago. With the advent of digital audio tape (DAT) technology, 
the record industry and the consumer electronics industry diverged on 
the need for government intervention. Both sides produced consumer 
surveys and studies supporting their points of view. The non-partisan 
Of˜ce of Technology Assessment (OTA), created to provide Congress 
with authoritative analysis of complex technical issues, sponsored theo
-retical, empirical, and survey research that addressed consumer patterns 
as well as the concerns about infringing use of home recording technol
-ogy. Although the legislation growing out of this workŠthe Audio Home Recording Act of 1992, P.L. 102-563, 106 Stat. 4237Šwas soon eclipsed by 
more effective digital copying and playback technologies (e.g., computer 
ripping of audio ˜les from CDs and MP3 players), the OTA studies, in 
particular its consumer survey, provided an objective basis for anticipat
-ing consumer behavior and evaluating policy options (U.S. Congress 
Of˜ce of Technology Assessment, 1989). 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 47The analogy to empirical patent research has limitations. Unlike the 
patent system, there is no comprehensive repository for copyrighted 
works. Measuring their value using sales or usage data is challenging 
because such data are either unknown, dispersed, or privately owned. 
Owing to the vast, decentralized, and often private nature of the data, 
the costs and bene˜ts of the collection process are often dif˜cult to know. 
In some cases, such as orphan works, it is simply infeasible. Thus, before 
describing some types of research projects that might be pro˜tably under-taken, we outline in this chapter both key opportunities and formidable 
challenges associated with acquiring and using data related to copyright 
and identify some promising data resources to support policy-relevant 
empirical studies.
OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES ARISING 
FROM DIGITAL TECHNOLOGY
Copyright policy is most contentious and in ˚ux in the digital realm. 
The introduction of CDs, DVDs, 
MP3
 ˜les, UGC websites, web-based 
content aggregators, and now streaming music and radio have all created 
challenges for the interpretation and enforcement of copyright law not 
only in the music industry but also in other copyright-intensive industries 
such as newspapers, software, and ˜lm. Digital technology also enables 
rapid changes in the nature of consumption, which can expand rapidly 
in new areas and contract just as swiftly in others.
The implications for data collection are also profound. Most promis
-ing, the process of digitizing and digitally distributing expressive works 
generates a digital data trail that can then be used by researchers to 
study copyright policy. File-sharing is a prime example. By its design 
˜le-sharing software requires an accounting infrastructure that keeps 
track of users connected to the system, including their location, operating 
system type and speed, as well as information on which ˜les are being 
shared by whom in what way. These data are ostensibly public, although 
collecting, organizing, and making data amenable to systematic research 
takes considerable effort. Several studies have collected different chunks 
of such ˜le-sharing data and use it to telling effect. Such direct compre
-hensive data-based analysis of music sharing would have been impossible 
in a world where users swapped CDs and purchased bootleg copies from 
local dealers. 
Although infringing use of music has been the phenomenon most 
thoroughly studied using this digital data trail, it is not inconceivable 
that similar methods could be applied to other industries as they become 
increasingly digitized. E-books provide a prime example. In a world 
where readers increasingly consume written content on digital devices, 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
usage data now exist that would have been prohibitively expensive to 
collect in the analog age. Software logs routinely collect information not 
only on sales of books downloaded from centralized repositories like 
Amazon, but also information on if and 
when
 a particular book was read, 
how 
quickly
 it was read, and so forth. Similar analyses could be done on 
e-magazines and blogs where it is now possible to measure time spent 
on a particular article or blog-post, and click-through rates of particular 
hypertext links. In the context of streaming video, YouTube and Net˚ix 
collect data on user behavior including repeat consumption and the loca
-tion and time of consumption. All of this information, if routinely col
-lected by private and public entities and systematically organized, would 
be invaluable to the study of copyright in the digital age, as well as other 
aspects of the digital economy. Of course, proper use of this data will 
require taking steps to protect the privacy of consumers.
On the other hand, collecting such microdata for research remains 
a considerable challenge. Perhaps the biggest challenge lies in the fact 
that data about the creation, consumption, and distribution of digital 
media increasingly reside in the hands of private entities whose incen
-tives diverge from those of researchers. Even if such data were available, 
constructing pseudo-experimental research designs places an additional 
burden on data when, as is usually the case, researchers are unable to 
directly run experiments. Finally, the problem of ﬁfreeﬂ goods is particu
-larly salient in the digital domain. E-magazines and blogs are often free to 
read, free applications for smartphones abound, and free music and video 
are widely available. In such cases, it becomes hard to place a dollar value 
on such goods, compounding the dif˜culty of estimating consumer or 
producer surplus in these industries. This section highlights the practical 
and conceptual challenges inherent in the collection of digital copyright-
related data and its use in carefully designed research. 
Incentives of Data Owners
Data collection can be costly. Firms and industries have some moti
-vation to collect such information in the pursuit of pro˜t maximization 
and industry-focused advocacy. To out-compete rivals they will want to 
keep some information proprietary, but in some cases they will be open 
to selectively sharing data that will help their industry in policy advocacy. 
They might also design studies and surveys to shape public or political 
elite perceptions in ways that favor their policy agenda. The home record-ing controversy described earlier is a good example. What private data 
holders do not have at present is an incentive to act in concert to share 
data with researchers whose results they do not control.
These challenges will undoubtedly persist as the Internet and digi
-Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 49tal technologies continue to evolve. For that reason, we believe that the 
policy agenda must begin with a multi-faceted, robust, broad-based, for
-ward-looking data collection foundation.
Challenges of Research Design
Even if some of the adverse data-sharing incentives of data owners 
could be negotiated, credible research requires well-conceived research 
designs. The ideal approach is to experimentally subject a treatment 
group to a particular policy while leaving another, similar ﬁcontrolﬂ 
group untouched, then to estimate the impact of the policy using relevant 
outcome variables. This simple comparative approach would work if we 
could experimentally expose, say, half a population to an opportunity to 
engage in infringing use of copyrighted content. But this may not be fea
-sible. We assume that the people we would observe engaging in infringe
-ment are likely those with a high level of interest in the work. However, 
research into whether this assumption is valid may be a threshold step 
in this inquiry. For example, it may be that some people access the work 
without authorization merely for the purpose of skimming, sampling, or 
other initial inquiry much as one would use a précis, index, or other aid. 
Gaining access to data while simultaneously implementing a credible 
research design is often a considerable challenge. Nevertheless, the more 
data collection is expanded, the more it will be possible to implement 
better research design. (Angrist and Pischke, 2008).
The copyright context may well be a source of pseudo-experimental 
comparisons. As a general rule, books and musical works published in 
1923 are now in the public domain while some works produced a year 
later are not, making it possible for simple comparisons to provide impor-tant insight into the effect of copyright although this may be complicated 
by the fact that there are often several editions of the same title. If copy
-right protection inhibits useŠor if being in the public domain promotes 
over-useŠthen the works still under copyright protection should see less 
use. As useful as this insight may be, a researcher of course still needs 
data on usage or other outcomes of interest. In particular, careful research 
designs must re˚ect the fact that copyrighted material is heterogeneous 
and ensure that ﬁapples to applesﬂ comparisons are being made when 
the objective is to determine the impact of copyright law on the creation, 
diffusion and use of those works. 
Free Goods
The challenges of incorporating the impact of digital technology into 
GDP are particularly troublesome in the case of digital goods and services 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
whose price is zero. To see why, consider the usual approach to adjusting 
for quality. Suppose that technical change has allowed the price of lettuce 
to fall from $3.50 to $2.00 from 2009 to 2010 and that demand is perfectly 
inelastic, i.e., the quantity remains constant. While the total nominal sales 
of lettuce would decrease from 2009 to 2010, we can easily make a price 
index adjustment. Using the 2009 prices for the same good, GDP would 
have been higher, and so we can use these quality-adjusted prices to char
-acterize the impact of technical change on the lettuce industry.
If a good that formerly had a price becomes free, however, there is 
no procedure for incorporating it into GDP statistics. Suppose that in 
2009, there were many sales of music CDs, but by 2010 consumers relied 
exclusively on infringing downloads, possibly in much higher volume. 
As customers download music without cost from the Internet in place of 
purchasing music CDs, both the price and quantity of music purchases 
disappear from GDP calculations. There is no simple price adjustment 
that will allow us to link the 2009 and 2010 distribution and account for 
the change in price. Instead, the entire category of music sales simply 
disappears from the GDP estimation. A concrete example is the decline 
in sales of printed encyclopedias, initially attributed to the rise of Encarta, 
which was recorded as a drop in GDP, while the rise of Wikipedia, which 
displaced Encarta, is absent from the GDP statistics. Similarly, there is no 
direct accounting in GDP for the rise of online media services such as the 
New York Times
 or 
Washington Post 
except for the indirect sales generated 
through advertising revenue. This mismatch in the quantity of digital 
output and its mis-measurement in copyright-relevant industries makes 
empirical analysis extremely hard to implement. 
Despite the formidable challenges of measuring the value of free 
goods, their increasing importance in many digital contexts requires that 
new research methods be developed and implemented. Contingent valu
-ation, randomized control trials, and quasi-experimental settings are all 
potential methods for helping to determine what value consumers and 
other stakeholders ascribe to free goods on the Internet. Companies like 
Google have been measuring and benchmarking the impact of digital 
content. A website™s PageRank or reputation on the Web translates into 
how much attention or time it can expect to get from consumers, which 
translates into how much ad revenue it can demand from advertisers. 
These links fall short of scienti˜c rigor, and it is debatable whether ad 
revenue captures all the values and if not, what the correct methodology 
should be. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 51Measuring the Impact of Digital Technology
Many of the topics in copyright policy research require measuring 
some aspect of the transition to a digital age. The measurement ques
-tions are central in some cases, secondary in others; but measuring the 
emergence of digital technology is an underdeveloped ˜eld attracting a 
level of effort woefully small in comparison to its social and economic 
importance. A very large scale government enterprise measures GDP, 
the ˚ow of pecuniary goods and services. The shifts toward digital goods 
and digital distribution command attention nothing like it in scale or 
sophistication.
The symptoms of underdevelopment are apparent in many aspects 
of U.S. policy. For example, the recently issued 360-page National 
Broadband Plan contains information from only a few statistical studies 
authored by neutral third-parties, primarily academics. It contains little 
in the way of statistical analysis of the consequences of various policy 
options. This is not attributable to inadequate staff effort but re˚ects the 
inchoate state of economic research about digital infrastructure and digi
-tization more broadly, in particular, the absence of an organized commu
-nity of researchers with a large and well developed body of knowledge.
So incomplete a data foundation would be unthinkable in other infra
-structure contexts. Every congressional bill supporting transportation 
infrastructure, for example, is accompanied by a forecast for the economic growth it will generate and the number of jobs it will create. Nothing 
comparable can be done for legislation shaping the information infra
-structure because there is not even a simple measure of the size of the 
digital economy nor any apparatus in place to project its growth.
Many initiatives to improve measurement of the digital economy 
were launched in the 1990sŠat the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Census 
Bureau, Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), and the National Telecommu
-nications and Information Administration. A few of these have survived, 
for example, a survey about the labor market for information technol
-ogy workers, and an estimate of the scale of electronic commerce, called 
E-Stats. Others did not survive, howeverŠfor example, household and 
business surveys of broadband supply, adoption, and use. 
Unlike in other developed countries, the best information about the 
online behavior of the U.S. population came not from a government-spon-sored survey but instead from a private foundation, the Pew Internet and 
American Life Project. Although the Pew survey has been useful, espe
-cially in tracking social behavior online, its scale is limited, ranging from 
a little more than one thousand to several thousand households at a time. 
With these sample sizes the survey could only gauge general trends and 
gain some insight into their variance. It is incapable of achieving what the 
BLS survey, involving 80,000-100,000 households, does wellŠproviding a Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
picture of variance across populations in different regions with different 
gender, age, skill level, educational, and ethnic pro˜les.
WHAT DATA ARE NEEDED AND AVAILABLE, 
ACCESSIBLE, OR COULD BE CREATED?
Public discourse about copyright would bene˜t from a range of 
innovative institutions contributing to measurement efforts. What types 
of publicly accessible databanks would contribute to research efforts? 
What standards for data in this area would contribute to building further 
research? What data remain locked in proprietary vaults but could be 
unlocked by a standard process for protecting privacy while informing 
research? What is not being systematically measured but could be? 
Assessing the health of the copyright system requires, at a minimum, 
documenting both the supply side and the demand side of the market for 
each content areaŠbooks, movies, recorded music, newspapers, software, 
etc. On the supply side, this means determining the number of products, 
and new products, available in each year, and the prices of each of the 
products. Generally a harder task is quantifying the consumer side of the 
market, not only the quantities sold but also the amount of use that each 
product gets. Harder still, but vital for answering important policy ques
-tions, is ascertaining the volume of unpaid use of each product over time. 
Because many copyright industries derive much of their revenue from 
ancillary activities, it would be useful to know about revenue ˚ows to 
producers from these activities, including, for example, live performance 
revenue for musicians and speaking fees for authors. With data of these 
sorts, one could begin to address the following questions: What has hap
-pened to revenue? To what extent has unpaid consumption displaced 
sales? What has happened to the ˚ow of new creative works?
To study the role of each agent in the digital economyŠcreator, mar
-keter, distributor, and consumerŠthree categories of data are needed. 
These include data that are currently available to the public but not exten
-sively studied in the context of digital technology; data that exist but for 
whatever reason are not available to the general public; and data that do 
not currently exist but can be created.
Existing Accessible Data
We have found a wide range of data sources from government agen
-cies to private institutions that can be used to measure the impact of copy
-right in the digital age. Most of the data are published on an annual or 
quarterly basis, although a few reports have been released on a one-time 
basis. First, we will examine data related to Internet use in general from 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 53public and private institutions. Then we will look at the relevant data 
sources for digital copyright in particular. See Table 4-1 for an annotated 
bibliography of these data sources.
The most comprehensive public domain report on the behaviors and 
demographics of Internet users is the Federal Communications Commis
-sion™s High-Speed Services for Internet Access, which focuses on the sta
-tus of broadband in the United States. It shows the number of consumers 
connected on broadband through DSL, cable modem, FTTP, and satellite. 
The report further breaks down each population group into seven tiers 
both in terms of upload and download speeds. It also includes a geo
-graphical mapping of connection speeds on a state-by-state basis. 
The Pew Research Center publishes an annual report that shows the 
number of Internet users by gender, race, age, household income, educa
-tion, and community type. This report includes data on broadband and 
wireless penetration as well as the percentage of Internet users who carry 
out certain activities online such as reading the news or playing games. 
Together, the Federal Communications Commission and Pew reports 
describe some aspects of the user dynamics of the digital world and have 
the potential to model different aspects of consumer behavior online.
Private ˜rms collect a great deal of information on products, prices, 
and volumes of paid consumption (see Table 4-2). Nielsen, for example, 
collects very detailed data on the quantities of books and music record
-ings sold as far back as 2001 in the case of books and the 1990s in the case 
of music. Nielsen also conducts a quarterly survey, the A2/M2 Three 
Screen Report, that tracks the penetration of broadband, HDTV, DVR, and 
smartphones. In addition, the report contains the number of users for and 
the hours spent on TV, Internet, and mobile phones broken down by age 
demographics. Although some researchers have gained access to Nielsen 
data, they have not been widely used because of the restrictive terms on 
which they are available.
Movie box of˜ce revenue data are available from the Internet Movie 
Database (IMDb) and Box Of˜ce Mojo, among other sources. Information 
on sales of discs is available from Opus and other providers. The RIAA 
now provides substantial data on its member companies™ current and 
historical sales activity. 
Perhaps the biggest void is data on the volume of unpaid consump
-tion, yet that, too, is changing. Big Champagne has tracked the popular
-ity of copyright-protected works through unpaid distribution channels 
for a decade. And Google™s recently developed Transparency Report 
portal provides real-time and historical data on take-down and user data 
requests.
Another regularly published report, by the International Data Cor
-poration (IDC), shows the size and growth of digital data over time. The 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
 SupplyDemandMusic

music tracks including 
professional, semi-
professional, and amateur 
recordings

(with details on venues, 
capacities, etc.)
new music recorded

recorded work



and elsewhere 

times (including online 
streaming services like 
Pandora and Spotify)

Performance 
Artists

activities, and income 
of dancers, performers, 
musical artists, etc.
consumption of artistic 
performances of various types, 
and the impact of digitization 
on that.Original artistic 
productions


activities, and income of 
originating artists including 
fine artists, architects, 
designers, sculptors, etc.
consumption of art by 
museums, collectors, galleries, 
corporations and the general 
publicScientific 
papers and 
research reports

researchers

and finances of scientific 
publishers

by scientific researchers, by 
professional practitioners who 
rely on scientific findings 
(e.g., physicians), and by the 
general publicMovies
clips released


video content
recorded work


from YouTube, Ustream and 
other video content sites

including internet purchases, 
video rentals, streaming 
movie services, set-top box 
consumption, etc.
TABLE 4-1
 Data Requirements for Copyright Analysis: An 
Illustrative FrameworkCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 55numbers include both historical values and future projections as far into 
the future as 2020. The report shows the cost of information management, 
the percentages of Internet data that require various levels of security, and 
the number of people using social networks. The State of the Internet is a 
quarterly report published by Akamai that provides country-level Inter
-net data. The statistics include Internet attack traf˜c, average connection 
speed, and number of unique IP addresses. The same data is available on 
a state-by-state basis for the United States.
Some copyright data from government and academic institutions 
have not yet been analyzed. The online U.S. Copyright Of˜ce Database 
contains roughly 20 million records of works registered since 1978 by 
creators of books, music, ˜lms, maps, software, etc. Each record con
-tains the date of creation, date of publication, and basis of the copyright 
claim. Pre-1978 Copyright Of˜ce records are being digitized back to 1923. 
Another source of copyright data is the Stanford Copyright Renewal 
Database, which contains renewals of copyrighted books between 1950 
and 1992. Each record shows the title, author, renewal date, and renew
-ing entity. 
Another category of government data, important for understanding 
copyright enforcement, is civil infringement suits ˜led in U.S. Federal 
District Courts and criminal prosecutions for infringement. This provides 
a record of plaintiffs, defendants, and judgments for cases that proceed 
through litigation. A private ˜rm, Lex Machina, is preparing copyright 
litigation data in a form that should be useful to researchers.
We have also identi˜ed data in the private sector that can advance 
our understanding of the impact of copyright laws. The RIAA publishes 
an annual Music Consumer Pro˜le report that estimates the market size 
 SupplyDemandSoftware

software produced, value 
of such software, and 
its diffusion in various 
formats
of software by users in both 
the private and public sectors

software, including software 
from open source movement
Contentof new content, by 
publication type (magazine, 
newspapers, blogs, 
websites, etc.)



consuming content


TABLE 4-1
 ContinuedCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
AgentsDatabase NameSource
Frequency
DescriptionConsumers 
A2/M2NielsenQuarterly



mobile phones. Discusses what consumers watch, how much time spent, and how 
trends are changing.


Consumers 
The Diverse and 
Exploding Digital 
UniverseIDCOne-time






footprints of digitization.
universe.pdfConsumers 
The Digital 
Universe DecadeIDCOne-time



at the cost to manage  information, security issues, and the prevalence of social  
networks. 

Consumers 
High-speed 
services for 
Internet accessFCCSemi-annual

services. Includes details about subscribership differences among census tracts.

Consumers 
Survey dataPew InternetAnnual


online. Describes the frequencies of Internet activities. 

Consumers 
Soundscan Social 
Media Report 
Television Report
NielsenOngoing

CD, DVD, consumption of social media, etc. Scattered across multiple reports and 
Nielsen channelsCreators
Copyright records
U.S. Copyright 
Office
Ongoing


the date of creation, basis of claim,  previous registration, and claimant. 

Creators
Copyright 
renewal database
Stanford 
UniversityOne-time



and 1963. Contains information on renewing entity, renewal date, and registration 
date.
Distributors10-K and 10-Q 
reports
Media 
distribution 
companiesAnnually and 
quarterly

discloses special events such as CEO departure, bankruptcy, and business risks. 
Available on company websites and from financial information services.
CopiersDigital Music 
Report 2010IFPIAnnual


unauthorized use across different domains. Imperfect sales suggest that the decline 
in global music revenue is a result of unauthorized use with certain regions 
suffering more than others. 

RegulatorsMusic Consumer 
Profile
RIAAAnnual

Estimates the overall size of the music industry.

TABLE 4-2
 Existing Data Sources and Stakeholders
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 57AgentsDatabase NameSource
Frequency
DescriptionConsumers 
A2/M2NielsenQuarterly



mobile phones. Discusses what consumers watch, how much time spent, and how 
trends are changing.


Consumers 
The Diverse and 
Exploding Digital 
UniverseIDCOne-time






footprints of digitization.
universe.pdfConsumers 
The Digital 
Universe DecadeIDCOne-time



at the cost to manage  information, security issues, and the prevalence of social  
networks. 

Consumers 
High-speed 
services for 
Internet accessFCCSemi-annual

services. Includes details about subscribership differences among census tracts.

Consumers 
Survey dataPew InternetAnnual


online. Describes the frequencies of Internet activities. 

Consumers 
Soundscan Social 
Media Report 
Television Report
NielsenOngoing

CD, DVD, consumption of social media, etc. Scattered across multiple reports and 
Nielsen channelsCreators
Copyright records
U.S. Copyright 
Office
Ongoing


the date of creation, basis of claim,  previous registration, and claimant. 

Creators
Copyright 
renewal database
Stanford 
UniversityOne-time



and 1963. Contains information on renewing entity, renewal date, and registration 
date.
Distributors10-K and 10-Q 
reports
Media 
distribution 
companiesAnnually and 
quarterly

discloses special events such as CEO departure, bankruptcy, and business risks. 
Available on company websites and from financial information services.
CopiersDigital Music 
Report 2010IFPIAnnual


unauthorized use across different domains. Imperfect sales suggest that the decline 
in global music revenue is a result of unauthorized use with certain regions 
suffering more than others. 

RegulatorsMusic Consumer 
Profile
RIAAAnnual

Estimates the overall size of the music industry.

TABLE 4-2
 Existing Data Sources and Stakeholders
continuedCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
AgentsDatabase NameSource
Frequency
DescriptionRegulatorsThe State of  the 
InternetAkamaiQuarterly



connection speeds, Internet penetration and broadband adoption. Also aggregates 
publicly available news and events.
RegulatorsFair Use on the 
InternetLibrary of 
Congress
One-Time


the difficulty in creating a general guideline for fair use on the Internet.

Researchers/
 InventorsWeb of Science
Thomson ReutersOngoing

web_of_science/Researchers/
 InventorsUSPTO Patent 
DatabaseUSPTO
Ongoing

for the industry. The market ˜gures are broken down by genre, format, 
age and gender of consumer, and channel of sales. In addition, music 
recording companies publish annual ˜nancial 10-K reports that contain 
pro˜t margins and revenues numbers. The same is true of publicly held 
companies in other copyright-intensive industries such as ˜lm, publish
-ing, and software. These data can shed light on the stakes involved for 
copyright regulation.
Lastly, there are one-time reports published by government institu
-tions and special interest groups to address the issue of digital copyright. 
The Library of Congress published the Fair Use on the Internet report 
in 2002, which contains a list of court cases that can help de˜ne what 
is considered fair use and what is not. The International Federation of 
the Phonographic Industry (IFPI) Digital Music Report 2010 estimates 
the revenues lost due to music infringement in select countries around 
the world. Estimates include global revenues for games, music, ˜lms, 
newspapers, and magazines. The report also provides a list of legal music 
providers for each country.
Existing Data with Limited Access
Massive amounts of copyright-related data exist but are not readily 
available for public use for multiple reasons. For example, the records of 
customer purchases on eBay or Amazon.com can be used to study online 
consumer behaviors. Due to privacy issues, these data are not easily acces-sible by research institutions and have limited use even for keepers of the 
TABLE 4-2
 ContinuedCopyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 59AgentsDatabase NameSource
Frequency
DescriptionRegulatorsThe State of  the 
InternetAkamaiQuarterly



connection speeds, Internet penetration and broadband adoption. Also aggregates 
publicly available news and events.
RegulatorsFair Use on the 
InternetLibrary of 
Congress
One-Time


the difficulty in creating a general guideline for fair use on the Internet.

Researchers/
 InventorsWeb of Science
Thomson ReutersOngoing

web_of_science/Researchers/
 InventorsUSPTO Patent 
DatabaseUSPTO
Ongoing

TABLE 4-2
 Continueddata. Another example is the amount and content nature of peer-to-peer 
˜le transfers that take place over the Internet. Some of that information 
exists on peer-to-peer network servers that are operating in questionable 
legal realms and some on individual personal computer hard drives. For 
these types of data, the ˜rst challenge is simply to identify the sources, 
then to overcome the legal barriers to access, and agree on protocols to 
protect privacy, and ˜nally, to aggregate the data into one place.
Currently Non-existent Data
A full understanding of the digital economy will eventually require 
collection of additional data that currently do not exist. These data may 
not be quantitative or even quanti˜able. In the Internet realm, with little 
control and regulation, the data collection process presents many techno
-logical challenges. Examples of such data of interest include systematic 
measures of copyright enforcement, radio playlists for all stations, and 
licensed use of musical works in television and movies.
Closing the Gap
We have three suggestions to advance research to inform evidence-
based policy making. First, we need to attract social science researchers™ 
attention to the questions we have identi˜ed. By forming a cohort of 
researchers from a wide variety of disciplines and by supporting them 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
with a robust and comprehensive data infrastructure we can make sig
-ni˜cant progress on a wide variety of policy issues relevant to copyright. 
Second, public and private grant-making organizations should sup
-port research that builds the data infrastructure that would support 
research in this area. They could convene a representative group of 
researchers, for example, under the auspices of NBER, to further iden
-tify, characterize, and prioritize data sources. Funding agencies could 
then assist researchers in negotiating access to such data and in some 
cases fund their acquisition from industry stakeholders, perhaps through 
a research consortium. In many cases, private ˜rms hold data that may 
be recent enough for some research purposes but obsolete commercially. 
They might be induced to release these to researchers on a rolling basis.
Third, as we have observed, the federal government needs to expand 
the collection of data on the digital economy as well as on intangible 
assets such as intellectual property holdings and their use. This should 
take several forms. First, agencies such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics 
and the Bureau of the Census should consider adding copyright-related 
information to regularly conducted surveys of businesses and consumers. One prime example would be revising the Bureau of Labor Statistics Time Use Survey to address questions of digital consumption in a contemporary 
way. In the current survey, there is no measurement of time spent listen
-ing to music exclusively rather than in combination with other activities. 
Although private sector sources of data are important, as we have noted, 
there are signi˜cant limitations of current surveys, and the availability 
of such data is limited for researchers. The Bureau of Economic Affairs 
of the Commerce Department has very limited resources to acquire the 
types of business data described above that could be extremely useful in 
understanding
 the landscape of intangible assets.
The committee proposes a more ambitious approach. Agencies such 
as the Bureau of the Census, Bureau of Economic Analysis, National Sci
-ence Foundation, U.S. Patent and Trademark Of˜ce, and the Copyright 
Of˜ce should form an interagency group that, along with expert advisors, would study the advisability and feasibility of an ongoing and systemic 
national business survey of intellectual property. Like the Business R&D 
and Innovation Survey (BRDIS), the IP survey would include samples of 
businesses in the service and manufacturing sectors. It would probe uses 
(e.g., licensing) and holdings of intellectual property and costs of acquisi
-tion and maintenance. Because of the nature of the production of digital 
goods, including the prominence of user-generated content, the business 
survey should be complemented, if at all feasible, by a detailed consumer 
survey of user-generated content and use. This would include, among 
other things, measurement of the amount of production and distribution 
of digital content by non-business entities (i.e., by users), and also mea
-Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DATA INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COPYRIGHT POLICY RESEARCH
 61surement of the consumption of such content by both business and the 
population at large. 
Unlike BRDIS, these surveys could be conducted periodically, such as every ˜ve years. The Bureau or the National Science Foundation would 
issue periodic reports of aggregated data, but detailed data would be 
available to quali˜ed licensed researchers on the same basis as other busi-ness con˜dential information, through the Census data centers. Such sur
-vey data could never provide data to answer all of the research questions 
we pose in Chapter 3 but would be a considerable advance on the status 
quo, greatly contributing to our ongoing efforts to better understand the 
stock and ˚ow of intangible assets in the economy. 
We cast this proposal as a study recommendation because of the con
-straints of our charge and limitations of our expertise. Although a survey 
would be especially important for understanding copyrights because of 
the lack of a formal registration requirement, it would make little sense to 
mount a survey of copyrights alone, neglecting patents and trademarks. 
Nevertheless, other forms of intellectual property are outside our state
-ment of work.
 Equally important, we are not in a position to judge two 
very important considerations that could render either or both surveys 
impracticableŠthe burden they would impose on respondents (e.g., the 
need for businesses to conduct patent and copyright searches) and the 
resources needed by agencies charged with carrying them out. The fed
-eral statistical agencies generally are tightly budget constrained and hav
-ing to cut back activities.
 The gap between what would be ideal in terms of data requirements 
for a thriving research agenda around copyright and what exists currently 
is large. Building easily accessible and comprehensive datasets relevant 
to the study of copyright-relevant industries is crucial for the develop
-ment of a research community based around copyright issues. We hope 
the categories of data described in this chapter will help focus efforts to 
obtain and create high quality datasets for addressing some of the key 
policy questions described in this report. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.References
Angrist, J.D., and J-S. Pischke. 2008. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist™s Companion.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, W.M., and S.A. Merrill, eds. 2003
. Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy
. Washing
-ton, DC: National Academies Press.
Cohen, W.M., R.R. Nelson, and J.P. Walsh
. 
2000. Protecting Their Intellectual Assets: Ap
-propriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not). National 
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7522. Cambridge, MA. 
Commission on Intellectual Property Rights and Development. 2002.
 Integrating Intellectual 
Property Rights and Development Policy. 
London.
Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel. 2006a. Intangible Capital and Economic Growth. 
Working paper in the Finance and Economics Discussion Series, Division of Research 
and Statistics and Monetary Affairs, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, DC.
Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel. 2006b. Intangible Capital and Economic Growth. Na
-tional Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper W11948. Cambridge, MA. 
Federal Communications Commission. 2010. 
Connecting America: The National Broadband 
Plan. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce.
Federal Trade Commission. 2003. 
To Promote Innovation: The Proper Balance of Competition and 
Patent Law and Policy. 
Washington, DC. U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce.
Griliches, Z. 1990.  Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey. 
Journal of Economic 
Literature. 
28(4): 1661-1707.
Handke, C. 2010. 
The Economics of Copyright and Digitisation: A Report on the Literature and 
the Need for Further Research
. London, UK: Strategic Advisory Board for Intellectual 
Property Policy.
Hargreaves, I. 2011.
 Digital Opportunity: A Review of Intellectual Property and Growth. 
London: 
Intellectual Property Of˜ce.
HM Treasury. 2006. 
Gowers Review of Intellectual Property.
 London: HM Stationery Of˜ce.
Jaffe, A., and M. Trajtenberg. 2002. 
Patents, Citations, and Innovations: A Window on the Knowl
-edge Economy.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
63
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
Lee, J., and A.G. Schmidt. 2010. Research and Development Satellite Account Update Esti
-mates for 1959-2007. 
Survey of Current Business
 90(12):16-27.
Levin, R.C., A.K. Klevorick, R.R. Nelson, and S.G. Winter.
 1987. Appropriating the Returns 
from Industrial R&D. 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
 3: 783-820.
Merrill, S.A., R.C. Levin, and M.B. Myers
, eds. 2004. 
A Patent System for the 21st Century.
 Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
National Endowment for Science, Technology, and the Arts. 2009.
 The Vital 6%: How High 
Growth Innovative Businesses Generate Prosperity and Jobs
. London.
National Endowment for Science, Technology, and the Arts. 2011.
 Driving Economic Growth
. London.
National Research Council. 2000. 
The Digital Dilemma: Intellectual Property in the Information 
Age. 
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Parker, R., and B. Grimm. 2000. Recognition of Business and Government Expenditures for 
Software as Investment: Methodology and Quantitative Impacts, 1959-98. Washington, 
DC: Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce.
Rogers, T., and A. Szamosszegi. 2010
. Fair Use and the U.S. Economy: Economic Contribution 
of Industries Relying on Fair Use. Washington, DC: Computer and Communcations 
Industry Association.
Samuelson, P. 2010. The Copyright Principles Project: Directions for Reform. 
Berkeley Technol
-ogy Law Journal
 25(3):1175-1245. 
Siwek, S.E. 2011. 
Copyright Industries in the U.S. Economy: The 2011 Report
. Washington, DC: 
International Intellectual Property Alliance.
U.S. Congress Of˜ce of Technology Assessment. 1989. 
Copyright and Home Copying: Technol
-ogy Challenges the Law. 
8-10-OTA-CIT-422. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Of˜ce.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2012. 
Intellectual Property and the U.S. Economy: Industries in 
Focus
. Washington, DC. U.S. Government Printing Of˜ce.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2003. 
Guide on Surveying the Economic Contribution 
of the Copyright-based Industries. 
Geneva, Switzerland.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2012. 
Copyright + Creativity = Jobs and Economic 
Growth. WIPO Studies on the Economic Contribution of the Copyright Industries. 
Geneva, 
Switzerland.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
A Copyright Primer
For those readers less familiar with the development of copyright, 
this appendix describes how the basic logic of copyright is re˚ected in 
the structure and evolution of the law. We focus on U.S. law, with some 
attention to how it ˜ts into the international copyright system.
ORIGINS
The precursors of modern copyright protection trace back to the inven
-tion and diffusion of the printing press in the second half of the ˜fteenth 
century, which dramatically expanded the size and competitiveness of the 
potential market for copies of books. In the ˜fteenth and sixteenth centu
-ries, European governments obliged the emerging printing industry by 
granting individual printers exclusive privileges to print speci˜ed books 
or classes of books. It was not until the passage of the Statute of Anne in 
1710, however, that the English Parliament enacted the basic features of 
modern copyright protection: exclusive but transferable rights for 
authors
 of printed works to print, reprint, and sell those works for speci˜ed times, 
all for the purpose of ﬁthe encouragement of learning.ﬂ
Most U.S. states, shortly after gaining their independence, enacted 
copyright laws modeled on the Statute of Anne, but with signi˜cant varia
-tion. Problems with applying these different laws across state borders 
led to a consensus that a national law was necessary. Among the ˜rst 
enactments of the ˜rst United States Congress was the Copyright Act of 
1790. Authorized by the constitutional directive ﬁto Promote the Progress 
65
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 APPENDIX Aof Science and the Useful Artsﬂ and modeled on the Statute of Anne, the 
Copyright Act granted authors or their transferees protection though rem
-edies of forfeiture and monetary penalties against infringing ﬁprint[ing], 
reprint[ing], publish[ing], and vend[ing]ﬂ of books, maps, and charts for 
14 years and allowed renewal for a second 14-year term. 
Like other legislation of this era, Congress left many of the details to 
be ˚eshed out by the courts. As a result, many essential elements of copy
-right protection, such as infringement standards and defenses, developed 
through judicial decisions. Some of these doctrines were later codi˜ed, but 
many continue to exist solely in case law. Private copyright-related insti
-tutions and transactional practices and technology for creating, copying, 
and distributing works are also important contributions to the evolution 
of the copyright policy environment as we describe below. 
EVOLUTION
Advances in the technologies for creating and distributing works of 
authorship have played a critical role in shaping copyright law starting in 
the nineteenth century and continuing to today. As technology for mak
-ing and reproducing works of authorship has expanded and the arts have 
˚ourished, Congress has repeatedly amended the Copyright Act to extend 
to new media and means of exploitation.
The domain of copyrighted works expanded over the course of the 
nineteenth century due to technological advances, changes in the creative 
market, and resulting changes in the scope of protectable subject matter. 
The publishing industry experienced explosive growth, with innovations 
in technologies for embodying artistic expression, such as the invention of 
photography. Whole new categories of works were created with Congress 
and the courts expanded protection to cover them. As the Supreme Court 
would later observe, ﬁ[a]s our technology has expanded the means avail
-able for creative activity and has provided economical means for repro
-ducing manifestations of such activity, new areas of federal protection 
have been initiatedﬂ 
Goldstein v. California
, 412 U.S. 546, 562 n.17 (1973).
Over the course of the nineteenth century, the nature of the exclusive 
rights granted by U.S. copyright law changed from the initial relatively 
narrow rights to print, reprint, publish, and vend. Some of this change 
occurred in the courts whose decisions were later codi˜ed in subsequent 
statutory amendments. In 1856, copyright holders™ exclusive rights were 
expanded by statute to cover the right to publicly perform dramatic 
works. In 1870, translation and dramatic adaptation were added to the 
Copyright Act. In 1897, a public performance right was added for dra
-matic musical compositions. The process of judicial development and 
legislative codi˜cation also included limitations to the scope of copyright. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 67The fair use doctrine, for example, now set forth in Section 107 of the 
Copyright Act, traces back to Justice Joseph Story™s seminal 1841 decision 
in 
Folsom v. Marsh
, 9 F. Cas. 342 (C.C.D. Mass. 1841). 
1909 Act
Congress comprehensively overhauled the Copyright Act in 1909. 
Building on the more modest amendments of the prior half century, the 
1909 Act broadened the scope of copyright protection. It de˜ned copy
-rightable subject matter to encompass ﬁall the writings of an author.ﬂ It 
added to the copyright holder™s exclusive rights the right to ﬁmake any 
other version[s]ﬂ of literary works. The 1909 Act doubled the duration 
of copyright protection and codi˜ed two important doctrines that had 
been recognized in the copyright case law. The 1909 Act™s ﬁwork-for-hireﬂ 
provision speci˜ed that ﬁthe word ‚author™ shall include an employer in 
the case of works made for hire.ﬂ The 1909 Act also codi˜ed the ﬁ˜rst 
sale doctrine,ﬂ providing that the owner of an authorized copy of a copy
-righted work may distribute and display that copy publicly notwithstand
-ing the copyright owner™s exclusive rights. 
The increasing scope and complexity of copyright law in the early 
twentieth century interacted with efforts by private parties, some of them 
government encouraged, to manage those rights through contractual and 
institutional mechanisms. The foremost example of innovative private 
ordering was the formation in 1914 of ASCAP for the purpose of enforcing 
the public performance rights that had been created in 1897. After initiat
-ing a series of lawsuits to con˜rm their right to object to the performance 
of their compositions in restaurants and similar venues, ASCAP estab
-lished a blanket license that alleviated the transaction costs that might 
otherwise have made it dif˜cult for those venues and later radio stations 
to license the rights to perform a wide variety of musical compositions 
owned by publishers and individual composers.
1976 Act and Related Reforms
Through the middle of the 20th century, advances in technology for 
creating and distributing works of authorshipŠmost notably, sound 
recording and broadcastingŠas well as anachronisms of the 1909 Act 
periodically aroused interest in reforming the copyright law. In 1955, Con
-gress funded the Copyright Of˜ce to undertake a series of studies aimed 
at assessing the copyright system and set in motion an effort aimed at 
comprehensive reform of the statute through negotiation among govern
-ment of˜cials, the principal interest groups affected by copyright policy, 
and scholars. The reform efforts stalled in the mid- to late 1960s. Although 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 APPENDIX Aa more comprehensive reform was delayed, Congress did proceed with 
a narrower change to the law. It provided copyright protection for sound 
recordings in 1971. Finally, after two decades of study, negotiation, and 
debate, Congress approved the 1976 Act, which continues to serve as the 
principal framework for copyright protection in the United States. 
The 1976 Act expanded the scope of copyrightable subject matter to 
any original work of authorship ˜xed in a tangible medium of expres
-sion, thus spanning the broad range of literary and artistic expression 
including literature, music, dance, sculpture, graphics, painting, photog
-raphy, sound, movies, and computer programming. The Act established 
a new trigger for protection of these works, replacing publication with 
mere ﬁ˜xationﬂ of an original work in a ﬁtangible medium of expres
-sionﬂ and relaxing formal registration requirements. The Act thus made 
copyright protection easier to acquire. It also extended copyright dura
-tion. The 1976 Act replaced the dual term of protection with a unitary 
term that lasted in most cases for the life of the author plus 50 years, 75 
years in the case of anonymous works, pseudonymous works, and works 
made for hire. 
The comprehensive reworking of the copyright law also introduced 
new language de˜ning copyright protections:
Reproduction
. The owner has the exclusive right to make copies of the 
protected work. Courts have interpreted this to mean that the owner may 
sue a copier for infringement if the copying is ﬁsubstantial,ﬂ even if the 
copy is in a different form or is only part of the whole.
Derivative Works
. The owner has the exclusive right to prepare derivative 
works, which are works based on the original but in different forms or 
otherwise altered (e.g., translations, movies based on books, etc.). These 
derivative works are themselves copyrightable to the extent that they 
contain original expression. Note that the right to create derivative works 
is closely related to the right to reproduce and employs essentially the 
same standard for infringement. 
Distribution
. The owner has the right to control the sale and distribution 
to the public of the original and all copies or derivative works. However, 
this right extends only to the ˜rst sale of such works. The owner does not have the right to bar resale or lending by purchasers of her works except 
in certain limited circumstances, such as rental of sound recordings.
Performance and Display
. The owner has the right to control public but 
not private performance and display of her works, including both liter
-ary and performance-oriented works. This right extends to computer 
programs and other audiovisual works. The owner generally does not, 
however, have the right to prevent the display of a particular original or 
copy of a work of art in a public place.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 69The 1976 Act codi˜ed and expanded limits on the rights of copy
-right holders. It clari˜ed that protection does not extend to any ﬁidea, 
procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or 
discoveryﬂ embodied in protected works, but only to their expression 
(17 U.S.C. §102(b)). It preempted most state and common law protec
-tions that overlap with federal copyright protection, established several 
new compulsory licensing regimes, approved numerous exemptions from 
liability for speci˜ed users and uses, and codi˜ed the fair use doctrine that 
had developed in the courts. Congress explicated the doctrine™s general 
contoursŠto create leeway for criticism, comment, news reporting, teach
-ing, scholarship, and researchŠand set forth a multi-factor test to deter
-mine whether use of copyrighted material should be permitted without 
the owner™s authorization.
The 1976 Act also included several provisions regarding the transfer
-ability of copyrights, more fully acknowledging the variety of mecha
-nisms by which authors may transfer or simply share their rights in whole 
or in part. A new provision ended a doctrine known as ﬁindivisibilityﬂ 
and enabled authors to execute outright transfers via a signed written 
instrument of one, some, or all of their exclusive rights, which can then 
be transferred again by subsequent owners. Authors and subsequent 
owners may also grant nonexclusive licenses that merely authorize uses 
that copyright law otherwise secures to them, without transferring their 
copyrights. The Act also granted authors an inalienable right to reclaim 
copyrights 35 years after transfer. 
Berne Convention Accession
As the global content market expanded in the 1980s, the United States became the last major industrialized country to join the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works. U.S. accession heralded 
important changes in the fabric of the U.S. copyright system by making 
compliance with formalities (registration of works with the government)
1 discretionary, introducing a narrow concept of the continental doctrine of 
ﬁmoral rights,ﬂ and restoring copyright for qualifying foreign works that 
had lost protection in the United States for failure to comply with formali
-ties. In 1994, with the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral 
trade negotiations, the United States implemented the Agreement on 
1Under the Copyright Act of 1909, which governs works published with proper notice 
prior to 1978, copyright registration was not required during the ˜rst term (28 years) of 
protection. Registration was required to obtain a renewal term during the 27th year of 
copyright susbsitence. That renewal registration requirement was abolished in 1992. Formal 
registration has never been required for works created after 1978, although the Copyright 
Act encourages registration through enhancement of remedies and procedural advantages.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 APPENDIX ATrade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). The TRIPS 
Agreement led to some substantive changes to U.S. copyright lawŠsuch 
as restoration of U.S. copyright protection for foreign works that had 
been injected into the public domain as a result of failure to comply with 
formalitiesŠand subjects the United States, like other members of the 
WTO to mandatory dispute settlement for domestic copyright provisions, 
including judicial decisions, that may be deemed inconsistent with treaty 
obligations. 
THE DIGITAL AGE
By the early 1990s, advances in digital technology were beginning 
to be felt in the major content markets. The traditional content indus
-tries believed that widespread availability of technology for making and 
distributing low-cost, perfect copies of digital media could undermine 
their ability to enforce their rights. In response, Congress passed several 
detailed amendments to the Copyright Act aimed at reforming copyright 
law for the digital age. The Audio Home Recording Act of 1992 regu
-lated the design of now largely obsolete digital audio tape technology 
and imposed a levy on the sale of devices and blank media to compen
-sate copyright owners for losses from home copying. The Digital Perfor
-mance Right in Sound Recordings Act of 1995 afforded owners of sound 
recordings a basis for earning income on digital streams of their works. 
The No Electronic Theft (NET) Act of 1996 expanded criminal enforce
-ment for piracy over digital networks. The Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act (DMCA) of 1998, implementing two international treaties, afforded 
copyright owners rights against those who circumvent copy protection 
technologies subject to several exceptions and limitations, and insulated 
online service providers from liability for infringing acts of their subscrib
-ers. In 1998, Congress also added an additional 20 years to the duration of 
copyright protection. The Digital Theft Deterrence and Copyright Dam
-ages Improvement Act of 1999 signi˜cantly increased statutory damages 
for the infringement of copyright.
 COMPARING THE COPYRIGHT AND PATENT REGIMES
Although the copyright and patent laws ˚ow from the same consti
-tutional text and share the same general approachŠstatutorily created 
exclusive rightsŠthey re˚ect very different ˜elds of endeavor. Copyrights 
are generally easier to secure and last substantially longer than patents, 
although the scope of protection afforded copyrights is far narrower than 
that given to patents.
 In contrast to patents, the exclusive rights under copyright law are 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 71subject to far more exemptions as well as statutory licenses. Copyright 
law protects only against copying and distribution of protected expres
-sion, some public performances or displays of copyrighted works, and the 
unauthorized creation of derivative works. Thus, independent creation of 
a copyrighted work does not violate the Copyright Act, nor does copying 
the unprotected elements of a work, such as facts, ideas, or material that 
is unoriginal or in the public domain. Although the United States Copy
-right Of˜ce registers works, it does not, unlike the Patent Of˜ce, conduct 
a search of the prior art or make any assessment of validity other than to 
ensure a modicum of creativity. The Copyright Of˜ce functions largely 
as a recording of˜ce. Registration today merely records a presumptively 
valid copyright.
Patent law offers the possibility of a limited period of exclusive rights 
to encourage research and development aimed at discovering new pro
-cesses, machines, and compositions of matter, and improvements thereof. 
Obtaining a patent involves a detailed government examination to assess 
protectability. To obtain a utility patent, an inventor must submit an appli
-cation to the Patent and Trademark Of˜ce (PTO) meeting ˜ve require
-ments: patentable subject matter, usefulness, novelty, nonobviousness, 
and adequate disclosure. Although the utility threshold is low, the novelty 
and nonobviousness standards are more substantial, and the PTO con
-ducts an independent review of the application to ensure that it meets 
these requirements. 
If the PTO grants a patent, the inventor obtains rights that can be 
substantially broader than those encompassed by a copyrightŠa fun
-damental difference between the two systems. Whereas patents protect 
the claimed invention whether or not the accused device, manufacture, 
composition of matter, or process was copied by the defendant, copyright 
law only protects against copying. Therefore, truly independent creation 
of the copyrighted work does not violate copyright law. Furthermore, oth
-ers are free to use the unprotected elements of a copyrighted work. They 
may also make ﬁfair useﬂ of a copyrighted work.
In contrast, a patent grants its holder the exclusive rights to make, 
use, and sell the innovation, regardless of how another comes by the 
knowledge. The patent grant is nearly absolute within the boundaries of 
the patent™s claims, barring even those who independently develop the 
invention from practicing its art.
2 Infringement will be found where the 
2The America Invents Act, passed in 2011, establishes prior user rights. See 35 U.S.C. § 273. 
In addition, in the aftermath of the Supreme Court™s decision in 
eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, 
L.L.C.,
 547 U.S. 388 (2006), injunctive relief is not longer routinely awarded in patent cases. 
Courts now apply an equitable balancing test that can result in a court-determined perma
-nent damage award.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 APPENDIX Aaccused device, composition, or process embodies all of the elements of 
a valid patent claim or accomplishes substantially the same function in 
substantially the same way to achieve the same result. A patent™s breadth 
is counterbalanced by a term that is short relative to the duration of copy
-right protection. A patent lasts for 20 years from the application ˜ling 
dateŠroughly one-˜fth the length of copyright protection. 
Despite these differences in scope, the rights granted by copyright 
and patent law are similar in an important respectŠthey do not vary 
much across the wide range of respective forms of subject matter. Under 
copyright law, a motion picture costing tens of millions of dollars to pro
-duce is treated in the same manner as a relatively modest graphic image 
on a shampoo bottle. The same is largely true for patent protection, which 
affords pharmaceutical discoveries that could cost hundreds of millions of 
dollars to develop comparable protection to relatively modest advances 
in computer software, although the patent system has subtly differenti
-ated patent protection across technological ˜elds. Copyright law affords 
somewhat greater categorical variation, as re˚ected in the distinctive rules 
applicable to music compositions, which are subject to compulsory licens
-ing, and sound recordings, which only enjoy a limited public performance 
right for broadcast transmissions. In general, however, both copyright 
and patent can be characterized as granting exclusive rights across broad 
˜elds of innovative and creative endeavors, although subject to statutory 
and jurisprudential variation in scope, rights, exceptions and defenses.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Commissioned Paper Authors
The Impact of Digitization on Business Models in Copyright-Driven 
Industries: A Review of the Economic Issues
Lisa Cameron and Coleman Bazelon
http://sites.nationalacademies.org/xpedio/groups/pgasite/
documents/webpage/pga_063398.pdf
 Lisa Cameron is a principal at the Brattle Group with over 15 years of 
experience consulting to attorneys and companies involved in commercial 
litigation, regulatory proceedings, and other complex matters. Her indus
-try experience includes energy, telecommunications, consumer products, 
broadcasting, software, health care, transportation, and pharmaceuticals.
Dr. Cameron has broad experience in intellectual property, regulatory 
policy, antitrust, and ˜nance matters. In addition, she has testi˜ed in mat
-ters involving competition and investment incentives before the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission and state public utility commissions. 
 Prior to becoming a consultant, Dr. Cameron was a professor of eco
-nomics in Carnegie Mellon University™s Graduate School of Business, 
where she taught courses in microeconomic theory, regulation, and anti
-trust policy. She earned her B.Sc. in Business/Economics from Cornell 
University and her Ph.D. in Economics from Stanford University.
Coleman Bazelon
 is a principal at the Brattle Group, which provides 
consulting and expert testimony in economics, ˜nance, and regulation to 
corporations, law ˜rms, and governments around the world. Dr. Bazelon 
73
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 APPENDIX Bis an expert in regulation and strategy in the wireless, wireline, and video 
sectors. He has consulted and testi˜ed on behalf of clients in numer
-ous telecommunications matters, ranging from wireless license auctions, 
spectrum management, and competition policy, to patent infringement, 
wireless reselling, and broadband deployment. 
Dr. Bazelon frequently advises regulatory and legislative bodies, 
including the U.S. Federal Communications Commission and the U.S. 
Congress. He also has expertise in the federal government™s use of dis
-count rates for policy and regulatory analysis, intellectual property valu
-ation, and antitrust and damages analysis. Prior to joining Brattle, Dr. 
Bazelon was a vice president with Analysis Group, an economic and 
strategy consulting ˜rm. During that time, he expanded the ˜rm™s tele
-communications practice area. He also served as a principal analyst in 
the Microeconomic and Financial Studies Division of the Congressional 
Budget Of˜ce (CBO) where he researched reforms of radio spectrum 
management; estimated the budgetary and private sector impacts of spec-trum-related legislative proposals; and advised on auction design and 
privatization issues for all research at the CBO. 
Dr. Bazelon earned his B.A. in Economics from Wesleyan, his M.S. in 
Agricultural and Resource Economics from the London School of Eco
-nomics, and his Ph.D. from the University of California at Berkeley.
Economic Effect of Copyright: The Empirical Evidence So Far
Christian Handke
http://sites.nationalacademies.org/xpedio/groups/pgasite/
documents/webpage/pga_063399.pdf
Christian Handke
 is Assistant Professor (tenured) of Cultural Eco
-nomics at Erasmus University Rotterdam and Senior Researcher at Uni
-versity of Amsterdam. At Erasmus University, Dr. Handke is program 
coordinator for the Master in Cultural Economics and Entrepreneurship. 
At University of Amsterdam, he participates in the research project on 
Copyright in an Age of Access. His research focuses on cultural economics 
and the economics of copyright, innovation, and technological change, as 
well as the record industry.
In 2010, Dr. Handke received his doctorate in economics at Erasmus 
University Rotterdam with highest distinction. His dissertation was short-
listed for the Boekman Dissertation Prize 2012. He also holds an M.A. 
with distinction in Science, Technology, and Society from Linköping Uni
-versity (Sweden) and a B.A. in European Studies from the University of 
North London. Between 2003 and 2007, he was junior lecturer/researcher 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 75at Humboldt University Berlin, Centre for British Studies, where he par
-ticipated in the research project on Commerce and Culture.
Christian Handke has consulted for a variety of public and private 
organizations, including Industry Canada, the UK Intellectual Property 
Of˜ce and Fundacion Autor (Spain).
Online Access and the Scienti˜c Journal Market: An Economist™s Perspective
Mark J. McCabe
http://sites.nationalacademies.org/xpedio/groups/pgasite/
documents/webpage/pga_063400.pdf
Mark J. McCabe
 is a research investigator in the School of Informa
-tion at the University of Michigan, a visiting professor in the Department 
of Economics at the University of Goettingen in Germany, and a Visiting 
Scholar at OFCE and SKEMA Business School in Sophia Antipolis, France. 
Dr. McCabe™s research in the ˜eld of industrial organization currently 
focuses on the economics of digital information goods markets (with a 
particular interest in scienti˜c publishing) and the implications of the 
online environment for competition policy. His research has appeared 
in scholarly journals including the 
American Economic Review, 
the 
Rand 
Journal of Economics, 
and 
Nature.
 As a member of the State Center Panel 
of Economists, Dr. McCabe has assisted Attorney Generals from different 
states including California, Connecticut, Illinois, Massachusetts, and New 
York, on a variety of antitrust investigations. He earned his B.A. from 
Brown University, his M.S. from MIT and his Ph.D. in Applied Economics 
from the Sloan School of Management at MIT.
Copyright-Protected Assets in the National Accounts
Rachel Soloveichik and David Wasshausen
http://sites.nationalacademies.org/xpedio/groups/pgasite/
documents/webpage/pga_063401.pdf
Rachel Soloveichik
 works for the U.S. Department of Commerce™s 
Bureau of Economic Analysis. Dr. Soloveichik earned her B.A. in Math 
and Statistics, then her M.B.A. and Ph.D. in Economics from the Univer
-sity of Chicago. Her interests include entertainment investment, biologi
-cal investment, personal remittances by immigrants, and other areas. Dr. 
Soloveichik™s papers have been published in the Survey of Current Business
 and the 
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings
.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 APPENDIX BDave Wasshausen
 is chief of the Industry Sector Division within the 
Bureau of Economic Analysis™s (BEA) Industry Economic Accounts direc
-torate.  He is responsible for the preparation and publication of many of 
the industry accounts products, including the forthcoming arts and cul
-tural production satellite account. Previously, Mr. Wasshausen spent over 
20 years working in BEA™s National Economic Accounts directorate, most 
recently overseeing BEA™s Fixed Assets Accounts, which included net 
stocks, depreciation, and ˜xed investment. His areas of interest include 
input-output analysis, index number theory, price indexes for IT goods 
and services, productivity analysis, and depreciation pro˜les. He earned 
his Bachelors and Masters in Economics from Miami University and 
American University respectively. Mr. Wasshausen is published in the 
American Economic Review
 and the National Bureau of Economic Research 
journal 
Measuring Capital in the New Economy
.Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Committee Members
William J. Raduchel, 
Chair
, is an independent director, angel investor, 
and strategic advisor. He is the non-executive Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of Opera Software ASA and is a director of ePals, Live Intent, 
MokaFive, and Virident, all private companies. He is also a director of 
two public companiesŠBlackboard, Inc. and Silicon Image. Dr. Raduchel 
is a strategic advisor to Daily Mail and General Trust PLC, a leading U.K. 
media company, and to Naspers, Ltd. He teaches corporate strategy at 
the McDonough School of Business, Georgetown University, and is a 
strategic advisor to Myriad International Holdings, Trion World Network 
and vMark. After receiving his B.A. in economics from Michigan State 
University in 1966, and his A.M. (1968) and Ph.D. (1972) degrees in eco
-nomics at Harvard, he taught economics, econometrics, and public policy 
at Harvard. He also served as Assistant Dean of Admissions and Financial 
Aid for Harvard and Radcliffe Colleges. In the late 1980s, he joined Sun 
Microsystems, Inc. where he served as Chief Information Of˜cer, Chief 
Financial Of˜cer, Acting Vice President of Human Resources, and Vice 
President of Corporate Planning and Development. He also managed 
relationships with the major Japanese partners. After spending 11 years 
at Sun Microsystems, Dr. Raduchel joined AOL and served as strategic 
advisor, Executive Vice President, and Chief Technology Of˜cer. In 2001, 
Infoworld named him CTO of the year. He was recognized separately as 
CIO of the year and as best CFO in the computer industry. Dr. Raduchel 
left AOL in 2002. From March 2004 through June 2006, he was CEO and 
Chairman of the Board of Ruckus Network, a digital entertainment net
-77
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 APPENDIX Cwork for students at colleges and universities. Dr. Raduchel is a member 
of the Conference of Business Economists and the Board on Science, Tech
-nology, and Economic Policy of the National Academies. He was also a 

member of the National Academies™ Committee on Internet Navigation 

and Domain Name Services and the STEP committee which produced 

A Patent System for the 21st Century
. He has several issued and pending 
patents. 
Peter S. Menell, 
Vice Chair
, is Robert L. Bridges Professor of Law at the 
University of California at Berkeley School of Law. He is one of the U.S. 
Patent and Trademark Of˜ce™s inaugural Thomas Alva Edison Visiting 

Professionals, where he serves as an expert advisor. After graduating from 

law school, he clerked for the Honorable Jon O. Newman of the U.S. Court 

of Appeals for the Second Circuit. Dr. Menell joined the law faculty at the 

University of California at Berkeley in 1990, where his research and teach
-ing have focused on intellectual property and the digital technology and 

entertainment industries, as well as environmental law, property law, and 

law and economics. In 1995, he co-founded the Berkeley Center for Law 

and Technology where he serves as a director. He has written more than 

50 articles and numerous books, including 
Intellectual Property in the New 
Technological Age
 (with R. Merges and M. Lemley, now in its 6th edition) 
and 
Software and Internet Law
 (with M. Lemley, R. Merges, P. Samuelson, 
and B. Carver, now in its 4th edition). Dr. Menell has co-authored numer
-ous articles on copyright law with David Nimmer and has contributed to 

Nimmer on Copyright, a leading treatise. He has organized more than 40 

intellectual property education programs for the Federal Judicial Center 

since 1998. Dr. Menell founded and supervises the Annual Review of Law 

and Technology (now in its 16th year, published by the Berkeley Technol
-ogy Law Journal). He has advised the U.S. Congress, federal agencies, 

state attorney generals, and major technology and entertainment com
-panies on a wide range of intellectual property, licensing, and antitrust 

matters. Dr. Menell earned his S.B. from the Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology, his M.A. and Ph.D. in economics from Stanford University, 

and J.D. from Harvard Law School.
Michael A. Keller
 is the Ida M. Green University Librarian, Director of 
Academic Information Resources, Founder and Publisher of HighWire 
Press, and Publisher of the Stanford University Press. As University 

Librarian, he champions deep collecting of traditional library materials 

(especially of manuscript and archival materials) concurrent with full 

engagement in emerging information technologies. Uniquely, Mr. Keller™s 

responsibilities at Stanford encompass libraries, cybraries, academic 

and residential computing, publishing, and publishing services. Long 

involved in the great debate on serials pricing, especially in the arenas of 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 79science, technology, and medicine, he has served as advisor, consultant, 
and committee member to the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science and many other scholarly societies. Based on the successful 
HighWire model, Mr. Keller is now fostering development of additional 
information tools and services for the scholarly community. He speaks 
at about thirty professional, high-technology, and scholarly gatherings 
around the world every year on topics ranging from librarianship, musi
-cology, information topography, to national and global information policy. 
Mr. Keller™s board service includes Hamilton College, Long Now Foun
-dation, Japan™s National Institute for Informatics, the National Library of 
China, Biblioteca Alexandrina, The Council on Library and Information 
Resources, SIPX Inc., and Mondobiotech AG. Keller is a guest professor 
at the Chinese Academy of Sciences, has been Senior Presidential Fellow 
of the Council on Library and Information Resources, in 2008 was elected 
a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, 
and in 2010 was elected Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and 
Sciences. Mr. Keller was educated at Hamilton College (B.A. Biology and 
Music, 1967), SUNY Buffalo (M.A. Musicology, 1970), and SUNY Geneseo 
(MLS, 1971). From 1973 to 1981, Mr. Keller served as Music Librarian and 
Senior Lecturer in Musicology at Cornell University and then in a similar 
capacity at University of California at Berkeley. While at Berkeley, he 
also taught musicology at Stanford University and began the complete 
revision of the de˜nitive Music Research and Reference Materials. Yale 
called him to the post of Associate University Librarian and Director of 
Collection Development in 1986.
Christopher M. Kelly 
is a Silicon Valley-based attorney with a long track 
record of representing innovative companies and helping make the Inter
-net a safer place for children and adults alike. Most recently, Mr. Kelly 
was a Democratic candidate for Attorney General of California, ˜nishing 
second in a ˜eld of seven in the June 2010 primary election. Previously, 
as the ˜rst Chief Privacy Of˜cer, and Head of Global Public policy for 
Facebook, he worked with attorneys general in all 50 states to develop 
safeguards protecting children from sexual predators and represented 
the company in complex situations involving privacy and intellectual 
property in the digital age. As a policy advisor for President Clinton™s 
1992 campaign and then his White House Domestic Policy Council and 
Department of Education, Mr. Kelly advanced critical domestic programs, 
including the successful initiative to put 100,000 new community police 
of˜cers on America™s streets and the formation of AmeriCorps, a network 
of national service programs that engage Americans to improve educa
-tion, public safety, health, and the environment. In 1997, he returned to 
California to clerk for federal Judge Barry Moskowitz of the United States 
District Court in San Diego. He assisted on a range of criminal and civil 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
cases, including drug smuggling, immigration, and money laundering. In 
1998, he returned to his boyhood home in Silicon Valley to practice law. 
Among other clients, Mr. Kelly represented Netscape in the Microsoft 
antitrust case and Diamond Multimedia in the groundbreaking suit over 
the MP3 player that furthered personal use rights over digital content. He 
received his undergraduate degree from Georgetown University, a mas
-ter™s degree in political theory from Yale University, and his law degree 
from Harvard University.
Ruth Okediji
 is the William L. Prosser Professor of Law at the Univer
-sity of Minnesota Law School where she teaches contracts, copyright, 
trademarks, patents, and global aspects of intellectual property law. After 
visiting at the University of Minnesota in 2001, Dr. Okediji joined the Min
-nesota faculty in the 2002-2003 academic year. She served on the faculty 
at the University of Oklahoma College of Law from 1994 to 2002, where 
she held the Edith Kinney Gaylord Presidential Professorship. She is an 
internationally renowned expert on international intellectual property 
with a special emphasis on innovation policy, technology transfer, copy
-right and new technologies, and on the geo-political relationship between 
multilateral trade law, innovation, and intellectual property policy. Dr. 
Okediji™s scholarship focuses on the design and implementation of legal 
rules, institutions, and processes that shape national and international 
policies on intellectual property rights. She has written, lectured, and pub
-lished extensively on these topics. She has also worked with numerous 
international organizations including the United Nations Development 
Program™s (UNDP) ˚agship project on Innovation, Culture, Biogenetic 
Resources, and Traditional Knowledge; the United Nations Conference 
on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)-ICTSD Capacity Building Project 
on Intellectual Property Rights and Sustainable Development; and as 
an advisor to various countries on intellectual property policies under 
the auspices of the Commercial Law Development Program of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce. Dr. Okediji has earned numerous teaching 
awards, citations, and has held an appointment in public service. She 
has chaired the American Association of Law School™s Section on Intel
-lectual Property, Section on Law and Computers, and the Nominating 
Committee. She also is a member of the Executive Board of the Order of 
the Coif. At the University of Minnesota, Dr. Okediji recently co-chaired 
the university-wide committee which helped develop the new Regents 
Copyright Policy. She has held visiting research positions at Harvard Law 
School and the Max Planck Institute for International and Comparative 
Patent, Copyright, Trademark, and Unfair Competition Law in Munich, 
Germany. She is a member of the New York Bar, the Minnesota Bar, and 
the American Bar Association. 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 81Marilyn Hall Patel
 served as a judge on the United States District Court 
for the Northern District of California, sitting in San Francisco, since 
August 1980 when she was nominated by Jimmy Carter to a seat vacated 
by Lloyd Hudson Burke, until 2012. She is a member of the Bars of New 
York and California. Judge Patel was the ˜rst woman to serve as Chief 
Judge of the Court and held that position from 1997 to 2004. Prior to 
joining the federal bench, she served on the bench of the state court of 
California. During her years on the bench, Judge Patel has presided over 
many intellectual property cases ranging from patent to copyright and 
trademark to trade secret cases. Among them was the litigation involv
-ing the original peer-to-peer ˜le sharing system, Napster. She has been 
involved in a number of advanced legal education programs within and 
outside the United States on litigation, civil practice, securities law, and 
intellectual property law as well as a number of other subjects. She has 
participated in programs conducted by Loyola School of Law and Califor
-nia Institute of Technology delving into the intersection of technology and 
other important issues including human genome research, communica
-tion, and globalization. She has also been one of the initiators of judicial 
education programs in California and federal courts dealing with gender 
bias and equity, leading to the ˜rst gender bias studies and commissions 
in these courts. Judge Patel received her B.A. degree from Wheaton Col
-lege in 1959 and her J.D. from Fordham University Law School in 1963.
Mitch Singer
 is Chief Digital Strategy Of˜cer at Sony Pictures Entertain
-ment. In this capacity, Singer collaborates with Sony Pictures™ various 
business units on studio-wide strategies to address the ongoing digital 
transformation of the entertainment industryŠ helping to identify digital 
business opportunities, exploring new products, formats, and services, 
representing SPE in industry forums, and working to mitigate digital 
theft. He focuses on emerging and disruptive technologies and evaluates 
and develops adaptive business models to stay ahead of the technologi
-cal curve. In addition to developing new consumer usage models, Singer 
plays a central role in Sony Pictures™ worldwide anti-digital theft and 
digital rights management efforts. Singer has been the lead negotiator for 
Sony Pictures in content protection technology licensing issues. 
Singer represents the studio in numerous standards setting activities. 
He currently serves as President of DECE, the 75-member, cross-industry 
consortium behind UltraViolet (
http://www.uvvu.com
), the effort to cre
-ate open standards for digital entertainment distribution enabling con
-sumers to acquire and play content across a wide range of services and 
devices. 
Singer sits on the boards of Motion Picture Laboratories, DVD CCA, 
Entertainment Technology Center USC, the HDBaseT Alliance as well as 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
the HQME (ﬁHigh Quality Mobile Experienceﬂ) Steering Committee. He 
also was on the Board of Industry Leaders for the Consumer Electronics 
Association (CEA). 
Christopher Sprigman
 joined the University of Virginia™s School of Law 
in 2005. As the Class of 1963 Research Professor in Honor of Graham C. 
Lilly and Peter W. Low, he teaches intellectual property law, antitrust law, 
competition policy, and comparative constitutional law. Mr. Sprigman™s 
scholarship focuses on how legal rules affect innovation and the deploy
-ment of new technologies. He received his B.A. with honors from the Uni
-versity of Pennsylvania in 1988 then attended the University of Chicago 
Law School, serving as a Comment Editor of the University of Chicago 
Law Review and graduating with honors in 1993. Following graduation, 
Mr. Sprigman clerked for the Honorable Stephen Reinhardt of the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and for Justice Lourens H. W. 
Ackermann of the Constitutional Court of South Africa. He also taught 
at the law school of the University of the Witwatersrand, in Johannes
-burg, South Africa. From 1999 to 2001, Mr. Sprigman served as Appellate 
Counsel in the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of Justice, where 
he worked on 
U.S. v. Microsoft
, among other matters. He then joined the 
Washington, DC, of˜ce of King & Spalding LLP, where he was elected a 
partner. In 2003, he left law practice to become a Residential Fellow at the 
Center for Internet & Society at Stanford Law School before joining the 
University of Virginia faculty, two years later.
Scott Stern
 is the School of Management Distinguished Professor and 
Chair of the Technological Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Strategic 
Management Group at the MIT Sloan School of Management. He is the 
co-organizer of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Inno
-vation Policy and the Economy Working Group and a Senior Fellow of 
the Searle Center on Law, Regulation, and Economic Growth. Dr. Stern 
is also an associate editor of 
Management Science
, the 
Journal of Industrial 
Economics
, the 
International Journal of Industrial Organization
, serves on 
the Board of Management of the International Schumpeter Society, and 
has served on the editorial boards of the 
Antitrust Law Journal
 and the 
Journal of Business and Economics Statistics
. In 2005, he was awarded the 
˜rst Ewing Marion Kauffman Prize Medal for Distinguished Research in 
Entrepreneurship. Dr. Stern explores how innovationŠthe production 
and distribution of ideasŠdiffers from more traditional economic goods, 
and the implications of these differences for business and public policy. 
His more recent studies examine the drivers of commercialization strat
-egy for technology entrepreneurs, the determinants of R&D productivity, 
and the role of incentives and organizational design on the process of 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 83innovation. He works widely with both companies and governments in 
understanding the drivers and consequences of innovation and entrepre
-neurship, and has worked extensively in understanding the role of inno
-vation and entrepreneurship in competitiveness and regional economic 
performance. Dr. Stern graduated with a B.A. degree in economics from 
New York University, and received his Ph.D. in economics from Stanford 
University in 1996. From 2001 to 2003 Stern was a Non-Resident Senior 
Fellow of the Brookings Institution and between 2001-2010 he was an 
associate professor at the Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern 
University.
Molly Shaffer Van Houweling
 is Professor of Law at the University of 
California, Berkeley, where she also serves as one of the Faculty Directors 
of the Berkeley Center for Law and Technology. She joined the Berkeley 
Law faculty in 2005 after starting her law teaching career at the Univer
-sity of Michigan. Ms. Van Houweling™s teaching and research interests 
include intellectual property, law and technology, and property doctrine 
and theory. Before entering academia, Ms. Van Houweling was President 
of Creative Commons, a nonpro˜t organization that facilitates sharing 
of intellectual property. Ms. Van Houweling has also served as Senior 
Adviser to the President and Board of Directors of ICANN, the entity that 
oversees the Internet Domain Name System. She has been a research fel
-low at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard Law School 
and at the Center for Internet and Society at Stanford Law School. Ms. 
Van Houweling served as a law clerk for Judge Michael Boudin of the U.S. 
Court of Appeals for the 1st Circuit and Justice David H. Souter of the U.S. 
Supreme Court. She received her B.A. from the University of Michigan 
(1994) and her J.D. from Harvard Law School (1998).
Paul Vidich
 is a director of MediaNet Digital (also known as Musicnet) 
since 2006 and a director of Reverbnation (since 2009). He is Vice Chair
-man of the Board of Governors, The New School for Social Research, 
and is a director of Poets & Writers. Mr. Vidich also serves as Member of 
Strategic Advisory Board at Brightcove, Inc., and is an advisor to various 
other Internet companies. He has extensive experience with music and 
media. As Executive Vice President at Warner Music, Mr. Vidich was 
responsible for global business development and technology strategy, 
closing the ˜rst major record company agreement with Apple iTunes in 
2002, which became the template for deals Apple would later conclude 
with Universal Music, Sony, and EMI. He was also responsible for world
-wide music strategies, market research, technology and business devel
-opment activities, including joint-venture development, acquisitions and 
initiatives in mobile, e-commerce, electronic music distribution, and new 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84 COPYRIGHT IN THE DIGITAL ERA
music formats. At AOL, Mr. Vidich was the senior executive in charge of 
video operations, and helped establish the ˜rst on-demand, premium-
content video portal that laid the ground work for companies like Hulu. 
He also managed AOL™s acquisition of video search company, Truveo, and 
led AOL™s investment in Brightcove. Mr. Vidich holds an M.B.A. from the 
Wharton School of Finance and Commerce at the University of Pennsyl
-vania, and a B.A. from Wesleyan University. He received his MFA in 2009 
from Rutgers-Newark. 
Joel Waldfogel
 is the Frederick R. Kappel Chair in Applied Economics 
at the University of Minnesota™s Carlson School of Management and is a 
research associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Before 
coming to Carlson, Dr. Waldfogel was at the University of Pennsylvania™s 
Wharton School (1997-2010), where he was the Ehrenkranz Family Profes
-sor of Business and Public Policy and had served as department chair and 
associate vice dean. Between 1990 and 1997, he was an assistant and later 
an associate professor of economics at Yale University. Dr. Waldfogel™s 
main research interests are industrial organization and law and econom
-ics. He has conducted empirical studies of price advertising, media mar
-kets, the operation of differentiated product markets, and issues related 
to digital products, including piracy, pricing, and revenue sharing. He 
has published over 50 articles in scholarly outlets including the 
American 
Economic Review
, the 
Journal of Political Economy
, and the 
RAND Journal of 
Economics
. He has published two books and has also written for 
Slate
. Dr. 
Waldfogel serves on the advisory boards of two companies, Tango Card, 
Inc. and HowMutch. He received an A.B. in economics from Brandeis 
University in 1984 and a Ph.D. in economics at Stanford University in 
1990. 
STAFF
Stephen A. Merrill, 
project director, has been Executive Director of the 
National Academies™ Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy 
(STEP) since its formation in 1992. With the sponsorship of numerous fed
-eral government agencies, foundations, multinational corporations, and 
international institutions, the STEP program has become an important 
discussion forum and authoritative voice on innovation, competitive
-ness, intellectual property, human resources, statistical, and research and 
development policies. At the same time Dr. Merrill has directed many 
STEP projects and publications, including 
A Patent System for the 21st 
Century
 (2004), 
Innovation Inducement Prizes
 (2007), and 
Innovation in Global 
Industries
 (2008). For his work on patent reform he was named one of the 
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 8550 most in˚uential people worldwide in the intellectual property ˜eld by 
Managing Intellectual Property 
magazine and earned the Academies™ 2005 
Distinguished Service Award. He has been a member of the World Eco
-nomic Forum Global Council on the Intellectual Property System. Previ
-ously, Dr. Merrill was a Fellow in International Business at the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), where he specialized in tech
-nology trade issues. He served on various congressional staffs including 
the U.S. Senate Commerce, Science, and Transportation Committee, where 
he organized the ˜rst congressional hearings on international competi
-tion in the semiconductor and biotechnology industries. Dr. Merrill holds 
degrees in political science from Columbia (B.A.), Oxford (M.Phil.), and 
Yale (M.A. and Ph.D.) Universities. He attended the Kennedy School of 
Government™s Senior Executives Program and was an adjunct professor 
of international affairs at Georgetown University from 1989 to 1996. 
Aqila Coulthurst 
has been Program Coordinator for STEP since the fall 
of 2011. Prior to joining STEP, she spent over two years in the production 
and marketing divisions of the National Academies Press (NAP), the arm 
of the National Academies that publishes over 200 reports annually. Ms. 
Coulthurst was involved in several initiatives at NAP including: direct 
marketing and online outreach; facilitating the sale of intellectual prop
-erty rights to publishers abroad; and general operational support. She 
was instrumental in developing relationships with agents and publishers 
in the Asian market resulting in over $40K in intellectual property sales.
Over the years, Ms. Coulthurst has worked in various capacities at 
Smithsonian Enterprises, the National Community Action Foundation, 
Kingsley Associates, and the Center for Science, Technology, and Eco
-nomic Development at SRI International. She has experience conducting 
impact assessments and program evaluations, as well as recruiting experts 
to serve on committees in various ˜elds. In addition to her interest in U.S. 
competitiveness and innovation policies, Ms. Coulthurst is interested in 
how these policies impact development abroad. She spent several years 
studying U.S. foreign policy and sustainable development at renowned 
institutions in DC and while studying abroad in Central America. She 
has a B.A. in economics and in Spanish, and a certi˜cate in markets and 
management from Duke University. She also has a Master of Science in 
Foreign Service from Georgetown University.
Copyright in the Digital Era: Building Evidence for PolicyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.