DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/1497Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining theAgenda127 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-04176-8 | DOI 10.17226/1497The Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research CouncilKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Keeping the U.S.Computer IndustryCompetitive:Defining the Agenda
A Colloquium Report by the
Computer Science and Technology Board
Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources
National Research Council
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESSWASHINGTON, D.C. 1990
iKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the

National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distin-
guished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of sci-

ence and technology and to their use for the general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter

granted to it by the Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the fed-

eral government on scientific and technical matters. Dr. Frank Press is president of the National

Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the
National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding engineers. It is autonomous

in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sci-

ences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering

also sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education and

research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Robert M. White is president

of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to
secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy mat-

ters pertaining to the health of the public. The Institute acts under the responsibility given to the

National Academy of Sciences by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal govern-

ment and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr.

Samuel O. Thier is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to
associate the broad community of science and technology with the Academy's purposes of further-

ing knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general poli-

cies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the

National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing services to

the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is adminis-

tered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of Medicine. Dr. Frank Press and Dr. Robert M.

White are chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.
Support for this project was provided by the following organizations and agencies: Air Force
Office of Scientific Research (Grant No. N00014-87-J-1110), Apple Computer, Inc., Control Data

Corporation, Cray Research, Inc., the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (Grant No.

N00014-87-J-1110), Digital Equipment Corporation, Hewlett Packard, IBM Corporation, the

National Aeronautics and Space Administration (Grant No. CDA-860535), the National Science

Foundation (Grant No. CDA-860535), and the Office of Naval Research (Grant No. N00014-87-

J-1110).
Library of Congress Catalog Card No. 89-63507
International Standard Book Number 0-309-04176-7
COVER:
Flare, by Benoit B. Mandelbrot, IBM Fellow, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, and a Foreign
Associate of the National Academy of Sciences. Image courtesy of ACM Siggraph with permission 

of Professor Mandelbrot.
Shown is a framed fragment of a generalized Mandelbrot setŠ
a set of numbers that produce strikingly beautiful images of mathematical complexity that, as they ar

e magnified, reveal yet more detailed, infinitely nonrepeating tendrils, whorls, and curlicues.
Like the Mandelbrot set, the U.S. computer sector when viewed from afar may seem relatively 
well defined;
upon closer examination, however, the industry is revealed to consist of a myriad of complex and ev

olving interdependencies, driven by technology and subject to the ever-

changing constraints of the global marketplace.

Available from: National Academy Press 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20418

S064
Printed in the United States of America
iKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computer Science and Technology Board
JOSEPH F. TRAUB, Columbia University, 
ChairmanALFRED V. AHO, AT&T Bell Laboratories

JOHN SEELY BROWN, Xerox Corporation

MICHAEL L. DERTOUZOS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

SAMUEL H. FULLER, Digital Equipment Corporation

JAMES FREEMAN GILBERT, University of California at San Diego

WILLIAM A. GODDARD III, California Institute of Technology

JOHN L. HENNESSY, Stanford University

JOHN E. HOPCROFT, Cornell University

ROBERT E. KAHN, Corporation for National Research Initiatives

SIDNEY KARIN, San Diego Supercomputer Center

LEONARD KLEINROCK, University of California at Los Angeles

ROBERT LANGRIDGE, University of California at San Francisco

ABRAHAM PELED, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

RAJ REDDY, Carnegie Mellon University

MARY SHAW, Carnegie Mellon University

WILLIAM J. SPENCER, Xerox Corporation

IVAN E. SUTHERLAND, Sutherland, Sproull & Associates

VICTOR VYSSOTSKY, Digital Equipment Corporation

IRVING WLADAWSKY-BERGER, IBM Corporation

MARJORY S. BLUMENTHAL, Executive Director

DAMIAN M. SACCOCIO, Staff Officer

MARGARET A. KNEMEYER, Staff Associate

MARK BELLO, CSTB Consultant

PAMELA R. RODGERS, CSTB Consultant

DONNA F. ALLEN, Administrative Secretary

CATHERINE A. SPARKS, Secretary
iiiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and Resources
NORMAN HACKERMAN, Robert A. Welch Foundation, 
ChairmanROBERT C. BEARDSLEY, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

B. CLARK BURCHFIEL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

GEORGE F. CARRIER, Harvard University
RALPH J. CICERONE, University of California at Irvine

HERBERT D. DOAN, The Dow Chemical Company (retired)

PETER S. EAGLESON, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

DEAN E. EASTMAN, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center

MARYE ANNE FOX, University of Texas

GERHART FRIEDLANDER, Brookhaven National Laboratory

LAWRENCE W. FUNKHOUSER, Chevron Corporation (retired)

PHILLIP A. GRIFFITHS, Duke University

NEAL F. LANE, Rice University

CHRISTOPHER F. McKEE, University of California at Berkeley

RICHARD S. NICHOLSON, American Association for the Advancement of
ScienceJACK E. OLIVER, Cornell University

JEREMIAH P. OSTRIKER, Princeton University Observatory

PHILIP A. PALMER, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company

FRANK L. PARKER, Vanderbilt University

DENIS J. PRAGER, MacArthur Foundation

DAVID M. RAUP, University of Colorado

ROY F. SCHWITTERS, Superconducting Super Collider Laboratory

LARRY L. SMARR, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

KARL K. TUREKIAN, Yale University

MYRON F. UMAN, Acting Executive Director
ivKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceOn May 23, 1989, the Computer Science and Technology Board sponsored a
colloquium in Washington, D.C., on the competitiveness of computer-related

industries. The colloquium attracted a standing-room-only group of invited

executives, government officials, academic analysts, and journalists. Participants

discussed the structure of computer-related industries, evolving patterns of

competition in global markets, and the roles of industry and government in

making the most of U.S. strengths in computer-related technologies and markets.
The colloquium was organized by a steering committee chaired by Samuel
H. Fuller, vice president of research at Digital Equipment Corporation. Other

members of the steering committee included Robert W. Lucky, executive director

for research in the communications sciences division of AT&T Bell

Laboratories, William J. Spencer, vice president of the corporate research group

at Xerox Corporation, and Irving Wladawsky-Berger, vice president of the data

systems division and general manager of the Kingston facility at IBM

Corporation.This report is a distillation of the far-ranging colloquium discussions. It has
two goals. First, it strives to open a window into the richness of the U.S.

computer sector, a collection of interrelated industries that is by and large poorly

understood by those outside the computer field. Second, it seeks to illuminate the

range and depth of the challenges facing the computer sector. The report is

aimed, in particular, at policymakers, but it is also intended to be of interest to

leaders in and students of the computer sector.
JOSEPH F. TRAUB, CHAIRMAN

COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY BOARD
PREFACEvKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACEviKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  Executive Summary
 11 Overview 52 Hardware 183 Software 304 Services and Systems Integration
 405 Business and Marketing
 506 Turning Point
 64  Appendixes  A Colloquium Program
 73B Colloquium Participants
 75CONTENTSviiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTSviiiKeeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Executive SummaryIn May 1989, top executives from the U.S. computer sector, joined by
university and industry researchers, met with governmental policymakers for a

one-day colloquium in Washington, D.C., to define an agenda for keeping the

U.S. computer industry competitive. Conducted under the auspices of the

Computer Science and Technology Board of the National Research Council, the

colloquium encompassed the full range of computer industries
Šhardware,software, and services and systems integration
Šthat collectively constitute the
computer sector.From this broad representation emerged a strong consensus on one central
theme: Ensuring that the United States remains preeminent in computing at the
beginning of the next century requires strategic commitment, leadership, and

collective will that cannot be attained with a "business as usual" approach by

industry or government. 
This conclusion was based on discussion in five major
areas.MAINTAINING U.S. COMPETITIVENESS
Strategic Intent
What is good for one firmŠeven the leaderŠin computer-related industries
may not be good for the industry in question or for the computer sector as a

whole. The exodus of U.S. merchant semiconductor manufacturers from dynamic
random access memory (DRAM) markets is a prime example of this problem,

but others exist. Advances by foreign firms that have licensed new
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.microprocessor technology developed by innovative, cash-strapped U.S.

companies raise the question, How can the nation secure a greater share of the

returns from technologies that originate within its borders? Colloquium

participants frequently made appeals for strategic commitment on the part of

individual firms. Some suggested, however, that lower costs for borrowing

capital and other incentives will be needed to counter the financial resources of

foreign investors shopping for U.S. technology and to encourage firms to evaluate

the long-term impacts of short-term business decisions. Indecision can be costly;

cooperative projects under way in other nations and the successes of foreign

firms that have not been deterred by occasional setbacks clearly illustrate the

value of strategic commitment.
CooperationCompeting in global technology markets requires cooperation within and
among firms and between industry, universities, and government. 
 Joint researchefforts (such as SEMATECH and the Microelectronics and Computer Technology

Corporation) are only a part of what is needed, although they represent a good

start. The magnitude of the investment and risk associated with emerging

technologies, the need for worldwide technology and business development, and

the importance of timely actions are among the factors behind the growing push

for cooperation.Cooperation has already contributed to U.S. successes in the computer
field, and the nation should build on those successes. 
Government-university-industry collaboration underlies U.S. leadership in technologies ranging from

networked computing to artificial intelligence and parallel computing, and its

potential underscores the value of a continuing dialogue. Within the computer

sector, the success of the systems integration industry with interfirm alliances

may be a harbinger of the future for other computer-related industries.
ManufacturingMore and more computers and components will resemble consumer
electronics goods, taking on a commodity-like character with both quality and

price determining market success; firms that are successful in these large-volume

markets will be those with superior product design, manufacturing efficiency, and

product quality. 
If weaknesses in manufacturing and in the integration of
research, development, and manufacturing are not corrected, computer hardware

manufacturers could find themselves serving only specialty markets.

Manufacturing strengths are essential for competing in the high-volume markets

that fuel revenue and technology growth. Moreover, product quality is

increasingly key to customer differentiation among types and varieties of

hardware and software.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY2
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Erosion of the semiconductor-manufacturing segment of the computer
hardware industry jeopardizes the health of the entire sector. 
The flaggingfortunes of U.S. semiconductor producers will not be confined to the electronic

components segment of the hardware industry, if present trends persist.

Manufacturing capabilities and capacity must be developed to assure a major

domestic supply of DRAM chips and to preserve adequate supplies of other key

components. U.S. leadership in computers, software, and related services depends

on timely and economical access to such key components. However, the

dominance of a few integrated Asian firms in important semiconductor

technologies vests these companies with the potential for cartel-like control over

inputs essential to U.S. computer manufacturing. To maintain adequate access

over the long term, even extreme measures, such as government subsidies, may

have to be considered.
Technology Development and Transfer
Some standardization is essential, but the optimal level is not clear-cut
Štheissue is one of balance. 
Most colloquium participants called for standards to
facilitate computer-to-computer communication and exchange of data. But

standardizing operating systems and other elements was more controversial.

According to several participants, standardizing operating systems could stifle

creativity, lock technology at a primitive stage, and open the industry to imitator

firms that compete on the basis of low manufacturing costs rather than

innovation. According to the opposing view, it could instead ensure a base level

of conformance onto which innovative firms could add their own specialized

hardware and applications, and it could make sophisticated systems cheaper and

easier to use and thereby increase the productivity of the nation as a whole.
Computer and other technologies are converging. 
Consumer electronics,
business computer systems, communications systems, and other business

equipment (e.g., copiers) increasingly rely on a common set of technologies and

components. This convergence can convey advantages to manufacturers with

relatively broad product lines or correspondingly broad partnerships.
Systems technology is a domestic strength. 
Software and systems integration
businesses are strong, thanks to U.S. strengths in designing and implementing

complex systems. Concentrating further effort in these areas would build on

existing strengths.Technology transfer was the key to many of today's commercial successes,
but U.S. computer firms have frequently failed to realize the commercial benefits

of research conducted in the United States. 
Successful technology transfer is
difficult, even chaotic. Organizational impediments within firms often result in

the most fruitful transfers occurring to and from the outside. Further opportunities

for transfers from universities and federal laboratories are too often missed. In an

environment characterized by rapid change, delay and missed opportunity can be

crippling, if not fatal.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY3
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Small entrepreneurial firms may dominate the popular view of innovation in
the computer sector, but many important innovations originally emerged from

research at large firms. 
While large firms may not always run with their
inventions, small firms too often fail to acquire the manufacturing, marketing, and

other business capabilities necessary to sustain market leadership. The cult of the

entrepreneur seems to be an American phenomenon, and its appropriateness for

the future was called into question by colloquium participants. Japan's large

integrated firms are establishing an increasingly impressive record of innovation

to go along with their manufacturing prowess, and large firms dominate

technology and market advances in Europe. How to maximize the strengths of

large and small firms and harness those strengths together will be key to

achieving a more cooperative, strategic posture in the computer sector.
Infrastructure and Education
Enhancing information infrastructure will benefit producers and users of
computer technology. 
Computer networks with limited interconnection and
cumbersome or costly access contribute to what many colloquium participants

saw as a failure of the country to achieve much of the promise of computers.

Several participants proposed building a national advanced-technology

computing and communications network that would enable a variety of

computer-based activities and resources, while fostering advances in hardware

and software technologies that would benefit the computer sector.

Acknowledging that this concept raises a number of implementation and policy

questions, participants suggested that federal proposals for a national research and

education network were a good place to start.
Ultimately, the growth of the U.S. computer sector depends on high-quality
education and training programs. Colloquium participants returned frequently to
the need for education to make computing a more integral part of many activities,

to make the U.S. population more comfortable with and interested in computing,

and to ensure that we in the United States have the talent to advance computer-

related technology and its commercialization.
SETTING THE AGENDAEach issue highlighted by this colloquium is complex, and each poses a host
of implementation questions. The task of communicating what the problems are

and why they are problems is itself difficult, as illustrated by the discussions that

took place at the colloquium. The Computer Science and Technology Board

intends to examine several of these issues in more detail, and it urges

decisionmakers in the computer industry and in government and academia to

continue the dialogue needed to resolve key problems of mutual concern.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY4
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1OverviewAlthough the competitiveness of key industries
Šmost notably,semiconductor manufacturingŠhas seriously declined, the computer sector as a
whole retains much vitality. U.S. firms dominate the fastest growing, and perhaps

most lucrative, markets for computer-related goods and services. For example,

more than 60 percent of the world software market, totaling about $65 billion in

1989 and growing at an annual rate of about 25 percent, is controlled by U.S.-

based suppliers.1,2 Similarly, domestic enterprises and their overseas subsidiaries
reap the majority of the global revenues earned for designing and integrating

computer systems, a market whose annual value colloquium participants

estimated to be between $25 billion and $40 billion. Finally, U.S. computer

manufacturers are by far the world's largest producers of computing and

peripheral equipment; in 1989 they earned approximately half of the $134 billion

generated worldwide by the production of computer systems per se and perhaps

45 percent of the $300 billion in total global revenues when systems software,

service, maintenance, and leasing are included.3,4 This position reflects, amongother things, U.S. strengths in relatively large and advanced-technology

computers. Whether this nation retains a vigorous presence in computer-related

technologies depends on how it responds to changing terms of competition in a

global economy.
For the U.S. computer sector, the rapid rate of technological change and the
direction of that change have been key determinants of its competitive position.

Recognizing that technological leadership does not automatically transfer from

one generation of products to the next, the U.S. computer industry has

traditionally invested heavily in research and development. In a recent study of

897OVERVIEW5Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.firms in over 40 industries, computer manufacturers averaged the highest

investment as a percent of sales (8.2 percent) for all industries except one,

software, which as an industry invested an average of 13.3 percent of sales

revenues into R&D activities.
5High rates of technological advance, a hallmark of computer manufacturing,
''change the structure of the industry in spans of 10 years or so,'' explained

colloquium participant Richard S. Rosenbloom, professor at Harvard University's

Graduate School of Business Administration. And the commercial manifestations

of the change often defy prediction. Underscoring his point, Rosenbloom noted

that a major 1977 study on the future of the computer industry addressed the

development of microprocessors and large-scale integration but did not anticipate

the impact of personal computers.
Rapid rates of technological change in computer hardware have been used as
a competitive advantage by U.S. computer makers. U.S. manufacturers of

workstations, for example, have managed to stave off foreign competitors in the

$6 billion market by rapidly incorporating the results of research into their

products. According to the U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. makers of

"lowend" workstations can now develop and introduce new products in only six

months, while "high-end" manufacturers have reduced this period to two years.
6In so doing, U.S. firms have maintained a two-generation lead over Japanese

firms vying in the workstation market.
If trends that are already well established in the computer-manufacturing
base continue, however, much, if not all, of the U.S. computer sector may falter.

Even such value-added activities as software development, system design and

integration, and after-sale maintenance may be in jeopardy. "Falling behind in

computer technology . . . ," said Lawrence G. Tesler, vice president of advanced

technology at Apple Computer, Inc., "is a very serious issue. The country got very

galvanized about the idea of falling behind in space exploration 30 years ago, and

it's just as important today that we do not fall behind in computer technology."

Yet, according to Tesler, "We are losing our lead in software . . . slowly."
Jeffrey M. Heller, senior vice president and head of the technical services
group at Electronic Data Systems, explained that the individual industries are

interdependent, and so their fates are linked. "Our business [services and systems

integration]," Heller said, "cannot exist on a long-term basis successfully without

a healthy domestic industry in both the hardware and software business."
Meanwhile, political and economic developments worldwide are shaping
computer-related markets of tomorrow. In particular, with the integration of the

European Economic Community in 1992, Western Europe, with a population of

about 320 million, will surpass the United States as the world's largest market.

Four decades ago, the U.S. market was eight times larger than the next biggest,

providing the nation's manufacturers with a large "home audience" for their
OVERVIEW6Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.products. Numbering more than 240 million, American consumers still are an

attractive market but have already shown an increasingly strong willingness to

buy foreign-made goods. As a result, U.S. firms, no longer assured of dominance

in domestic markets, must compete for sales at home and abroad.
GLOBALIZATION AND COMPETITIVENESS
"Technology is a fluid," said John Doyle, executive vice president for
business and development at Hewlett Packard. "It will go anywhere that it is

needed."Most computer-related markets have been international from the outset, and
this has influenced policymaking in other countries. By the early 1960s, the

nation's infant computer industry was already active in foreign markets, earning

about 25 percent of its total revenues from sales abroad.
7 The success of world
leader IBM, in particular, was a major catalyst in the decisions of foreign

governments to shepherd the development of their fledgling computer industries.

In 1966, for example, Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry

designated the growth of the domestic computer industry as the number one

priority for future economic growth. Not coincidentally, U.S. computer makers'

share of the Japanese market began to fall, a decline abetted by formal and

informal trade barriers. In the 1960s, sales of IBM computer equipment accounted

for about 40 percent of the Japanese market; today, IBM's share is less than 15

percent.8 Starting in the late 1970s, the Japanese share of the U.S. market
increased dramatically, and within a decade, the United States had a $4 billion

deficit in computer trade with Japan.
Computers are perhaps the best and most tangible evidence of a world
economy. Generally, machines "made in the United States" are made from

components, subassemblies, and assemblies manufactured by many different

domestic and foreign firms, including offshore subsidiaries of U.S.-based

companies. In its most extreme form, this internationalization of the computer has

resulted in entirely foreign-built machines that are sold under the label of an

American company.Several colloquium participants referred to cost advantages and other
incentives motivating U.S.-headquartered firms to establish manufacturing and

other operations overseas. "I'm told that, if I want to build a semiconductor

fabricator," explained Patrick A. Toole, senior vice president and general

manager of technology products at IBM Corporation, "I can get practically

everything paid for in some countries, like Singapore. You can get long-term tax

incentives, you can get training assistance, you can get them to pay for all the

tools. . . . That is their national policy with regard to growing and engaging in an

emerging industry."Although embodying different mechanisms, policies associated with
integration of the European Economic Community will achieve similar results,

pointed out Gordon E. Moore, chairman of the board at Intel Corporation, a U.S.

semiOVERVIEW7Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.conductor manufacturer. In addition to eliminating national trade barriers between

the 12 member countries, "Europe '92" will establish rules of origin and local

content requirements that will require today's exporters of integrated circuits to

build the devices in Europe. "Intel avoided for 20 years doing any manufacturing

in Europe, because it [did] not make sense," Moore said. Now, the company has

"two teams running all over the continent, looking for the place we ought to build

our plants. We export over a half a billion dollars [of products] to Europe every

year. We are going to add a half billion dollars to our trade deficit because of

'1992.'""What we are looking at is not 'fortress Europe,' but 'magnet Europe,'" added
Hewlett Packard's Doyle.
C. Gordon Bell, vice president for research and development at Stardent
Computer, Inc., a U.S.-based, Japanese-financed manufacturer of workstations,

suggested that superior manufacturing skills available in foreign nations also

motivate offshore location of plants. "The bottom line
Šwhy we manufacture inJapanŠis, we are trying to transfer manufacturing technology to the United
States, and we want quality," Bell said.
Benefiting from the resources and support of overseas environments is
neither automatic nor enduring. IBM's Toole noted, for example, that a company

that subcontracts too much of its manufacturing to offshore plants "will soon lose

the expertise to design and the ability to innovate, because it won't get the

feedback it needs." There are strategic dangers as well. Toole said that an

underlying motive of host countries is to acquire the technology, and, he added,

"it is not long before a competitor has been developed." Moreover, the cost

advantages of offshore manufacturing can be transitory. A strong dollar, local

wage levels, and the absence of trade barriers are strong incentives for offshore

manufacturing, according to Toole, but "none of these factors is within a

company's control."Nevertheless, most colloquium participants said they expected offshore
assembly of computer hardware to increase. Similarly, U.S.-headquartered

companies are expected to invest more in foreign R&D. According to preliminary

figures from the National Science Foundation (NSF), U.S. firms invested $5

billion in overseas research facilities in 1987, up 6.4 percent from the previous

year.9 U.S. computer manufacturers appear to be among the leaders in this trend.
For example, IBM has two of its four major research centers overseas, and

Hewlett Packard's four-year-old Integrated Systems Center in Bristol, England,

accounts for about a third of that firm's central research effort. William J.

Spencer, vice president and head of the corporate research group at Xerox

Corporation, described Hewlett Packard's move as an "example of a major

company taking a strategic view in its R&D investment." At the European

facility, Hewlett Packard can "take advantage of a large cadre of highly talented

people and an ability to build
Šadd local value to compete effectively in Europe,"
Spencer said.
OVERVIEW8Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Tapping foreign talent and technology is essential for firms that do business
in international markets, and many companies see their investments in overseas

R&D as a necessary ante for full acceptance in foreign markets, according to

observers. These investments also help counter the so-called "not-invented-here

syndrome," the parochial view that all innovations originate in the United States.

"The post-World-War-II era, when it was just automatically assumed that the

United States led the world in everything, is over," NSF Deputy Directory John

H. Moore has said.
10 "We need to wake up to the fact that there's a lot of good
work going on elsewhere in the world. And we need to appreciate that fact and

take advantage of it."
Investments overseas are also expanding beyond research and
manufacturing, integrating the operations of firms headquartered in the United

States more completely into the fabric of foreign economies. As Toole of IBM

explained, "It is very important for U.S. computer companies to establish and

grow market share in all of the markets where their products have a value to

prospective companies. In the computer industry, it is extremely difficult to

survive for long in either a market niche or a single geographical area

orientation."What is perhaps confusing to outside observers is how these international
linkages are blurring the traditional concept of a "U.S. firm." Is a firm with its

headquarters in the United States but with most of its capital assets and

employees overseas truly a U.S. company? How does that firm differ from a

U.S.-located subsidiary of a foreign company? Obviously, the answers to these

questions have important implications for federal policy and for business.

Colloquium participants grappled with these questions, offering a variety of

opinions of what constitutes a U.S. firm (see box). Despite the diversity of views,

most agreed that for a company to be considered a U.S. firm, it must contribute to

building capital and raising the standard of living in this nation. One way to

define the U.S. benefit is the value added by capital, management, design,

engineering, manufacturing, distribution, sales, or service functions performed by

people from the United States. In a heavily interdependent set of worldwide

industries, a given country's benefit is likely to be measured by the value added,

which supports employees, taxes, infrastructure, reinvestment, and ultimately the

standard of living.
COOPERATIONColloquium participants repeatedly addressed the issue of cooperation
Šcooperation between firms and among universities, government, and industry.

Cooperative efforts abroad clearly stimulated examination of cooperation, but

there was a strong perception that emerging technological and market challenges

are creating a new mandate for cooperation in this country.
"Japanese companies, in particular, have mastered the art of cooperating in
order to compete," explained colloquium participant David J. Teece, professor
OVERVIEW9Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.WHAT IS A U.S. FIRM?
ANSWERS FROM COLLOQUIUM PARTICIPANTS
A reasonable definition [of a U.S. firm] for many purposes would be one
with significant U.S. ownership and a fair share of technology manufacturing

and development in the United States.
[A U.S. firm is] one where the majority of the board, top management
and owners take a U.S.-centered view of the welfare of the firm (whether it

is multinational or not) and can be expected to consider the effects of their

actions on the welfare of the United States first. It is clear we know what a

foreign firm is since we keep Philips (Signetics) out of SEMATECH. U.S.

firms are the others.
What is meant, will be meant, should be meant are all important
questions. The current connotation of a U.S. firm is one that is incorporated

in the United States and has a plurality of its business interest in the United

States or one whose tax payments are significant to the United States. A

suggestion: A U.S. firm is one that is important to U.S. society and

contributes to the well-being of the United States.
A U.S. firm is a company incorporated and headquartered in the United
States, which designs, builds, and sells computers on a worldwide basis.

Company control is with U.S. nationals. Design is within the United States to

exploit particular technology skills. Financing is increasingly likely to come

from outside the United States given the large supply of "cheap" dollars.

Manufacturing may be done outside the United States using manufacturing,

manufacturing-engineering, and assembly skills and foreign capital.
U.S. computer companies (and other large companies) become
increasingly "global" in their operation and development/manufacturing,

even research efforts, in addition to their traditional worldwide marketing. I

would call a company a "U.S. firm" as opposed to Japanese, or German,

[for example,] if the majority of ownership is U.S. based and, thus, its profits

contribute to building capital and the standard of living in this country.
Today's products and services are marbled with international
involvement. A high-tech product may well be designed in London, the

software developed in France, the parts fabricated in Taiwan and the entire

product assembled in Torino for sale in the United States. Which is more

German,OVERVIEW10Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for exampleŠa Volkswagen produced in Rio, or a Ford made in
Stuttgart? Is the Nobel Prize awarded to a pair of Swiss scientists working

for an American company in Lucerne a source of pride for Switzerland, or

for the United States? Or both? In today's global marketplace, ownership is

often irrelevant as a factor in a company's success. What really matters are

the kinds of contributions a firm can make to the localities where it resides.
[I]n the rapid internationalization of business it is also important to ask,
"What is the United States?" It is a country almost entirely populated by

people who came from around the world to better their life. With the coming

decline in work force size and existing deficiencies in U.S. education, we

should be encouraging immigration of educated people from all countries.
It is no longer meaningful to talk of U.S. firms. It may be somewhat
more meaningful to talk of "U.S.-based firms," if their headquarters are

located in the United States, and at least half of their business is conducted

there. The fact that the classic distinctions between domestic and foreign

firms has all but disappeared raises important policy questions. Policies

that are aimed to help "U.S. firms" can no longer be easily implemented.

Accordingly, it is probably necessary to think about policies in terms of their

impact on U.S. economic activity, rather than on U.S. firms.
of business administration and director of the Center for Research on
Management at the University of California, Berkeley. Teece continued, "There

has been, and there remains, a recognition that by acting together, sometimes with

government assistanceŠbut without governmental barriers
ŠJapanese firms can
do better than they might by competing alone. U.S. firms must also recognize

that cooperation can be used to catch up with competitors, stay ahead of

competitors, and respond to foreign industrial policies."
Sometimes called "alliance capitalism," Japan's efforts have inspired
cooperative projects in many nations, including the United States. Some

observers, like Teece, would argue that Japan's success makes cooperation an

almost mandatory condition for long-term survival in global markets. Two

corollaries follow from this argument. First, U.S. firms and the federal

government must monitor the progress of the growing number of cooperative

R&D projects under way overseas. Second, the government must be vigilant

about trade barriers and other protectionist measures that other nations may take

to nurture the growth of their computer industries.
Many colloquium participants questioned whether some of the relatively
OVERVIEW11Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.recent foreign cooperative research efforts, such as Japan's Fifth-Generation

Computer project, would translate into commercial successes for participating

firms. "No doubt exists whatsoever regarding the seriousness behind these

efforts," said Sam R. Willcoxon, president of AT&T business markets group.

"Whether they're a challenge remains to be seen."
11Collective industrial research projects in the U.S. computer sector are a
recent development. Their formation was shaped by widening recognition that the

complexity, scale, and risk of advanced computer-related technologies

increasingly demand more resources than individual firms, even market leaders,

can afford. Industry representatives at the colloquium commented most on

SEMATECH, the semiconductor-manufacturing technology consortium jointly

funded by private industry and the Department of Defense. They expressed

optimism, but they noted that it was premature to judge the performance of this

and other cooperative efforts in the computer sector. Regarding such efforts in

general, Gordon Bell of Stardent Computer noted that cooperative research

projects attract and sustain scientific and engineering talent.
While joint R&D projects have a longer history in this country than is
typically recognized, they represent only one realization of the cooperative links

that must extend horizontally and vertically from individual firms, according to

IBM's Toole. "We must improve cooperation at levels within companies
Šbetween functions such as marketing, manufacturing, development, and

research," Toole said. Relationships must also be developed with suppliers,

customers, and, "more importantly these days, competitors." Toole also extended

his web of industrial cooperation to encompass universities and government

agencies."With the fierce competition we face throughout the world, we can no
longer cling to traditional . . . arms-length, business-as-usual dealings," Toole

said. "We must find new ways and new areas in which to cooperate at all levels."

The prospects for doing this may be poor; several speakers suggested that U.S.

firms, grounded in the ideals of free enterprise and competition, still do not know

how to cooperate.
STANDARDIZATIONStandardization, the process of specifying technical requirements for
computer hardware, software, and networking, has emerged as a strategic

competitive issue. The market-shaping power of standards in the computer sector

was first demonstrated 25 years ago. In 1964, IBM firmly entrenched itself as the

world's leading computer manufacturer by establishing its own internal standard

for computer components and peripherals, which was showcased in its 360

System of compatible computers. Software developed for one computer model in

the family would run on any other machine in the IBM product line. This

compatibility assured IBM's customers that all of their computer equipment
OVERVIEW12Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.would perform in essentially the same manner and that their hardware and

software would not become obsolete with the next series of new product

introductions.For IBM, standardization permitted the company to spread its R&D costs
over a wide array of products that served a large-volume market. By virtue of

IBM's large market share, the company's proprietary standard became the

industry standard. But because IBM controlled the standard, it could make

changes, making it difficult for competitors to overtake the industry leader.
Today, with the proliferation of computing equipment and applications,
there is a well-accepted need to develop standards that attain at least a certain

level of compatibility and connectivity among the machines of different

manufacturers. Indeed, more than 1,000 standards pertaining to computer-related

technology have either been adopted or are under consideration by national and

international standards-setting bodies.
12Computer-related firms throughout the world are keenly interested in the
development of these nonproprietary standards, with many trying to influence the

outcome of the decisions. Some firms (e.g., Sun Microsystems), for example,

seek to have their own standards adopted by the entire industry. But debate is not

limited to specific standards; it surrounds the entire issue of standardization.
Colloquium participants also engaged in the debate. At issue is where to draw
the line between necessary standardization and excessive standardization.

Virtually all agreed that standards are necessary for data storage and exchange

and for communication. Beyond that point
Šat the level of operating systems and
hardware elementsŠthe consensus deteriorated. The relevant issues will be
discussed in greater detail in each of the following chapters; the costs and

benefits from the manufacturer's perspective will be summarized only briefly

here.Standardization expands markets and lowers costs. Moreover, by providing
users with a greater array of compatible machines from which to choose, it

increases competition. On the negative side, standardization, particularly if it is

done too early in a technology's evolution, can freeze the technology at a

"primitive stage," said Apple Computer's Tesler. In addition, Tesler and others

noted that standardization can eliminate innovation as a prerequisite for entry into

computer markets, thus placing greater emphasis on high-volume, low-cost

productionŠa strength of Asian competitors. It also places a premium on
protecting the intellectual property embodied in whatever innovative elements are

present. Adequate safeguards (e.g., patents or copyrights) must be maintained and

enforced, especially internationally, to ensure that the innovator receives

appropriate return on investment.
13Given the global push for standardization, all colloquium participants
agreed, the issue cannot be ignored. U.S. firms, they said, must confront the

question of what level of standardization is best, or they risk having the matter

settled by the competition.
OVERVIEW13Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE GOVERNMENT ROLE
Perhaps the biggest gap in cooperation to bridge is the one between
government and industry. Here, too, the nature of the relationship remains to be

defined, even though the need for more constructive links between the two has

been emphasized in nearly every one of the numerous studies that have examined

the flagging competitiveness of American industry.
Ironically, the U.S. computer sector is a creature of government-industry
cooperation, motivated by a strategic interest, namely, national security. During

and after World War II, the Department of Defense funded well over half of the

research that resulted in the first electronic computers, and it supported much of

the work that led to subsequent refinements and innovations that made the

machines commercial products. As Kenneth Flamm has noted, only 4 of the 12

major U.S. producers of digital computers in 1956 exist today.
14 Yet thetechnical roots of many of today's firms, old and new, he writes, "can be traced to

experience accumulated in the pioneering days of computing" when almost all

R&D was sponsored by the nation's military services. A congressional committee

estimated that in 1959, 85 percent of electronics R&D in the United States was

funded by the federal government.
15 By 1986 federal support had slipped,
accounting for less than 30 percent of the funding for U.S. electronics R&D. 
16More than half of IBM's R&D during the 1950s was conducted under

government contract, and even after the commercialization of computers had

begun, over a third was government-supported in 1963.
17The U.S. government's influence extends over many of the important
technological developments in computer hardware and software, sometimes

creating marketing niches effectively exploited by IBM's U.S.-based competitors.

For example, time-sharing, a product of work supported by what is now known as

the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, was a boon to the Digital

Equipment Corporation, whose PDP-6 computer was the first commercially

available machine to offer the feature. Today the federal government, primarily

through the Department of Defense, continues to fund much of the basic research

in computer science and engineering, such as studies of gallium arsenide and

other nonsilicon semiconducting materials. Some of today's leading-edge

computing technologies
Šamong them, parallel processing and artificial
intelligenceŠare outgrowths of military-supported projects. This situation
reflects the strong dependence of U.S. national security on advanced technology.
Although the precedent of cooperation between the government and the
computer sector was established long ago, and the government continues to fund

basic research important to the sector, the relationship that has evolved is not

commensurate with changing global conditions. Indeed, many colloquium

speakers observed that the cornerstone of this relationship
Šmilitary sponsorshipof computer-related R&D
Šis much weaker than it was two or three
OVERVIEW14Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.decades ago, while at the same time it is not sufficiently complemented by

civilian support."In the absence of a national appreciation of the developing computer role,"
said Alan J. Perlis, professor of computer science at Yale University, "the support

by the military of computer development has been essential and farsighted." Yet

Perlis and others noted the divergence of the military's needs and interests
Šsuchas "radiation hardening" of electronic devices
Šfrom those of the marketplace.
''There has been too little effect on our economy, our society, our industry, and

our quality," Perlis said. Military sponsorship tends to channel "computer

development in far too narrow a way and prevents our society from adequately

exploiting its potential.''
In addition, factors crucial to success in commercial markets are not often
high priorities in the development of products for the military. "There is a problem

with using military funding to drive the direction of computer innovation," said

James H. Morris, professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University.

"People who work on such projects are force-fed with money and never get a

feeling for costs or markets."
Further skewing the government-industry relationship is the fragmented
regulatory and policymaking structure of the federal government. In the executive

branch, as many as 12 federal agencies help shape and carry out policies that

influence the activities of firms in the U.S. computer sector. In Congress, 9 of the

13 appropriations subcommittees are involved in determining the research budget

and specific allocations.18 This fragmentation and the lack of a coherent
perspective on the cumulative effect of actions taken by widely dispersed units

within the federal bureaucracy pose serious obstacles to achieving the

coordination and cooperation that colloquium participants, as well as the Council

on Competitiveness and other groups, argue is needed.
"Those who are likely to be in a position to implement any remedies," said
Robert M. White, president of the National Academy of Engineering, "are found

in many different organizations spread across the federal government and private

industry. They deal in relative isolation with many separate and relative issues

whether in trade policy, tax policy, procurement policy, employment and training

programs, [or] research support. Until there is a meaningful interaction, it will be

difficult to fashion a nationally coherent or coordinated response to the challenge

that is now facing the U.S. computer sector."
These factors may contribute to the perception, expressed by Xerox's
Spencer, that "cooperation between government and industry [seems like] an

unnatural act. It seems so difficult for us to do."
By contrast, broad-based cooperation between government and industry has
been a boon to the computer sectors of other nations. "Foreign industrial policy is

affecting the outcomes in American markets all the time," said Teece of the

University of California, Berkeley. To assume that market and price mechanisms

guide firms to pursue individual optima that result in a maximum benefit
OVERVIEW15Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for the nation
Šan assumption that, Teece said, "informs public policy in this
nation today"
Šis to ignore other important factors at work, including actions of
foreign governments.Some colloquium participants suggested that the nation has a government-
directed industrial policy, in the form of a composite of fragmented decisions in

areas ranging from defense spending and overall government procurement to

antitrust laws. Moreover, several studies suggest that the success of strategically

chosen industrial sectors in nations with such policies stems from factors other

than direct government intervention.
19While it can be difficult to sort out the nature and impact of government
actions in the United States as well as abroad, the computer sector must not be a

passive observer in the policymaking process. Clyde V. Prestowitz, Jr., principal

adviser on Japan affairs to the U.S. secretary of commerce from 1983 to 1986,

said firms should be making greater efforts to present their views and suggestions

to Congress and federal agencies. Patrick Toole of IBM noted, "We have to do it

not only by meetings like this, but also by very strong industry associations."
"The main thing that makes the computer industry different from other
industries is that the rapid change of the technology far exceeds the

policymakers' ability to change," argued Heller of Electronic Data Systems. He

suggested that this rigidity is the legacy of institutions shaped by concepts of law,

education, work, and accounting that evolved during the industrial age. Cautioned

Heller, "The heavily entrenched, industrial structural model works poorly in a

service society and worse in an information-based world."
NOTES1. U.S. Department of Commerce. "Computer Equipment and Software," 
1989U.S. Industrial Outlook 
(Washington, D.C., 1989); 1989 world market estimate
provided via personal communication from a Department of Commerce analyst.

2. Quantitative estimates within the computer sector are particularly sensitive to

definitions and methodologies. Comparisons should be made with caution as

different estimates seldom, if ever, measure the same market with the same

methodology. The numbers used in this report are generally as reported by the

Department of Commerce, supplemented where appropriate by industry and trade

group data.

3. Gartner Group, Inc., Stanford, CT, 1989.

4. CBEMA. 
Information Technology Industry Global Market Analysis
, IndustryMarketing Statistics Committee, Washington, D.C., 1989.

5. 
Business Week: Innovation in America
, October, 1989, pp. 177-228.
6. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook
, 1989, p. 26-11.
7. Flamm, Kenneth. 
Creating the Computer 
(Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, 1988), p. 101.

8. Dertouzos, Michael L., Richard K. Lester, and Robert M. Solow, MIT

Commission on Industrial Productivity. 
Made in America: Regaining the
Productive Edge 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), pp. 262-263.
NOTES16Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9. Buderi, Robert. "U.S. Companies Hike Investment in Foreign R&D," 
TheScientist, May 29, 1989, p. 1.
10. Buderi, The Scientist, 1989, pp. 1, 6.
11. One that bears watching, according to Stardent's Bell, is Japan's SIGMA

project (see 
Chapter 3 of this report).
12. Gantz, John. "Standards: What they are. What they aren't," 
NetworkingManagement, May, 1989, p. 23.
13. A Computer Science and Technology Board report on issues in the protection

of intellectual property in software is anticipated in mid-1990.

14. Kenneth Flamm, 
Creating the Computer
, 1988, p. 81.
15. Kenneth Flamm, 
Creating the Computer
, 1988, p. 16.
16. American Electronics Association, 1989, as reported in 
The CompetitiveStatus of the U.S. Electronics Industry Sector
, U.S. Department of Commerce,
1989 (draft version).

17. American Electronics Association, in 
The Competitive Status of the U.S.
Electronics Industry Sector
, 1989, p. 94.
18. Council on Competitiveness. 
Picking Up the Pace: The Commercial
Challenge to American Innovation 
(Washington, D.C., 1988).
19. "Even in Japan and France, countries where the state is reputed to shape the

industrial structure in accordance with some national strategic vision," reported

the MIT Commission on Industrial Productivity, "some of the most recent

research is far more skeptical about the actual influence of state policy and more

inclined to emphasize the role of private actors." (Dertouzos et al., 
Made inAmerica, 1989, p. 109).
NOTES17Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2HardwareThe U.S. computer hardware industry, a diverse collection of small and large
firms, is composed of three major and integrally related industries:

semiconductor manufacturing equipment producers, semiconductor

manufacturers, and manufacturers of computers ranging from personal and

portable systems to supercomputers and associated peripheral equipment. The

$4.6 billion U.S. semiconductor-manufacturing-equipment industry makes the

toolsŠwafer-processing, testing, and assembly equipment
Šthat semiconductor
manufacturers use to fabricate integrated circuits and related electronic devices,

the source of revenues totaling $24 billion in 1988.
1 In turn, 40 percent of all
semiconductors sold in the United States are bought by domestic computer

manufacturers, who, according to the Department of Commerce, were estimated

to have sold $70 billion worth of computing equipment in 1989.
2 Perhaps doublethat amount may have been earned by domestic manufacturers in 1989 if systems

software, service, maintenance, and leasing revenues are included, according to

an industry trade group.3 Each of these industries is, in turn, divided into
segments defined by the products they make and sell. Colloquium participants did

not systematically survey the hardware industry, but rather drew on their

experiences to comment on what they saw as critical issues and trends.
Serious cracks have developed in the chainlike relationship between these
important domestic industries. Weakest in the chain is the semiconductor

industry, which at the start of this decade held commanding leads in world

markets for virtually all types of integrated circuits. The Japanese pulled even

with, and then surpassed, the approximately 250 U.S. merchant semiconductor

manuHARDWARE18Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.facturers in percentage of world sales beginning in 1985. By 1988 Japanese

manufacturers held a commanding 48 percent of the world market, whereas the

world share for U.S. firms had fallen to 37 percent. 
4Observers quoted in the media and at congressional hearings have described
the decline as ruinous, and evidence from the domestic industries that are

suppliers and clients of the U.S. semiconductor producers suggests that the

description is apt. The position of the U.S. semiconductor-manufacturing-

equipment industry has fallen precipitously relative to that of Japanese

equipment makers. U.S. firms still claim more than half of the $7 billion world

market, but their Japanese counterparts now lead in sales of lithography

equipment (for imparting circuit designs on silicon wafers) and other critically

important tools.5 Some steps have been taken to arrest this decline, primarily
through the formation of the SEMATECH consortium. More recently, several of

the computer industry's leading hardware manufacturers have joined together in

an ambitious effort to establish another major domestic supply of state-of-the-art

dynamic random access memory (DRAM) chips. But this effort has only just

begun, and its success is by no means certain. As it stands now, however, the

nearly complete exit of U.S. merchant semiconductor suppliers from the market

for DRAM chips
Šby far the world's largest market for semiconductors
Šweakens prospects for the equipment industry.
Computer manufacturers have felt the demise of U.S. DRAM production
from the client end. Forced to buy the memory chips from Japanese producers,

which account for 90 percent of the world DRAM market, most U.S. computer

makers faced serious shortages in 1988. Some were forced to delay introductions

of new products and to cut production. 
6 Consumers also felt the pinch as rising
DRAM prices translated into a 15 percent increase in the cost of some computer

models. (IBM, which produces DRAM chips for use in its products, was less

affected by the shortage.) In contrast, Japanese computer manufacturers, large

integrated firms that produce semiconductors for their own diversified line of

products and sell the rest on the world markets, avoided the bottleneck and

continued to increase their relative share of international sales of computers.
The ripplelike effects and the contributing causes of what is now called the
"DRAM fiasco" are instructive, and they will be discussed in greater detail

below. Colloquium participants suggested that other segments of the hardware

industry may experience comparable crises during the 1990s.
A comment by Gordon Moore of Intel, the U.S. firm that invented the DRAM
but no longer makes the chip, underscores the gravity that many ascribe to the

situation. "If you take the whole sequence of things," Moore said, "in the end we

are all going to be dead, and the end may be nearer than we think because the

whole structure necessary to remain competitive is, frankly, getting out of our

controlŠincreasingly."HARDWARE19Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SEMICONDUCTORSInvented in the United States in 1959, the integrated circuit launched what
many call the Computer Revolution, and a seemingly endless series of advances

in device technology have sustained the revolution. Of the hundred-thousand-fold

improvement in computer performance since the 1950s (measured as a function

of the cost of information-processing capacity), the greatest share stems from

innovations in component devices (e.g., central processing units and internal

memory) built from integrated circuits. These devices are often referred to as

"semiconductors," a reference to the base materials from which they are made.
For 20 years after the invention of the integrated circuit, U.S. firms' mastery
of semiconductor technology translated into preeminence in world markets, and

the rapidity of innovation was viewed as perpetuating the industry's dominance.

In recent years, however, the relative importance of innovation as a competitive

advantage has waned, and the value of manufacturing efficiency has risen, setting

the stage for the U.S. industry's decline.
"[T]o a very great degree, the United States arena functions as a kind of
public service organization for worldwide industry," said Charles Ferguson,

postdoctoral associate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Center for

Technology Policy and Industrial Development. "We innovate and people thank

us for the innovations that we develop and then incorporate them into their

commercial products, which they then sell, often to us."
The "most spectacular and visible symptom" of this situation, according to
Ferguson, is the nearly complete exodus of U.S. merchant semiconductor

manufacturers (firms that produce electronic devices for sale to other companies)

from DRAM markets. Indeed, Ferguson and many others at the colloquium

suggested that this episode embodies the nature of the challenge confronting all

of the interdependent segments of the hardware industry.
The "DRAM Fiasco"
Intel's Moore believes that Japan's rise in DRAM manufacturing began when
the evolution of the technology shifted from a series of rapid, seemingly random

advances to a predictable course. In the early 1970s, theory and practice

demonstrated that memory capacity would quadruple about every three years,

from 1 kilobit, to 4 kilobits, to 16 kilobits, and so on. Japan established a series of

programs aimed at developing world-competitive capacity for manufacturing

64-kilobit DRAMs, but, aided by a booming market for memory chips during the

late 1970s and early 1980s, that nation's firms beat the timetable. Japanese

semiconductor manufacturers capitalized on the shortage to achieve a significant

share of the market for 16-kilobit DRAMS.
"Beyond that," Moore said, "they went to their usual strategy of overinvest
HARDWARE20Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ment," adding considerably to Japan's DRAM-manufacturing capacity. The firms

then "engaged in dumping, selling significantly below their total cost," to sell the

excess product that resulted from the overinvestment in capacity.
In the mid-1980s, demand for semiconductors dropped, triggering an
industrywide recession and exacerbating the price-reducing effects of excess

DRAM capacity. During that period, according to Moore, the Japanese firms

demonstrated another attribute to go along with their manufacturing prowess
Ša"tremendous tolerance for pain."
During the DRAM glut of the mid-1980s, the Japanese industry lost an
estimated $4 billion, about double the loss sustained by U.S. manufacturers.

"Clearly, they won," Moore said. "They came out with a 90 percent market share

in DRAMs, and we abandoned the business." According to MIT's Ferguson, "In

1986, the world DRAM market was $1.5 billion. This year [1989], it is probably

going to be $10 billion"
Šapproximately a sixfold increase.
Today the United States is home to three merchant manufacturers of
DRAMsŠMotorola, Micron Technologies, and Texas Instruments (which
manufactures most of its components abroad)
Šand most observers believe the
continued existence of the firms in this market is tenuous. With the exception of

IBM, which has its own DRAM-manufacturing facility in Burlington, Vermont,

U.S. computer makers are forced to shop overseas for much of their needed

supply of memory chips.
Why did U.S. merchant semiconductor manufacturers choose to exit from
the DRAM market? Moore's recounting of the factors underlying Intel's decision

not to compete is illustrative.
By mid-1985, Intel had completed the design of a "good 1-megabit DRAM"
and had worked out the manufacturing process, Moore said. Instead of proceeding

to the mass-manufacturing stage, the company chose to forego making the $400

million investment in equipment required to compete for about a 10 percent share

of the world market. According to Moore, the company could not afford the

investment and decided to leave the market, opting to concentrate on logic

circuits and erasable programmable read-only memories (EPROMs). "I think had

we made the DRAM investment at that time," Moore said, "we would be a much

weaker company today."
Today it is highly unlikely that an individual U.S. semiconductor firm would
opt to enter the market and help bolster domestic production, according to Moore

and others at the colloquium. In addition to Japan, South Korea and other Asian

nations, as well as Western European countries, are building plants that will add

greatly to world DRAM-manufacturing capacity.
"For a company to go into a business like that with the idea of making
money," Moore said, "frankly seems like a real folly. It is going to require

something more than the usual market motivations to get a significant reentry in

the United States."
HARDWARE21Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Free market economics would appear to suggest that the United States does
not need to manufacture DRAMs, given that other countries appear to do so more

cheaply and that the world semiconductor industry seems destined for another

glut of memory chips. Computer makers and other customers can purchase their

chips from overseas suppliers, and U.S. semiconductor producers can devote

their resources to products with higher profit margins.
While acknowledging that this perspective is embodied in the tactical
thinking of individual firms, many colloquium participants pointed out that the

collective result of these tactical decisions can be sectorwide harm. The nearly

complete loss of the DRAM market, they maintained, inflicted strategic damage

on the entire hardware industry, and perhaps the entire U.S. computer sector.
Why? An answer is that DRAMs are technology drivers. Although their
designs are far less sophisticated than those for logic devices, DRAMs have the

densest circuitry of any integrated circuit: The same standard-cell unit may be

repeated millions of times on a single chip. Thus DRAMs are the commercial test

bed for tools and methods that achieve ever-finer line widths. Once perfected and

mastered, this manufacturing technology allows chip makers to squeeze more and

smaller transistors and other subcomponents onto their microprocessor chips, gate

arrays, and other types of integrated circuits
Šthe new devices that are the basis
for the next round of improvements in computer equipment.
Consequently, in all but abandoning DRAM production, U.S. merchant
semiconductor manufacturers lost the primary means for "addressing the kind of

manufacturing issues that we have not done as well as the Japanese," Moore said.

Moreover, the developers of the tools needed to correct these manufacturing

weaknesses are suffering from the tandem effects of the loss of a major domestic

market and the growing prowess of their competitors. Hewlett Packard's Doyle

reported, for example, that a Japanese semiconductor company executive told him

that 70 percent of the equipment in the firm's plant for making 1-megabit

DRAMs had come from U.S. suppliers. In the company's facility for making the

next generation of memory chips
Š4-megabit DRAMs
Šonly 30 percent of the
equipment had come from the United States.
"It is an extremely disturbing situation," said MIT's Ferguson. "If you are an
American semiconductor producer, you have to ask yourself how deeply in your

heart of hearts do you really trust Canon, Nikon, and Advantest. The answer

cannot be terribly comforting." Nearly a quarter of Advantest, the world's largest

maker of digital semiconductor test equipment, is owned by Fujitsu, a Japanese

conglomerate that makes semiconductors, computers, and consumer electronics

goods.Even a company as large as IBM, which has a tradition of meeting many of
its needs internally, is feeling the effects, finding that it must become more self-

dependent than it might otherwise prefer. "We use the best of the U.S.

infrastructure, which, unfortunately, is not enough," said Toole. "We have to

supplement what is available in tools and materials by our own developments

within the company."
HARDWARE22Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The DRAM situation is emblematic of what many have characterized as the
"hollowing out" of U.S. industry, the loss of the manufacturing infrastructure that

supports many sectors of the economy.
7 The computer sector and the federal
government have recognized this problem, and they have combined their

resources to form the SEMATECH consortium, aimed at developing the

advanced manufacturing technology needed for fabricating 4-megabit DRAMs

and the next generation of logic circuits.
Even if SEMATECH meets all expectations, its success may not
reinvigorate the semiconductor and semiconductor-manufacturing-equipment

industries. In the area of DRAMs, for example, it is unlikely that an individual

firm will take the risk and make the capital investment required to achieve a

major presence in DRAM markets.
As a result, Moore and others said, the strategic commitment that building
such a facility would require will not be forthcoming without external incentives

or a means of distributing the inherent risk. Interestingly, shortly after the

colloquium seven hardware manufacturersŠIntel, IBM, Hewlett Packard, Digital
Equipment Corporation, National Semiconductor, Advanced Micro Devices, and

LSI LogicŠannounced their intention to build a joint manufacturing facility for
producing memory chips. Called U.S. Memories, Inc., the facility would require

about $1 billion in capital, half of it to be provided by the seven founding firms

and by additional partner firms that are being sought. The rest would be raised

through debt financing and other means. Although business details have not been

made public, initial plans called for production of 4-megabit DRAMs
Šbased on a
design licensed from IBM
Što begin in 1991. However, less than five months
later, observers questioned the future of U.S. Memories after IBM announced it

would license some 4-megabit DRAM technology to Micron and because of the

absence of commitments by other major U.S. computer manufacturers.
8 Whileany one venture must be evaluated on its merits, these circumstances and the

shadow they cast on U.S. Memories once again called into question U.S.

industry's capacity for sustaining a strategic, cooperative effort.
Another means to help secure the still fragile position of U.S. semiconductor
manufacturers, Moore and others noted, would be to subsidize memory-chip

production to assure adequate supplies. Like federal subsidies for agricultural

products, a DRAM subsidy would set a guaranteed minimum price for U.S.-made

chips.Beyond DRAMs
The U.S. semiconductor industry continues to maintain significant leads in
microprocessors and other advanced areas of integrated circuit technology. In

addition, colloquium participants predicted that the industry would continue to be

the source of many of the innovations that drive the evolution of semiconductors

and the products that use them, including computers. Participants were
HARDWARE23Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.far less certain, however, about the marketing advantages that would convey with

innovation, given the rapid diffusion of technology and the demonstrated

manufacturing strengths of Japanese firms and other Asian nations.
"We had as big an advantage in DRAMs [as] we now have in
microprocessors," said Moore. "I think it is a matter of time until the competition

is just as strong there. We cannot keep moving to the edge and living there very

effectively." Signs of this progression are already evident, particularly in markets

for application-specific integrated circuits. DRAM-manufacturing capabilities are

directly transferable to these fully or partially customized electronic devices, and

Japanese firms now control about 40 percent of this high-growth market.
9Speeding the competition's catch-up efforts, according to several colloquium
participants, are technology-licensing agreements that, while advantageous to

individual firms, are strategically damaging to the hardware industry. Among the

technologies transferred to Japanese semiconductor manufacturers in recent

licensing agreements are two advanced microprocessor designs based on reduced

instruction set computing (RISC) architecture. Licensing payments can alleviate

individual firms' cash-flow problems, of particular concern to small start-up

firms. Also, by accelerating the diffusion of a new technology, licensing can

expand the relevant market. However, licensing can also work like a Trojan

horse: Often, foreign licensees emerge as the top competitors in licensors'

markets.A particularly troubling aspect of the increase in licensing to foreign firms is
that it reflects a relative dearth of licensing and other strategic alliances within the

United States. Colloquium participants noted that large U.S. firms in the industry

are often approached for financing from innovative start-up firms. But nearly as

often, those large firms are not responsive, forcing the start-up company to look

to the queue of foreign investors who come to the United States to shop for

promising new technology developed by entrepreneurial companies. (See

Chapter 5 for a discussion of this phenomenon.)
COMPUTER EQUIPMENTGlobal competitive factors shaping the semiconductor industry are also
influencing the world computer industry. Before the late 1970s, U.S. computer

imports were virtually nonexistent; in 1988, sales of foreign-made computers and

related equipment captured 39 percent of the $51 billion U.S. market.
10 As is the
case for semiconductors, U.S. firms hold the dominant position in markets for

technologically advanced products, such as supercomputers,

superminicomputers, workstations, and high-performance machines with new

processing architectures. But in the industry's largest unit-volume market,

personal computers, foreign competitors account for more than 40 percent of

worldwide sales, which are expected to total $25 billion in 1989.
11 Whetherpersonal computers become the computer manufacturing industry's equivalent of

the DRAMHARDWARE24Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.may well be determined by the manufacturing performance and strategic actions

taken by U.S. firms during the 1990s.
The similarities between the competitive factors shaping the semiconductor
and computer industries do not end there, however. The foremost foreign

competitors in computer markets include many of the same Japanese firms that

now account for more than about half of the worldwide sales of semiconductors.

Not coincidentally, these firms have not experienced the same DRAM shortages

that have beset many U.S. computer manufacturers.
''There is a great deal of evidence," said MIT's Ferguson, "that the memory
market is subject to strategic control
Šwhether coordinated or not is unclear. . . .
It is subject to strategic control by the collection of vertically integrated Japanese

electronics firms that dominate not only Japanese semiconductor production, but

also Japanese computer, telecommunications equipment, and, to some extent,

consumer electronics production. What is interesting about that, I think, is the

striking degree to which this situation demonstrates the continuing ability of

Japanese firms to both cooperate and compete." Similar trends are emerging

among the growing computer sectors of other Asian countries, including Taiwan

and South Korea, which are gaining a growing share of the personal computer

market.Like the pattern of competition facing U.S. semiconductor makers, the
technological trends steering the evolution of the computer industry also are

coming into view. These trends will promote significant changes in industry

structure. Most significant, perhaps, is the commoditization of computers,

particularly at the low end of the product spectrum.
CommoditizationWhereas individual companies may now manufacture thousands or several
hundred thousands of machines in a year, soon the annual production levels of

"each competitive, successful firm" will exceed millions of units, Ferguson

predicted. "As a consequence, the ability to manufacture in very large volumes,

the ability to design products rapidly, to insert them into production rapidly, to

have a worldwide sourcing, manufacturing, and distribution network [will

become] ever more important. That is an area in which . . . the United States is

not doing very well."
C. Gordon Bell of Stardent Computer outlined the technological factors
underlying this trend. According to Bell, all of the components that will be used

in the commercially available machines in the year 2000 are now under

development. His reading of the field suggests that personal computers at the

start of the next century will be as powerful as today's supercomputers (while

supercomputers of the day will themselves be far more powerful). Speeding this

transition will be the already-visible movement to distributed computing

environments, in which users can simultaneously exploit the resources and
HARDWARE25Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.applications not only of their local machines but also of any number of computers

that are accessible through a network. Both trends will increase demand for

smaller computer systems, driving down their price and stimulating supply.
According to Bell, while the performance of all levels of computers
(measured by the standard metric of millions of instructions per second, or MIPS)

has been increasing at double-digit rates since the 1960s, the processing

capabilities of microcomputers have been increasing at the astounding rate of

about 40 percent annually, as compared with approximately 14 percent for

minicomputers and mainframes. With the anticipated widespread use of RISC

technology in microcomputers, performance of what traditionally has been the

industry's low-end offerings will increase at an annual rate of 70 percent.
Bell did not foresee the extinction of high-end markets, such as for scientific
uses and other computation-intensive tasks. But he raised questions about how

demand for computers with different levels of performance will change. Will

many people who require supercomputers today find that the powerful personal

computers of tomorrow
Šoperating alone or in combination with others
Šmeettheir needs? Will new applications and new approaches to problems emerge that

cannot even be addressed with today's most powerful machines? Answers to these

and other questions will determine the size, structure, and profitability of the

computer industry in the future. Bell suggested that change will be relatively

radical and that the vast majority of computers for sale at the beginning of the

next century will resemble consumer electronics goods and will be produced in

similar volumes.Technological Convergence of Industries
The comparison of computers to consumer commodities was also made by
Ferguson, who foresaw similarities that went beyond volumes of production.

According to the MIT researcher, a common technology base of "digital optics,

digital microelectronics, and digital magnetics"
Šthe technology areas that have
been the wellspring of advances in computer and telecommunications equipment

Šare "going to be used in a wide spectrum of products." Included in this category
of products, by Ferguson's accounting, are digital facsimile machines, printers,

high-definition televisions, and home communications and information systems.

Early commercial versions of these items are already available; other products are

under development.An example of this new trend toward horizontal integration in design and
production is Canon, a Japanese firm. Known to most American consumers as a

manufacturer of cameras, Canon also makes laser printers, photocopiers, and

photolithography equipment. With this diversification into new product lines,

which exploit the same optical and electronic technologies, the company's

revenues have increased tenfold
Što $10 billion
Šduring the last 10 years,
Ferguson said.While IBM has a broad product range, the U.S. computer-hardware industry
HARDWARE26Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.overall is not characterized by extensive horizontal integration. Moreover, the

virtually complete loss of the nation's consumer electronics industry makes it

difficult for U.S. companies to exploit the converging technology base and the

production economies of scope it implies and to diversify into many product

lines.ManufacturingBoth commoditization and convergence to a common technology base make
manufacturing efficiency and flexibility essential for competing in domestic and

global markets. "This scenario is manufacturing-and semiconductor-intense and,

hence, subject to intense competition in areas in which we perform poorly," said

Bell, adding later that the nation's general "lack of manufacturing ability" is the

primary source of the hardware industry's declining competitiveness. According

to Ferguson, ''Industries already are making a transition to a mass-produced,

low-unit-cost structure. Those industries are increasingly dominated by Asian

firms."Ferguson predicted that U.S. manufacturing weaknesses will become an
increasingly costly liability as manufacturing capabilities become the primary

"determinant of long-run competitive success" in computer manufacturing and

the growing cluster of related industries. Moreover, the continuing
Šand, somewould say, accelerating
Šerosion in the upstream industries that supply
materials, manufacturing equipment, displays, and electronic components will

handicap U.S. computer manufacturers' abilities to develop the necessary level of

manufacturing proficiency."We have to find ways to improve and to protect our fragile manufacturing
base," IBM's Toole said. "We are at a huge disadvantage because of the virtual

absence of consumer electronics."
As pointed out in several studies, Japanese firms have achieved higher-
quality products at lower cost through continuous improvement in processing.

Incremental improvements, accomplished by fostering the translation of

innovations into new products, can help a firm maintain a competitive advantage.

A telling indicator of the different manufacturing perspectives of Japanese and

American firms is their spending patterns. Citing a study by Edwin Mansfield,

Doyle of Hewlett Packard noted that the average U.S. company spends 70

percent of its R&D budget on product development and only 30 percent on the

manufacturing process. In the average Japanese firm, the percentages and

priorities are reversed.
STANDARDIZATIONHardly separate from the industry-shaping trends described above, the
international push for standardization (affecting computer hardware, software,

and data communications) is a catalyst in each hardware industry. Although

carriedHARDWARE27Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.out by domestic and international standards-setting bodies, the push is prompted

by users seeking compatibility and interconnection among the machines of

different manufacturers. Companies may also advocate standardization if a

particular set of standards improves their competitive position or at least

diminishes the advantages of the market leaders. Two examples, using IBM

products, illustrate how standardization can be a boon or a bane to an individual

company. Based on internally developed standards, the 360 System family of

compatible computers cemented IBM's leadership position in the large

international market for mainframes. The company's proprietary control of what

became a de facto industry standard gave it a clear advantage, and other

computer manufacturers directed their attention to market niches not filled by

IBM mainframes.
IBM chose a different tack when it made its relatively late but hurried entry
into the personal computer market, revealing its microcomputer architecture to

the rest of the industry and purchasing the machine's operating system from an

outside vendor. The openness of the company's standard was effective in

promoting the development of software and peripherals by other firms, assuring,

as IBM intended, that customers had ample support. The strategy made the IBM

PC a marketing success. But within about five years after the computer was

introduced, cheaper PC "clones," most assembled in the Far East, began to claim

significant shares of the market, and they continue to do so. U.S. sales of

imported clones in 1988 were up 50 percent over the previous year.
12 Toconfound clone manufacturers, IBM has introduced a new family of personal

computers (the Personal System/2 series) with proprietary features.
While IBM was reasserting more proprietary control over its line of
personal microcomputers, Sun Microsystems was exhibiting yet another approach

to standardization, actively encouraging foreign and domestic firms to adopt its

Sparc microprocessor. Some observers predict that Sun is destined to repeat

IBM's experience with its personal computer, but Sun Chief Executive Scott

McNealy espouses what others view as a pragmatic view of the drive for

standardization. "I don't believe the world can go back to proprietary systems,"

McNealy said after his company licensed two Taiwanese firms to manufacture

personal computers based on Sun's microprocessor design.
13 Sun is a staunch
advocate of standardization, and through its licensing agreements with foreign

and domestic firms, it is maneuvering to have its system adopted as the industry

standard, thereby creating a relatively high-volume market.
Critics of the open-architecture stance taken by Sun and other U.S.-based
companies argue that these firms have made it easier for foreign competitors to

perfect the technology, speeding their entry into high-end computer markets now

dominated by U.S. firms. Although colloquium participants did not agree on the

point at which standardization handicaps innovation, most agreed that user

demand for increased compatibility among the machines of different vendors and

for a greater choice of applications will result in more hardware standards. Most

also agreed that as the number of software and hardware features
HARDWARE28Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.shared by different vendors increases, the importance of manufacturing efficiency

increases, and more firms may enter computer markets, competing on the basis of

cost and product quality rather than innovation. Given the nation's manufacturing

weaknesses, IBM's Toole said, "Standardization will probably hurt both the

technology and systems competitiveness of the United States, as it moves the

contest to the area of Japan's greatest strengths."
NOTES1. U.S. Department of Commerce. "Electronic Components, Equipment, and

Semiconductors," 1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook 
(Washington, D.C., 1989), p.
30-9; 1990 U.S. Industrial Outlook 
(Washington, D.C., 1990).
2. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1990 U.S. Industrial Outlook, 1990; figure
provided via personal communication with a Department of Commerce analyst.

3. CBEMA. 
Information Technology Industry Global Market Analysis
, IndustryMarketing Statistics Committee, Washington, D.C., 1989.

4. Dataquest as cited in "Japanese Solidify Dominance of Semiconductor

Market," Washington Post
, January, 4, 1989, p. F1.
5. U.S. Department of Commerce. 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook
, 1989, p. 30-9.
6. U.S. Department of Commerce. 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook
, 1989, p. 26-2.
7. See, for example, Jodi T. Allen. "Regaining America's Dulled Industrial Edge:

the Answer is Right Here at Home," 
Washington Post
, May 10, 1989, p. F3.
8. Richards, Evelyn. "Future of Joint Chip Venture Now in Doubt," 
WashingtonPost, November 10, 1989, p. F1.
9. Dertouzos, Michael L., Richard K. Lester, and Robert M. Solow, MIT

Commission on Industrial Productivity. 
Made in America: Regaining the
Productive Edge 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), p. 249.
10. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook
, 1989, p. 26-1.
11. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook
, 1989, pp. 26-9
to 26-11.
12. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook
, 1989, p. 26-7.
13. Fisher, Lawrence M. "2 Taiwan Licenses Set by Sun Microsystems," 
NewYork Times
, June 22, 1989, p. D4.
NOTES29Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3SoftwareGrowing at a rate of about 25 percent a year, estimated global revenues from
sales of software exceeded $65 billion in 1989.
1 Moreover, when the value of
software developed within businesses and other organizations is taken into

account, the size of the market for software is much larger. Measured by salaries

and other costs, the value of internally generated software in the United States

may range between $150 billion and $200 billion.
2These figures are compelling evidence of the attractiveness of the software
market, which is dominated by U.S. firms. They also attest to the increasingly

important role that programs and their applications play in enhancing investments

in hardware. Moreover, the growing emphasis on software development spurs the

innovation of new equipment, which in turn creates ideas for new applications

that require new software.
"As software gets developed," explained Alan Perlis of Yale University, "it
exposes opportunities for the application and creation of hardware. The two work

together, and there is no permanent boundary between them. There is a

continuous shift, one way or another." Thus, for example, the emergence of new

processing architectures, notably parallel processing, gives rise to a need for a

whole new body of software
Šwhich may in turn enhance the development of new
hardware.The current situation has changed dramatically in less than 15 years. Prior to
the introduction of the personal computer, software functioned somewhat as a

"loss leader," an often-free inducement for buying
Šand continuing to buy
Šaparticular vendor's computer equipment. Software development was part and

parcel of hardware development, and computer manufacturers were nearly the
SOFTWARE30Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sole source of programs, which were written to run on their machines only. The

few independent software firms that did exist wrote programs tailored to

individual vendor's machines. Sales of about a thousand copies were the

benchmark for a highly successful software package.
Starting with Apple Computer's popularization of the personal computer, the
size of the software market grew immensely, spawning small and large firms that

derive all or most of their revenues from this market. Today a million copies of

popular software packages may be sold. Moreover, increasing but still modest

standardization has made it somewhat easier for developers to adapt programs for

use on the computers of different manufacturers. In addition, even the largest

computer companies recognize that they have neither the financial resources nor

the technical staff necessary to provide the full array of software support that

potential buyers of their machines now demand
Šwhile larger buyers of
software, with similar resource limitations, look to the software industry to meet

their needs affordably.
Out of these seeds grew the burgeoning software industry. Some U.S.
software firms are now very large, the biggest reporting annual revenues of about

$1 billion, but most are quite small, sometimes consisting of not much more than

one or two people "with a personal computer and an idea." This diverse collection

of U.S. firms accounts for more than 60 percent of world sales of software.
3 Atpresent the U.S. industry enjoys a commanding lead in the world market, but

hindsight suggests that no lead in markets for computers and computer-related

parts is secure.
"Assuming some of the dire predictions . . . come true," said Samuel H.
Fuller, vice president for research at the Digital Equipment Corporation, "then a

large part of our hardware [will be] . . . manufactured and eventually designed

outside the United States. Is there the kind of infrastructure and support in the

other industries of the computer sector that they could remain, in fact, healthy

industries in their own right? Can software exist as an industry without the

supporting underlying hardware?" The answers to these questions are not clear-

cut, but Fuller suggested addressing potential problems before they become real

ones. Software "is an area where we have to learn how to remain strong, rather

than take it for granted," he said.
SOFTWARE: A HIGHLY UNUSUAL PRODUCT
Arguably one of the most important products of the age of high technology,
software has properties that make it distinct from all other products. The largest

and most sophisticated sets of programs, such as those written for air traffic

control systems or early-warning defense systems, are among the most complex

of human creations, rivaling the crowning physical achievements of modern

engineering. Yet software development has features that make it more akin to an

art or a craft than to a high-technology enterprise. It is an expensive, slow,
SOFTWARE31Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and labor-intensive process that has undergone only incremental improvements in

productivity.4Another special characteristic of software is that it typically does not remain
constant. Observed Perlis, "The thing that has been missed by software

engineering to date, to everyone's great peril, is the concept of evolution
Šthatsoftware, as soon as it comes to exist, must change. The most successful software

is that which is unstable and incomplete." Perlis explained that "unlike hardware,

software gives the illusion that the costs of change are negligible since they

apparently involve only scribblings. This is not so. Software affects its

specification so that both undergo continuous change."
Other major properties that distinguish software, according to Perlis, are
networkingŠtoward the end of direct communication between programs, and
automationŠsince "it must be the case that most of our programs run essentially
independently of us." Finally, Perlis explained that "in the computer, programs

are in a sense live. . . . They can do things we find extremely difficult to do
Šthatis, to keep informed in a broad way about what is going on in the world."
Perhaps the most complex pieces of software entail integrating isolated
collections of computer, communication, and other types of equipment into

coherent information-processing systems. Systems-integration software, the

means of accomplishing this complex linkage, often must be customized to meet

the diverse requirements of customers, explained Laszlo A. Belady, vice

president and program director for software research at Microelectronics and

Computer Technology Corporation (MCC). Because of this customization

process, software development can be considered as much a service activity as a

manufacturing process.Software is itself increasingly valuable in the production and modification
of software. Researchers throughout the world are developing productivity-

enhancing tools and methods for specifying, writing, editing, compiling, testing,

and verifying programs. Although many are the proprietary possessions of

individual companies, the tools already in hand have helped shorten the software

development cycle, particularly for easily specified, straightforward applications.

However, continued leadership in software calls for greater investments in

developing and using software development tools. Noted Lawrence Tesler of

Apple Computer, "In order to compete with, say, the Philippines where the labor

costs are lower for programmers, we need to lower our overall cost of producing

software by improving our tools."
In the software industry, low levels of productivity growth are a shared
shortcoming, besetting firms in the United States, Japan, Western Europe, and

everywhere else. In the United States, the most visible efforts to enhance

productivity in software development, including the software research programs

at MCC and the Software Productivity Consortium (SPC), were encouraged by

frustrated users, notably defense contractors interested in reducing programming
SOFTWARE32Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.costs. The software industry has not pursued a coherent strategy to improve

software development, not the least because of the implicit costs and

uncertainties.TOWARD A BIFURCATED MARKET
Current trends
Šin particular, the emergence of large-volume markets for
packaged software and the growing demand for customized software
Šarestimulating a division within the industry, points out Laszlo Belady of MCC. One

segment, he said, will concentrate on software packages that, although varying in

size and complexity, can serve many different customers without major

customized alterations. "These packages can be produced anywhere," said

Belady, suggesting that U.S. firms serving this market will be most vulnerable to

foreign competition because "everybody has the same chance."
In Belady's second category, systems integration, competition will be
determined by the ability to manage complexity, to develop applications tailored

to the idiosyncracies of individual enterprises: "What you have to do in order to

make this complex integrated application work is to provide the glue, that is,

additional software, which does the traffic control and holds the pieces together."

This category, according to Belady, is where the greatest business opportunities

may lie and where U.S. firms may have an inherent advantage.
Successful software of this second type can only be developed through
extensive cooperation between the customer and the contractor, Belady

emphasized, and "it is impossible to come up with a huge computerized integrated

application for an enterprise where the vendor comes and does everything . . . it

cannot be done without team work." For members of such teams, "it is not enough

to teach programming," he said, "but you also have to give real-life experience,

even at school, and teach people how to work together and not just to excel

individually."Belady explained that if we wish to master the necessary complexity of this
second software category, we must exploit the potential of computers themselves

in retraining individuals. He described retraining as "an incredible opportunity, an

incredible benefit to the country." Belady stated that retraining could be

invaluable in making this country more flexible and able to cope with the many

new challenges that the "accelerating change of industry and society" confronts

us with.EDUCATION FOR BETTER SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
AND USE
The link between education and the ability to stay competitive was made
succinctly by Tesler: "If other countries have better-educated populations in

computer science and software engineering, then we will fall behind." Many

colloquium participants commented on the promise for improved education and

training as means to achieve better software and better software development.
SOFTWARE33Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Colloquium participants cited university computer science programs as a
particularly valuable asset to the software industry, because they provide needed

personnel. "At times, people will argue that because of our education and because

of our innovative spirit," observed Fuller, "we [the United States] will continue to

hold a commanding lead in the area of software." The proportion of American-

born students enrolled in these programs has dropped substantially, however.

"Whereas it is bothersome that half of our graduate students are from foreign

countries," said James H. Morris of Carnegie Mellon University, "we should try

to make that a competitive advantage and give them every opportunity and

encouragement to stay, both at the graduate and undergraduate level."
Getting the most out of software may, as Perlis suggested, entail developing
systems that "get the human being out of the loop," but achieving that end

requires human talent and skill. All colloquium participants had suggestions for

improving educational programs in computer science and software engineering.

Tesler, for example, pointed to the need for a practical perspective, commenting

that "in terms of computer science and software education, what I would like to

see coming from the colleges is people with more practical experience . . .

[including experience doing] major projects on teams to revise other people's

software, which is what one ends up doing in industry quite a lot." The value of

increasing the exposure of faculty and graduate students to industrial software

problems and development conditions has been noted elsewhere by the Computer

Science and Technology Board.5A recurring theme was the importance of interdisciplinary training that goes
beyond software and hardware issues per se. Tesler related such training to

maintaining a specific competitive advantage: "One thing that I think the United

States can maintain a lead in is human interface design, which makes application

software distinctive, but to do that, our students have to be very broad in their

education. They cannot learn only technology; they have to learn something

about psychology, something about art, and learning to work in teams with

people of other disciplines. . . . We can stay ahead, particularly in the Far East, . . .

by maintaining these cross-disciplinary development teams."
But participants' concerns about education extended to the general
population. The health of the entire computer sector and the development of the

technology will depend to a great degree on how society chooses to use

computers and extend their applications. "The important thing to remember," said

Yale's Perlis, "is that software is intended, as is the computer, . . . to make life

more imaginative for all of us." He added that, because of the technology's

influence, society will be changing continually.
Therefore, Perlis and others said, computing must be integrated into all areas
of study. From growing familiarity with the technology among broad segments of

the population, ideas for new applications will emerge, fostering the evolution of

the technology and driving the growth of the software industry and others. "The

effective use of computing," said Abraham Peled, vice president of
SOFTWARE34Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.systems research and director of computer sciences at IBM's T. J. Watson

Research Center, ''will be the key to the industrial competitiveness of the country

as a whole, as products are conceived and developed inside a computer instead of

the laboratory, and integrated directly with manufacturing [and] with the field

force."Education is an immediate concern. "If we see it as long-term, and therefore
not requiring immediate attention, we will never get around to it," emphasized

Tesler, "and I think that is what we have been doing in this country for the last 20

years."FOREIGN CHALLENGESome erosion of the nation's lead in software markets is inevitable, but if
limited, it could have positive effects, according to Apple Computer's Tesler.

"Some degree of decline is healthy for the world economy," he said, and it will

"stimulate more attention by U.S. software companies to international markets."

Already, noted Tesler, "For routine types of software creation, the sorts of things

that run businesses, . . . people are beginning to find that they can buy software

development services from other countries ten times more cheaply than they can

get them here." Several U.S. firms have already responded to this reality by

establishing software development centers in such countries as Singapore and

Ireland, where they benefit from relatively low labor costs. Domestic companies

also "import" temporary foreign workers to write code for basic, or standard,

software packages. India, for example, advocates exporting its programmers to

work on international software conversion projects. How much of this activity

takes place is not known, but it does involve leading U.S. companies.
Foreign production of packaged software is also growing. Tesler pointed
out, "Some of the more innovative packages in the personal computer market

have come from other countries, generally in Europe, say, France in particular.

But as I have traveled around the world, I have seen interesting software in other

places."To enhance their competitive prospects, Japan and Western Europe have
concentrated on developing productivity-enhancing tools and techniques, as well

as methods for verifying the reliability of programs. To remedy gaps in expertise

and to sidestep licensing restrictions, Japanese firms have also established

software research laboratories in the United States. Other countries that have

made their domestic software industries economic priorities, such as the People's

Republic of China, India, Malaysia, and Taiwan, are focusing, for now, on large-

volume reproduction of basic software rather than on innovation. Some firms in

developing countries, capitalizing on the low cost of replicating software and

weak international protection for intellectual property, market imita
SOFTWARE35Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tive packages.6 Such copied products undercut sales of legitimate products and
drain resources for legal action for copyright infringement.
The impacts of Japan's most visible efforts to achieve parity in software
markets are uncertain. Colloquium participants saw neither the Japanese Fifth-

Generation Computer project nor The Real-Time Operating System Nucleus

(TRON) project as yielding breakthroughs that could threaten the U.S. software

lead. They were more cautious in their appraisal of a cooperative effort involving

government and industry to develop Software Industrialized Generator and

Maintenance Aids (the SIGMA project). SIGMA "is a software production and

industrialization system developed for the purpose of improving the fundamental

environment for software development in Japan,"
7 building on AT&T's UNIX
operating system. UNIX, developed by AT&T, is one of the leading candidates

for a standardized computer operating system for the entire industry. The some 40

Japanese companies participating in the SIGMA project have all agreed to use a

specific version of UNIX. With a standard operating system, according to one

line of reasoning behind SIGMA, Japan could be able to address deficiencies in

software development."The openness of UNIX," Morris of Carnegie Mellon warned, "makes it an
ideal place for the Japanese to enter the U.S. software market. Look out."
While ongoing developments clearly indicate a Japanese push to penetrate
U.S.-dominated software markets, these efforts may not pose the most formidable

challenge to U.S. firms. "The real software competitor is Europe, not Japan,"

MCC's Belady maintained. "Europe 1992' will reinforce the successes of [the

cooperative research program] ESPRIT in the area of standardization and formal

methods 'creeping' into industrial applications."
8The European Community has also emphasized development of so-called
formal methods for software engineering. If successful, formal methods could

make some software development more systematic and less craftlike. Moreover,

formal methods can also enhance software quality by giving more assurance that

software does not contain errors and will perform as specified.
Foreign competition has been constrained by U.S. dominance in computers,
which has fed U.S. prominence in software. Although machine compatibility is

increasing, getting the software developed for one vendor to work on the

computers of another is far from effortless, and users are reluctant to switch to

new hardware vendors and an associated new set of software vendors. Increasing

standardization and, as has been the rule for three decades, continuing declines in

the cost of hardware for a given level of performance could eliminate this barrier

and open the door for increased foreign competition in software markets. Under

these circumstances, it is imperative that U.S. software developers understand

before their competition how to program computing structures that will emerge to

achieve higher performance (e.g., multicomputers
Šdistributed processing
Šandmultiprocessors).SOFTWARE36Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.STANDARDIZATIONSoftware research in Europe and Japan has a common thread, a push toward
standardization. Underlying this push is the undisputed assumption that

standardization will improve productivity, lower the cost of software

development, and increase competition. Virtually all software firms are advocates

of these ends, but they disagree on whether standardization is the best means to

achieve them. Discussions among colloquium participants were representative of

this disagreement.
Comments by Apple's Tesler characterize one view of the issue. ''Any
standard that has to do with data communications
Šwith exchange of data
between computersŠis absolutely critical," he said. He maintained that to
standardize beyond that point would encourage competition from imitator firms

and slow the rate of innovation in software and hardware.
"Standards and what goes on inside a computer are another matter," Tesler
said. "Standardizing processor designs by standardizing operating systems, my

company feels, [will make the] United States very vulnerable to competition from

abroad. . . . Japan and [South] Korea do very well when they can find something

that has been standardized, or [they] create a standard and then leverage that to

reduce costs, reduce prices, and gain market share and take the market away."
Tesler continued, "One thing that we [at Apple] have done is very carefully
protect the insides of our computer, both the operating systems software and the

hardware designs, so that they cannot be copied. We are very bothered by the

fact that there are moves in the industry to try to standardize on those sorts of

things, because we think . . . that is basically giving away the show to the

competition from the Far East."
Others in the industry are not bothered by the movement for a standardized
operating system. As MCC's Belady noted, "Many people believe that

standardization is necessary for progress." According to this view, standards

establish a base level of conformance for well-developed technologies, freeing

the industry to concentrate on areas where advances are likely to have a greater

impact on the capabilities and applications of computers.
Raj Reddy, professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University,
argued that failure to achieve some standardization of operating systems would be

counterproductive, diluting the efforts of programmers, who are already in short

supply, and draining financial resources. "I think we should be standardizing

routine things, including operating systems, and trying to use our creativity at

higher levels," Reddy said.
Preventing the adoption of standards is not the answer to maintaining
competitive U.S. software and hardware industries, he maintained. If, in the

future, foreign firms can produce powerful yet inexpensive workstations and

U.S.SOFTWARE37Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.companies cannot, Reddy argued, the disparity will stem from a problem that is

more fundamental than standardization.
The implications are similar for firms that develop software only. By
fostering high levels of compatibility among the computers of different vendors,

standardization would greatly expand software markets, uniting a fragmented

customer base and eliminating the need to write unique code for each of the many

operating systems that now exist. As for hardware manufacturers, efficiency of

production would be a key determinant of the market success of software

companies.Fuller of DEC warned of a proliferation of standards and called for a more
deliberate approach to the issue. "[W]ith too many standards, I believe, we will

tie the hands of developers and inhibit innovation," he said. The challenge, as

Fuller described it, is to develop a "set of well-selected standards" for hardware,

software, and communication areas that are at a mature stage of technological

evolution. "The rest of the playing field," areas where ideas and technology are

changing rapidly, should be left "open for innovation,'' according to Fuller.
The questions of what to standardize and when to do it are as contentious as
the issue of what the specifications for particular standards should be. Are

operating systems at a mature stage of evolution, for example, or do significant

advances lie ahead? Once in place, would standards make it difficult for new,

superior ideas and technologies to gain acceptance and, ultimately, market share?

Fuller suggested that effective standardization by many users on UNIX illustrates

the mixed consequences of standardization.
Tesler noted, however, that reducing the cost of equipment is only one
factor to be considered in decisions to develop or encourage standards. Noting

that the cost-effectiveness of standards will decrease as they age and technology

improves, Tesler said that companies that "leap ahead" of the standard will be

excluded from a major segment of the market
Šthe federal government and,
perhaps, its contractors.
Debates over standardization will continue in domestic and international
arenas. But if the push for standards continues to gain momentum, standardization

will greatly influence the business strategies of software companies. Perhaps the

only choice for U.S. firms, several speakers suggested, is to join forces and

develop U.S. standards that are superior to those now under consideration.
"If the Japanese are getting together and making a standard," Reddy asked,
"why do we not get together and make a better standard than they do, and always

stay one step ahead of the competition?"
NOTES1. U.S. Department of Commerce. "Computer Equipment and Software," 
1990U.S. Industrial Outlook 
(Washington, D.C., 1990); figure provided via personal
communication with a Department of Commerce analyst.
NOTES38Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2. Dertouzos, Michael L. Richard K. Lester, Robert M. Solow, MIT Commission

on Industrial Productivity. Made in America: Regaining the Productive Edge 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), p. 264.

3. U.S. Department of Commerce. "Computer Equipment and Software," 
1989U.S. Industrial Outlook 
(Washington, D.C., 1989), p. 26-3.
4. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 
ScalingUp: A Research Agenda for Software Engineering, 
(Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1989).

5. Computer Science and Technology Board, 
Scaling Up: A Research Agenda for
Software Engineering, 
1989.6. The CSTB has explored intellectual property issues in software through a

workshop and forum in the fall of 1989. A report will be issued in mid-1990.

7. National Technical Information Service. "Foreign Technology," Abstract No.

37, 031, September 13, 1988.

8. ESPRIT, the European Strategic Program for Research and Development in

Information Technology, is an umbrella program that encompasses some 200

specialized projects. One product that has emerged from ESPRIT is the Portable

Common Tool Environment (PCTE), a standardized substrate, or foundation, for

developing software for large systems. PCTE accommodates existing and

emerging software engineering tools, which permits programmers to exchange

tools and researchers to develop new ones that enhance the utility of the software

substrate. Eureka, a European Community research and development program

focused on commercially promising technologies and innovations, has provided

funding for a software factory based on PCTE.
NOTES39Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Services and Systems Integration
Once thought of as separate entities, telecommunications and computing
equipment have merged to become "information technology," the umbrella term

for the growing array of digital devices and software that gather, process,

display, and exchange data and information. According to the Department of

Commerce, revenues for computer professional services (e.g., contract

programming, systems and network management, education and training on the

use of computer systems) were expected to reach $37 billion in 1989.
1 The still-evolving merger of technologies has added emphasis to the notion that

information is a strategic asset that every competitor must have. This notion has

spawned a large and rapidly growing market for information-related services:

database and videotext services, contract programming and design, value-added

networks, training and education, data processing, systems integration, and

others. Annual rates of growth in nearly all segments of the services industry

exceed 10 percent; in some, growth rates top 20 percent and are expected to

remain at that level for the near future. 
2One booming segment, and potentially the most lucrative, is systems
integration, which entails designing, implementing, and maintaining complex

systems of computing and communication equipment and software, often in

combination with other types of equipment and systems. Systems-integration

firms help businesses and other clients achieve the desired interoperability of

their information technology. The systems mesh technology
Šoften a
combination of equipment, software, and network-based services supplied by

many different vendorsŠwith an organization's activities, operations, structure,
and plannedSERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION40
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.development. Some firms specialize in turnkey systems, but most provide

customized systems that are developed in accordance with customers' needs. In

1989, system integrators were expected to earn approximately $13 billion, with

established firms reporting annual revenue increases of more than 15 percent in

their domestic business and more than 25 percent in their foreign operations.
3Hardware and software manufacturers, accounting firms, communications
companies, and other types of companies have targeted the systems-integration

market, and the number of businesses diversifying into the market is growing

rapidly. In 1988, more than 1,450 U.S. firms earned all or the bulk of their

revenues from systems integration.
4 The U.S. market for systems integration is
the world's largest, and it has attracted Western European and Japanese firms.

Entry is achieved almost exclusively through acquisitions of U.S. firms rather

than through start-up subsidiaries.
SYSTEMS INTEGRATION: A U.S. BUSINESS CONCEPT
The U.S. federal government launched systems integration in the 1960s,
when federal agencies hired contracting firms to design large-scale systems to

coordinate data processing or communication operations. Although still young

and growing, the U.S. systems-integration industry is in a much more advanced

stage of development than that of the emerging foreign competition. The

difference, according to Jeffrey M. Heller of Electronic Data Systems (EDS), can

be attributed to U.S. firms' early recognition of the business opportunities in

integrating computing and communications equipment that organizations were

assembling from various vendors as they tried to keep step with technological

advances and the apparent opportunities they created. Building on expertise

acquired in work done for the federal government, pioneering firms have recently

branched into commercial markets, which were slow to develop at first but have

been gaining momentum with the growth of private networks and other large-

scale private applications.
"[T]he gradual move in the industry toward open systems architectures and
networking standards," said Paul A. Turner, executive director of the Price

Waterhouse Technology Center, "created an opportunity for brokers to interpose

themselves between clients and the traditional proprietary hardware and software

vendors."For prospective clients, Turner added, systems-integration firms offered an
"alluring" service: "a reduced tie-in to the proprietary systems of any one vendor, a

more cost-effective solution to the needs of the client, made possible by 'cherry-

picking' the best of the offerings of several vendors, and all this coupled with a

single source of management and accountability that gave the chief information

officer some degree of career insurance."
The attractiveness of the concept has been proven, compelling even vendors
SERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION41
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of hardware to set up systems-integration units that, in principle, are free to use

the products of other manufacturers. Given the bright forecast for the industry,

the stream of newcomers may increase.
"Systems integration," said Irving Wladawsky-Berger, vice president of
IBM's data systems division and general manager of their Kingston facility, "is an

area we all expect to continue to grow for a very simple reason: The same forces

that are driving the technology and producing the tens of millions . . . of

workstations with the networks and huge data bases, those same forces are

driving complexity. This business would dry up if complexity disappeared, but I

think there is about as good a chance of that happening as finding a parking space

in Manhattan."ELEMENTS OF SUCCESS
Being the first to market with a commercially valuable service is one
obvious and important factor contributing to U.S. firms' dominance of the

systems-integration market. Another is the large domestic market that served as a

springboard for expansion into foreign markets, which are now growing more

rapidly than the one in the United States.
Wladawsky-Berger and MCC's Belady suggested that an American flair formastering complexity may also be fundamental to the strong showing of U.S.

systems-integration firms. "Management of complexity is a most American

endeavor; it really plays well to the things we are good at," Wladawsky-Berger

said, summarizing the position thus: "It is skills intensive; it is highly technical

and, so, our R&D effort will serve us well."
Turner of Price Waterhouse elaborated on the implications for skills. "As
often happens," he said, "the major advances come from effort in those areas that

fall between the cracks of the conventional disciplines. The skills . . . necessary to

perform a radical reevaluation of system functionality include the conventional

technical-system skills, but also vital are the skills needed to understand the

business, [its] management, and the organizational issues. And also required,

critically, is a problem-solving process that gets the people involvedŠand that is
all of them, both users and systems designers, thinking outside the box and

beyond the obvious solutions."
Inherent in the process of integrating multivendor information technology is
the need to form flexible partnerships, not unlike the horizontal and vertical

cooperative relationships that many have advocated for other industries in the

computer sector. In the European market, for example, EDS competes "rather

heavily at times with IBM," Heller explained. However, he noted, "we team

together sometimes and [EDS is] their customer and they are ours. So, we have

complex relationships.""Seldom does a system integrator have all the resources needed to do a
particular job," Turner added, "and these partnerships increasingly cross national
SERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION42
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.boundaries and lead to a very complex set of interdependencies, but ones that are

required in order to cope with the diversity and complexity of technology . . . ."
Other factors that underlie the success of U.S. systems-integration firms are
neither unique to this market nor cultural in origin. Rather they are good business

practices, sometimes applied in ways that may go beyond conventional

expectations. Foremost among these is the demonstrated importance of

developing close working relationships with customers, a point made by all

industry representatives at the colloquium. Customers want, according to one

speaker, a "total applications solution," requiring intricate understanding of a

client's operations.
Price Waterhouse's Turner noted that businesses have invested heavily in
information technology, but many, particularly those in (other) service industries

(e.g., financial services), have not realized expected increases in productivity. In

fact, the service sector has experienced a "clear slowdown in productivity," he

said, after an "unprecedented spending binge" on information technology.

Systems integration can solve this dilemma, but it requires a ''back-to-basics

questioning" of the functions served by information systems that have often

evolved in piecemeal fashion. Needed applications of information technology

may be quite different from those considered to be common practice.
Speed is another requisite attribute. Systems-integration firms must meet
changing needs and opportunities, placing a "premium on being able to move

fast," Turner said. "Solutions to problems that can be solved with yesterday's

answers can be provided by the client's own resources."
Given the intricacy of the working relationships between systems-integration
firms and their clients and the often substantial investment that integration

requires, industry representatives stressed the importance of a local presence in

foreign markets. Closeness and longevity of contact can also overcome the

suspicion that new entries often encounter in other nations.
DIVERSITY IN THE WORLD MARKET
"Networked computing is a galloping customer requirement" throughout the
world, according to Sam R. Willcoxon of AT&T. Ongoing deregulation of

telecommunications services in many countries and the confluence of

communications and computer technology could fuel "exponential" growth in

overseas markets, he said.
In the European Community, the competition facing U.S.-based firms comes
from two primary sources. One is in-house competition. Many organizations draw

on internal resources and technical staff to design and develop their own systems,

according to Heller. "That has always been our [EDS's] competition as we tried to

get involved in this business back in the '60s," he said. "So, we feel like from a

marketing standpoint, we know how to address in-house compe
SERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION43
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tition," he added. Large hardware- and software-manufacturing firms
Šso-calledfull-service providers
Šconstitute the other category of competition.
In addition, European firms that produce software are only beginning to
expand into systems integration, according to Heller. Several companies have

emerged as "formidable" competition in niche markets for specialized systems,

such as for computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing.
Japan, South Korea, and other Far Eastern nations are more difficult markets
for systems-integration firms. Heller described the use of outside firms for

internal tasks as "countercultural." "They like doing everything in an integrated

sense and for themselves," Heller said. ''It is a sign of weakness" to hire an

outside firm and entrust a contractor with the responsibility for enhancing

functional and strategic capabilities. Nevertheless, EDS has managed to make

some inroads in the Japanese market.
Turner added that Price Waterhouse's Japanese office encountered stiff
resistance upon its entry into the systems-integration business. Over time,

however, the firm's marketing efforts have become progressively more

successful.At this point in the industry's development, as Heller observed, systems
integration as an exportable service is largely a U.S. invention that the world

market is gradually emulating. AT&T's Willcoxon noted that the concept of

systems integration is still evolving, but at a differential pace
Šfaster in theUnited States than in most other parts of the world. Interestingly, early advances

in overseas markets to date have been facilitated by business relationships

launched in the United States. For example, the requirement for a local presence

overseas by accounting firms like Price Waterhouse that serve multinational

clients has provided a springboard for serving foreign clients, a development

noted by Turner, while the merger of EDS with General Motors opened doors to

new relationships with foreign firms for EDS, according to Heller.
DEPENDENCE ON OTHER COMPUTER-RELATED
INDUSTRIESThat the global systems-integration market is poised to take off
Šoffering an"exponential" increase in business opportunities, in Willcoxon's view
Šis notdisputed. Nor is the characterization of U.S.-based enterprises as world leaders in

this market. But will the apparent U.S. advantage deteriorate if the underlying

industries in the U.S. computer sector
Šhardware, telecommunications
equipment, and software manufacturing
Šfalter in the world marketplace?
Major players in this market acknowledge its dependence on other
computer-related industries. Strategically, Heller pointed out, EDS views the

health of the other industries in the U.S. computer sector as directly affecting the

health of domestic systems-integration firms. "[I]t behooves us to have a very

strong force in both software and hardware domestically," Heller said. This is so

even though, in the short term, the lower cost or higher quality of some foreign-

made goods may influence his firm's buying decisions, or local laws may require

useSERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION44
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of components manufactured in the home country.
Electronic Data Systems carries ''a fair amount of capability in the software
arena," Heller noted, "but not to the extent that we want to shift a major portion

of our investment into carrying it as fully as the industry itself. In the hardware

arena, we have no interest in that kind of shift in capital investment. So, long

term, we are willing, able, capable, and have the intention of supporting the

domestic capability, whether that means in terms of our dollars, our energy, or

our political influence. . . . [W]e see it as a team effort."
STANDARDIZATIONOn scales small and large, systems integration is made easier by standards:
The greater the level of standardization, the greater the level of interoperability

between computers and other digital devices as well. Today, as noted in earlier

chapters, idiosyncracy rather than standardization is the norm, and systems-

integration firms have devoted some of their resources to overcoming barriers to

compatibility. "We have had to formulate solutions where standards didn't exist,"

Heller said. From an industry wide perspective, the process may be inefficient, a

duplication of investment and effort. Standards can motivate innovation by

serving, explained Heller, "as the act of declaring innovation significant . . . ,

[establishing] a benchmark that the next round of innovation must significantly

surpassŠor leapfrogŠor sidestep." But without adequate safeguards for
protecting intellectual property, according to Heller, standardization will quicken

the transfer of innovations from inventor to imitator. Therefore, if standardization

is to increase, there must be stronger safeguards for preserving the returns to

innovation and greater international compliance with those laws, in Heller's view.
AT&T's Willcoxon contended that without greater standardization, the
"magnificent opportunity for productivity improvement" that computers afford

would go largely unrealized. "Users are beginning to reject closed proprietary

systems that isolate their data in computers that can't talk to each other," he said,

adding that clients want to ''mix, match, and interconnect products from whatever

vendors meet their needs."
Standards are critical to meeting customers' varied needs, enabling the
information industry to "really begin to deliver on its promises," according to

Willcoxon. Willcoxon called for an "enlightened combination of cooperation and

competition." He said that firms must cooperate in developing and selecting

appropriate standards and then compete in "devising solutions that are best

tailored to user needs."
Turner of Price Waterhouse offered a complementary view. While
acknowledging fears that standards may hurt innovative software and hardware

companies, he urged firms to view the issue from the perspective of users who

have invested heavily in information technology but who have not reaped the

anticiSERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION45
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.pated benefits. If standards can deliver "better productivity enhancement," then

firms must accede or risk "increasing dissatisfaction from users."
But would high levels of compatibility between the computer and
telecommunications equipment of different vendors eliminate the need for

systems-integration firms? Absolutely not, according to industry representatives.

"[T]here are a lot more things involved than just whether boxes and software

hook together compatibly," Heller said. The "real value-added" part of systems

integration is the "understanding of the problem you are trying to solve.''
Given the number of hardware and software options facing customers and
the many potential approaches to solving a problem, systems-integration firms are

not likely to see complexity or demand for their services evaporate with

increasing standardization, according to Heller and other industry

representatives. Raj Reddy of Carnegie Mellon University shared the following

analogy: "Just because you have a vocabulary and a language and a syntax and a

dictionary, it doesn't mean you can write a best-selling novel. A best-selling

novel is the composition of these things in ways that make an attractive plot and a

solution and various other things. I think no matter how many standards you

have, you still have that problem of creating the best-selling plot and novel. That

is the systems-integration business."
Perhaps, as several colloquium participants suggested, the debate over
standards should shift from whether they are needed to how standards are

developed and how they influence innovation and technological progress. Robert

E. Kahn, president of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives, suggested

that rather than viewing them as "unchanging over time," standards should be

considered dynamic, evolving in step with technology. With a flexible standard-

setting system, the "critical issue" becomes how to manage standards so they

accommodate change, in Kahn's view.
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR THE INFORMATION AGE
Firms that specialize in computer and communications services are, in
effect, building an Information Age equivalent of the highway system, an

infrastructure that accommodates the flow of information in textual, graphic, and

voice form. Systems-integration firms, for example, link once-independent

islands of hardware, applications, and their specialized domains of software into a

functioning whole, just as roads connect previously isolated communities into

zones of commerce. Like the businesses that now line many stretches of the

nation's highway system, a growing array of electronic databases and other

specialized services have sprouted up to serve an increasing number of users

whose computers are connected to networks.
Colloquium participants argued that this movement toward network-based
enhancement and integration of computer and communication capabilities is

proceeding much more haphazardly than did the development of the national
SERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION46
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.highway system; the full promise of networked computing
Šin which one
computer can communicate with any other, regardless of its location or its type

Šis far from being fulfilled. Many obstacles stand in the way of making
computer-to-computer communication as easy as making a telephone call. The

potential economic advantages of a nationwide information network appear to be

motivating Japan and Western European countries to begin developing the

necessary infrastructure. In the United States, where the geographic scope and

scale of the task and its cost are significantly greater, a cohesive approach is

lacking.In recent years several groups, including the Computer Science and
Technology Board, have called for the development of a national information

infrastructure or a partial implementation of this concept devoted to the support

of research and development.
5,6 At the colloquium, Charles Ferguson of MIT
explicitly advocated a government-coordinated program to build a nationwide

advanced-technology computer communications infrastructure over the next one

or two decades. The network would be the conduit for communications required

by an ever-growing number and variety of digital devices, from computers and

telephones to high-definition television sets.
According to Ferguson, a national information infrastructure will not only
become an economic necessity, but its development also will be a direct stimulus

to a "very wide spectrum of information- and technology-intensive industries."

Manufacturers of base technologies
Šfor semiconductor packaging, automated
assembly, optoelectronics, and production of printed circuit boards and fiberoptic

cableŠwould benefit from infrastructure-oriented research projects and,
ultimately, from the demand generated by the actual construction and

implementation of the network and the associated user equipment. Moreover, the

proposed network could be the means for U.S. reentry into markets for consumer

electronic equipment, which increasingly incorporates the same digital

technologies used in computers (see 
Chapter 2).Some colloquium participants equated a government-led project to build a
national information infrastructure with the U.S. decision in the early 1960s to

send astronauts to the moon by the end of the decade. The "symbolic value" alone

of such a project could "galvanize the technical community" and the rest of the

country, suggested Wladawsky-Berger of IBM. But more important,

Wladawsky-Berger and others stressed, is the great underlying utility of having a

networked economy. "If U.S. industry generally is served by inferior networks

and digital systems,'' Ferguson has written, "the economy will suffer. Conversely,

if the United States were to possess the world's most advanced [information]

infrastructure, the economy would benefit, and so probably would U.S. vendors

of digital information systems.''
7One significant benefit would be to open up new markets for information
and information-processing productsŠmarkets that the United States might
understand and exploit before foreign competition does. A possibility is to

computerize commerce, using digital communications among computers acting

as agents
SERVICES AND SYSTEMS INTEGRATION47
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for companies to find suppliers, determine price and availability of parts,

negotiate deliveries, convey shipping information, and deal with problems. This

array of services goes far beyond what electronic data interchange achieves

today. It is an example of the kind of service that needs careful fostering by

government and other institutions; it is not simply a university research project.
Although no one at the colloquium opposed the idea of a national
information infrastructure, levels of enthusiasm for the concept varied. Heller of

EDS advised proponents to define clearly the national purpose that would be

served by such a network. He also cautioned that private firms would not

embrace the proposal without government leadership and government-sponsored

incentives for companies that contribute to developing a public good. Without

incentives, firms will act in their own self-interest and avoid projects that do not

benefit them directly.
Proponents of a national information network also injected cautionary notes
into their endorsements of the concept. For example, Stardent Computer's Gordon

Bell, who helped craft a proposal for a national research and education network

while he was an assistant director of the National Science Foundation, warned

that continuing erosion of the nation's manufacturing base may mean that many

infrastructural components, such as switches and optical fiber, may have to be

purchased from foreign suppliers. He also advised focusing first on networking

for researchers, to avoid making the task so large and complex as to be

unmanageable.Ferguson of MIT has cautioned that if proprietary controls of network-
oriented cooperative research projects are lax, foreign firms may benefit more

than U.S. participants. There is also the danger, he maintained, that policies

intended to preserve the U.S. market for domestic firms could result in "crude

protectionism." If policies are designed to benefit only a few selected industries,

the competitiveness of others that produce goods and services based on digital

technologies could suffer, Ferguson suggested. A potential outcome is greater

foreign penetration of U.S. computer and networking markets, in his view.
"I think it is the government's business to provide infrastructure," said
Robert W. Lucky, executive director of the communication sciences research

division at AT&T Bell Laboratories. "I don't think there is money in this right

now, but I think the nation needs it. . . . [W]hat it requires, I think, is government

leadership, not government regulation."
NOTES1. U.S. Department of Commerce. "Information Services," 
1989 U.S. Industrial
Outlook, 
(Washington, D.C., 1989), p. 45-2.
2. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook, 
p. 45-4.
3. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook, 
p. 45-4.
4. U.S. Department of Commerce, 
1989 U.S. Industrial Outlook, 
p. 45-2.
NOTES48Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 
TheNational Challenge in Computer Science and Technology 
(Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press, 1988).

6. Computer Science and Technology Board, National Research Council. 
Towarda National Research Network 
(Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press,
1988).
7. Ferguson, Charles H. "HDTV, Digital Communications, and Competitiveness:

Implications for U.S. High Technology Policy," VLSI Memo No. 89-506,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, VLSI Publications, February, 1989, p. 6.
NOTES49Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Business and Marketing
The market is the final judge of a firm's caliber
Šits ability to manage its
capital and human resources to develop and produce goods and services tailored

to the preferences of consumers
Šand the competitiveness of an industry reflects
the capabilities of its constituent firms. In growing industries, innovation can be a

prime determinant of marketing success. As an industry matures, however,

manufacturing efficiency, sales, marketing, and other factors become the critical

ingredients of competitiveness. "In many cases," observed Lawrence Tesler of

Apple Computer, "we lost our competitive edge not because of technology, but

because of better management and smarter strategy."
"Increasingly, market success depends on early product introduction to
determine customer requirements," observed William J. Spencer of Xerox. "The

lessons learned from selling and servicing your own product and watching

competitors must be quickly incorporated into product changes that meet market

needs. The high content of electronics and software in current and future systems

will lead to ever more rapid introduction of new products and an increased

requirement to respond in shorter times to market needs."
Spencer added that, unfortunately, many of the now-essential attributes for
competing in domestic and global markets
Š"listening to customers, learning
from the market, and quick reactions"Šare "not the hallmarks of U.S.
corporations." The consequences of this deficiency can be ''loss of market share,

lower revenues and profits, and an inability to support long-term initiatives,

including R&D in U.S. corporations."
Colloquium participants focused on the causes and symptoms of flagging
competitiveness in important computer sector industries. Like Spencer, many
BUSINESS AND MARKETING50
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.saw overarching problems, difficulties spanning many parts of the U.S. economy

but perhaps imposing an especially heavy toll on the research-intensive computer

sector. For example, John L. Doyle of Hewlett Packard advised his business

counterparts, as well as government officials, to heed the findings of the

President's Commission on Industrial Competitiveness.
1 That body found, Doyle
said, "four causes of U.S. industrial decline: failure to develop human resources

as well as our competition, inadequate incentives for saving and investment, trade

policies that failed to recognize global reality, and a slowness in the

commercialization of new technology." Of overriding concern to individual

firms, he suggested, is the failure of many to integrate manufacturing with

development."It has been said that the manufacturing industry has passed through three
phases, pursuing efficiency, quality, flexibility, and now innovation," Doyle said.

"But these are not alternatives. They are cumulative, and competitiveness

demands improvements in all four."
Discussions at the colloquium focused on several key problems that, if
uncorrected, will continue to hamper the performance of individual firms and the

computer sector as a whole.
ISOLATING THE ISSUES
Technology Management and Transfer
Success, says an adage, has many owners. This timeless insight has taken an
ironic twist in the computer sector. U.S. enterprises, sometimes building on

research performed at the nation's universities, have spawned many commercially

successful innovations. Innovative firms may receive proper acknowledgment for

their path-breaking efforts, but, too often, foreign companies have claimed the

commercial rewards of invention.
A growing body of business literature has documented the failure of U.S.
firms to capitalize on innovations that later proved tremendously successful in

foreign-manufactured consumer products. Among the many legendary examples

is the Japanese dominance of global markets for video recorders, invented by the

Ampex Corporation in 1956. Through the 1960s, the California firm claimed a 70

percent share of the world market for video recording technology. Then came the

video cassette recorder (VCR), an industrywide, standardized format that

suddenly eclipsed Ampex's proprietary format and attracted many competitors.
"[T]he basis of competition quickly became manufacturing and the ability to
move quickly through the design cycle," recounted Richard S. Rosenbloom,

professor at Harvard's Graduate School of Business Administration. "What had

been a six-year product life cycle collapsed to six months. Ampex never

developed the skills needed to compete in that kind of business, never anticipated

thatBUSINESS AND MARKETING51
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.its business could come that way, and found itself very quickly limited to a narrow

and shrinking niche in an industry that it created and which expanded a

hundredfold as a result of its technology."
Obviously, VCRs are not computers, although the technological similarities
between the two are increasing. Nevertheless, the problems that confounded

Ampex are not unique to VCRs, or even to the broader consumer electronics

industry, Rosenbloom maintained. "I think that is a story," he said, "that can

happen throughout the information products industries to companies that are

banking on sustaining proprietary positions and banking on a set of skills that

have served them well to date but that are not guaranteed to serve them in the

future."Addressing the same issue from a different angle, Rosenbloom noted that
some of the largest businesses in the computer sector have failed in major efforts

to diversify into new markets. IBM's venture into telecommunications, AT&T's

move into the merchant market for memory chips, and Xerox's attempt to branch

into workstation production failed to fulfill expectations for reasons other than a

lack of technological expertise, Rosenbloom suggested. "They had no trouble

grasping intellectually the science and technology of those new businesses," he

explained, "but somewhere they lacked the industrial capacity to establish a

competitive advantage in a marketplace that called for something different from

what they were offering."
"There is more than random error here," he said. The direct causes of the
"persistent failure of leading firms to adopt new technology that has later proven

astonishingly important to the industry" remain elusive, according to

Rosenbloom. He speculated that part of the problem may be endemic to the

American style of management and perhaps to the way managers are educated

and trained. But remedies will not be forthcoming until the problem is thoroughly

understood, he maintained. "There is something systematically vulnerable about

the way American companies have built positions in industrial markets and have

tried to sustain their dominance in those markets," Rosenbloom said.
Clues may come from tracing the often-fragmented lineage of commercially
valuable technologies. James H. Morris of Carnegie Mellon University described

the evolution of the user-friendly human interface embodied in Apple's highly

successful family of Macintosh computers. Like many other innovations, it

originated in an organization that can lay claim to many of the technological

advances that underlie successful products, but the innovating firm did not guide

the technology to commercial fruition.
Morris traced the roots of the successful user interface, which is
characterized by a bit-map display, a pointing device ("mouse") for guiding the

cursor, and screen "windows," to federally funded research conducted at the

Stanford Research Institute (now SRI International) during the late 1960s. A

collaborative project between SRI and the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center

essentiallyBUSINESS AND MARKETING52
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.transferred the technology to Xerox Corp., which continued the effort and drew

on programming developments in Europe and at U.S. universities. Many of the

embryonic components of the user interface technology were embodied in

Xerox's experimental ALTO computer of the early 1970s. Eventually, the

company introduced the Xerox 8010 Star System, the first commercial product to

feature the interface that is now used in virtually all computer workstations (see

Figure 5.1).The Star System represented a major advance in commercial technology,
according to Morris, who was involved in the product's development, but it was

too expensive. "We didn't think about marketing and the cost of these things,"

said Morris. He attributed this "marketing myopia" to most of the staff's previous

experience in research funded by the Department of Defense, where cost

considerations often do not enter into evaluations of a system's performance.
Through circuitous events, the approach pioneered at Xerox was eventually
perfected at Apple, but success was not immediate. The Lisa computer, Apple's
Figure 5.1
Key technology transfer paths leading to the Macintosh series of computers.

Source: Courtesy of James Morris, Carnegie Mellon University, 1989.
BUSINESS AND MARKETING53
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.first product with the advanced human interface, did not win many customers,

but a subsequent introduction, the Macintosh, has helped the company secure a

significant share of the global market for personal computers.
Morris's examination of failed attempts to transfer technology internally
yielded several common themes. Contrary to conventional thinking, Morris

explained, many commercially successful ideas
Šat least in the software
industryŠdid not originate with small start-up firms, but rather they were the
offspring of "rather large research investments made by rather big companies."

Start-up firms, however, often succeeded where established firms failed: They

developed good ideas into cost-effective products.
Morris speculated that large firms may fail to capitalize on promising
innovations because their attention is divided among many product lines. As a

result, they may overlook a line of research that is ripe for development; in

contrast, a small firm that seizes a good idea concentrates almost entirely on

developing the innovation. Perhaps that is why technology transfers between

firmsŠwhat Morris called "hostile transfers"
Šare more successful than those
that are attempted internally.
Moreover, a firm that capitalizes on an innovation pioneered elsewhere is
not limited to using an idea in its original form. "If somebody is taking something

without permission," Morris said, "they are free to pick and choose what they

take and don't take." The same may apply to foreign firms that capitalize on

research developments pioneered in the United States. Their selections and

adoptions of U.S. technologies are likely to be guided by marketing

considerations that innovating firms fail to recognize, according to Morris.
To the benefit of the U.S. computer sector, greater emphasis on cooperative
research could promote technology transfer in the United States, Morris

suggested; "intermixing" of organizations and technologists appears to facilitate

the kind of "creative technology transfer" that U.S. firms have found so difficult

to do internally. In addition, with Japan and other nations challenging or

overtaking U.S. leadership in key areas of technology, U.S. firms should broaden

their purview of science and engineering research, Morris advised. U.S. firms

should be just as quick to exploit commercially promising innovations that

originate overseas as foreign firms are to capitalize on the results of research done

in the United States. "In some sense," Morris observed, ''grabbing something from

another country . . . is a more powerful and better thing to do." John Doyle of

Hewlett Packard was even more direct: "I believe that not legally using good

ideas from our competitive products is improvident.''
Harnessing Complementary Assets
Even if firms master the complexities of innovation and technology transfer,
there is no guarantee that they will succeed in the market. "[M]any of the ideas
BUSINESS AND MARKETING54
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and productsŠonce introduced to the market and, often, before they are
introducedŠare essentially available to everyone," explained David J. Teece of
the University of California at Berkeley. "They can be reverse engineered, they

can be improved upon, and so forth."
Unless an innovative firm controls or has access to all the necessary
"complementary assets," Teece said, such as specialized manufacturing

capabilities and well-developed distribution and marketing channels, it will not

realize the commercial benefits of its R&D accomplishments. Instead, those

benefits will flow to "imitator" or ''follow-up'' firms that have harnessed these

complementary capabilities, Teece explained.
Much of the success of Japanese firms in global markets can be attributed to
their mastery of the competitive elements that support the commercialization of

innovations. Design cycles and the time needed to develop manufacturing

proficiency for a new product are often faster in Japan than in the United States.

"Therefore, [Japanese firms] can take what is best out there in the world stock of

knowledge and bring it into the market ahead of the competition and take a good

chunk of the market," Teece said.
Given the success of this approach, it is not surprising that Japanese firms
invest the bulk of their R&D dollars in process improvements. The attention to

process extends even to the processes of research and development. The

penetration of supercomputing, for example, into electronics and automotive

R&D in Japan suggests a Japanese advantage in applying advanced tools to

improve design innovation, reduce production time, and improve quality. In the

United States, firms tend to allocate most of their R&D dollars to developing new

products. If U.S. firms do not devote more resources to developing manufacturing

competence and other complementary capabilities, continued investment in

product-oriented research could be self-defeating because results will quickly be

transferred to competitors, Teece maintained. If a firm innovates, it must

"simultaneously be in a position" to commercialize the innovation, he observed.
The integrated structure of Japanese firms and industries facilitates rapid
product introduction because it facilitates the harnessing of complementary

assets. For example, many of Japan's electronics firms manufacture

semiconductors and other components as well as the computers and other

products that use such devices. In addition, these firms often have partial-equity

shares in companies that produce needed specialized assets, such as

semiconductor-manufacturing equipment. Moreover, competing firms develop

relationships to address issues of mutual concern.
Most firms in the U.S. computer sector control few of the specialized
complementary capabilities that Teece believes are necessary for competing in

global markets. This may reflect, in part, a lack of vertical integration. In the

United States, IBM may be the only computer sector firm that has achieved levels

of integration comparable to those of the larger Japanese electronic firms. It is
BUSINESS AND MARKETING55
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.hardly self-sufficient, however. Recognition of that fact may explain why IBM

has assumed a leading role in forging cooperative relationships among U.S.

hardware manufacturers.Teece argued further that the computer sector as a whole is losing
complementary capabilities. As the sector's domestic infrastructure of materials,

component, and equipment suppliers erodes, its ability to compete will also

deteriorate, even if U.S. firms continue to be prodigious sources of innovations.
This point was also noted by Yale's Perlis, who observed that "the thing that
we seem to be losing to the Japanese is the infrastructure that is most important.

It is nice that IBM can make everything from 'A to Z' and that other companies

exist. What is most important is that, when they look around for some activity,

technique, [or] equipment that they need to fulfill an idea to produce something

worthwhile, it will not be there. They will have to spend large amounts of time,

funds, and energy to gather what should have been around the corner."
In his writings, Teece has disputed the "notion that the United States can
adopt a 'designer role' in international commerce while letting independent firms

in countries such as Japan, [South] Korea, Taiwan, or Mexico do the

manufacturing."2 In the long run, he believes, the majority of benefits will flow to
the firms that make the products rather than to the companies that supply designs

or other knowledge-based, intangible assets "whose true performance features are

difficult to predict."
A somewhat different view was offered by Joel Birnbaum, vice president
and general manager of Hewlett Packard's information architecture group. If a

firm buys components from foreign suppliers, he contended, it still can succeed in

designing and marketing systems. Birnbaum used Hewlett Packard's popular

Laser Jet printer as an example, which was also cited earlier in the colloquium by

another speaker, of how U.S. firms are becoming increasingly reliant on foreign

manufacturers of components. "We buy the print mechanism from Canon, but we

did a much better job than they did of figuring out what goes around it, the page

definition formats, how to service it, how to document it, how to package it, how

to market it, and how to manufacture the entire product." The result is a high

value-added product, one with annual sales exceeding $1 billion. According to

Birnbaum, standardization accommodates the development of value-added

products and services, allowing firms to use the best components the

international market has to offer and to sell their products throughout the world.
Complementary capabilities will become especially critical as more
computer products evolve into commodity products, as many at the colloquium

predicted. In commodity markets, Teece said, "manufacturing matters. That is

where marketing matters. That is where many other things [besides innovation]

matter. So, while one cannot in general say that manufacturing always matters, I

think it matters in this industry, . . . where one doesn't have good intellectual

property protection." Strengthening international intellectual property laws
BUSINESS AND MARKETING56
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.would benefit innovative firms, he added, but there are "inherent limits" to

safeguards that might be extended to intellectual property.
An Argument for Cooperation
The importance of complementary assets suggests that a promising avenue
to maintaining a competitive U.S. computer sector is cooperation. Cooperation

between manufacturers and suppliers and even between competitors can effect a

sharing of some complementary assets. Recognizing this possibility, many U.S.

enterprises have turned to foreign firms, allowing their technologies to be

licensed in exchange for manufacturing expertise and capital. But failure to

cooperate and to make necessary assets available domestically results in tactical

decisions that benefit individual firms but may eventually harm the entire sector.
Thus, as the international push for standardization grows and as computers
come to resemble consumer commodities, "cooperation becomes increasingly

important," facilitating the strategic thinking and investments that were absent

during Japan's rise to dominance in DRAM production, Teece maintained.

Changes in management styles and in policies governing the structure of U.S.

industry will be needed to achieve the levels of cooperation that global

competition demands, he added. For example, perceptions about the constraints

resulting from antitrust laws may discourage cooperation, although the laws

actually allow a wide range of mergers, joint ventures, and so on.
Teece also stressed the importance of integrating science policy and
technology policy, which now overlap only slightly. "If you don't connect the

development of scientific capability with technological capability, there won't be

too many national benefits," he said. According to computer sector

representatives, that link must extend to the federal research laboratories. Several

criticized the paucity of commercially relevant technologies that have been

generated by the laboratories. To date, argued Hewlett Packard's Doyle, the

returns from research conducted at the more than 700 tax-payer-supported

facilities have not been commensurate with the nation's annual investment of

about $20 billion.Managerial Incentives and Short Time Horizons
United States business as a whole is consistently criticized as being myopic,
focusing on short-term gains at the expense of long-term competitiveness. The

computer sector is no exception, according to colloquium participants. Nor has it

escaped the consequences of this short-term outlook that are most evident,

perhaps, in the deterioration of the manufacturing base.
But is there a single, fundamental cause of the problem? The list of
detrimental influences includes the federal budget deficit, tax policies that

encourage consumer spending over saving, stockholders' expectations for

immediateBUSINESS AND MARKETING57
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.returns on their investments, managers' emphasis on high quarterly and annual

profits and neglect of investments in equipment and R&D projects that are

critical not to next year's profit statement but to their firms' performance three or

more years down the road. Perhaps, as several studies have suggested, this

tendency to risk the future for short-term gain reflects, in part, attitudes imparted

during managers' educational training.
All of these factors, and probably others, contribute to the short time
horizons of U.S. firms. Sorting through the list and assigning the proportion of

blame attributable to each factor diverts attention from the critical task of

addressing the problem in all areas. As colloquium participants noted, the issue is

clearly recognized as one directly affecting the health of the entire computer

industry. Each responsible party, from the federal government to individual

firms, must act, participants emphasized. Otherwise, U.S. firms will continue "to

optimize locally," not globally, and foreign companies that act on the basis of

long-term, strategic interests will continue to gain in markets.
At the level of the individual firm, both Ferguson and Teece recommended
evaluating the incentives that guide management decisions. For example, the

short-term emphasis of U.S. managers, Teece suggested, "may be due to the fact

that their incentive structure is weighted, in some cases at least, too heavily in

favor of salary and not enough in terms of stock."
Learning from Failure and Responding to the Market
Interpreting the results of his own studies and that of other researchers,
MIT's Ferguson described the emergence of an approach to manufacturing

management that is now well established in Japan, is currently being adopted in

South Korea and Taiwan, but is uncommon in the United States. The hallmarks

of the approach are short design cycles due to the partial sharing of different

product designs, close coordination between design and manufacturing, and a

very flexible manufacturing system.
One attribute of the Japanese system is that it accommodates failure, several
speakers noted. "In the VCR story," said Harvard's Rosenbloom, "there were

three generations of VCRs that the Japanese, particularly Sony, introduced before

they finally got to the one that worked, and each time they learned some things

that were very important in developing the next generation." "Failure," he added,

"is an inherent part of learning, which is an inherent part of innovation.''
Doyle pointed out, however, that the consequences of introducing a poorly
received product differ among markets. In contrast to commodity consumer

electronic goods, high-cost products for business customers leave little margin

for error. For now, design and development cycles for business computer

systems, Doyle suggested, must be longer than those for consumer products.

However, he added, "the trouble is that industrial marketing [appears] to be
BUSINESS AND MARKETING58
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.moving closer to consumer marketing." Rapid product development could

become more important, placing U.S. firms at a disadvantage.
The Role of Small Entrepreneurial Firms
Small entrepreneurial firms have been popularly associated with the vitality
of the U.S. computer sector. To their credit, they have been the wellspring of

many of the innovations that have paced the technological and market advances

of computer-related products. However, recent competitive shifts have brought to

light the limitations of smaller firms and the consequences of assuming that their

strengths will preserve the interests of domestic industries overall.
In retrospect, for example, start-up semiconductor firms appear to have
destabilized the industry and have lacked the resources to continue developing the

manufacturing expertise necessary to stave off the challenges of better-financed

and better-organized Japanese competitors. 
3 Had the U.S. semiconductor
industry undergone consolidation, the argument continues, the resultant vertically

integrated firms would have been in a strategic position to meet the competitive

challenge.The history of the semiconductor industry also supports a contrary view:
Large U.S. firms may not be dynamic enough to compete in the rapidly changing

industry. Many conglomerates and large U.S. electronics firms did diversify into

semiconductor manufacturing, but most eventually withdrew. IBM is the most

notable exception. Looking at the computer sector more broadly, there is the

problem, previously noted, of an inability of large firms to capitalize quickly on

innovation. As Carnegie Mellon's Morris observed, while many innovations

originated in large firms, their successful commercialization was often realized by

small start-up companies (see above, "Technology Management and Transfer"

section of this chapter).
These events present a quandary. "In the United States," Ferguson said,
"there is the striking fact that a very disproportionate fraction of innovation and

newness comes from small entrepreneurial firms." The phenomenon appears

unique to the United States. "That is not the case in Japan or [South] Korea,"

Ferguson added. "Korean manufacturing is dominated by four vertically

integrated, diversified industrial complexes. In Japan, eight firms account for

most electronics production. The smallest of them [has annual revenues] of $10

billion."Gordon Bell of Stardent Computer stressed the importance of small firms in
computer manufacturing, arguing that productivity is "inversely proportional to

size. . . . I have been in two start-ups, each with 50 engineers," he said, "and I

assure you I could not have done those same projects in a large organization with

500 people. It would have taken twice as long, and the quality would not be the

same."Colloquium participants did not dispute the firm-size dichotomy and its
BUSINESS AND MARKETING59
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.apparent relationship to innovation. The general failure of large U.S. firms to

demonstrate the same speed in reacting to the market as their Asian counterparts,

several suggested, stems from management and organizational problems.

Compared with companies that have flat management structures and only a few

integrated divisions, hierarchically structured firms lack the cohesion and

versatility needed to respond quickly to market opportunities.
"I would argue," said William R. Hambrecht, president and co-chief
executive officer of the venture capital firm Hambrecht & Quist, "that the

entrepreneurial young company has done a good job of competing . . . because

[it] is usually the ultimate integrated business unit. It has representations from

other functions, but they are all in one room."
Also troubling to computer sector representatives was the apparently
increasing prevalence of foreign investment in small high-technology companies.

In exchange for needed capital and, perhaps, manufacturing expertise, these

start-up firms are often licensing their technology to foreign firms, which may

later emerge as competitors. (It should be noted, however, that licensing

arrangements may be the only option for entering a foreign market in which

access is government controlled.)
Foreign firms find the United States to be a very attractive place to shop for
new ideas, Ferguson added. To underscore his point, Ferguson told of a Japanese

firm that was setting up a holding company in the United States to invest in new

technology in computer and other areas. The firm allocated $2 billion for this

purpose, he noted.
Unfortunately, established U.S. firms have been less receptive than their
foreign competitors to small firms seeking assistance to develop their ideas. One

factor that may contribute to this reluctance is that pioneering new technologies

entails risks. An established firm may forego the chance to make a technological

leap, deciding instead to respond if and when an innovation proves commercially

promising. Another factor may be the so-called "Arrow effect," which suggests

that market-leading firms benefit by slowing the rate of technological advance.
4Hambrecht suggested that established U.S. firms have begun to change their
views on entrepreneurial firms. In recent years, he said, large firms have

demonstrated "growing acceptance . . . that entrepreneurial companies are good

places to develop products" and look at them "less as threats and more as

partners."CONSOLIDATION AHEAD?
Venture capital provided much of the seed money that led to the U.S.
computer sector's flush of growth during the 1970s and early 1980s, giving rise to

such firms as Digital Equipment Corporation, Apple Computer, Microsoft, and

Sun Microsystems. According to Hambrecht, the flurry of new company for
BUSINESS AND MARKETING60
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mation is ebbing, and today's start-up firms will often face formidable obstacles.
Much of the nation's estimated $40 billion pool of private venture capital has
been invested in the computer sector, to the point of overstimulating entry of new

companies, Hambrecht maintained (see 
Figure 5.2). Returns to investors have
fallen dramatically since the late 1970s, and the numerous new companies created

with the influx of venture capital have made it increasingly difficult for today's

start-up firms to carve out a market niche that offers the potential for above-

average earnings growth.
"[E]ven when we were right," Hambrecht explained, "even when we picked
the right people in the right niche at the right time, and they [the start-up firms]

executed well . . . they found a crowded landscape. . . instead of having a

reasonably free run to exploit their product position, they were in a corporate

dogfight."With fewer apparent opportunities available to potential start-up firms,
investors have soured on the computer sector and, according to Hambrecht, the

sector may not regain its allure. One reason for this outlook is the shortened

horizons of venture capital funds. In principle, venture capital is invested with the

aim of long-term earnings growth. But increasingly, investors expect quick

returns, and they have become more averse to risk. Fund managers are responding

in kind, Hambrecht added.
In Hambrecht's view, the hardware-manufacturing industry has begun to
mature, and forces of consolidation are already in evidence. Computer

manufacturing continues to outperform other parts of the economy, but annual

rates of revenue growth in many segments of the industry are about half of what

they were in the late 1970s. Moreover, costs of entry have soared, not only for

equipment but also for setting up marketing channels and other components.

Hambrecht noted that Intel began manufacturing semiconductors in 1968 with an

initial investment of $3 million. Today, building and equipping a modern

semiconductor plant would cost about $300 million.
Another deterrent to starting new companies in the hardware industry is
standardization. Acknowledging the arguments for and against standardization,

Hambrecht said his firm has decided that "standards are a way of life and

standards mean hardware becomes a commodity." Opportunities to develop

computers that surpass standardized versions and gain market acceptance will be

few, he predicted.
Given these trends, formation of new companies will continue to slow, and
intraindustry mergersŠ"the strong buying the weak"
Šwill increase, according to
Hambrecht. In the short-term, consolidation will appear to promote greater

efficiency in the industry, he explained, noting that a reduced flow of venture

capital creates the need for more cooperation within an industry. Hambrecht also

sounded a warning, however: As the entry of new firms decreases, established

firms will slow their product development efforts to increase their
BUSINESS AND MARKETING61
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure 5.2Venture capital raised and distributed in the United States. Source: Courtesy of Hambrecht & Quist, 1989.BUSINESS AND MARKETING62
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.returns. This situation, akin to the experiences of the U.S. automobile,
textile, and consumer electronics industries, sets the stage for increased

competition from foreign firms, according to Hambrecht.
Hambrecht's outlook for the software industry is considerably brighter.
Software innovation, he believes, is the key to "above-average profitability and

the ability to build a truly successful business"
Šalthough they do not now,
investors will eventually recognize the growth potential of software

development.NOTES1. President's Commission on Industrial Competitiveness. 
Global Competition:The New Reality (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1985).
2. David J. Teece. "Capturing Value from Technological Innovation: Integration,

Strategic Partnering, and Licensing Decisions," in 
Technology and GlobalIndustry, Bruce R. Guile and Harvey Brooks, eds. (Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1987), pp. 91-92.

3. Dertouzos, Michael L., Richard K. Lester, Robert M. Solow, MIT Commission

on Industrial Productivity. Made in America: Regaining the Productive Edge 
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1989), p. 256.

4. As Kenneth Flamm explains the Arrow effect, "For the established leader, a

new product may very well compete with its existing product lines in some

markets. Profits on the new product are then partially offset by lost profits on

other offerings. For a new entrant, there is no offsetting loss, and the perceived

return to entry will be higher" (Kenneth Flamm, Creating the Computer
,Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1988, p. 227).
NOTES63Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Turning PointThe maturation of the computer sector and the escalation of foreign
competition place the sector at a turning point. U.S. semiconductor manufacturers

and their suppliers face the prospect of continuing losses of market share to

foreign firms. In turn, manufacturers of computers and related equipment find

their base of domestic support eroding as competitors strengthen theirs. For now,

the nation's software, services, and systems-integration industries sit atop global

markets, but given events in other parts of the sector and developments abroad,

one feels compelled to ask, For how long?
Building on strengths, overcoming existing problems, and averting new ones
require "a massive change in thinking," noted AT&T's Lucky. "I am left with the

sense that we have a consensus on what is wrong," he said, reflecting on

conditions in the hardware industry, "but no collective will to do anything about

it."The history of numerous other industries and the observations of all
colloquium participants underscore how difficult significant change will be to

achieve. As Harvard's Rosenbloom described it, "[T]here is something

systematically vulnerable about the way American companies have built

positions in industrial markets and have tried to sustain dominance in those

markets."The computer sector is saddled with perceptions from its earlier years that
may no longer be appropriate and that may motivate a complacency among

policymakers that is unwarranted, in view of current realities. For example, "We

have become slaves to the image of the entrepreneur shaping technology
Šthegarage computer or spreadsheet software package," warned Belady of MCC.

"Unfortunately, many software projects, especially those having considerable
TURNING POINT64
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.risk and which have lengthy development periods, cannot emerge from such an

environment. Bits and pieces from the academic side have difficulty getting

integrated. The massive efforts aiming at improved tools and techniques for

complex system design and sustained by long-term stable funding at [Japanese]

companies . . . have few counterparts in the United States.''
The U.S. computer sector is too large and too complex to link the fortunes
of each its three major industry groups
Šhardware, software, and services and
systems integrationŠin a dominolike fashion. Yet as representatives from each
industry group pointed out at the colloquium, there are strategic dependencies

common to all. And these dependencies are likely to grow as technology, the

terms of competition, and the structure of the sector change at a rapid rate, one of

the hallmarks of the sector. Therefore troubles in one industry can have

implications for all and, as computing becomes more pervasive, for the entire

economy.AN ASSET AT RISK
The woes of the U.S. semiconductor and semiconductor-manufacturing-
equipment industries focus concern on another major chunk of the hardware

industry, computer manufacturers. If U.S. computer manufacturers were to

surrender their leading position in global markets, would the consequences be any

worse than those wrought by market declines in steel or other mature industries?

If computer manufacturing is indeed becoming a mature industry, as Hambrecht

and others maintained, might it not be more efficient to use computers that are

manufactured elsewhere, freeing up resources for production of higher-value-

added goods and services? These questions are not uncommon.
"There are a lot of people who are still not convinced that there is a
problemŠthat manufacturing needs to be preserved
Šand those people are in
influential positions, making decisions in the government," said John E. McPhee,

director of the Office of Computers and Business Equipment at the Department

of Commerce.
Colloquium participants shared the view that a narrow economic analysis
focusing on comparative production efficiencies across countries ignores the

rationale for a more strategic perspective. Computer development and

manufacturing are not simply ends in themselves
Šalthough they are nontrivial
ends in terms of their contribution to the GNP, the balance of trade, employment,

and other conventional measures. Rather, they are intricately linked both to the

development of other computer-related products, including software and services

as well as other types of hardware, and to advances in the use of computer

technology. The use of computers contributes increasingly to the competitiveness

of virtually all industries. In short, computers themselves are an engine of

technological change, a prerequisite for national growth in a global economy.
The special and increasingly intrinsic value of computer-related
technologies was captured by Perlis of Yale.
TURNING POINT65
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The computer is a tool of thought and function. It helps us model and it itself is

modeled. As an agent of control it permits us to interact with nature at all levels

of granularity from the stars to the quarks. The computer is crucial in our effort

to escape from the biological polyhedron that evolution has consigned us to: It is

crucial in the operations that extend the temperature range, the atmospheric

pressures, the years of life, the atmosphere, and the health that are required for

us to continue to exist. We must never forget that we are at the beginning of the

Computer Age, so that exploration of its role must continue into the foreseeable

future. Thus the physical form of the computer may change, but our recognition

of and dependence on the abstract concept "computation" will continue to

deepen. It is inconceivable that we could function without the computer. Of

course we must not worship the machine as an idol but we must domesticate it so

that it serves both as a good and as a performer. The computer must be expected

to play a role in almost every human activity.
It is because of the growing pervasiveness of computing, argued Perlis and
others, that we cannot yield a leadership role complacently. "For the computer

industry," commented Perlis, "yielding control to foreign concerns will have an

impact in the intellectual sense that yielding agriculture would have in the

biological sense." Echoed Teece from the University of California at Berkeley,

"The computer industry generates significant positive technological and market

demand spillovers to other industries. Moreover, for a nation to capture these

spillovers, it is necessary to have a domestic computer industry."
Despite the great progress that has been made in making computers easier to
use and finding new ways to use them, colloquium participants acknowledged

that businesses and individuals are still learning to use computers. The growth of

the systems-integration business and other services reflects some of the

difficulties users have experienced. Taking advantage of distributed computing

requires "thinking outside the box and beyond the obvious solutions," Price

Waterhouse's Turner observed. New, more productive ways of doing business
Šperhaps revolutionary, when compared with the mechanized approaches to

computing so common today
Šare likely to result. Indeed, computers and their
convergence with telecommunications equipment and other technologies present

the opportunity to create new businesses and even new industries.
In education, the arts, and virtually every other field of endeavor, computers
and software are extensions not only of human abilities, but also of the human

imagination. This is a "world of restless technology," said Yale's Perlis, and the

computer is likely to insinuate itself into most societal and economic affairs. No

one, he added, can "predict with any accuracy whatsoever what the role of the

computer will be in our lives or our children's lives. . . . One thing we can very

well be sure of is [that] it will be far different from what it is today."
Although the United States does not have a monopoly on new ideas, it is a
prodigious source, demonstrated best perhaps by the pioneering innovations that

launched the Computer Revolution and the Information Age. A healthy computer
TURNING POINT66
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sectorŠone that does not rely on imported hardware and software
Šwill be
critical to generating and applying the new ideas that set the stage for future

technological and economic advances. A computer sector that is healthier than

the one that now exists will be essential for U.S. firms and the nation as a whole.
SETTING A COURSE FOR IMPROVEMENT
Colloquium participants expressed general agreement on where remedial
actions are needed, differing principally on how to resolve issues in the area of

standardization. They were unanimous about the need for action; as Ferguson put

it, "The time is fast approaching, I think, when we really have to mobilize." The

agenda emerging from the colloquium includes the following key areas requiring

action.CooperationSigns that the computer sector has begun to mobilize are appearing. Most
striking, perhaps, is the effort to establish U.S. Memories, Inc., a joint DRAM-

manufacturing facility funded by hardware industry firms that was announced in

June of 1989. The production facility, if successfully launched, would work

closely with SEMATECH, the privately supported and government-funded

consortium that is developing methods and equipment for manufacturing

advanced integrated circuits. Such novel cooperative arrangements represent a

fundamental break from past ways of doing business, but more are likely to be

needed, many colloquium participants believed: "We are learning about

cooperation," Ferguson noted, "but Japanese firms understand it already."
Teece, of the University of California, also noted the importance of
cooperation and in his writings has stressed the need to form alliances in

accordance with shifting corporate and market boundaries. As the digital

technologies once used almost exclusively in computers continue to spread to

telecommunications, consumer electronics, and other areas, new interfirm

relationships will be required to harness the manufacturing, marketing, and other

capabilities required to compete in global markets.
The Role of Government
"We need government support," said Heller of EDS, "but let me also point
out that we need to support the government," The nature of this now-essential

relationship, which also includes universities, has been slow to materialize. A

major obstacle is the fragmented structure of the federal government and

industry.Given the environment in which computer-related industries operate, what
does the computer sector need from government? According to several comput
TURNING POINT67
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.er sector representatives, the answer is likely to involve creating conditions that

help businesses and government to adjust to competition in a global economy.

''Whether we succeed or fail," said John Doyle of Hewlett Packard, "depends on

how we manage our businesses and how the government manages the business

environment."Most colloquium participants saw the government as playing an enabling
role, as setting up a policy and regulatory framework that accommodates the

flexibility needed to compete in global markets and fosters a long-term strategic

view of competitive issues.
Taking this argument further, Paul Turner, director of research at Price
Waterhouse Technology Center, cautioned against an active, protectionist
posture. "Like it or not," he pointed out, "we are now part of a global economy

with complex interdependencies that are ill understood. In such circumstances it

is surely wise to recall the obligation of physician to patient expressed by

Hippocrates: 'First do no harm.'"
In areas such as education and tax and trade policy, all of which are vitally
important to the computer sector, the government must play a lead role.

According to many participants, that leadership responsibility should also extend

to initiatives designed to create an infrastructure for the Information Age,

including a national computer network. With the aid of industry, government

should be addressing what infrastructural elements are needed and determining

which elements are likely to emerge through the marketplace and which will

require federal or state incentives, Teece advised.
Responsibility for other initiatives deemed critical to the performance of the
computer sector, Teece also recommended, should rest with private industry,

assisted at times by government. "If there should be an industrial policy," he said,

"it should be what I call a private industrial policy, led by industry, with industry

dollars, perhaps supplemented by a small amount of government dollars."
ManufacturingSpeaker after speaker emphasized the importance of competence in
manufacturing, reinforcing the conclusions reached in many examinations of the

nation's competitiveness. It is an acknowledged fact that foreign competitors that

have eclipsed U.S. firms in many domestic and international markets have

achieved their market-leading positions on the strength of their manufacturing

capabilities. The ability of the hardware firms to recover market share and to fend

off challenges in product areas they still dominate will be determined largely by

their ability to make high-quality products efficiently and to insert innovations

quickly into their product designs and manufacturing processes.
"The primary ingredient for success in the next decade," said IBM's Toole,
"is speedŠspeed in development and speed in delivering derivative products of
TURNING POINT68
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.very high quality to the marketplace. To win, one needs to be competitive in all

areasŠcompetitive designs; well-trained employees; a strong infrastructure of
tools, materials, and components; and much-improved manufacturing prowess."
Unfortunately, the means to upgrade manufacturing capabilities in the
computer sector are diminishing. "The first problem that we face collectively,"

Ferguson maintained, "[is the declining capabilities in a] number of base

technologies, component technologies, and component markets [that] are quite

critical to the ability of a downstream systems firm to succeed in the computer

industry."StandardsPerhaps the most contentious issue discussed at the colloquium,
standardization is gaining international momentum, and the U.S. computer sector

must reckon with it. One way to view standards was characterized by Teece. "The

whole role of standards is one that cannot be underestimated," he said, "because

control of standards confers protections akin to patents."
The discussion about standards should not revolve around whether there
should be standards or not, according to Teece. "The point to recognize is that if

one controls standards, one can turn that into a competitive advantage." Morris

and others noted that the standards game is international and that "universal

international" standards can place U.S. vendors at a disadvantage. Consequently,

harmonizing the actions of all U.S. parties
Šindividual firms, the computer
sector, and the government
Šis necessary.The challenge may be even greater than the colloquium's discussion of
technical aspects suggests. The United States is in some sense outnumbered in

international standards arenas, because each country effectively has an equal

vote. Consequently, innovations, leadership, and early deployment in this country

can be vitiated by politics. The current one-country/one-vote system could be

used by regions to protect local businesses by promoting a series of mutually

incompatible standards adopted in individual regions, although this would

ultimately be to the disadvantage of all involved, given the benefits of

standardization discussed elsewhere in this report.
EducationConcerns about education ranged from the sector's needs for people with
scientific and engineering talent to the broader need for education to support

more and better uses of computer-related technologies. The government has

traditionally been crucial in providing support for the education of the country's

computer scientists and engineers. The results have been extremely positive,

according to Stardent's Bell, who maintained, "I think we [the United States] have

the most creative engineers. I think we have the finest scientists in com
TURNING POINT69
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.puter science going." However, in comparison to the level of effort other

countries are now expending, he said, "we do have a training problem."
The nation cannot afford to carry the burden of 25 percent of its high-
school-age youth dropping out, according to Heller, who argued that there is a

mismatch between education and other institutions that compose our economic

infrastructure and the evolving economy: "Most of the institutions of the U.S.

infrastructure were created to administer the Industrial Age society" and may now

be in some respects obsolete.
Obviously, the interest of the computer sector are affected by this national
problem. "For marketing to succeed," Perlis said, "there has to be a market. . . .

Not only do we need an educated work force to be able to perform jobs, but we

need an educated force that wants to know [and is] interested in essentially

expanding [its] own knowledge." In the not-so-distant-future, in Perlis' view,

computers and their applications will be integral to virtually every effort intended

to extend one's personal knowledge.
Widespread and imaginative use of computers in education can help to
better equip tomorrow's adults for contributing to U.S. society, several

participants suggested. In turn, new, more effective uses of computers may

evolve from the familiarity with the technology that is cultivated through

education and training. The future industrial competitiveness of the entire nation,

one speaker noted, may largely be determined by how effectively the general

population uses computers.
CLOSING OBSERVATIONS
The agenda that emerges from the colloquium implies the need for sustained
follow-up measures by industry, government, and universities, acting together

and independently. The nature of the necessary interaction, as well as the

mechanisms and the extent of cooperation, must be defined through a continuing

dialogue that has only just begun. From this dialogue, perhaps, will come the

necessary leadership to ensure that the United States responds effectively to the

strategic challenges mounted by foreign competitors. Fragmented, piecemeal

responses will not be sufficient. One clear lesson of the 1980s is that simply

invoking the need for leadership is not enough. For government and industry,

incremental tinkering at the margin will not be enough, either. The Computer

Science and Technology Board will examine several of the issues raised in this

colloquium in more detail, and it urges decisionmakers in industry, government,

and academia to do so as well.
TURNING POINT70
Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AppendixesAPPENDIXES71Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIXES72Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Colloquium Program
Monday, May 22, 1989

8:00 p.m.Keynote Address

Clyde V. Prestowitz, Jr.
, Senior Associate, Carnegie Endowment
Tuesday, May 23, 1989

8:30 a.m.Introduction and Welcome

Robert M. White
, President, National Academy of Engineering
Samuel H. Fuller 
(Colloquium Chairman), Vice President of Research,Digital Equipment Corporation8:45 a.m.Hardware Panel
Chair:Robert W. Lucky
, Executive Director, Research Communications
Sciences Division, AT&T Bell Laboratories

C. Gordon Bell, Vice President, Research and Development, Ardent
Computer Corporation
*Charles H. Ferguson
, Postdoctoral Associate, Center for Technology
Policy and Industrial Development, Massachusetts Institute of

Technology* Ardent has since merged with Stellar Computer to become Stardent Computer, Inc.
APPENDIX A
73Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Gordon E. Moore
, Chairman, Intel CorporationPatrick A. Toole
, Senior Vice President and General Manager of
Technology Products, IBM Corporation
10:15 a.m.
Break10:30 a.m.Software Panel

Chair:Samuel H. Fuller, Vice President of Research, Digital EquipmentCorporation
Laszlo A. Belady
, Vice President and Program Director,
Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation

James H. Morris
, Professor of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University
Alan J. Perlis
, Professor of Computer Science, Yale University
Lawrence G. Tesler
, Vice President of Advanced Technologies, Apple
Computer, Inc.12:00 p.m.
Lunch in the Refectory Alcove
1:00 p.m.Services and Systems Integration Panel
Chair:Irving Wladawsky-Berger, Vice President, Data Systems Division and
General Manager Kingston, IBM Corporation

Jeffrey M. Heller
, Senior Vice President, Electronic Data Systems
Paul A. Turner
, Director of Research, Price Waterhouse Technology
Center
Sam R. Willcoxon
, President of Business Market Group, AT&T
2:30 p.m.Break2:45 p.m.Marketing and Business Aspects Panel
Chair:William J. Spencer, Vice President, Corporate Research Group, Xerox
Corporation
John L. Doyle
, Executive Vice President, Hewlett Packard Company
William R. Hambrecht
, President, Hambrecht & Quist
Richard S. Rosenbloom, Professor, Graduate School of Business
Administration, Harvard University

David J. Teece
, Professor, W. A. Haas School of Business, University
of California at Berkeley
4:15 p.m.Synthesis, Recommendations, and Response
APPENDIX A
74Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix BColloquium ParticipantsNorman Achilles, U.S. Department of State

Donald M. Austin, U.S. Department of Energy

David Beck, U.S. International Trade Commission

Laszlo A. Belady, Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation

Brian C. Belanger, U.S. Department of Commerce

C. Gordon Bell, Stardent Computer, Inc.

Kathleen C. Bernard, Cray Research, Inc.

Joel Birnbaum, Hewlett Packard Company

Jane Bortnick, Library of Congress

Michael Boudin, U.S. Department of Justice

Charles Brownstein, National Science Foundation

James H. Burrows, U.S. Department of Commerce

Virginia Castor, U.S. Department of Defense

Skip Dalton, Digital Equipment Corporation

Ambassador Peter Jon de Vos, U.S. Department of State

John L. Doyle, Hewlett Packard Company

C. F. Emde, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Charles H. Ferguson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Samuel H. Fuller, Digital Equipment Corporation

Oliver Grave, Federal Trade Commission

Bruce Guile, National Academy of Engineering

William R. Hambrecht, Hambrecht & Quist

Christopher H. Hankin, U.S. Department of State

Jeffrey M. Heller, Electronic Data Systems
APPENDIX B
75Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Lee Holcomb, National Aeronautics and Space Administration

Kenwin Jarboe, Senate Subcommittee on Government Information and
RegulationRaymond L. Jones, U.S. Department of Commerce

Robert E. Kahn, Corporation for National Research Initiatives

Philip Kardis, Senate Committee on Budget

William M. Kendall-Johnston, U.S. Department of State

V. N. Kryuvov, Embassy of the U.S.S.R.

Alfred M. Lee, U.S. Department of Commerce

Robert W. Lucky, AT&T Bell Laboratories

William Maher, Federal Communications Commission

John E. McPhee, U.S. Department of Commerce

Samuel Merrill, Jr., Library of Congress

George P. Millburn, U.S. Department of Defense

Katie Miller, Senate Judiciary Committee

Gordon E. Moore, Intel Corporation

James H. Morris, Carnegie Mellon University

James M. Murphy, Jr., Office of the U.S. Trade Representative

David B. Nelson, U.S. Department of Energy

Michael R. Nelson, Senate Committee on Commerce, Science and
TransportationJames D. Otis, Supercomputer Systems, Inc.

Charles T. Owens, National Science Foundation

Abraham Peled, IBM T.J. Watson Research Center

Jorge Perez-Lopez, U.S. Department of Labor

Alan J. Perlis, Yale University

N. Scott Phillips, House Armed Services Committee

James R. Porter, National Academy of Engineering

Clyde V. Prestowitz, Jr., Carnegie Endowment

J. Mark Pullen, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

Raj Reddy, Carnegie Mellon University

William A. Reinsch, Office of Senator John Heinz

Cesare Rosati, U.S. Department of State

Richard S. Rosenbloom, Harvard University

Gary Russell, U.S. Department of Labor

Steven Saboe, U.S. Department of State

Liz Sadove, House Committee on Energy and Commerce

William Scherlis, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

Jacob Schwartz, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

Mary Shaw, Carnegie Mellon University

Michael Skarzynsky, U.S. Department of Commerce

V. Slavyantsev, Embassy of the U.S.S.R.

William J. Spencer, Xerox Corporation
APPENDIX B
76Keeping the U.S. Computer Industry Competitive: Defining the AgendaCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Stephen L. Squires, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

Will Stackhouse, Jet Propulsion Laboratory

David J. Teece, University of California at Berkeley

Lawrence G. Tesler, Apple Computer, Inc.

Andre M. van Tilborg, Office of Naval Research

Patrick A. Toole, IBM Corporation

Paul A. Turner, Price Waterhouse Technology Center

Thomas A. Weber, National Science Foundation

Harvey Weiss, Digital Equipment Corporation

Ambassador E. Allan Wendt, U.S. Department of State

Robert M. White, Control Data Corporation

Robert M. White, National Academy of Engineering

Mary Wileden, U.S. Department of the Treasury

Sam R. Willcoxon, AT&T

Deborah Wince-Smith, U.S. Department of Commerce

Irving Wladawsky-Berger, IBM Corporation

William Wulf, National Science Foundation
StaffMarjory S. Blumenthal, Executive Director

Damian M. Saccocio, Staff Officer

Margaret A. Knemeyer, Staff Associate

Mark Bello, CSTB Consultant

Pamela R. Rodgers, CSTB Consultant

Donna F. Allen, Administrative Secretary

Catherine A. Sparks, Secretary
APPENDIX B
77