DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/15853Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media:Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps92 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-29033-3 | DOI 10.17226/15853Committee on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: CurrentKnowledge and Research Gaps; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board;Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilPublic Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: 
Current Knowledge and Research GapsComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesPUBLIC RESPONSEUSING SOCIAL MEDIATO ALERTS AND WARNINGSREPORT OF A WORKSHOP ON CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND RESEARCH GAPSPublic Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee responsible 
for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance.
Support for this project was provided by the Department of Homeland Security 
with assistance from the National Science Foundation under award number IIS-
1118399. Any opinions, ˜ndings, or conclusions expressed in this publication are 
those of the authors and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organizations 
that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-29033-3
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-29033-3
This report is available from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, NW
Washington, DC 20001 
Additional copies of this report are available from:
The National Academies Press
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360
Washington, DC 20001
(800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313 
http://www.nap.edu
Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS 
AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA: CURRENT 
KNOWLEDGE AND RESEARCH GAPS
ROBERT E. KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University, 
Chair
ALESSANDRO ACQUISTI, Carnegie Mellon University
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University
LESLIE LUKE, San Diego County Of˜ce of Emergency Services
RICHARD G. MUTH, State of Maryland Emergency Management 
Agency
LEYSIA PALEN, University of Colorado, Boulder
TIMOTHY L. SELLNOW, University of Kentucky
MICHELE WOOD, California State University, Fullerton
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˜cer
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Sun Labs, 
Chair 
PRITHVIRAJ BANERJEE, Hewlett Packard Company 
STEVEN M. BELLOVIN, Columbia University 
JACK L. GOLDSMITH III, Harvard Law School
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
JON M. KLEINBERG, Cornell University 
ROBERT E. KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study 
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 
DAVID E. SHAW, D.E. Shaw Research 
ALFRED Z. SPECTOR, Google, Inc. 
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
PETER J. WEINBERGER, Google, Inc. 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Associate Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
ENITA A. WILLIAMS, Associate Program Of˜cer
For more information on CSTB, see its website at 
 http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, National Research Council, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, call (202) 334-2605, or 
e-mail the CSTB at 
cstb@nas.edu
.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Following an earlier workshop organized by a separate National 
Research Council (NRC) committee that explored the public response 
to alerts and warnings delivered to mobile devices,
1 the Depart
-ment of Homeland Security™s (DHS™s) Science and Technology Director
-ate asked the NRC™s Computer Science and Telecommunications Board 
to convene a workshop on the role of social media in disaster response.  
Held February 28 and 29, 2012, the workshop was organized by the Com
-mittee on Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: 
Current Knowledge and Research Gaps. The resulting report points to 
potential topics for future research and possible areas for future research 
investment by DHS and others and describes challenges facing disaster 
managers seeking to incorporate social media into regular practice. 
 One of the ˜rst workshops convened to look systematically at the use of social media for alerts and warnings, the event brought together social 
science researchers, technologists, emergency management professionals, 
and other experts on how the public and emergency managers use social 
media in disasters. The workshop explored (1) what is known about how 
the public responds to alerts and warnings; (2) the implications of what is 
known about such public responses for the use of social media to provide 
alerts and warnings to the public; and (3) approaches to enhancing the 
1  National Research Council. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Sum
-mary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
. The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2011.
Preface
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
situational awareness of emergency managers. It also considered how 
of˜cials monitor social media and the privacy considerations that result. 
The complete statement of task for the workshop is provided in Box P.1.
This report summarizes presentations made by invited speakers, 
other remarks by workshop participants, and discussion during parallel 
breakout sessions. In keeping with the workshop™s purpose of exploring 
an emerging topic, this summary does not contain ˜ndings or recom
-mendations. Nor, in keeping with NRC guidelines for workshop reports, 
does it necessarily re˚ect consensus views of the workshop participants 
or the responsible committee. In addition, these summaries should not be 
taken as remarks made solely by the scheduled session speakers, because 
the discussions included remarks offered by others in attendance, and 
the summaries of the workshop sessions provided in the chapters of 
this report are a digest both of the presentations and of the subsequent 
discussion. 
 Chapter 1 provides a brief overview of background information on 
the alerting process and public response as well as current understanding 
of social media use. Chapters 2 through 5 provide integrated summaries 
of the session presentations and the discussion that followed, organized 
by topic. Chapter 6 summarizes the research questions identi˜ed during 
the breakout sessions and subsequent plenary discussion. Appendix A 
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ
˝
An ad hoc committee will oversee development and facilitation of a work
-shop that convenes experts from across the nation in the ˜elds of alerts and 
warnings, social media, and privacy.
  The workshop will examine the use of and 
public response to social media for alerts, identifying past and current research 
and future research needs.  It will also explore potential privacy implications of 
issuing alerts and warnings via social media. The workshop will use a mix of in
-dividual presentations, panels, breakout discussions, and question-and-answer 
sessions to develop an understanding of the relevant research communities, 
research already completed, ongoing research, and future research needs. Key 
stakeholders will be identi˜ed and invited to participate.
  An unedited (ver
-batim) transcript of the event will be prepared.
  A report summarizing what 
transpired at the workshop will be prepared.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ixpresents the workshop agenda, and speaker biosketches are provided in 
Appendix B. Appendix C provides biosketches of the committee and the 
staff.
Robert E. Kraut, 
Chair
 
Committee on Public Response to 
 Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: 
 Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s 
Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is 
to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in 
making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the 
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and respon
-siveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We 
wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Robert Dudgeon, San Francisco Department of Emergency 
Management
Prabhakar Raghavan, Google
Ellis Stanley, Independent Consultant, Roswell, Georgia
Clarence L. Wardell III, CNA Safety
Duncan Watts, Microsoft Research
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the 
material presented, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report before its 
release. The review of this report was overseen by Ruzena Bajcsy, Univer
-sity of California, Berkeley. Appointed by the National Research Council, 
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSshe was responsible for making certain that an independent examination 
of this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring com
-mittee and the institution.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
1  
FUNDAMENTALS OF ALERTS, WARNINGS, AND SOCIAL 
MEDIA
 1 Current Knowledge About Public Response to Alerts and 
   
Warnings,
 2
 Social Media Use by the Public During Disasters, 4
 Barriers to Incorporating Social Media into Emergency 
   
Management, 5
 Technology Development for the Use of Social Media in 
   
Emergency Management,
 6
 Technologies for Developing Situational Awareness from 
   
Social Media, 9
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 10
2 CURRENT USES OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCIES
 12
 Use of Social Media by the Los Angeles Fire Department,
 12
 Use of Social Media by WCNC, Charlotte, to Provide 
   
Weather Information,
 14
 Using Social Media for Earthquake Detection and Alerting,
 16
 Using Social Media to Assess Communication Needs and 
   
Disseminate Information During a Health Emergency, 17
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 20
Contents
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTS3 DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 22
 Studying Twitter Use to Understand How People 
   
Communicate,
 22
 Problem Solving with Social Media,
 25
 Standby Task Force: Volunteer Networks During Disasters,
 28
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 32
4 CREDIBILITY, AUTHENTICITY, AND REPUTATION
 34
 Reputation Systems,
 34
 Encouraging Self-Correction,
 36
 Computational Claim Veri˜cation,
 36
 Applying the ﬁCitizen Scienceﬂ Model to Disaster 
   
Management,
 37
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 40
5  
PRIVACY AND LEGAL CHALLENGES WITH THE USE OF 
SOCIAL MEDIA
 41
 Legal and Policy Perspectives on Privacy and on 
   
Government Monitoring of Social Media,
 41
 Privacy Protection in the Context of Programs for Citizen 
   
Reporting of Threats,
 44
 Legal Perspective on First-Responder Responsibilities,
 45
 Observations of Workshop Participants, 47
6 RESEARCH GAPS AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
 49
 Message Content and Dissemination,
 49
 Trust and Credibility,
 51
 Privacy,
 52
 Volunteers,
 52
 Technology Diffusion,
 53
 Emergency Management Practice, 54
APPENDIXES
A Workshop Agenda
 57
B Biosketches of Workshop Speakers
 63
C Biosketches of Committee and Staff Members
 73
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11Fundamentals of Alerts, 
Warnings, and Social Media
The Warning, Alert, and Response Network (WARN) Act of 2006 
called for the creation of a national all-hazards alerting system that 
would use multiple technologies to better reach affected popula
-tions. Since its passage, there has been an increasing interest in exploring 
the use of social media to provide alerts and warnings. 
Social media 
is a 
loosely de˜ned term that refers to a set of Internet-based tools that sup
-port social interaction through many-to-many communications. The term 
encompasses a variety of technologies including weblogs, microbloging 
and mashup tools, and online social networks, examples of which include 
Twitter, Google Maps, Facebook, and Flickr.
  It also includes tools like 
Ushahidi that were purpose-built for use in crises.
  Social media are being 
used in all sectors of society to support communication, collaboration, 
and information collection and dissemination.
  Social media have proven 
useful in a crisis both to of˜cials seeking to deliver alerts, warnings, and 
other information to the public and to citizens communicating with of˜
-cials and each other.
This report presents a summary of a February 2012 workshop orga
-nized by the National Research Council™s (NRC™s) Committee on Public 
Response to Alerts and Warnings on Using Social Media: Current Knowl
-edge and Research Gaps. The ˜rst session of the workshop provided 
an overview of alerts (an 
alert 
indicates that something signi˜cant has 
happened or may happen), warnings (a warning typically follows an 
alert and provides more detailed information indicating what protective 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
action should be taken),
1 the use of social media for delivering alerts and 
warnings, and other applications of social media in disaster manage-ment. Dennis Mileti, University of Colorado, Boulder, described what is 
known about how the public responds to alerts and warnings. Kristiana 
Almeida, American Red Cross (ARC), described how the ARC uses social 
media during disasters and provided results of ARC research on social 
media use. Edward Hopkins, Maryland Emergency Management Agency, 
discussed barriers to the use of social media by emergency managers. 
Emre Gunduzhan, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, 
described current and emerging technologies for disseminating alerts and 
warnings and enhancing situational awareness using social media.
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE ABOUT PUBLIC 
RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS
More than 60 years of interdisciplinary research on disaster response 
has yielded many insights about how people respond to information indi
-cating that they are at risk and under what circumstances they are most 
likely to take appropriate protective action. Much of this knowledge has 
been captured in the ﬁAnnotated Bibliography for Public Risk Communi
-cation on Warnings for Public Protective Action Response and Public Edu
-cationﬂ that lists more than 350 publications.
2 This body of research covers 
natural disasters such as Hurricane Camille and the Mount St. Helens 
eruption; terrorist attacks such as those on the World Trade Center in 1993 
and 2001; hazardous material spills such as those that occurred during 
the 1979 Mississauga, Ontario, train derailment and the 1987 Nanticoke, 
Pennsylvania, factory ˜re; building ˜res such as those at the MGM Grand 
Hotel in Las Vegas in 1980 and at Chicago™s Cook County Hospital; and 
technological accidents such as the 1979 incident at the Three Mile Island 
nuclear power station in Pennsylvania. Mileti outlined some of the key 
results from research on how the public responds to alerts and warnings:
1  The difference between alerts and warnings can be unclear because a warning can also 
serve as an alert, and an alert may be accompanied by some information about protective 
measures. Technology has further eroded the distinction. For example, on mobile devices, 
the Commercial Mobile Alert service will simultaneously deliver both a distinctive tone (the 
alert) and a brief message with additional information (a warning). Similarly, sirens have 
evolved to provide both a siren sound and a spoken message.
2  The extensive ﬁAnnotated Bibliography for Public Risk Communication on Warnings for 
Public Protective Actions Response and Public Educationﬂ was compiled by Dennis Mileti, 
Rachel Bandy, Linda B. Bourque, Aaron Johnson, Megumi Kano, Lori Peck, Jeannette Sutton, 
and Michele Wood and is available at www.colorado.edu/hazards/publications/informer/
infrmr2/pubhazbibann.pdf.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDAMENTALS OF ALERTS, WARNINGS, AND SOCIAL MEDIA
 3˜˚
Research using hypothetical scenarios does not faithfully represent public 
response. 
Studies on how people would respond to hypothetical events 
do not generally predict how the public is likely to behave in response to 
an actual alert or warningŠor during a real event. By contrast, although 
they may be harder or more expensive to conduct, studies of actual events 
yield much better insights about the situational determinants of behavior 
during emergencies. 
˜˚
Education about the warning system is needed before an event
. Public 
education on warning systems is an important complement to educa
-tion about how to prepare for disasters. For example, it is important that 
people know that a certain television or cell phone tone designates an 
alert or warning, and where additional sources of authoritative informa
-tion can be found. Furthermore, it is important to remember that the 
majority of people cannot remember what a given siren means, what a 
color code may represent, or even the difference between the watches and 
warnings issued by the National Weather Service. Comprehensive educa
-tion programs teach the public that a hazard exists, inform them about 
the alerting/warning systems in place in their communities, and outline 
what protective actions they might be asked to take. Essentially, these 
programs prime the public by removing surprises and reducing confusion 
in a future warning event. 
˜˚
Alerting needs to attract attention.
 A primary goal of alerting is to 
attract the affected population™s attention so that one can then provide 
information. The most effective alerts are incredibly intrusive, able to be 
noticed amidst the cacophony of daily life, and, for those who are asleep, 
literally loud enough to wake them. The more channels, or mechanisms 
used to disseminate alerts and warnings, the greater the chance an indi
-vidual will receive a message. Warnings should also be repeated; repeti
-tion commands attention, fosters con˜rmation, and prompts protective 
action. 
˜˚
People seek social con˜rmation of warnings before taking protective 
action. Before acting in response to a warning, people generally seek 
con˜rmation from others. The resulting process is known as milling, 
in which individuals interact with others to con˜rm information and 
develop a view about the risks they face at that moment and their possible 
responses. Milling creates a lag between the time a warning is received 
and the time protective action is taken. Yet few approaches to formulating 
and delivering warnings focus on shortening this milling time. Indeed, 
one important lesson from past research is that without careful attention 
to the process of milling, the introduction of new warning systems may 
increase rather than decrease individuals™ delay in response. Social media 
provide a new way for these interactions among individuals to occur. 
Although many ˜rst responders believe that social media have given 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
them less control over the warning process, informal dissemination of 
messages has always played an important role in the warning process. 
Indeed, one might conjecture that the inherently social nature of social 
media might help reduce milling time, but whether this is true and under 
what conditions is an open research question. 
˜˚
Messages should contain information that is important to the population. The key content of messages is what (the protective actions that should be 
taken); when (by what time the protective actions should be taken); where 
(the geographic area that will be affected); why (the risks and how protec
-tive action would reduce their impact); and who (the individuals or enti
-ties providing the information). In addition to content, message style also 
matters. Messages need to be clear, simply worded; speci˜c (i.e., precise 
and non-ambiguous); accurate (i.e., free from errors that can create con
-fusion); certain (i.e., authoritative and con˜dent); and consistent. When 
changes in instructions are required, the reasons should be explained. 
˜˚
Responders should consider the demographics of affected populations 
when preparing warning messages.
 Status differences (e.g., gender, sex, age, 
ethnicity, socioeconomics, and family relationships), an individual™s or a 
community™s past experiences, and other environmental and social factors 
all can affect how a warning will be interpreted. 
˜˚
Access for those with disabilities must be considered when developing 
alert or warning systems. 
Individuals with impaired hearing or impaired 
vision or those with limited abilities may face challenges in receiving 
particular alerts or warnings. Furthermore, individuals with disabilities 
may encounter unique challenges in taking protective action or there may 
be important unique factors in how they may interpret a warning. 
˜˚
Alerting and warning is a process, not a single act.
 The communications 
process includes issuing a warning, monitoring the public™s response to 
the warning, listening for incorrect information the public may be receiv
-ing, and rewarning based on observations of what the public is doing or 
not doing. Given the mix of of˜cial and unof˜cial information available 
to the public, it is almost inevitable that people will be exposed to some 
incorrect information, which can lead to inconsistencies that can delay 
protective actions. Such misinformation and misinterpretation need to be 
addressed in subsequent warnings. 
SOCIAL MEDIA USE BY THE PUBLIC DURING DISASTERS
With a growing fraction of the public using social media, there has 
been increasing interest in their use during disasters. One source of infor
-mation on how social media are used, presented by Kristiana Almeida, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDAMENTALS OF ALERTS, WARNINGS, AND SOCIAL MEDIA
 5comes from a 2011 American Red Cross study
3 in which approximately 
2,000 people were interviewed. Nearly 50 percent of those interviewed 
reported that they visited one or more social media sites almost every day. 
For those in metropolitan areas, this percentage was higher. Although one 
in six subjects reported that they had used social media to ˜nd informa
-tion about an emergency, television continues to be their primary source 
of information during these events. However, in cases where people did 
not have access to a television, Facebook became their primary informa
-tion source. Furthermore, more than 80 percent of those interviewed 
indicated that they were willing to post information about a disaster on 
social media sites, including images or video clips.
More than a third of the regular social media users interviewed in 
the Red Cross study indicated that they would request help via social 
sites, and of those who would post requests for help, 80 percent expected 
a response within an hour. However, only 15 percent believed that emer
-gency management agencies were actively following social media during 
emergencies. That is, although many believed that emergency of˜cials 
should be following their feeds, few believed that they actually were. 
Several key lessons could be taken from the 2011 Red Cross study, 
observed Almeida. First, it suggests that there are opportunities for emer
-gency managers to use social media ﬁcrowdsourcingﬂ
4 to supplement 
their situational awareness during emergencies. Second, because (accord
-ing to the Red Cross study) public of˜cials are not currently prepared to 
respond to requests for assistance via social media despite growing public 
expectations for such a capability, of˜cials will need to continue to remind 
the public to use 911 to call for assistance. 
BARRIERS TO INCORPORATING SOCIAL MEDIA 
INTO EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Although some emergency management organizations have begun 
using social media to interact with the public, several barriers and chal
-lenges remain to more widespread adoption, including limited under
-standing of social media, concerns about loss of control, and institutional 
limitations. Drawing on lessons he learned from discussions with fellow 
local emergency managers, Edward Hopkins, Maryland State Emergency 
Management Agency, noted the follow challenges: 
3  American Red Cross. Social Media in Disasters and Emergencies. 2011. Available at 
http://www.redcross.org/www-˜les/Documents/pdf/SocialMediainDisasters.pdf.
4  Crowdsourcing
 refers to the use of information provided by multiple, and often many, 
individuals, who may have volunteered this information or been paid or given some other 
incentive to provide it. Chapter 3 explores the use of crowdsourcing to win a competition.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
˜˚
Limited understanding. Despite growing appreciation of the role that 
social media can play in disasters, many emergency managers remain 
more comfortable with traditional media, and not all are aware of the 
potential advantages of social media as a tool for alerts and warnings. 
Some of this is surely a result of generational or cultural differences. 
Familiarity and comfort with social media for emergency management 
can be expected to grow as training opportunities are provided and newly 
hired employees bring with them a greater familiarity with social media. 
(The adoption of social media by practitioners is discussed further in 
Chapter 2.)
˜˚
Loss of control.
 When they use social media, emergency of˜cials 
cannot control which information social media users share, which raises 
concerns that they might lose control of messaging or face civil liabilities 
if misinformation is shared. By contrast, in the traditional command-post 
style of information dissemination, long-standing relationships between 
the press and emergency managers provide some sense of control over 
what information is disseminated as well as well-understood opportuni
-ties to disseminate corrections as needed. It is the belief of some of˜cials 
that with social media, misinformation may spread more rapidly and 
continue to spread even after a correction is issued.
˜˚
Institutional limitations.
 Especially in an era of shrinking budgets, 
it is hard to ˜nd the resources to evaluate and adopt new tools and tech
-nologies, or to invest in the training necessary for their use. Also dif˜cult 
is securing new resources to cover the additional staff time necessary to 
monitor social media activity. As a result, although emergency manage
-ment personnel may try to experiment with social media use, they may 
˜nd that their other (day-to-day and emergency) responsibilities crowd 
out the possibility for this work. Also, such experimentation with social 
media often precedes the creation of guidelines or formal policies for 
their use, which can lead to unforeseen complications or questions being 
raised by managers, and implementation of measures that restrict the use 
of social media.
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR THE USE OF 
SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Emre Gunduzhan discussed technologies that are needed to dissemi
-nate public alerts and warnings using social media and to develop situ
-ational awareness during disasters using information gleaned from social 
media. Although some of these tools may be available now, they might 
not have been used in emergency management practices. Additional tools 
will also have to be developed that focus on the speci˜c needs of disaster 
response, commented Gunduzhan, who also outlined the following set of 
technical challenges common across multiple alerting systems:
 Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDAMENTALS OF ALERTS, WARNINGS, AND SOCIAL MEDIA
 7˜˚
Standard message formats. The Common Alerting Protocol (CAP) is a 
recently adopted protocol being used across multiple alerting platforms.
5 The advantage of CAP is that as an XML-based standard, it is machine-
readable, and Web services and applications can receive and process these 
alerts. More recently, an Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) working 
group, Authority-to-Citizen Alerts, has been developing a new protocol 
for transmitting alerts to the public over the Internet.
˜˚
Capabilities for authorizing users.
 Some sort of scheme, which might 
be a centralized, federated, or distributed identity management system, 
is needed to help ensure that only those properly authorized to do so can 
issue of˜cial messages.
˜˚
Digital signatures that indicate who sent a message.
 Public response is 
affected by who sends a message. The public needs to be able to verify 
who has sent a message and that the message is authentic. Nonrepudia
-tion supports the assignment of responsibility for the issuance of an alert 
and protects from potential liability parties who relay an of˜cial message 
in good faith. 
˜˚
Geotargeting of alerts and warnings.
 Controlling the granularity of 
alerting by geographically limiting the area targeted for receiving an alert 
might greatly protect the public from alert overload and better ensure that 
information gets to those who need to take a particular protective action 
(e.g., shelter in place versus evacuate). With respect to this capability, 
social media services diverge prominently from other alerting systems. 
In other existing communication channels, physical parameters, such as 
the area served by a set of cell towers or the metropolitan area served by 
a radio or television broadcast tower, constrain the distribution of alerts 
to a speci˜c geographical area. By contrast, social media services embody 
limited and imperfect knowledge of the precise location of their users. 
Most often the information available is the address or town that may 
have been provided as part of a user™s pro˜le; a user™s Internet Protocol 
address may also provide clues about his or her location. Although users 
accessing social media services via mobile devices may be able to provide 
accurate geotargeting information, users generally need to enable this 
feature, and many choose not to do so owing to privacy concerns. 
There are two possible methods for using social media to deliver 
alerts and warnings. One is for the entity issuing the messages to simply 
be registered as a user of the service, as would any other information 
provider. The other is for the entity to establish a special relationship with 
5  OASIS. Common Alerting Protocol, v. 1.1. OASIS Standard CAP-V1.1, October 2005. 
Editors: Elysa Jones and Art Botterell. Available at http://www.oasis-open.org/apps/
org/workgroup/emergency/download.php/14205/emergency- CAPv1.1-Committee%20
 Speci˜cation.pdf.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
the social media service. The characteristics of each method are outlined 
in Box 1.1.
Today, emergency managers are making use of only the ˜rst alterna
-tive, noted Gunduzhan. For example, a local jurisdiction may set up a 
Twitter account and simply post warnings as an update that would be 
seen by those who follow that account or ˜nd the post as the result of 
a search. Similar possibilities exist with other social media services like 
Facebook and Google+, although who sees what messages and under 
what conditions is more complicated owing to the service design. Such 
arrangements have the advantage of being possible to implement today 
without reaching agreement on a new interface to deliver alerts and warn
-ings or new arrangements for their display to users at risk from an event. 
On the other hand, they require that emergency managers ˜nd a set of 
clients that allow them to post messages to each service, and no special 
provisions are available to ensure that affected populations see the right 
set of alerts and warnings. (There is also a question of how to establish 
the authenticity of alerts and warnings; see above.) 
Alternatively, emergency managers might establish partnerships with 
social media services for disseminating alerts and warnings, either on 
behalf of individual agencies or collectively at the state or federal level. 
˜˚˛˝ˇˆˇ
˝˝





˜˚Alerts appear as ordinary 
 ˜˚Alerts can be given priority and
messages.
 special treatment.˜˚Alerts are dif˜cult to scale and 
 ˜˚A single standard interface
maintain due to many different 
 de˜nition can be used by all
application programming interfaces 
 collaborating social media sites. (APIs) that are subject to change at 
 ˜˚Citizens will automatically be
any time.
 included in the service but may be
˜˚Citizens have to register for the 
 allowed to opt out.
service (opt in).
 ˜˚The social media site˜˚Alert authentication and 
 implements additional alert
authorization are managed 
 authentication and authorization.externally to the social media site.
 ˜˚Non-repudiation and liability˜˚Non-repudiation is not a major  protection need to be addressed.
issue.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDAMENTALS OF ALERTS, WARNINGS, AND SOCIAL MEDIA
 9For example, social media providers could agree with emergency man
-agers to take steps in concert to make alerts more obvious to users. Such 
an approach is analogous to the Commercial Mobile Alert Service, in 
which cellular carriers have been working with the federal government 
to establish a standard message format, alert tone, and national gateway 
for delivering messages.
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DEVELOPING SITUATIONAL 
AWARENESS FROM SOCIAL MEDIA
Several workshop participants observed that unlike other means of 
delivering alerts and warnings, social media technologies offer the dis
-tinct advantage that they are two-way, are interactive, and provide an 
opportunity to see how the public is responding to the message. That 
same interactivity poses new challenges, however, such as managing 
the sheer volume of messages that can be sent during a major event. For 
example, following the announcement of Osama Bin Laden™s death, mes
-sages (ﬁtweetsﬂ) were being posted to Twitter at a rate of about 3,000 per 
second. 
Given the ˚ood of information available from social media, some 
workshop participants observed that automated ˜ltering tools are likely 
to be key to developing situational awareness. For example, automation 
can help categorize sources and separate relevant and irrelevant infor
-mation. Progress toward such automated tools will rely on advances in 
natural-language processing. The location of a source of information is 
also helpful in separating out relevant information and can sometimes 
be determined from a user™s pro˜le or from metadata associated with 
the message, or inferred from the content of the message itself. Several 
workshop participants noted that even with greater automation, human 
judgment will be needed to interpret and act on the selected messages.
6 Visualization tools that can help emergency managers make sense of 
social media information are already available to some extent, observed 
workshop participants. Ushahidi, an open source tool for information 
collection, visualization, and interactive mapping,
7 for example, has been 
used successfully during a number of disasters.8 Looking ahead, one 
6  In an effort to combine technological tools and human judgment to monitor social media, 
the American Red Cross opened its Digital Operations Center in March 2012. 
7  See http://www.ushahidi.com/.
8  The value of Ushahidi during the 2010 earthquake in Haiti is explored in Nathan 
Morrow, N. Mock, A. Papendieck, and N. Kocmich, 
Independent Evaluation of the Ushahidi 
Haiti Project, 
Development Information Systems International, 2011, available at http://
www.alnap.org/pool/˜les/1282.pdf. The report explains, ﬁPerhaps the most common use 
of information aggregated by UHP was for situational awareness. The Department of State 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
challenge is how to integrate information from multiple social media 
services as well as from other information sources. Gunduzhan noted 
that addressing this challenge will require attention to a mix of standard 
interfaces and formats as well as translators.
The use of tools to gather and analyze information derived from 
social media services raises a set of privacy issues associated with the col
-lection, processing, retention, and distribution of such information. These 
issues were explored in another workshop panel, whose observations are 
presented in Chapter 5.
OBSERVATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
During the discussion, panelists and other workshop participants 
offered a number of observations on the use of social media for alerts and 
warnings, including the following:
˜˚
Although the public response to alerts and warnings has been 
studied for some time, as have more general questions about the informa
-tion needs of the public during disasters, there has been comparatively 
little research on the use of newer technologies such as mobile devices 
(e.g., cell and smart phones) or social media during disasters. Research 
would help shed light on such key questions as how the new technologies could help shorten the milling time between receipt of an alert or warning 
and the taking of protective action. 
˜˚
Questions still remain regarding the extent to which social media 
represent a truly new source of information for improving the situational 
awareness of emergency managers or whether much or most of the infor
-mation simply repeats information already available from other, tradi
-tional sources.
˜˚
The particular characteristics of social media platforms yield dif
-ferent ﬁaffordancesﬂ of use during disaster situations. For example, social 
networks on Facebook are usually user-de˜ned: messages to one™s net
-work might help target localized attention and allow extended discus
-sion. Facebook newsgroups, however, are public and can draw collected 
attention. Twitter supports rapid communications that are most often 
public. The communications are short and can easily be ﬁretweetedﬂ or 
analysts for the USG interagency task force used Ushahidi in at least one case to help 
triangulate conclusions about the situation on the ground, and US military organizations 
used Ushahidi data feeds along with other sources in a similar manner to inform their 
early situational assessments. There is also some evidence of the information being used 
for speci˜c operational and tactical actions targeting speci˜c communities (and to a much 
lesser extent, individuals). US marines used the information to identify ‚centers of gravity™ 
for deployment of ˜eld teams to [affected] areas.ﬂ
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FUNDAMENTALS OF ALERTS, WARNINGS, AND SOCIAL MEDIA
 11propagated publicly. Those that are propagated have a chance of receiving 
attention; those that are not die out quickly. 
˜˚
It is important not to think of these platforms as better or worse; 
rather, it is critical to understand that they are different places along some
-times circuitous paths to seeking and ˜nding information.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12
2Current Uses of Social 
Media in Emergencies
A variety of emergency management organizations and other groups 
that communicate with the public during disasters have been 
using social media to disseminate information and observe the 
public response to events. In this workshop session, four speakers shared 
˜rsthand experiences with the use of social media: Brian Humphrey, Los 
Angeles Fire Department; Brad Panovich, WCNC-TV in Charlotte, North 
Carolina; Paul Earle, United States Geological Survey National Earth
-quake Information Center; and Keri Lubell, Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention.
USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA BY THE LOS 
ANGELES FIRE DEPARTMENT
Brian Humphrey described the wide array of social media tools the 
Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD) uses to both disseminate and moni
-tor information before, during, and after ˜re emergencies, including two 
Twitter accounts: @LAFD,
1 used solely for alerts, and @LAFDtalk,
2 used 
for conversations with the public. The latter account is used to help build 
trust between the public and the ˜re department. For example, when 
followers share personal news, such as birthdays or anniversaries, via 
Twitter, @LAFDtalk may acknowledge these occasions to engage with fol
-1  See https://twitter.com/lafd.
2  See https://twitter.com/lafdtalk.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USES OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCIES
 13lowers socially. Status updates often include names or initials to reinforce 
that there are real people behind the account. 
The value of the LAFD™s engagement of the public through social 
media was highlighted during an incident in which an explosion was 
reported at the Los Angeles International Airport. The LAFD could see 
who had recently indicated via Foursquare
3 that they were at the termi
-nal where the explosion was reported, and asked these individuals (via 
Twitter) to contact its public affairs of˜ce by telephone. By asking these 
individuals what they had observed, the public affairs of˜ce could pro
-vide ˜rst responders with information about the event even before they 
were on the scene; in this case, the public affairs of˜ce was able to tell the 
responders that the explosion was in fact the result of a lithium battery 
overheating, a relatively minor incident.
Nevertheless, some potentially useful tools for using social media 
have proven too expensive to acquire, and some uses of certain tools 
are precluded by the terms of their end user license agreements, com
-mented Humphrey, but he noted that the LAFD has identi˜ed a set of 
free or low-cost tools that are useful for disseminating and monitoring 
information. Many of the LAFD™s social media accounts are fed by email 
using the services Ping.FM
4 and HelloTXT.com,
5 which makes it possible 
to quickly provide or request information through the approximately 80 
social media accounts managed by the LAFD. These accounts, including 
@LAFD and @LAFDtalk, can also be used individually to interact with 
the public. 
Different social media tools are useful during different stages of a 
disaster. For example, according to Humphrey, Blog Talk Radio
6 is a tool 
that is particularly helpful during the recovery stage. Blog Talk Radio can 
be used to create Internet radio stations, which can take calls from users. 
Other related tools are also useful. Standards such as RSS (Really Simple 
Syndication) and various XML (Extensible Markup Language) schema 
make it easier to represent, distribute, and analyze information. 
One task for which better tools would be helpful, Humphrey observed, 
is in extraction of information from photographs distributed over social 
media. Currently, the LAFD relies on manual searches for potentially 
useful pictures based on the social media tags they are associated with. 
Another possible source of information is the metadata included in image 
˜les, such as the time or location. It would also be helpful to have tools 
3  Foursquare is a location-based, social media application for mobile devices. Users ﬁcheck 
inﬂ to locations found near their current location, which is detected using the GPS hardware 
in the mobile device. See https://foursquare.com.
4  See https://ping.fm.
5  See http://hellotxt.com/.
6  See http://www.blogtalkradio.com.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
that could automatically identify pictures that might enhance the LAFD™s 
situational awareness about events, such as pictures that show ˜re or 
smoke. 
Humphrey concluded his remarks by identifying several important 
lessons from the LAFD™s experience with social media:
˜˚
A partnership with information technology (IT) staff in the emer
-gency management organization is important in part so that IT staff 
understand how emergency professionals are using the computers and 
network. 
˜˚
Appropriate management of and collaboration with traditional and 
new media are critical components of each phase of a given disaster. There 
is often a gap between response (usually an acute situation) and recovery 
(a more ongoing process). Social media can smooth the gaps in the cycle 
by providing two-way communication between the affected population 
and both ˜rst responders and emergency personnel. 
˜˚
Messages disseminated using social media need to be clear, con
-cise, and, most important, actionable. 
˜˚
The more one is willing to empower people and engage them, the 
more information the public is willing to provide.
˜˚
Understanding how people communicate with social media is 
important. People often do not simply state ﬁhelp,ﬂ ﬁ˜re,ﬂ or ﬁexplo
-sionﬂ but instead use such exclaimers as ﬁOMG!ﬂ (oh my god!) or other 
slang. When one has three or more people within a 20-mile radius saying 
ﬁOMG,ﬂ this can be a signal to look more closely at what might be hap
-pening in the area.
˜˚
Different phrasing suggests quite different meaning, as the follow
-ing examples regarding a ˜ctional shooting illustrate:
 Š I 
heard there was
 a shooting at 5th and Elm St.
 Š I 
heard there is
 a shooting at 5th and Elm St.
 Š I 
heard about
 a shooting at 5th and Elm St.
 Š I 
heard 
shots ˜red at 5th and Elm St.
 Š I 
saw 
a shooting at 5th and Elm St.
 Š I just 
saw a person
 get shot at 5th and Elm St.
USE OF SOCIAL MEDIA BY WCNC, CHARLOTTE, 
TO PROVIDE WEATHER INFORMATION
Brad Panovich began by describing the multi-tiered warning process 
he uses to inform the public when potentially severe weather is forecast. 
The ˜rst step is a blog post several days in advance to increase public 
awareness. As severe weather approaches, Panovich begins issuing alerts 
or warnings via Twitter and Facebook. Many of the alerts and warnings 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USES OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCIES
 15originate from iNWS, a service of the National Weather Service, which 
sends information via text and email to emergency managers, local county 
of˜cials, and the media.
7 Panovich, using his desktop computer, laptop, or other mobile device, 
needs to be able to quickly post alerts and warnings from iNWS to his 
social media accounts. In Panovich™s work˚ow, these messages are sent to 
an email account that has a rule set to automatically forward iNWS mes
-sages to TwitterMail, which in turn posts the alerts to Twitter. Panovich 
noted that a more complicated setup is needed to automatically post 
messages to Facebook because only the subject of an email is included 
in a status update when a message is emailed to Facebook. Instead, tools 
like Ping.FM and Tumblr
8 can be used to automatically post information 
to Facebook. A text alert from iNWS can be pasted into Ping.FM, which 
is con˜gured to send the message to any of the six Facebook pages that 
Panovich manages. Tumblr blogs allow for posts via email, and then these 
posts can be sent directly to an RSS feed, a Web-based tool that can dis
-play various updated Internet sites in a standard format, or automatically 
posted to Facebook or Twitter.
WCNC uses YouTube and uStream to transmit video over the Inter
-net. One use is to supplement the broadcast forecasts with additional 
background on the science behind the weather, which is appreciated by 
audiences and helps strengthen Panovich™s credibility with them. Stream
-ing also allows the public to view forecasts and other information on 
computers and mobile devices9 and can be used as a supplemental source 
of information to point people to an alert displayed over normal televi
-sion programming, allowing viewers who seek additional information 
to quickly ˜nd it using a cell phone or other mobile device. In general, 
Panovich believes, the public ˜nds this approach less disruptive than 
interrupting programming to provide information to supplement an alert, 
especially when many of those receiving the broadcast may not be in the 
affected geographical area.
Panovich™s viewers and readers access his information using both tra
-ditional and social media channels. Understanding an audience™s needs is 
important, Panovich observed. He uses a tool called SocialBro to analyze 
the activities of his followers. For example, information on when users are 
most active helps inform decisions about when to create new content. The 
7  See http://inws.wrh.noaa.gov/.
8  Tumblr is a social networking site that allows for the sharing of microblogs, reposting of 
multimedia, or writing of short blog items. See https://www.tumblr.com/.
9  To provide mobile device streaming, it is important to use the correct codex for mobile 
devices. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
tool also can be used to understand other aspects of users, such as what 
words are used to describe signi˜cant weather events. 
Panovich identi˜ed several important lessons from his experience 
using social media as a broadcast weather forecaster:
˜˚
It is important to build a social network before an emergency 
occurs. 
˜˚
Although automatically transmitted alerts are useful, the best 
results come through a dialog with the public. 
˜˚
Because people use social media around the clock, a forecaster 
must be quite active to fully engage the public. 
˜˚
Social media and other new tools for disseminating information are 
important, but not everyone uses social media, so broadcasting and other 
traditional media also play an important role in informing the public 
about weather events.
USING SOCIAL MEDIA FOR EARTHQUAKE 
DETECTION AND ALERTING
The National Earthquake Information Center (NEIC) monitors earth
-quakes worldwide. Additionally, the center provides backup for the net
-work of regional seismic centers. The NEIC™s customers include relief 
organizations, government agencies, and research and ˜nancial institutes, 
as well as the media and general public. The main products include 
real-time monitoring (which is used mostly by researchers), estimates 
of the magnitude of ground shaking that are based on seismic monitor 
readings and damage reports, and rapid estimates of fatalities and eco
-nomic damage on a green-yellow-orange-red scale. The rapid estimates 
are emailed to approximately 200,000 subscribers and are posted on the 
NEIC Web site. The NEIC also uses Twitter to disseminate alerts and 
detect earthquakes.
Paul Earle described an event detector developed by the NEIC that 
examines tweets
10
 to detect when an earthquake has occurred. It watches 
for a sharp increase in the rate at which keywords associated with earth
-quakes are used. This tool detects between 1 and 4 earthquakes a day 
worldwide (seismic instruments detect approximately 50 a day). Although 
not as accurate as seismographs in determining either magnitude or loca
-tion, it extends coverage in areas with little instrumentation and also 
provides a backup should instruments fail or be off-line. Where detectors 
are sparse, earthquake detection based on instrument readings can take 
up to 5 minutes, whereas detection using Twitter can take less than 2. 
10
  Status updates posted on Twitter are often referred to as ﬁtweets.ﬂ
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USES OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCIES
 17Earle described several limitations to Twitter-based detection. First, 
fewer than 5 percent of all tweets used are accurately geocoded. Second, 
the keyword detection algorithms have approximately a 10 percent false 
rate. Detection thresholds can be positively adjusted, but there will always 
be tradeoffs between false positives and false negatives.
To distribute earthquake alerts using Twitter, the NEIC manages 
a veri˜ed11 Twitter account, @USGSted (US. Geological Survey Tweet 
Earthquake Dispatch). Although the Twitter feed currently reaches fewer 
people than does NEIC™s email distribution list, the alerts are distributed 
almost instantly (whereas it can take up to 20 minutes to send emails to 
the approximately 200,000 email subscribers), and the Twitter feed is not 
as hard to manage as an email list. 
The Twitter alerts contain the region name and geocoded information 
if available, the data, the time, and the rate at which Twitter messages 
used to detect the earthquake were sent. The Twitter messages do not 
include the quake magnitude because this information can change rapidly 
as measurements are veri˜ed, and retweeted messages may continue to 
circulate long after their content is no longer current. Instead, the mes
-sages contain a link to a Web page that provides current information on 
the earthquake. An example of a Twitter alert and of the Web page it links 
to is shown in Figure 2.1. 
USING SOCIAL MEDIA TO ASSESS COMMUNICATION 
NEEDS AND DISSEMINATE INFORMATION 
DURING A HEALTH EMERGENCY
The mission of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) 
includes the detection of emerging health threats, informing the pub
-lic about these threats, and informing public of˜cials about potential 
responses and the associated risks and bene˜ts. Sometimes this involves 
circumstances where knowledge about a potential threat is incomplete 
and where there is considerable uncertainty about its implications.
The CDC uses social media both to help detect emerging threats and 
to disseminate information to the public about how to respond, explained 
Keri Lubell. Social media can provide clues not only about emerging 
events but also about how people are responding to those events and to 
the information that the CDC and others are providing. As a result, there 
11  Veri˜ed Twitter accounts are marked with a blue veri˜ed badge. Veri˜ed users have 
authenticated identities, and veri˜ed accounts are generally not available to the general 
public but instead to those who are considered high-quality sources. A list of frequently 
asked questions on veri˜ed accounts is available from Twitter at https://support.twitter.
com/articles/119135#.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
FI GURE
 2.1 An example of a tweet and the associated Web page for a detected 
earthquake.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USES OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCIES
 19is interest in automated approaches that could take greater advantage of 
all the potential information available from social media. 
In terms of the use of social media to disseminate information, Lubell 
said that the CDC had been an early adopter but that the agency™s use of 
social media and associated policies are still evolving. The CDC™s Face
-book page for emergencies (https://www.facebook.com/cdcemergency) 
has approximately 14,000 ﬁlikes,ﬂ
12
 and the main CDC Facebook page 
(https://www.facebook.com/CDC) has about 210,000 likes. 
The Twitter handle @CDCemergency was established in January 
2009 and was ˜rst used during the 2009 
Salmonella typhimurium
 outbreak 
that was associated with peanut butter. That account has approximately 
1,350,000 followers, and the general CDC account, @CDCgov, has approx
-imately 97,000 followers. (Up until NASA launched the last shuttle, the 
CDC had the highest number of followers in a single government Twitter 
account, Lubell noted.) If the agency can determine good ways to mobi
-lize them, 1.3 million followers could prove a useful resource.
A recent use of social media in conjunction with the CDC™s world
-wide polio eradication effort illustrated both the public™s interest in and 
potential pitfalls of using social media, observed Lubell. As part of this 
push, the CDC had activated its emergency operations center for an 18- to 
24-month period. As a part of the campaign™s communication strategy, the 
CDC along with its global partners used Twitter to engage the public and 
volunteers across the world. (Such prearranged public discussions are fre
-quently used by the CDC to engage the public in important health issues.) During the discussion, several items were retweeted by @CDCemergency, 
with the goal of reaching the wider audience connected to @CDCemer
-gency. However, within a few minutes, followers began complaining that 
because these messages about polio were not about an emergency, they 
were not an appropriate use of that feed (Figure 2.2). 
In response, the @CDCemergency team provided a brief response 
and stopped using that channel. Lubell observed that the incident dem
-onstrated that people who followed @CDCemergency were engaged and 
that it was important to adapt in the face of public response. It also 
pointed to the need for organizations like the CDC to develop strategies 
for how best to use the various social media channels at their disposal. 
12
  A Facebook ﬁlikeﬂ is similar to ﬁfriendingﬂ or ﬁfollowing.ﬂ By liking a Facebook page, 
a user may receive updates on the liked organization on his or her news feed. The informa
-tion frequently changes. See https://www.facebook.com/cdcemergency or https://www.
facebook.com/CDC for an up-to-date count of ﬁlikes.ﬂ
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
FIGU RE
 2.2 Examples of the public™s response to the use of @CDCemergency 
to send messages about the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention™s global 
polio eradication campaign. 
OBSERVATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
Observations on current uses of social media offered by workshop 
panelists and participants in the discussion that followed the panel ses-
sion included the following: 
˜˚
Emergency response agencies, notably in the areas of ˜ re and pub-
lic health response, have been successful in building considerable trust 

with the public. There are potential risks involved in using social media, 

and government agencies tend to be very risk-averse. However, social 

media can signi˜ cantly enhance public response capabilities and can also 

be used to enhance public trust. 
˜˚
Social media offer a partnership through which of˜ cials can pro-
vide the best information they have available at the moment and their 

followers can help disseminate the information. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CURRENT USES OF SOCIAL MEDIA IN EMERGENCIES
 21˜˚
The public response to events, including both individual messages 
and trends such as increased social media traf˜c in a location or about a 
particular topic, can help responders understand an event as it unfolds. 
˜˚
Local of˜cials, who already have credibility advantages because 
they are perceived as being ﬁin the same boatﬂ as the public they serve, 
have had success in fostering public trust in advance of crisis events and 
in using social media to communicate effectively with the public during 
such events.
˜˚
As communication becomes increasingly mobile and Internet 
media services are substituted for broadcasting services, social media 
applications can provide an increasingly important way for emergency 
managers to reach the public. 
˜˚
Although a number of existing tools have been successfully 
adapted, there is also a need for tools for both information dissemina
-tion and monitoring that are better matched to the needs of emergency 
managers. 
˜˚
The use of social media for disaster response requires signi˜cant 
advance planning. This includes experimenting with various work˚ows 
and technologies to assist in the rapid dissemination of information.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22
3Dynamics of Social Media
How social connections form, how information is disseminated 
within social networks, and why people volunteer their time and 
knowledge to solve problems are all questions that have been 
examined by researchers in sociology and computing and experienced by 
those using social media to coordinate disaster response. Duncan Watts, 
at Yahoo! Research at the time of the workshop and since at Microsoft 
Research, discussed some of what researchers have learned about how 
people use social media and the implications for use of social media 
in disasters, drawing on research about Twitter users. Manuel Cebrian, 
University of California, San Diego, examined approaches for incentiv
-izing participation in time-critical situations, drawing on lessons from 
two recent challenges sponsored by DARPA. Melissa Elliott, Standby 
Task Force, discussed the dynamics of social media during a crisis, draw
-ing on experience with volunteer efforts to use social media for disaster 
management.
STUDYING TWITTER USE TO UNDERSTAND 
HOW PEOPLE COMMUNICATE
In the United States, hundreds of millions of people interact with 
media sources and each other via social media, making the number of 
nodes and connections in an entire social media network incredibly large. 
The enormous diversity in the subjects being discussed via social media 
and the range of effects are even harder to study. Social media, and the 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 23data they yield about people™s interactions, have emerged as a valu
-able new lens through which to explore the full range of communication 
among individuals. Duncan Watts discussed work at the intersection of 
social science and computer science performed at Yahoo! that used a sub
-set of Twitter user information and updates.
1Media research has tended to focus on two types of communicationŠ
individual organizations broadcasting to large, undifferentiated audi
-ences, and individuals communicating with each otherŠbut generally 
has not looked at anything that happens between these two extremes. 
Although most people think of Twitter as a social network, it can also be 
viewed as a full-spectrum media ecosystem.
2 Twitter communications 
cover the spectrum between the two types of communication tradition
-ally examined by media research; individuals as well as traditional mass 
media outlets are able to broadcast information. New forms of interaction 
have emerged, such as mass personal communication, in which ﬁeliteﬂ 
individualsŠcelebrities, politicians, journalists, or recognized expertsŠ
not only broadcast information to large audiences but also engage in 
public conversations that are widely followed. 
One of the biggest challenges to using social media, Watts noted, is 
the large number of accounts and the volume of data they generate. It 
is dif˜cult to categorize the more than 200 million Twitter accounts as 
those associated, for example, with individuals or organizations. In 2009, 
Twitter introduced a new feature called lists, which provided users with 
a mechanism for ˜ltering incoming feeds and other users, providing 
researchers with data (which is public by default) on how users classify 
each other. 
Watts explained that the Yahoo! study drew on a collection of data 
originally used by Haewoon Kwak in his study of Twitter. Collected in 
2009, the data included 42 million users and 1.5 billion individual con
-nections.
3 (However, the focus of the work was on 260 million tweets that 
included a bit.ly URL, a URL-shortening service.) 
One important ˜nding from this work was that a small number of 
ﬁeliteﬂ users were followed by half of all Twitter users. Yahoo! used the 
list feature to help separate out four categories of elite users: celebrities, 
1  Shaomei Wu, Jake Hoffman, Winter Mason, and Duncan Watts. Who Says What to Whom 
on Twitter. 20th Annual World Wide Web Conference, Association for Computing Machin
-ery, Hyderabad, India, 2011. Available at http://research.yahoo.com/pub/3386.
2  Haewoon Kwak, Changhyun Lee, Hosung Park, and Sue Moon. What is Twitter, a social net
-work or a news media? Available at http://product.ubion.co.kr/upload20120220142222731/
ccres00056/db/_2250_1/embedded/2010-www-twitter.pdf.
3  Haewoon Kwak originally made the data public at http://an.kaist.ac.kr/traces/WWW2010.html. However, a change in Twitter™s terms of service resulted in the researchers 
being unable to share their original data set.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
media outlets, organizations and corporations, and bloggers.
4 Researchers 
put Twitter users into one of the elite categories based on how frequently 
they were categorized as such by individual users. For example, a Twitter 
handle labeled as that of a celebrity by 20,000 other users most likely did 
in fact belong to a celebrity. What was learned was that 50 percent of all 
attention was being paid to just 20,000 elite users. This is not to say that 
those elite users were producing half of all tweets, but rather that half of 
all the tweets that were read were updates provided by these elite users. 
Focusing on the above four categories of elite users suggests an inter
-esting corollary to what is known as the homophily principle in sociol
-ogy. People who are connected are more similar than people who are not 
connected. Celebrities pay attention to other celebrities, the media follow 
the media, and so on. Only users in the organization category pay more 
attention to users in other categories than to users in their own category. 
Several corporations, non-governmental organizations, and government 
organizations are using Twitter to listen as much as to talk. With retweets, 
the pattern is ever more striking. Celebrities rarely retweet messages from 
anyone. Bloggers, on the other hand, do a tremendous amount of retweet
-ing, which is consistent with the stereotype of a blogger as a synthesizer 
and distributer of information. 
Another important ˜nding cited by Watts was that a relatively large 
fraction of the population received information indirectly. To examine 
the ˚ow of information, researchers studied the propagation of URLs 
that originated from the media category, which consisted of about 5,000 
accounts. Approximately half of this information reaches users indirectly. 
A lot of information did not come directly from the media source but 
instead indirectly through other accounts, which were labeled opinion 
leaders by researchers. The number of opinion leaders was incredibly 
large. They were consuming much more content than normal users but 
also tweeting more and had a higher number of followers. These results 
suggest that many social media users will receive alerts from a non-
authoritative source.
A related issue is what sources of information have the most in˚u
-ence. Watts and his team used retweets as a measure of in˚uence; they 
assumed that an individual who was frequently retweeted was prob
-ably more in˚uential. By tracking tweets and retweets, they were able to 
develop in˚uence trees that described how a tweet was cascaded through 
the Twitter ecosystem.  It turned out that most URLs included in Twitter 
messages were not retweeted by anyone and that the average number 
4  Shaomei Wu, Jake Hoffman, Winter Mason, and Duncan Watts. Who Says What to Whom 
on Twitter. 20th Annual World Wide Web Conference, Association for Computing Machin
-ery, Hyderabad, India, 2011. Available at http://research.yahoo.com/pub/3386.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 25of retweets was around 1.2. This is a relatively small number, especially 
considering the vast literature on diffusion theory that predicts very large 
cascades. However, very large cascades were also observed. For example, 
the data examined by Watts et al. included at least one cascade of about 
10,000 retweets. Another important factor is how many generations of 
retweets occur. Several cascades extended several generations, with infor
-mation moving farther away from the source, but almost 90 percent of 
retweets went only one step away from their origin. 
Two things about in˚uence can be inferred from the Twitter data, 
Watts observed. First, someone with in˚uence probably will continue to 
be in˚uential, and second, the number of followers someone has increases 
his or her in˚uence. No other factors were found to affect in˚uence. For 
example, the content of the tweet was in general not predictive of how 
in˚uential it was (or how many retweets it received)Šalthough this ˜nd
-ing may not hold true in particular contexts such as emergency events in 
which the value seen in sharing critical information may be higher.
PROBLEM SOLVING WITH SOCIAL MEDIA
In addition to seeing social media as a source of information in disas
-ters, it is also natural to consider how social media can be used to engage 
people in solving problems. The essence of the question is how one can 
use social media and the right set of incentives to engage people to solve 
a set of tasks for which humans are well suited. Recent work by Manuel 
Cebrian in the context of two online challenges mounted by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)Šthe DARPA Network 
Challenge and the DARPA Shredder ChallengeŠhas provided some 
empirical knowledge and further insights.  The ˜rst contest, the 2009 
DARPA Network Challenge, offered a $40,000 prize to the ˜rst team to 
˜nd red weather balloons placed in 10 undisclosed locations in the con
-tinental United States. 
A key design issue facing the teams, according to Cebrian, was how to 
recruit participants. The winning team, from the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, chose a variant of the query incentive network model, ˜rst 
developed by Jon Kleinberg and Prabhakar Raghavan in 2005.
5 The indi
-vidual who actually found a balloon would receive the largest award, but 
those who recruited that individual would also be awarded an amount 
equal to half of what the connected award winner received. For example, 
if Dave found a balloon, he would receive $2,000; Carol, who recruited 
Dave, would receive $1,000; Bob, who recruited Carol would receive $500; 
5  J. Kleinberg and P. Raghavan.
 Query incentive networks.
 Proceedings of the 46th IEEE 
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
 2005, pp. 132-141. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
and Alice, who recruited Bob, would receive $250. Figure 3.1 illustrates 
how awards would be distributed in this scheme. 
In roughly 8 hours, the MIT team recruited approximately 4,500 par
-ticipants. Recruiting started in major cities and then spread into the sub
-urbs, which the team believes ultimately played a role in ˜nding some of 
the very-dif˜cult-to-locate balloons. With such a large number of recruits, 
the team expected to simply locate the balloons and win. Recruits would 
submit possible locations, the team would examine the density of submis-sions, and the prominent 10 locations would coincide with balloon place
-ment. However, in the ˜rst day of the competition, of the 400 submissions 
received, 85 percent were incorrect, and it became clear that people were 
attempting to sabotage the team™s effort. Initially the false locations were 
simply random, but later it became clear that some of the spoo˜ng was 
being coordinated to provide multiple reports of the same location. 
The MIT team developed several techniques to ˜lter out the false 
reports. One was to question multiple identical locations; correct submis
-sions were more likely to contain very close but not exactly identical loca
-tions. Another technique was to discount reports from someone located 
FIGURE 3.1 Recruitment and award distribution. SOURCE: Manuel Cebrian. 
Social mobilization under ﬁthe fog of war.ﬂ Presented at Workshop on Alerts and 
Warnings Using Social Media, February 28-29, 2012.
Balloon found!Alice wins $750Bob wins $500Carol wins $1,000Dave wins $2,000ALICE $250 $500BOB $500CAROL $1,000DAVE $2,000$1,000$2,000Another balloon found!Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 27far away from the reported site. The increased rate of incorrect reports 
also led the team to require a photograph for veri˜cation. Spoofers then 
began fabricating pictures, which led to a requirement that the photo
-graphs show the DARPA representative stationed at each balloon as well. 
That in turn led to someone dressing up as a DARPA of˜cial in order to 
submit misinformation. 
Ultimately, the MIT team was able to win because it had a small num
-ber of highly motivated participants who physically visited sites to visu
-ally con˜rm the presence of a red balloon. Several questions arose from 
the challenges presented by intentional misinformation, and in an attempt 
to test a set of related hypotheses, the same research team attempted to 
design the incentive network for the next DARPA challenge in a similar 
way.
The DAPRA Shredder Challenge asked individuals or teams to recon
-struct a progressively harder series of puzzles consisting of documents 
that had been shredded into fragments. The ˜rst puzzle had 200 pieces 
and the ˜fth had 6,000 pieces. By comparison, the best computer algo
-rithms are able to solve a 400-piece puzzle, which meant that computa
-tional approaches alone could not be used to win the challenge. The ˜rst 
team to reconstruct the puzzle would win $50,000. 
In an attempt to mimic the red balloon challenge incentive, MIT 
researchers decided that each of the pieces for all ˜ve puzzles in the 
challenge would correspond to a $1.00 award for correctly placing the 
piece. Once again, the network of the individual correctly placing a piece 
would also be rewarded. If an individual received $50.00 for assembling 
50 pieces, the person who recruited the individual would receive $25.00. 
Over 2 weeks, 3,500 people joined the team. Within those 2 weeks numer
-ous teams had already solved the ˜rst two puzzles. After 4 days the 
MIT team rose to third place in the competition by solving the ˜rst three 
puzzles. 
In the ˜rst three puzzles, steady progress was made toward a solu
-tion, but starting with puzzle four there were slowdowns in progress 
owing to intentional sabotage. Notably, those responsible for sabotaging 
the effort were also the same individuals who earlier had contributed 
solutions to hard pieces of the problem, making it dif˜cult to ˜lter out 
the bad actors.  
One saboteur contacted Cebrian, confessed to damaging the puzzle, 
and provided a summary of the techniques used to create the damage. 
The individual ˜rst enlisted the help of members of an online bulletin 
board to disconnect puzzles. In response, Cebrian locked correctly placed 
pieces in place and banned certain Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. The 
malicious individual then began using a virtual private network and open 
wireless networks to appear from a new IP address and was able to again 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
damage the puzzles. Other users quickly began noticing that the mali
-cious individual was simply stacking pieces; the individual then simply 
began moving pieces off the virtual workspace. As for motivation, his 
claimed rationale was that the shredder puzzle was intended to be a com
-puting/programming challenge and that crowdsourcing was ﬁcheating.ﬂ
Cebrian™s team approached the problem of saboteurs in several ways, 
most of which turned out to be mistakes. First, it attempted to police what was happening and to ˜nd the saboteurs. Although the team was able to 
determine that a group in San Francisco and a group in Amsterdam were 
coordinating the attacks, this information did not contribute to solving 
the puzzle. A second mistaken approach was to restrict participation 
in an attempt to block malicious peopleŠinitially, the virtual table had 
been available to everyone to move pieces at will. An additional step 
was to limit new users to moving one piece every 3 minutes. Ultimately, 
when the team reached the ˜fth puzzle, only the top 20 performers were 
allowed to participate. However, the ˜fth puzzle was simply too com
-plicated for even the best performers to solve, and the team received no 
points for puzzle four and puzzle ˜ve and ultimately placed sixth place 
in the competition.
Both the red balloon and the shredder challenges demonstrated that 
one can recruit a large crowd to solve a very hard problem, and the 
analytical tools to understand how that can happen do exist, observed 
Cebrian. However, when competitive forces arise, it can be very dif˜cult 
to determine the origin of those forces and what others™ goals are. During 
time-critical situations, there is little leeway to contemplate the best way 
to thwart the impact of malicious individuals, and it becomes easy to feel 
paranoid and limit participation. The combinatorial nature of the shred
-der challenge as compared with the red balloon challenge (solve versus 
search) made social mobilization much more problematic. Searching for a 
single balloon has no impact on the search for a second balloon; however, 
in the puzzle challenge, each step built on a previous step, and the useful
-ness of crowdsourcing appears to have degraded.
STANDBY TASK FORCE: 
 VOLUNTEER NETWORKS DURING DISASTERS
Melissa Elliott is a core team member of the Standby Task Force and is 
also a member of both Crisis Mappers and Crisis Commons. All three of 
these volunteer organizations work to coordinate volunteers who develop 
information-sharing tools and provide information to relief organizations 
during a disaster. 
One of the most dif˜cult aspects of using social media during the 2010 
Haitian earthquake, according to Elliot, was the lack of processes and 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 29systems to coordinate information. Essentially, the disaster management 
teams, both non-government organizations and of˜cials, were receiving 
multiple messages from multiple people. The repeating of old distress 
messages became a signi˜cant problem. Veri˜cation of shared information 
presented a growing challenge. 
In response, the Standby Task Force was launched at the 2010 Inter
-national Conference of Crisis Mappers in Boston. The purpose of the 
task force was twofold: to provide predictable crisis-mapping support to 
humanitarian organizations and to create a model for volunteer engage
-ment according to a set of processes so as to maximize ef˜ciencies and 
minimize redundancies. Today, the Standby Task Force comprises almost 
800 volunteers representing 60 different countries. Not every volunteer 
will participate in a deployment (although the organization is looking for 
ways to increase volunteers™ involvement). Many have joined the group 
as observers to understand how the task force works, ideally before par
-ticipating more actively. 
In January 2012, the Standby Task Force used a survey to help deter
-mine what motivates its volunteers and found that 45 percent participate 
because they are generally concerned about the people they help. Another 
35 percent volunteer for the experience and to gain skills in technology 
use and hands-on crisis response. Several became involved to gain vis
-ibility outside their immediate geographical area.
The task force is divided into several teams, each of which focuses on 
a particular task, including analysis, geolocation, humanitarian aid, media 
monitoring, reports, satellite imagery, mobile text messaging, translation, 
veri˜cation, and technology support. The teams ˜nd, map, verify, curate, 
and analyze different forms of social media to improve the situational 
awareness of responding organizations. Volunteers join particular teams 
but often cross-train in multiple teams. Training and coordination are 
done online via a closed platform, Ning,
6 and using Skype videoconfer
-encing. During deployments, a wide variety of tools are used; however, 
80 to 85 percent of deployments are done using Ushahidi. Google Maps 
and Apps and Open Street Maps are also used.
Over the last 2 years, the organization has had 18 deployments. 
Deployments are incredibly time intensive for volunteers, especially the 
coordinators. Volunteers™ work schedules are created and managed very 
closely to ensure that volunteers do not work continuously and that they 
take appropriate breaks from the work. The schedules also provide a way 
for participants to take ownership of their deployments. 
The beginning of each deployment is fairly chaotic, Elliott observed. 
Volunteers are eager to get started; however, coordinators need to ensure 
6 See http://launch.ning.com/.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
that they are all moving forward on the same path. Before beginning, 
teams establish work˚ows, schedules, and team-speci˜c technology plat
-forms to manage the process (mostly via Skype). 
Initially the chat window ˜lls up with brainstorming. Work˚ows, 
the process by which the task force ˜lters information through the team, 
will not change. However, during a deployment, the way in which data 
is gathered may shift as volunteers leverage their contacts, share data 
sets, or use a specialized skill or tool for data visualization that the task 
force might not have thought to use. Maintaining ˚exibility continu
-ally reinforces a sense of ownership. However, coordinators are also 
continually reinforcing the work˚ow process by which the information 
is ˜ltered.
Training is an ongoing process. Volunteers may have joined the task 
force between formal training sessions. In this case they receive extra sup
-port and, if time permits, may receive a one-on-one speed training session 
on whatever tool is being used during a deployment. Within hours of a 
deployment, members of the group begin stepping into leadership roles 
by providing direction and mentorship to new volunteers just joining. 
This approach allows coordinators to take a step back because they no 
longer need to be online constantly answering questions and reinforcing 
the process. 
The deployment teams are composed of digital volunteers who all 
want to support one another during the challenge of deployments. As this 
support builds, more trust develops within the group. A self-correcting 
process begins as well. For example, if the media-monitoring team (which 
is the largest team and does much of the data mining of social networks) 
creates a report in Ushahidi and the geolocation data is incorrect, this 
error can quickly be recognized and corrected by other volunteers. In 
addition, if an individual submits several erroneous reports, he or she 
is able to receive additional training immediately. Sharing the burden of 
ensuring correct information creates another avenue for giving ownership 
to the crowd for that information and continues to reinforce a need to 
mentor and help others who may submit data incorrectly. 
The large amount of data that arrives via Twitter, for instance, requires 
some initial sorting and then veri˜cation. Approximately 80 percent of the 
information the organization receives from Twitter is removed. Although 
retweets do provide redundant information, they can also be very valu
-able. Retweets highlight interest in a certain area. The task force can pro
-vide this information to humanitarian organizations, and further analysis 
can be done to determine why there is particular interest in the informa
-tion being retweeted.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 31Verifying incoming data is an important task.
7 The Standby Task 
Force takes several steps to maintain quality control. The most important 
quality control step is performed by the veri˜cation team, which com
-pares incoming reports with other similar reports. Typically, if the veri˜
-cation team can ˜nd two or three similar reports from different users, the 
organization considers that a more veri˜able report. In addition, other 
tools are used to verify information, including contacting individuals 
with Twitter direct messages or by email if an email address is available. 
Gathering information in con˚ict areas poses even more signi˜cant 
risks of misinformation and the dangers that misinformation may cre
-ate, Elliott cautioned. Partnerships with those stationed in the area can 
help. During the Libyan crisis, the Standby Task Force was asked to 
support the United Nations Of˜ce for the Coordination of Humanitarian 
Affairs (OCHA) to provide it with on-the-ground contacts that could help 
in assessing the unfolding situation. Although the Standby Task Force 
partnered with Amnesty International for con˚ict mapping of Syria, the 
task force decided to suspend this activity until it could further examine 
credential and validity questions. A recurring question for the task force 
is whether it is possible to ensure that the information it is providing is 
accurate and is not putting anyone in harm™s way.
More recently the Standby Task Force established the Human 
Resource team to monitor volunteers for burnout and to help resolve any 
con˚icts that arise. Unfortunately, the task force has had a few instances 
of volunteers being disruptive. Made up of a small, devoted group whose 
membership is by invitation only, the human resource team works with 
closed communication technologies. In addition, the Standby Task Force 
has engaged a psychologist to look for signs of post-traumatic stress dis
-order (PTSD) among deployed volunteers. A few years ago, few might 
have felt that PTSD could be experienced by digital volunteers who may 
be geographically far from a disaster site. However, volunteers do suffer 
from the emotional and mental impacts of disaster volunteer work, and 
further research is needed to determine how prevalent PTSD might be, 
how it can be prevented, and how organizations can monitor their vol
-unteers for it.
The Standby Task Force has also learned, reported Elliot, that it is 
important to continually provide feedback on how data generated by 
volunteers is being used. By learning how their work is bene˜ting others, 
7  For example, during the 2010 Haiti earthquake, locations would ask for resources, stating 
that they had no food or water, and when teams arrived at the location with supplies, they 
found that the location did in fact have food and water. The location was stocking supplies 
because there was concern about when another distribution of resources might occur.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
volunteers begin to appreciate the signi˜cance of their work. This feed
-back is one of the primary motivation tools during a deployment. 
OBSERVATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
Observations on the dynamics of social media offered by workshop 
panelists and participants in the discussion that followed the panel ses
-sion included the following:
˜˚
Comparing the dynamics of social media use during non-
 emergency situations with those of emergency situations can be incred
-ibly complicated. Each emergency situation involves unique factors that 
affect how social dynamics develop. For example, during a terrorist 
attack one can anticipate a more adversarial climate and the potential for 
terrorists to exploit misinformation as part of their attack, whereas dur
-ing a natural disaster there is less incentive to provide misinformation. 
During natural disasters, misinformation typically stems from constant 
rereporting of old news, although there is a possibility that awareness of 
limited resources could create an incentive and a desire to share misin
-formation so as to provide oneself with supplies before others. 
˜˚
An important factor in the use of social media tools and sites is 
the motivation of participants. As with the DARPA challenges, a ˜nan
-cial incentive to participate can lead to a large sensor network, but can 
also create an inducement to interfere with others™ work. If the stakes are 
lower, so also are the incentives to participate as well as to cause harm, 
thus reducing the concerns about signi˜cant interference. A question is 
how to use incentives to increase participation without also increasing 
interference. This problem is a primary reason that the Standby Task Force 
does not use ˜nancial incentives.
˜˚
Another option for preventing distribution of poor data is to limit 
the participation of anonymous workers. However, requiring that partici
-pants be non-anonymous would increase the effort required to register as 
a volunteer and would slow participation. 
˜˚
The use of identity systems, even a readily available one such as 
Facebook™s, also requires additional lead time, which is limited during 
disasters. Online identity structures are discussed further in the next 
chapter. 
˜˚
A system that uses a hierarchy of social media users may be help
-ful for ensuring that information is accurate prior to its dissemination 
during a crisis. An example of an online hierarchy of users is Wikipedia, 
which provides a classic example of how increased popularity changes 
the dynamics of a social Web site. Wikipedia was initially very egalitar
-ian: everyone could contribute and everyone had basic editing rights. As 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DYNAMICS OF SOCIAL MEDIA
 33Wikipedia became popular, this ˚at organization no longer worked, and 
a hierarchy of editors was created who could lock articles and exclude 
certain edits. But creating this sort of hierarchical system during a crisis 
would be quite dif˜cult, given the time constraints of disasters and crises, 
which provides an incentive to be as open as possible.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34
4Credibility, Authenticity, 
and Reputation
The use of social media to disseminate information, both of˜cial and 
unof˜cial, during disasters raises questions about how to assess the 
information™s credibility and authenticity. For example, although 
the reach of an of˜cial message may be widened greatly if it is redistrib
-uted (e.g., retweeted), the message might have been modi˜ed in ways 
not anticipated or desired by its originators. Paul Resnick, University 
of Michigan; Dan Roth, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign; and 
David Stephenson, Stephenson Strategies, examined credibility, authentic
-ity, and reputation in the context of social media and disaster response.
REPUTATION SYSTEMS
Paul Resnick observed that credibility problems have arisen in many 
online systems and that a variety of approaches have been explored to 
address them. One such approach is a 
reputation system
, which formalizes 
the process of gathering, aggregating, and distributing information about 
individuals™ past behavior. The electronic commerce ˜rm eBay operates 
one of the largest and best-known online reputation systems, which pro
-vides buyers with a history of a seller™s past transactions along with feed
-back from individuals who purchased items from the seller. Reputation 
systems have three principal functions: 









-mine if a particular participant is trustworthy.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREDIBILITY, AUTHENTICITY, AND REPUTATION
 35









they will be rated and that the rating is publicly available, they are more 
likely to provide accurate information (e.g., product listings), good ser
-vice, and so on. 









will be noticed and rewarded, they are more likely to join the system. Sim
-ilarly, would-be malicious participants will know that any incompetence 
or deliberate disruption will be made publicŠa deterrent to misbehavior.
Resnick cited two main challenges to reputation systems: the ability 
to create new pseudonyms and the high cost or other barriers to entry 
for newcomers. Most online sites use pseudonyms, and there are several 
valid reasons for not requiring ﬁrealﬂ names.
1 A user of a reputation sys
-tem who develops a bad reputation can often easily create a new pseud
-onym. However, reputation systems can still succeed even when users 
are easily able to create pseudonyms, because those that establish positive 
reputations will continue to use their account, thus ensuring that positive 
information is available in the system. Similarly, a user who establishes 
a positive reputation has a disincentive to suddenly shift behaviors. The 
lack of reputation limits that user™s ability to participate in transactions 
since having a high approval rating with one transaction is much less 
valuable than having a high approval rating with 200 transactions. 
Resnick also noted that the low value of having little or no reputation 
information creates barriers for newcomers. Research shows that it is not 
likely that one can treat each newcomer as having a positive reputation 
until they misbehave: when newcomers are treated as if they have a posi
-tive reputation, system managers become overwhelmed with the number 
of new, poorly behaved users that must be removed from the system. 
As a result, there seems to be no alternative to having newcomers pay 
their dues by developing a positive reputation over time. This tradeoff, 
between the utility of a well-managed reputation system and the high 
cost to newcomers, is a challenge to the growth of a reputation system, 
said Resnick. 
Turning to the usefulness of reputation systems in the context of 
disaster response, Resnick commented that some participants may be 
able to develop a positive reputation through interactions before a disas
-ter occurs, whereas other participants who may in fact have very useful 
information will not necessarily have established a prior reputation nor be 
able to establish their reputation quickly during an event. In such cases, 
additional measures are needed. 
1  For example, see National Research Council, 
The Internet™s Coming of Age,
 National Acad
-emy Press, Washington, D.C., 2001.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
ENCOURAGING SELF-CORRECTION
Another approach to enhancing credibility is to encourage Web users 
to spread correct information.
 When rumors of an event or disaster ˜rst 
appear, authorities and trusted information brokers are often tasked with 
broadcasting corrected information. However, rumors typically continue 
to spread despite having been found to be falseŠa problem that is not 
unique to the Internet or social media. Resnick mentioned that he has 
begun to examine the use of social processes in the context of politi
-cal campaigns and elections. Traditional news media outlets have estab
-lished online sites that examine the truthfulness of statements made by 
candidates. Although such sites are helpful to those who are already 
knowledgeable and are involved in politics, few others may visit these 
sites to verify information. One possibility is to use social media to mobi
-lize individuals to create pointers to such correct information. A person 
motivated to correct false information could, for instance, begin to search 
tweets containing misinformation and then invite other users to respond 
to these incorrect tweets, including supplying links to where the informa
-tion is corrected. 
COMPUTATIONAL CLAIM VERIFICATION
Evaluating the trustworthiness of a particular piece of informa
-tion can require connecting to many other pieces of information (either 
reinforcing or contradictory) from a wide variety of sources (e.g., news 
reports, of˜cial statements, blogs, wikis, and social media messages) that 
provide useful information. Metadata, such as embedded geographical 
coordinates or network activity associated with a piece of information, 
can also provide valuable information. Dan Roth observed that manually 
inspecting these potentially large amounts of data is dif˜cult, a situation 
that prompted his research group to develop a tool to integrate relevant 
information to score the trustworthiness of claims and sources.
2 Roth™s research aims to create a tool that judges trustworthiness in 
a manner similar to how a person might. Interestingly, accuracy is not 
the only important factor, because information can be technically accu
-rate yet misleading. Furthermore, simply counting the number of times 
information is repeated is not suf˜cient either. Rather, a decision on the 
trustworthiness of claims and sources should, according to Roth, be based 
on several characteristics: support for a given piece of information across 
multiple trusted sources, source characteristics (such as reputation), the 
2  V.G. Vinod Vydiswaran, ChengXiang Zhai, and Dan Roth. Content-driven trust propaga
-tion framework. 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining
 (KDD™11), 2011, pp. 974-982.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREDIBILITY, AUTHENTICITY, AND REPUTATION
 37organizational type of the source (e.g., public interest, government, or 
commercial entity), veri˜ability of the provided information, and prior 
beliefs and background knowledge of the source. 
Recognizing that a single metric based on accuracy is inadequate, 
Roth™s research group proposed three measures of trustworthiness: 
truthfulness (focusing on importance-weighted accuracy); completeness 
(thoroughness of a collection of claims); and bias (which results from 
supporting a favored position with untruthful statements or targeted 
incompleteness/lies of omission).
3 Roth™s group™s initial design was based on computing trustworthiness 
using sources and claims. However, this approach proved too simplistic, 
and other factors had to be added. These included information on the 
certainty (and uncertainty) of the system™s technical ability to extract 
information, similarity across claims, attributes of group memberships, 
independence of sources, and so on. The system also had to incorporate 
prior knowledge, including some commonsense understanding and an 
understanding of how claims interact with one anotherŠin order to rec
-oncile competing truth claims, for instance. 
Another aspect of checking trustworthiness is incorporating evidence. 
In adding another system layer for evidence, natural-language-processing 
techniques are needed to help determine what a message is actually 
sayingŠis it supporting or countering a speci˜c claim? 
APPLYING THE ﬁCITIZEN SCIENCEﬂ MODEL 
TO DISASTER MANAGEMENT
Past research at the University of Colorado, Boulder, and at the Uni
-versity of Delaware has found that during disasters individuals act largely 
in a self-directed, collaborative way to create emergent behavior. Their 
decentralized, pluralistic decision making, David Stephenson reported, 
˜nds imaginative and innovative ways to cope with the contingencies that 
typically appear in major disasters. Combining these emergent behaviors 
with social media tools could provide a signi˜cant opportunity to incor
-porate the public into disaster response, suggested Stephenson. 
The success of citizen science initiatives, a form of crowdsourcing 
that harnesses individual observations to assist in scholarly research, 
suggests that similar techniques could be very useful in harnessing the 
public for help in coping with disasters. The concept is not newŠthe 
3  J. Pasternack and D. Roth. Comprehensive Trust Metrics for Information Networks. 27th 
Army Science Conference, November 29-December 2, 2010, Orlando, Florida.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
112th Audubon Christmas Bird Count
4 was held in December 2011Šbut 
smart phones and similar technology have made it much easier to collect 
information. 
Although the primary goal in citizen science projects is to produce 
research and knowledge, these projects also serve as effective outreach 
mechanisms, Stephenson observed. Citizen science is a powerful educa
-tional tool because it involves volunteers directly in the research process 
and requires the creation of simple, easy-to-follow educational programs 
that enable nonexpert volunteers to participate effectively. 
Today, new technologies make the reporting of information much eas
-ier. For example, in a National Weather Service (NWS) program,
5 Twitter 
users are asked to report on weather conditions using the hashtag #WX. 
Through it, users can contribute information that may help the NWS bet
-ter understand very localized conditions such as microbursts that may be 
missed by conventional instrumentation and sources.
 In another initia
-tive, Tweak the Tweet,
6 a special syntax using simple, short, and easy-
to-remember hashtags was developed to make Twitter messages more 
focused and machine readable during disasters (Figure 4.1), thus making 
it easier for people to contribute information in a form useful in a disaster 
response. The syntax was rushed into service during the 2010 Haiti earth
-quake recovery and helped provide needed structure to the information 
that residents and aid workers were reporting from the scene. 
Many other possibilities are evident for the use of recent technolo
-gies in disaster reporting. Smart phones generally have precise location 
information, and this can be made available along with a person™s mes
-sages (if a user activates this feature), making it possible for emergency 
managers to map the sources of reports. Another useful capability is the 
ability to send still images and video. Multiple pictures or video clips 
shot from multiple perspectives could provide authorities with a virtual 
comprehensive view of an event. 
4  The Audubon Christmas Bird Count is a census of birds performed annually by volun
-teer birdwatchers.
5  See http://www.nws.noaa.gov/stormreports/ and http://www.nws.noaa.gov/
 stormreports/twitterStormReports_SDD.pdf.
6  Kate Starbird, Leysia Palen, Sophia B. Liu, Sarah Vieweg, Amanda Hughes, Aaron 
Schram, Kenneth Mark Anderson, Mossaab Bagdouri, Joanne White, Casey McTaggart, 
and Chris Schenk
, 
Promoting structured data in citizen communications during disaster 
response: An account of strategies for diffusion of the ﬁTweak the Tweetﬂ syntax,
 Christine 
Hagar (Ed.), Crisis Information Management: Communication and Technologies
, pp. 43-63, 
Chandos Publishing, 2012; K. Starbird and J. Stamberger, 2010, Tweak the tweet: Leverag
-ing microblogging proliferation with a prescriptive grammar to support citizen reporting, 
short paper presented at the 7th International Information Systems for Crisis Response 
and Management Conference, Seattle, Wash., May 2010. Also see http://epic.cs.colorado.
edu/?page_id=11.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CREDIBILITY, AUTHENTICITY, AND REPUTATION
 39FIGURE
 4.1 An example of Tweak the Tweet syntax used during the 2010 Haiti 
earthquake. SOURCE: Project Epic Web site. Reprinted by permission.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
OBSERVATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
Observations on credibility, authenticity, and reliability offered by 
workshop panelists and participants in the discussion that followed the 
panel session included the following:



-ally viewed as of˜cial sources of news, who can serve as trusted sources in 
social media, such as individuals active in a particular geographical area 
or in organizations such as the Standby Task Force. Many of these bro
-kers are taking steps to verify information. Those following these trusted 
brokers can in turn share this information with others who may not know 
who is a trusted broker. 


trust. For example, although an individual™s information may not be trust
-worthy, greater trust can be established if multiple reports with similar 
information can be found. 










be different from the ways they seek information normally. For example, 
research has shown that during a disaster or mass emergency situation, 
people have a greater willingness to follow individuals who are different 
from themselves than they do under normal circumstances. Also, they 
tend to seek ˜rsthand, ﬁon the groundﬂ information. Locality and hyper
-locality matter. On Twitter, formal emergency response agencies or local 
media are retweeted more often than others.
7 



(where groups of individuals collectively complete complex tasks they 
could not do independently)? What prior results apply to emergent 
behavior with social media, and what aspects might be different? 












-tion provided by the public, of˜cials must also ˜nd ways to build their 
credibility with the public. An effort to build credibility can be as simple 
as an acknowledgment that an organization is listening to the public. This 
kind of direct communication between of˜cials and volunteers builds a 
network of trust. 
7  Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen. Pass it on?: Retweeting in a mass emergency.
 Proceedings 
of the Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management 
(ISCRAM 2010). 
Seattle, Wash., May 2010.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41
5Privacy and Legal Challenges 
with the Use of Social Media
The use of social media by emergency of˜cials raises privacy con
-cerns that are not present with broadcast methods of sending alerts 
and warnings. Of˜cial monitoring of social media to better detect or understand unfolding events is of potential value to emergency managers 
but may also raise privacy concerns. In addition, the networked nature 
of social media may provide a substantial amount of information about 
a single individual. For example, based on whom individuals follow on 
Twitter, one could infer where they live and work and where their chil
-dren attend school. In addition to privacy challenges, liability and legal 
concerns will also have to be addressed. Peter Swire, Ohio State Univer
-sity, discussed legal and policy perspectives on privacy challenges. Bryan 
Ware, Digital Sandbox, discussed the privacy challenges that limit tool 
use and how privacy protections might be built into application develop
-ment. Aram Dobalian, VHA Emergency Management Evaluation Center, 
explored liability issues related to ˜rst-responder use of social media.
LEGAL AND POLICY PERSPECTIVES ON PRIVACY AND 
ON GOVERNMENT MONITORING OF SOCIAL MEDIA
Swire described two main points of view regarding the government™s 
monitoring of social media to gain situational awareness during an emer
-gency. One perspective is that because individuals have posted informa
-tion online and made it readily available to the public, the government 
should feel comfortable using that information to gain situational aware
-Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
ness and respond to needs during a crisis. The second perspective is that 
many people ˜nd it disconcerting to know that the government is reading 
and analyzing information posted in social media.1 The monitoring raises 
several questions: How long will such information be stored? What else 
will it be used for? Will individual dossiers be created that may poten
-tially lead to limitations on an individual™s freedoms? 
Swire observed that the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, 
with its limits on search and seizure by the government, helps shape 
understanding of what is public. Essentially, probable cause or a warrant 
is needed to enter an individual™s house or vehicle. 
By contrast, the Fourth Amendment does not limit the government™s 
ability to follow people on a public street or to read information published 
in a newspaper, a precedent that might be extended to cover govern
-ment monitoring of public social media communications. Interestingly, 
in the context of another circumstance involving new technology and its 
privacy implications, the January 2012 Supreme Court decision in 
United 
States v. Jones
 placed limits on the de˜nition of ﬁin public.ﬂ The court 
issued a unanimous opinion that a warrant was needed to place a GPS 
tracking device on an automobile even though the vehicle in question 
was traveling in public spaces. The majority of justices emphasized that 
physically attaching something to a car was a factor in the decision; other 
justices questioned whether ﬁin publicﬂ is enough to make surveillance 
acceptable. 
Another Fourth Amendment consideration relevant to social media 
is consentŠindividuals can consent to a search or seizure. When people 
make information available to the public through social media, does this 
action mean that consent has been given? A related question is under 
what circumstances people give consent. Facebook user settings provide 
an example of the lack of clarity surrounding the concept of consent. 
Several papers have discussed how Facebook users have trouble under
-standing their privacy settings.
2 Users often believe that postings are not 
available to the public when in fact they might be. 
1  Concerns about government use of information can, observed Swire, be attributed at 
least in part to past abuses. For example, it was uncovered after the fact that the FBI had 
placed many of the delegates at the 1972 Democratic party national convention under 
surveillance. In the wake of Watergate and other abuses, President Ford™s attorney general 
issued what would become known as the Levi guidelines to limit the information, including 
public information, that law enforcement could gather. Concerns about government intru
-sion also led to passage of the 1974 Privacy Act. 
2  Maritza Johnson, Serge Egelman, and Steven
 M. Bellovin. Facebook and privacy: It™s 
complicated. Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS), July 2012. Michelle 
 
Madejski, Maritza Johnson, and Steven
 M. Bellovin. A study of privacy setting errors in an 
online social network. 
Proceedings of SESOC 2012,
 2012. An earlier version is available as 
Technical Report CUCS-010-11.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND LEGAL CHALLENGES
 43Swire also discussed several areas of federal legislation and their pos
-sible implications for government monitoring of social media:


records is maintained and how information is shared with other federal 
agencies and individuals. Pursuant to this act, the Department of Home
-land Security (DHS) released a System of Records Notice in February 2011 
regarding its monitoring of social media.
3 Provided that a set of proce
-dures outlined in the regulation is followed, there is no strict constraint 
on data collection and use. 


-ment interception of telephone calls. While this constraint does not apply 
directly to items posted using social media, it highlights how protective 
the law can be regarding the monitoring of communications that are 
intended to be private.










party. Although a subpoena to the third party is required, there is a 
medium level of strictness around the collection of this information.








-lection of pen register informationŠwho an individual calls, texts, or 
emailsŠbut not the content of the communication. Although a judicial 
order is needed, the standard for receiving an order is fairly low. Routing 
information has not been considered particularly sensitive but is fairly 
useful to law enforcement. In addition, friends™ lists on Facebook are by 
default public. 
The state of the law regarding government access to and use of loca
-tion information available from mobile devices or social media is still 
being examined in the courts. The lower courts are currently split on 
whether a warrant is needed to track an individual™s cellular phone. This 
is a particularly sensitive area because cellular devices can track the loca
-tion, time, and date of a person™s activities, potentially revealing a broad 
picture of an individual™s life. 
Finally, Swire observed, although certain surveillance or monitoring 
activities may be legal, they may not be desirable as a matter of govern
-ment policy. Indeed, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) has 
recognized this concern and has itself imposed limitations on its monitor
-ing activities. DHS monitors some public of˜cials and traditional, new, 
and social media; the restriction is that individuals are not tracked. These 
3  Department of Homeland Security. Publicly Available Social Media Monitoring and 
Situational Awareness Initiative System of Records. FR Doc. No. 2011-2198, 2011. Available 
at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-02-01/html/2011-2198.htm.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
limitations were included in DHS™s System of Records Notice, which 
makes these rules binding.  Nevertheless, at a recent hearing in the House 
of Representatives, Congress criticized DHS™s approach to social media.
4PRIVACY PROTECTION IN THE CONTEXT OF 
PROGRAMS FOR CITIZEN REPORTING OF THREATS
Bryan Ware described the ﬁSee Something, Say Somethingﬂ (S4) cam
-paign and other efforts to encourage the public to report potential threats, 
and used them to illustrate how privacy considerations can constrain the 
development and deployment of applications and tools that enable the 
public to provide information on potential threats. 
The S4 program, which is run out of DHS™s Of˜ce of Public Affairs, is 
intended primarily to increase the public™s awareness of safety issues, and 
only secondarily to collect information. Accordingly, it does not provide a 
mechanism for making reports, other than the 911 emergency phone num
-ber that is ubiquitous in the United States. Each public safety organization 
has a unique reporting phone number or other reporting mechanism. 
Although there would seem to be considerable scope for accepting 
reports from smart phone applications and other forms of social media, 
Ware observed that their adoption was being held back in part by con
-cern about privacy and civil liberties. For example, Ware™s ˜rm, Digital 
Sandbox, Inc., developed an S4 reporting tool for mobile devices that 
was never deployed owing to unresolved privacy issues. Although the 
S4 program was thus ultimately not successful, the experience provides 
valuable lessons for future endeavors.
Another system, Threat and Risk Incident Management, also built 
by Digital Sandbox, Inc., was developed to provide capabilities similar 
to those of the S4 application and was deployed during the 2012 Super 
Bowl. The system, built to be used during the 10 days of Super Bowl 
activities, combined several information sourcesŠ911 calls, event activi
-ties and locations, ˜eld reports from trained personal, and very limited 
monitoring of social media. Although the system could have been used 
to collect citizen reports (such as pictures taken with a smart phone), its 
use was limited to trained personnel, again because of privacy concerns. 
Monitoring of social media was limited; for example, Twitter feeds were 
searched only for certain terms in certain areas, and Twitter users™ names 
and associated URLs were not collected. Despite these constraints, Ware 
4  Subcommittee on Counterterrorism and Intelligence. DHS Monitoring of Social Net
-working and Media: Enhancing Intelligence Gathering and Ensuring Privacy. February 16, 
2012. Washington, D.C. Available at http://homeland.house.gov/hearing/subcommittee-
hearing-dhs-monitoring-social-networking-and-media-enhancing-intelligence.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND LEGAL CHALLENGES
 45said that the tool proved very useful because it provided emergency man
-agers an integrated view of potential events and also made this informa
-tion available to of˜cials on their mobile devices.
LEGAL PERSPECTIVE ON FIRST-RESPONDER RESPONSIBILITIES
Aram Dobalian explored the use of social media for emergency 
response, including both informal and formal and paid and volunteer 
responders, focusing ˜rst on a set of legal issues related to the use of social 
media for emergency response. He observed that the case law in this area 
is very limited, but that there are some relevant legal perspectives that 
can be applied, including the tort of negligence, duty of care, and Good 
Samaritan laws:

Tort of negligence.
 There are four basic elements to the tort of neg
-ligence: duty, breach, causation, and damages. These form the basis, for 
example, for most medical malpractice claims and might be most relevant 
to ˜rst responders and social media use. Negligence states that ﬁa failure 
to provide the care that a reasonably prudent responder would provide 
under the same or similar circumstances might be the basis for liability.ﬂ 
For negligence to be found, there ˜rst must be a certain duty or responsi
-bility that is owed by the responder to the victim. Second, that duty has 
to be breached in some form. Third, as a result of that breach, the victim 
must be further injured or harmed. 

Duty of care.
 In most cases, bystanders have no duty or responsibil
-ity to provide aid to an injured individual.
5 However, courts and statutes 
have created several exceptions. One is that if someone begins to provide 
aid to an individual in distress, that person must continue to provide aid 
at least until someone more quali˜ed can provide the aidŠthe rationale 
for the requirement being that once someone starts, others are less likely 
to step in to provide assistance. In the context of social media, this stance 
suggests that a ˜rst responder who reads a social media post requesting 
assistance incurs obligations once he or she communicates an intent to 
provide assistance.  
A second exception is that if someone creates a situation that causes 
harm, that person has the duty to mitigate damage caused. In the context 
of social media, messages that, for example, led to a stampede could cre
-ate liability. 
A third exception is when the rescuer has a caretaker or other special 
5  In two states, Vermont and Minnesota, laws do require that assistance be provided. 
 
Vermont imposes a ˜ne, and Minnesota treats failure to provide aid as a misdemeanor, 
although the obligation can typically be met by calling 911.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
relationship (including teacher-student, business-customer, and provider-
patient) to the victim. A special relationship may also be created if the res
-cuer starts to provide advice on, say, how to treat injuries. However, there 
is very little case law that is relevant in this particular area. There may 
be some similarities as well to teledelivery of health services, but again 
there is still very little case law regarding remote diagnosis and treatment.

Good Samaritan laws.
  These laws shield individuals from liability 
when they offer assistance provided that they act rationally, in good faith, 
and in accord with whatever relevant training they may haveŠand when 
their assistance is not being provided in conjunction with their employ
-ment. The intent of such laws is to encourage bystanders to provide assis
-tance without fear of incurring liability. Jurisdictions vary in their applica
-tion of these laws to people with medical or other specialized training, 
and some apply only when victims are in imminent danger. Also, the 
laws do not apply to those who work in an emergency response-related 
profession if they are being paid at the time to provide aid. When they are 
acting as volunteers, how the laws apply is less clear-cut.
Because social media interactions readily span jurisdictions, their 
use in disasters raises issues that also arise with telemedicine. There are, 
for example, unresolved questions about the circumstances under which 
health care professionals can provide advice or care to someone located 
in a state where the professional is not licensed. There are also questions 
about what the standards of care should be when advice is provided 
remotely, without an opportunity for a physical examination. 
Social media interactions also raise privacy questions because infor
-mation transmitted over social media may be public or semipublic, yet 
a health care provider may have obligations under the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) or other privacy laws
6 that 
are dif˜cult to meet under those circumstances.  
Given all of these challenges, it is perhaps not a surprise that emer
-gency managers have not been able to put formal systems in place that 
use social media for emergency response, commented Dobalian. How
-ever, there is at least one example of such a serviceŠthe United Hatzalah 
in Israel, which coordinates a group of approximately 1,700 volunteers 
who are trained in ˜rst aid and have GPS-enabled smart phones. A smart 
phone application noti˜es the nearest responder to attend to an eventŠ
with a goal of responding within 90 seconds to a Twitter message or 
6  Department of Health and Human Services. Hurricane Katrina Bulletin: HIPAA Privacy 
and Disclosures in Emergency Situations. 2005. Also see ﬁDisclosures in Emergency Situa
-tionsﬂ under Frequently Asked Questions at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/faq/
disclosures_in_emergency_situations/index.html.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PRIVACY AND LEGAL CHALLENGES
 47other post signaling the event, well before an ambulance normally would 
arrive.
7  If the United States were to create an analogous volunteer-based 
system, the legal issues outlined above would have to be considered, 
observed Dobalian. And, Dobalian commented, if social media were to be 
used for professional emergency response, a number of questions would 
have to be addressed, such as the following:


















from existing 911 telephone systems?











monitor social media for requests for assistance?









from that available to a 911 operator, and what would the implications be 
for what resources were dispatched and what advance instructions were 
given?
OBSERVATIONS OF WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS
Observations on privacy and legal issues associated with social media 
offered by workshop panelists and participants in the discussion that fol
-lowed the panel session included the following:





a source of information when events are being monitored or the public™s 
response is being assessed, and people may be more comfortable remain
-ing anonymous when their communications are monitored by the govern
-ment. However, people™s attempts to remain anonymous are complicated 
because a user™s network may provide clues to his or her identity. 

other information about people is rapidly eroding as researchers have 
come to understand that fairly innocuous attributes can pinpoint indi
-viduals. Are there other techniques or approaches that can be used to 
disguise a person™s identity?









-tions) and interpersonal trust (trust in other individuals). During a crisis, 
trust has interesting dynamicsŠboth impersonal and interpersonal trust 
can be eroded, or one may serve as a substitute for the other. How are 
these dynamics altered by the use of social media during a disaster?










regulations regarding medical privacy in the aftermath of Hurricane 
7  See http://www.hatzalahrl.org/index.php.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
Katrina that allow health care providers to better share patient informa
-tion as necessary to provide treatment in an emergency. Health care pro
-viders can also share patient information as necessary to identify, locate, 
and notify family members, guardians, or anyone else responsible for an 
individual™s care. Could these guidelines serve as a more general model 
for how to relax privacy restrictions during emergencies? Could new 
HIPAA guidelines regarding de-identi˜ed health data provide a helpful 
starting point?









-ate an additional challenge to the use of social media, although copyright 
protects expression rather than the underlying data or idea. If photo
-graphs were used simply to identify patterns, this use of data would not 
create a copyright problem.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49
6Research Gaps and 
Implementation Challenges
Social media represent a relatively new and still rapidly evolving 
 
phenomenon, and their application to alerts, warnings, and other 
aspects of emergency management is still in its infancy. But there is 
much current interest in the use of social media because they have been 
embraced by a large segment of the population and because they enable 
new, two-way interactions among those affected by and responding to 
disasters. To date, formal study of the use of social media in disasters has 
been limited (Box 6.1 explores the state of research on the use of social 
media in emergency management), and there are many outstanding ques
-tions about how they can be used most effectively by emergency managers 
and other public of˜cials, organizations, communities, and individuals. 
 The following sections outline research opportunities and associated 
implementation challenges identi˜ed by the committee and workshop 
attendees during the plenary and breakout sessions of the workshop. The 
opportunities and challenges compiled here from presentations and dis
-cussions at the workshop do not re˚ect a consensus of the committee or 
the workshop participants, nor are they intended to be a comprehensive 
list of research questions.
MESSAGE CONTENT AND DISSEMINATION
A signi˜cant body of past research has considered what types of 
messages and communications strategies are most effective for alerting 
the public with traditional emergency alerting tools like broadcast radio 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
and television.
1 Comparatively little research has examined similar ques
-tions for messages disseminated via social media.
2 One of social media™s 
1  National Research Council. 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Sum
-mary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps.
 The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2011. 
2  Research that has been done in this area includes Kate Starbird, Leysia Palen, Amanda 
Hughes, and Sarah Vieweg, Chatter on
 the red: What hazards threat reveals about the so
-cial life of microblogged information,
 Proceedings of the ACM 2010 Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work
 (CSCW 2010), pp. 241-250, 2010; Kate Starbird and Leysia Palen, 
Pass it on?: Retweeting in mass emergencies, 
Proceedings of the Conference on Information Sys
-tems for Crisis Response and Management
 (ISCRAM 2010), Seattle, Wash., 2010; Leysia Palen, 
Sarah Vieweg, Sophia Liu, and Amanda Hughes, Crisis in a networked world: Features of 
computer-mediated communication in the April 16, 2007, Virginia Tech event, 
Social Science 
Computing Review,
 Sage, pp. 467-480, 2009; and Clarence Wardell and Yee San Su, 
Social Media 
+ Emergency Management Camp: Transforming the Response Enterprise
, 2011, available at http://
www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/˜les/SMEM_Report.pdf.
˜˚˛˝
˝
In her remarks at the February 2012 workshop on alerts and warnings using 
social media, Leysia Palen of the University of Colorado, Boulder, discussed 
the evolving application of social media for emergency management and the 
associated stages of research maturity. She suggested that growing interest in 
examining the role of social media re˚ects in part the progress that has been 
made toward their adoption, and that research together with learning from the 
practical application of social media will increase understanding of both pos-sibilities and pitfalls and thus foster greater, more effective use. 
From roughly 2008 to 2011 was a period in which the potential for using 
social media was ˜rst recognized and was marked by scattered grassroots ex
-perimentation, said Palen. In this ˜rst stage, publications by practitioners and 
researchers, workshops, and discussion developed a case that social media 
would inevitably play an important role in emergency management, although 
just how was unclear. Not all embraced the new technologies. Some felt that the 
use of social media was simply a passing fad, and even as late as 2011 otherwise 
knowledgeable people remained fearful about social-media-abetted change 
and sought to understand how social media could be ﬁheld back.ﬂ Still others 
embraced the trend but did not fully understand its grassroots and spontane
-ous nature; one result was attempts to shape it in order to gain commercial or 
tactical advantage.
Indications abound that both practice and research have since yielded sig
-ni˜cant advances, observed Palen. Local emergency managers are experiment
-ing with how to incorporate social media into their daily practices, for example, 
and the American Red Cross has incorporated certi˜ed volunteers into its social 
media response plans. Formal policy discussions are being held worldwide.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH GAPS AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
 51particular strengths, that messages can be widely shared, also presents 
challenges because messages can be readily altered as they are spread. In 
addition, messages that may no longer be accurate can continue to propa
-gate through social media long after they are no longer current. Their 
interactive nature makes social media useful as a medium for both receiv
-ing and con˜rming disaster information, which suggests opportunities to 
reduce the gap between the time individuals receive disaster information 
and when they take action. 
Some speci˜c research questions include the following:
˜˚
How should broadcast messages from emergency managers 
be crafted in light of the limitations (e.g., short message lengths) and 
strengths (e.g., opportunities to include images, maps, and URLs) pre
-sented by social media?
˜˚
How much of the word-of-mouth dissemination of information 
about disasters occurs through social media? Are there ways of designing 
messages that could increase the speed and breadth of their spread?
˜˚
How are messages altered as they are spread through social net
-works? How might messages be formulated to discourage or reduce the 
impact of these changes?
˜˚
What strategies and techniques can be applied to deal with mes
-sages that have ﬁagedﬂ to the point that they are no longer relevant?
˜˚
What types of messages and strategies would reduce the time lag 
before individuals take action (i.e., reduce milling time)?
˜˚
What challenges or opportunities will social media present in 
reaching unique populations such as non-English speakers or individu
-als with disabilities? 
TRUST AND CREDIBILITY
In addition to sharing and commenting on messages they receive, 
citizens often use social media to share ˜rsthand text, image, and video 
reports about disasters. This ˜rsthand information can be useful for deci
-sion making by emergency of˜cials as well as other individuals but raises 
questions about how to assess its trustworthiness. The nature of social 
media suggests the possibility for self-correcting information by combin
-ing reports supplied by many individuals provided that the number of 
reports is suf˜ciently large. 
Some speci˜c research questions include the following:
˜˚
How do consumers of social media messages distinguish credible 
from less credible information? How can emergency managers and other 
of˜cials create and disseminate messages that have high credibility?
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
˜˚
What are practical ways that of˜cials can evaluate and signal the 
credibility of unof˜cial messages during an event? 
˜˚
What are the relationships between the number and density of 
social media users or the size of an event and the effectiveness of mecha
-nisms for self-correcting information users supply? 
˜˚
What mechanisms and approaches foster such self-correction? 
˜˚
What are effective strategies of˜cials can use to intercede when 
misinformation is proliferated via social media?
PRIVACY
The use of social media for alerts and warnings raises privacy issues 
that were not in play with traditional methods of sending alerts and warn
-ings. For example, the social media communications being monitored by 
government of˜cials, while technically public, may have been sent with 
certain expectations of privacy such as that they would not be read by 
government of˜cials. 
Some speci˜c research questions include the following:
˜˚
How, if at all, do people differentiate the privacy implications of 
message monitoring by government agencies, by commercial entities, and 
by the general public during disasters versus at other times?
˜˚
 It has been suggested that people are willing to accept reduced 
privacy safeguards during disasters. What are people™s actual attitudes 
in these circumstances? 
˜˚
How might the government™s use of social media be adjusted dur
-ing disasters? For example, are there mechanisms that could be used to 
trigger monitoring when a disaster begins? What safeguards could be 
established to ensure that people have full control of adjustment to and 
reactivation of privacy settings?
˜˚
Is widespread adoption of social media, which relies on users 
sharing information about themselves, altering the privacy expectations 
of users of social media? What are the implications for the use of social 
media during disasters?
VOLUNTEERS
Social media have enabled the emergence of online groups of volun
-teers to respond to disasters. Some of these groups, such as the Standby 
Task Force and Humanity Road, have evolved from ad hoc groups to more 
structured volunteer organizations that designate individuals responsible 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH GAPS AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
 53for coordinating response activities. These more formal groups as well 
as spontaneously formed groups help curate disaster information from 
social media and other sources and use social media to provide relevant 
information to both of˜cial responders and the affected population.
Some speci˜c research questions include the following:
˜˚
What organizational theory provides an understanding of how ad 
hoc volunteer organizations form, function, and evolveŠand what the 
implications are for disaster management?
˜˚
Although of˜cial ˜rst responders in government and nongovern
-ment organizations have had training to deal with emergency situations, 
most ad hoc volunteers have not. Are there ways that social media can be 
used to make the efforts of ad hoc volunteers more effective?
˜˚
How do legal and policy concerns constrain the interactions of 
volunteers with formal emergency managers? What measures might be 
taken to address these concerns?
˜˚
What are points of cooperation and tension between of˜cials and 
volunteers? 
TECHNOLOGY DIFFUSION
Several instances of technologies that could have immediate applica
-tion for disaster management were discussed during the workshop, such 
as support for visualization of information derived from social media. 
However, it was also evident that there were relatively few points of 
engagement between researchers developing or investigating new tools 
and emergency managers and other potential end users. Emergency man
-agers are most likely to encounter new technologies only when such tools 
are made available by vendors. Given the rapid pace of change in social 
media and the associated rapid pace of change in tools for using social 
media, workshop participants suggested that more rapid and effective 
technology transfer would be valuable. 
 Some speci˜c research questions include the following:
˜˚
Are there emerging best practices for how social media can be used 
effectively by emergency managers?
˜˚
How can diffusion of available technologies be promoted? What 
are the special characteristics of the emergency management community 
that limit the adoption of new technologies and techniques, and how 
might such characteristics be addressed?
˜˚
How can the growing body of knowledge on how users behave in 
online communities be transferred to emergency management practices? 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PRACTICE
Although the rate of adoption of social media and the sophistication 
of their use by emergency managers vary considerably, it does appear 
that emergency managers have come to generally appreciate the potential 
value of social media. However, workshop participants cited a number of 
barriers that still exist to the effective use of social media in the practice 
of emergency management. These barriers stem in no small part from an 
incomplete understanding, as discussed above, of how to use social media 
in disasters and the relative newness of the medium. 
Some speci˜c challenges include the following:
˜˚
Limited knowledge about information-sharing techniques and col-lection of information;
˜˚
Limited staff plus budget challenges that create barriers to using 
social media for situational awareness;
˜˚
Lack of policies and discussion about the use of social media for 
dissemination of alerts and warnings and for situational awareness; and
˜˚
Concerns about potential liabilities that are created when new 
technology is introduced, speci˜cally with respect to fair representation 
of victims™ needs and the distribution of resources.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57
A Workshop Agenda
FEBRUARY 28-29, 2012
 BECKMAN CENTER
 IRVINE, CALIFORNIA
Tuesday, February 28, 2012
  8:30 am
 Welcome and Opening Comments
    
Robert Kraut, Chair, Committee on Public Response to Alerts 
and Warnings Using Social Media
 Denis Gusty, Department of Homeland Security
 9:00
  
Fundamentals of Alerts, Warnings, and Social Media
  
Much is known about the public response to alerts 
delivered by sirens, radio, television, and weather radio. 
As social media play an increasingly important role 
in societal communication, it will become increasingly 
important to understand the implications of these new 
capabilities for disaster alerts and warnings.
  
What is known about how the public responds to alerts 
and warnings?
 Dennis Mileti, University of Colorado, Boulder 
  
What is known about the use of social media during a 
disaster?
 Kristiana Almeida, American Red Cross 
  
What are barriers to of˜cial use of social media during a 
disaster?
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
  Edward Hopkins, Maryland State Emergency Management 
Agency
  
What technologies are in development for alert 
dissemination and situational awareness via social media?
  Emre Gunduzhan, Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics 
Laboratory
  Timothy Sellnow, University of Kentucky
, moderator
 10:30
 Dynamics of Social Media
  
The social aspect of these tools makes them especially 
attractive because of the ability to leverage the trust 
people place in their connections. Information about an 
event that is provided by neighbors, colleagues, friends, 
or family is often viewed as more credible than a mass 
alert or a news report. Social media may also provide a 
useful complement to other tools by providing a way to 
rapidly disseminate time-sensitive information that may 
be important to an affected community but not rise to 
the level of an of˜cial alert or warning. How connections 
form, how information is disseminated, and why users 
volunteer their time and knowledge to solve problems 
have been examined by researchers in human-computer 
interaction, psychology, and computer science. The panel 
will explore what motivates people to participate in 
knowledge sharing, what drives self-organizing, and what 
mechanisms exist for self-correction of information. 
  In˚uence mechanisms in social media 
  Duncan Watts, Yahoo! Research
  
Incentivizing participation in time-critical situations 
  Manuel Cebrian, University of California, San Diego
  
How the Standby Task Force harnesses the power of the 
crowd
  
Melissa Elliott, Standby Task Force
  Jon Kleinberg, Cornell University
, moderator
 Noon
 Lunch
 Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 591:00 pm
 Credibility, Authenticity, and Reputation
  
During disasters, citizens often post ˜rsthand information 
and pictures and re-post information they have received 
from of˜cial or unof˜cial sources. Although both types of 
information are useful to both emergency of˜cials and the 
public, such sharing raises questions about how to assess 
the credibility and authenticity of ˜rsthand reports and 
redistributed information. For example, although the reach 
of an of˜cial message may be widened if it is redistributed 
(e.g., retweeted), the message may have been modi˜ed 
in ways not anticipated or desired by its originators. The 
panel will explore credibility, authenticity and reputation 
in the context of social media and disasters.
   Information veri˜cation and rumor control
 Paul Resnick, University of Michigan
 Mechanisms for determining trustworthiness
 Dan Roth, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
  Training the public to provide useful data during a 
disaster
  David Stephenson, Stephenson Strategies, Med˜eld, Mass.
  Leysia Palen, University of Colorado, Boulder
, moderator
   2:30
 Personal Privacy
  The use of social media by emergency of˜cials raises 
privacy concerns that were not present with traditional 
methods of sending alerts and warnings. Also privacy-
sensitive, but of potential value to emergency managers, 
is of˜cial monitoring of social media to better detect or 
understand unfolding events. For example, the networked 
nature of social media may provide a substantial amount 
of information about a single individual: based on who 
one follows on Twitter one may be able to infer where she 
lives or works and what school her children attend. The 
panel will consider such questions as:
  ˜˚
What are the public™s perceptions and expectations 
of privacy, and how can they best be addressed? For 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
example, the communications being monitored by 
government of˜cials, while technically public, may have 
been sent with certain expectations of privacy such as not 
being intended to be read by government of˜cials.
  ˜˚
What is the appropriate balance of interests between 
achieving effective situational awareness and privacy? 
For example, how should location-tagged information be 
handled?
  ˜˚
What are best practices in providing adequate notice 
to the public and ensuring that collected information is 
used appropriately? For example, how can or should users 
whose public information is being monitored be made 
aware of that? How frequently should notice be provided?
  ˜˚
Are there existing features of social media that could 
be used to help protect privacy? For example, would 
asking people to use designated mechanisms (e.g., hash 
tags in Twitter) to label information they intend to be read 
by government of˜cials constitute an adequate opt-in 
approach?
  Privacy decision making
 Lorrie Cranor, Carnegie Mellon University 
  Social-psychological challenges of social media use in 
crises
  Gloria Mark, University of California, Irvine
  Implementation of the ﬁSee Something, Say Somethingﬂ 
campaignŠhow privacy can be protected
  Bryan Ware, Digital Sandbox 
  Today™s framework for privacy protection and its 
application to alerts and warnings using social media
  Peter Swire, Moritz College of Law, Ohio State University 
(remotely)
  Alessandro Acquisti, Carnegie Mellon University
, moderator
   4:00
 Break
 4:15
 Breakout discussion
 on opportunities and challenges. 
 5:30 pm
 Reception
 Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 61Wednesday, February 29, 2012
8:30 am
 Report-backs from breakout sessions
 9:30
 Case Studies of Uses of Social Media in Disasters
  Social media is already being used both formally and 
informally by emergency managers. Researchers have also 
begun to examine social media communication streams 
to learn how social media are used during a disaster. This 
panel will examine recent experience and research on 
social media use.
   Currently used tools for monitoring social media for 
situational awareness 
  Brian Humphrey, Los Angeles Fire Department 
  Use of Twitter for earthquake detection and alerting
  Paul Earle, USGS National Earthquake Information Center 
  The use of social media tools to disseminate information 
during a health crisis
  Keri Lubell, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
  Leslie Luke, Of˜ce of Emergency Services, County of San Diego 
and
 Richard Muth, Maryland Emergency Management Agency
, moderators
10:30
 Use of Social Media by Nongovernment Organizations
  News organizations and technology ˜rms have used social 
media during crises and disasters to provide information 
to and gather information from the public. This panel 
will explore lessons for government from this private-
sector experience, partnerships between the public and 
private sectors, and how new technology may shape those 
partnerships.
 Brad Panovich, News Channel 36, Charlotte, North Carolina 
  Robert Kraut, Carnegie Mellon University
, moderator
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
11:15
 Looking Ahead: Opportunities and Challenges
  What changes in preparation, management, and analysis 
will be needed to incorporate social media as an 
information tool? 
   Murray Turoff, New Jersey Institute of Technology (remotely)
  Social media: Legal perspectives on ˜rst-responder 
responsibilities
  Aram Dobalian VHA Emergency Management Evaluation 
Center 
  Spontaneous and organized digital volunteerism in the 
future of emergency management
  Leysia Palen, University of Colorado, Boulder
  Michele Wood, California State University, Fullerton
, moderator
12:30 pm
 Wrap-up Panel and Plenary Discussion
 Denis Gusty, DHS
 Robert Kraut, Carnegie Mellon University
 Leysia Palen, University of Colorado, Boulder
1:00 pm
 Adjourn/Lunch
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63
B Biosketches of Workshop Speakers
Kristiana Almeida
 has been with the American Red Cross for more than 
4 years.  Most recently, she has been serving as a consultant to the organi
-zation™s more than 250 socially active chapters, helping them to reach the 
next level of online engagement with their constituents while engaging 
new volunteers to help with social programs.  She also serves as part of 
the organization™s Advanced Public Affairs Team and as such has been a 
key on-the-ground media spokesperson after large-scale disasters, includ
-ing the tornadoes in Alabama, the historic ˚ooding in Tennessee, and 
Hurricane Irene. Almeida received her bachelor™s degree from the Univer
-sity of California, Santa Barbara, where she graduated with distinction in 
her major, and she is currently working on her MBA from the University 
of Massachusetts, Amherst.
Manuel Cebrian
 works at the intersection of the computer and social sci
-ences. He is currently an assistant research scientist with the Department 
of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of California, 
San Diego.  Prior to joining UC San Diego, Cebrian was a Fulbright Fel
-low with the MIT Media Laboratory. Previously, Cebrian worked with 
Facebook, Telefonica, and Brown University. Cebrian earned a PhD in 
computer science from the Autonomous University of Madrid, Spain.
Lorrie Faith Cranor
 is an associate professor of computer science and 
of engineering and public policy at Carnegie Mellon University, where 
she is director of the CyLab Usable Privacy and Security Laboratory 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
(CUPS). She is also a co-founder of Wombat Security Technologies, Inc. 
She has authored more than 100 research papers on online privacy, usable 
security, phishing, spam, electronic voting, anonymous publishing, and 
other topics. She has played a key role in building the usable privacy and 
security research community, having co-edited the seminal book 
Security 
and Usability
 (O™Reilly, 2005) and founded the Symposium on Usable 
Privacy and Security (SOUPS). She also chaired the Platform for Privacy 
Preferences Project (P3P) Speci˜cation Working Group at the W3C and 
authored the book 
Web Privacy with P3P
 (O™Reilly, 2002). She has served 
on a number of boards, including the Electronic Frontier Foundation 
board of directors, and on the editorial boards of several journals. In 2003 
she was named one of the top 100 innovators 35 or younger by 
Technology 
Review magazine. She was previously a researcher at AT&T-Labs Research 
and taught in the Stern School of Business at New York University.
Aram Dobalian
 is the director of the Department of Veterans Affairs™ 
Emergency Management Evaluation Center (VEMEC) at the VA Greater 
Los Angeles Healthcare System (VAGLAHS). VEMEC™s mission is to pro
-mote the health and social welfare of veterans and the nation before, 
during, and after national emergencies and disasters through research 
and evaluation. Dobalian is also an associate adjunct professor of health 
services at the Jonathan and Karin Fielding School of Public Health at the 
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Dobalian received his PhD 
in health services from the UCLA School of Public Health with an aca
-demic cognate in social psychology, and his JD from Whittier Law School 
where he was editor-in-chief of the 
Whittier Law Review
. He received his 
MPH in health services from UCLA and his BS in physics from Vander
-bilt University. From 2001 to 2004, Dobalian was an assistant professor 
in the Department of Health Services Research, Management and Policy 
at the University of Florida. His research focuses on emergency manage
-ment/public health emergency preparedness and response, including 
the impact of bioterrorism, hurricanes, earthquakes, and other natural 
and human-caused emergencies and disasters. His research also spans 
nursing, long-term care, nursing home malpractice, advance care plan
-ning, and the role of pain in the use of health services. In 2009 to 2010, 
Dobalian led the development of the ˜rst national VA Comprehensive 
Emergency Management Program Evaluation and Research agenda. The 
goals of this agenda were to provide a basis for fostering the conduct of 
VA-based emergency management research, to promote new discoveries 
and improve care delivery during and after emergencies, and to position 
VA as a national leader in emergency management research.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 65Paul Earle
 currently serves as the director of operations of the USGS 
National Earthquake Information Center (NEIC). His primary responsibil
-ity is oversight of 24/7 earthquake monitoring. In this capacity, he guides 
the development and implementation of new policy and procedures used 
during earthquake response and catalog production. He also serves in 
the rotating role of NEIC event coordinator, overseeing the production of 
near-real-time products following earthquake disasters around the globe. 
Previously, Earle graduated from the University of California, Berkeley, 
with a BA in geophysics and then received a PhD in geophysics from the 
Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California, San 
Diego, and had a National Science Foundation postdoctoral fellowship 
at the University of California, Los Angeles. His research has included 
studies of the ˜ne-scale structure of the deep Earth, characterization of 
Earth™s seismic signals, and post-earthquake impact assessment as part 
the the USGS Prompt Assessment of Global Earthquakes for Response 
(PAGER) project.
Melissa Elliott
 works to bridge the gap between technology and team
-work. She is a core team member of the Standby Task Force and has 
actively participated in deployments for Al-jazeera, Amnesty Interna
-tional USA, OCHA, UNHRC, UN-Spider, and WHO. An avid supporter 
of the Haitian relief efforts, Elliott was an early adopter of the Ushahidi 
platform to coordinate aid after the 2010 Haiti earthquake and has trav
-eled to Haiti on multiple occasions to assist. She is a member of Crisis
-Commons and CrisisMappers. She has presented social media techniques 
used in disaster relief to the American Red Cross during its Emergency 
Social Data Summit in Washington, D.C., as well as multiple presenta
-tions at the Canadian government™s Department of Foreign Trade and 
International Affairs during its Open Innovation Summit in Ottawa. Elliot 
is also a partner and executive producer at Blackbox Communications in 
Toronto. 
Emre Gunduzhan
 received his BS and MS degrees in electrical engineer
-ing from Bilkent University, Turkey, and his PhD degree, also in electrical 
engineering, from the University of Maryland, College Park. He worked 
at the Advanced Technology Research Group of Nortel for more than 10 
years before joining the Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Labo
-ratory, where he is currently a project manager in the Communication 
Systems Group. His current interests are modeling, analysis, and design 
of complex communication systems, including alert and warning systems, 
wireless networks, and satellite networks.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
Edward Hopkins serves as director of external affairs and communi
-cations for the Maryland Emergency Management Agency (MEMA), 
where he oversees all external communications and liaisons, messaging, 
and legislative affairs. He previously served as chief of staff, deputy 
director of operations, and manager of MEMA™s Of˜ce of Domestic Pre
-parednessŒLaw Enforcement Liaison Group, where he served as the law 
enforcement/intelligence liaison with all state, local, and federal law-
enforcement agencies and oversaw DHS grants totaling more than $10 
million. Hopkins previously served as the director of communications 
with Maryland™s Department of Juvenile Services, where he was respon
-sible for external communications with the statewide news media, and 
developing press conferences, presentations, speeches, and talking points 
on behalf of former Governor Robert Ehrlich. Hopkins served with the 
Harford County (MD) Sheriff™s Of˜ce for 29 years and retired in 2003 as a 
lieutenant. From 1994 to 2002 and from 2003 to 2005 he served as director 
of public and media relations and chief spokesman for the Sheriff™s Of˜ce. 
During his career, Hopkins served as director of the Harford County 
Child Advocacy Center, a center for the investigation of child sexual 
abuse, and for 11 years was assigned to the Criminal Investigation Divi
-sion, where he was a supervisor of the Major Crimes Unit. Hopkins holds 
a master™s degree in public administration with a minor in police manage
-ment from the University of Baltimore. He has attended numerous law 
enforcement seminars and has participated in panel discussions regard
-ing the role of law enforcement in public affairs. He formerly hosted and 
produced a cable television show entitled 
ﬁBehind the Badge
,ﬂ an award-
winning informational show about the Harford County Sheriff™s Of˜ce, 
and currently hosts ﬁInside Harford County,ﬂ a live call-in talk show on 
the Harford Cable Network. Hopkins is a graduate of the FBI/Harford 
County Sheriff™s Of˜ce Law Enforcement Executive Development School 
and has served as president and vice-president of Harvard Associates 
in Police Science, a 600-member medico-legal death investigation edu
-cational organization. He is actively involved in the community, having 
served 38 years with the Bel Air Volunteer Fire Company and serving 
currently as ˜re chief. He has held the positions of board president and 
assistant ˜re chief, paramedic, and public information of˜cer. He cur
-rently serves as chair of the Maryland Municipal League™s Hometown 
Emergency Preparedness Ad Hoc Committee, a subcommittee whose mis
-sion is to educate municipalities on emergency preparedness, planning, 
and awareness. In 2011 Hopkins was re-elected to local political of˜ce and 
currently serves as mayor of the Town of Bel Air, Maryland. 
Brian Humphrey 
joined the Los Angeles Fire Department in 1985, where 
he has served with distinction, earning honors on the battle lines of count-Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 67less storms, con˚agrations, and disastersŠincluding the Los Angeles 
riots of 1992 that caused more than $1 billion in property damage and 
left nearly six dozen dead. During the past 17 years, he worked full-
time in external relations for the Los Angeles Fire Department, dealing 
˜rsthand with all aspects of print, radio, television, and Internet jour
-nalism. Humphrey is active in a variety of government and diplomatic 
affairs, including service as an LAFD terrorism liaison of˜cer, public 
safety ambassador for visiting dignitaries, and manager of the popular 
LAFD news and information blog.
Keri M. Lubell
, PhD, is the lead for the Communication Surveillance 
and Evaluation Team and acting lead for the Emergency Web and Social 
Media Team in the Emergency Risk Communication (ECS) Branch, Divi
-sion of Emergency Operations, at the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention. Her current work focuses on developing ef˜cient and effec
-tive systems for gathering information from and analyzing the communi
-cation environment (news and social media) during emergencies in order 
to inform agency communication strategy. She also coordinates several 
efforts to evaluate CDC communication outreach activities during emer
-gency health threats, including the 2009 H1N1 in˚uenza pandemic. In 
addition to her H1N1-speci˜c work, she serves as a scienti˜c adviser for 
a CDC cooperative agreement with the Harvard School of Public Health 
to assess the public™s knowledge, attitudes, and behavior in response to 
health threats. Before joining the ECS Branch, she spent 10 years in CDC™s 
Division of Violence Prevention conducting research on violence-related 
issues and topics. Lubell received her PhD in sociology from Indiana Uni
-versity, Bloomington, where her dissertation research focused on gender 
differences in the impact of social isolation and mental health problems 
on suicide mortality. 
Gloria Mark is a professor in the Department of Informatics, University of 
California, Irvine. Mark received her PhD in psychology from Columbia 
University. Previously, she was a research scientist at the German National 
Research Center for Information Technology (GMD), a visiting research 
scientist at the Boeing Company, and a research scientist at the Electronic 
Data Systems Center for Advanced Research. Mark™s research focuses 
on the use of technology to support collaboration. Her current projects 
include studying citizen use of social media for resilience in crises and 
multitasking in the workplace. A recipient of a Fulbright scholarship, 
Mark has published more than 100 peer-reviewed publications in the 
˜elds of human-computer interaction and computer-supported coopera
-tive work (CSCW). She is the program chair for the Association of Com
-puting Machinery™s CSCW™12 and is on the editorial board of the 
ACM 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, CSCW Journal, 
and Ecommerce 
Quarterly.
Dennis Mileti
 is Professor Emeritus at the University of Colorado, Boul
-der, where he chaired the Department of Sociology and directed the 
Natural Hazards CenterŠthe nation™s clearinghouse for social science 
research on hazards and disasters. Mileti is the author of more than 100 
publications. Most of these are on the societal aspects of hazards and 
disasters. His book Disasters by Design summarized knowledge in all 
˜elds of science and engineering and made recommendations for shifts in 
national policies and programs. It became the most cited source on natural 
hazards in the nation and was required reading in more university emer
-gency management courses than any other book in the nation for almost 
a decade. Mileti has more than four decades of research and applications 
experience regarding pre-event public preparedness and event-speci˜c 
disaster warning response; he was awarded the U.S. Army™s Civilian 
Medal of Honor for his work in overseeing investigations by the Army 
Corps of Engineers about the levee failures during Hurricane Katrina; and 
he designed the National Institute of Science and Technology™s congres
-sional study of evacuation of the World Trade Center towers on 9/11. 
Mileti has served on many advisory boards, including as chair of the 
Committee on Disasters in the National Research Council of the National 
Academies, chair of the Board of Visitors to FEMA™s Emergency Manage
-ment Institute, a board member for the Earthquake Engineering Research 
Institute, and an advisory council member for the Southern California 
Earthquake Center. He was appointed by the governor as a California 
seismic safety commissioner. And he has decades of experience as a con
-sultant to the private and public sectors in matters related to emergency 
management, including, for example, utilities with nuclear power plants, 
federal and state agencies, and local governments. Mileti is currently a 
researcher with a Department of Homeland Security™s national center of 
research excellence on terrorism at the University of Maryland.
Leysia Palen
 is an associate professor of computer science at the Univer
-sity of Colorado, Boulder, and a faculty fellow with the Institute for the 
Alliance of Technology, Learning and Society (ATLAS) and the Institute of 
Cognitive Science. She is the director of the Connectivity Lab and the NSF-
funded Project EPIC: Empowering the Public with Information in Crisis. 
She examines sociotechnical systems, including coordination in online 
settings as well as the impacts of social computing in off-line arenas and 
social structures. Her most recent work is in the area of crisis informatics, 
although she has worked in aviation, digital privacy behavior, personal 
information management, mobile technology diffusion, health care, and 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 69cultural heritage. Prior to her appointment at Colorado, she completed 
her PhD at the University of California, Irvine, in information and com
-puter science and her undergraduate education in cognitive science at the 
University of California, San Diego. In 2006, Palen was awarded an NSF 
Faculty Early Career Development grant for her ﬁData in Disasterﬂ pro
-posal to study information dissemination in disaster events. From 2005 to 
2006, Palen was a visiting professor at the University of Aarhus, Denmark.
Brad Panovich is the chief meteorologist at WCNC-TV in Charlotte, North 
Carolina. He completed his BS in meteorology at Ohio State University. 
After OSU, he joined an NBC station in Dayton, Ohio, doing the morning 
shift. Given an incredible opportunity, Panovich moved to Traverse City, 
Michigan, to start a new weather department at a Fox af˜liate. During 
the 2005 hurricane season, he reported on both Hurricane Katrina and 
Hurricane Rita, working with WWL-TV, a CBS af˜liate. Panovich shares 
his weather knowledge on twitter, @wxbrad, and at wxbrad.com.
Paul Resnick
 is a professor at the University of Michigan School of Infor
-mation. He previously worked as a researcher at AT&T Labs and AT&T 
Bell Labs, and as an assistant professor at the MIT Sloan School of Man
-agement. He received master™s and PhD degrees in electrical engineering 
and computer science from MIT and a bachelor™s degree in mathematics 
from the University of Michigan. Resnick™s research focuses on socio
-technical capital, productive social relationships that are enabled by the 
ongoing use of information and communication technology. His current 
projects include making recommender systems resistant to manipula
-tion through rater reputations, nudging people toward politically bal
-anced news consumption and health behavior change, and crowdsourc
-ing fact-correction on the Internet.
 Resnick was a pioneer in the ˜eld of 
recommender systems (sometimes called collaborative ˜ltering or social 
˜ltering). Recommender systems guide people to interesting materials 
based on recommendations from other people.  The GroupLens system 
he helped develop was awarded the 2010 ACM Software Systems Award. 
His articles have appeared in 
Scienti˜c American
, 
Wired
, 
Communications of 
the ACM
, 
The American Economic Review
, 
Management Science
, and many 
other venues.  He has a forthcoming MIT Press book (co-authored with 
Robert Kraut) titled
 Building Successful Online Communities: Evidence-based 
Social Design
.Dan Roth
 is a professor in the Department of Computer Science and the 
Beckman Institute at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and 
a University of Illinois Scholar. He is the director of a DHS Center for 
Multimodal Information Access & Synthesis (MIAS) and also has faculty 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
positions in statistics and in linguistics and at the School of Library and 
Information Sciences. Roth is a fellow of the ACM and of the AAAI for 
his contributions to the foundations of machine learning and inference 
and for developing learning-centered solutions for natural-language-
 processing problems. He has published broadly in machine learning, 
natural-language processing, knowledge representation and reasoning, 
and learning theory and has developed advanced machine-learning-based tools for natural-language applications that are being used widely 
by the research community. Roth has given keynote talks at major confer
-ences, including the AAAI™s Empirical Methods on Natural Language 
Processing and the European Conference on Machine Learning, and has 
presented several tutorials in universities and conferences, including at 
the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) and the European 
Association for Computational Linguistics. Roth was the program chair of 
AAAI™11, the Conference on Natural Language Learning™02, and ACL™03; 
is or has been on the editorial board of several journals in his research 
areas; and has won several teaching and paper awards.  Roth received his 
BA summa cum laude in mathematics from the Technion, Israel, and his 
PhD in computer science from Harvard University.
W. David Stephenson
 is principal of Stephenson Strategies (Med˜eld, 
Mass.) and an internationally recognized theorist and consultant on the 
use of mobile devices and social media in preventing and responding to 
natural disasters and terrorist attacks. Among other accomplishments, 
he has designed emergency communications strategies for the Wireless 
Foundation and National Public Radio. He created the ˜rst comprehen
-sive guide to terrorism and disasters for smart phones, ﬁThe Terrorism 
Survival Planner.ﬂ Stephenson is also an international thought leader 
in the ˜eld of open data and the Internet of Things, having written 
Data 
Dynamite: How Liberating Information Will Transform Our World. 
He is a 
graduate of Haverford College and earned an MA from the Newhouse 
School at Syracuse University.
Peter P. Swire
 is the C. William O™Neill Professor of Law at the Moritz 
College of Law of Ohio State University. He is a senior fellow with the 
Future of Privacy Forum and is also a fellow with the Center for Ameri
-can Progress and Center for Democracy and Technology. He has been a 
recognized leader in privacy, cybersecurity, and the law of cyberspace for 
well over a decade, as a scholar, government of˜cial, and participant in 
numerous policy, public interest, and business settings. From 2009 until 
August 2010 Swire was special assistant to the President for economic pol
-icy, serving in the National Economic Council under Lawrence Summers. 
From 1999 to early 2001 Swire served as the Clinton Administration™s 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 71chief counselor for privacy, in the U.S. Of˜ce of Management and Bud
-get, as the only person to date to have government-wide responsibility 
for privacy issues. Among his other activities when at OMB, Swire was 
the White House coordinator for the HIPAA Medical Privacy Rule, led 
a White House working group on how to update wiretap laws for the 
Internet age, and led a project on public records and privacy. Swire is lead 
author of 
Information Privacy: Of˜cial Reference for the Certi˜ed Information 
Privacy Professional. 
Many of his writings appear at www.peterswire.net. 
Murray Turoff
 is a Distinguished Professor Emeritus at the New Jersey 
Institute of Technology. He is a co-editor of the recent book 
Emergency 
Management Information Systems
 (M.E. Sharp, 2010). Besides his early and 
continuing work with the Delphi method, he spent most of his academic 
research career in the design and evaluation of computer-mediated com
-munication (CMC) systems. He designed the ˜rst collaborative emer-gency management information system used to manage the wage price 
freeze in 1971 and many shortages and natural disasters over the fol
-lowing decade. He was with the Of˜ce of Emergency Preparedness until 
1973. In 1973 he joined NJIT, where he developed the EIES (Electronic 
Information Exchange System), an operational CMC system for ˜eld trials 
of alternative real user communities which operated until the mid-1990s 
at NJIT. This effort was sponsored by NSF to support emerging ﬁinvisible 
colleges.ﬂ A great many communities of practice started on EIES as well as 
very early work on online learning, including the design and application 
of the ˜rst major virtual classroom system. He is co-author of the book 
The
 Network Nation
 with Roxanne Hiltz in 1978 (revised edition 1993, MIT 
Press), which predicted many features and applications of the current 
Internet. After 9/11 he turned his attention to his early work in emergency 
management and related work in planning and foresight and Delphi 
design. In 2004, he was a cofounder of the international organization 
ISCRAM (Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management). 
Bryan Ware
 is chief company strategist, lead designer, and primary devel
-oper of Digital Sandbox, Inc.™s patented terrorist risk algorithms and is 
also responsible for designing the breakthrough DS7 product line and its 
underlying predictive analytics platform. He has been at the forefront 
of national innovation in risk analytics for more than 15 years, leading 
threat mitigation technologies for terrorist attacks and helping to identify 
and overcome military vulnerabilities, protect against bio
 
terrorism, boost 
infrastructure protection, contend with drug traf˜cking, and address 
weapons of mass destruction. A frequent speaker, he is consulted regu
-larly by government and industry executives on security and analytical 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
risk management issues. Ware holds a bachelor of science in applied 
optics from the Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology.
Duncan Watts
 is a principal researcher at Microsoft Research and a found
-ing mem
 
ber of the MSR-NYC lab. From 2000 to 2007, he was a professor 
of sociology at Colum
 
bia University, and then, prior to joining Microsoft, 
a principal research scientist at Yahoo! Research, where he directed the 
Human Social Dynamics group. He is a former external professor of the 
Santa Fe Institute and is currently a visiting fellow at Colum
 
bia University 
and at Nuf˜eld College, Oxford. His research on social networks and col
-lective dynamics has appeared in a wide range of journals, from 
Nature, 
Science
, and 
Physical Review Letters 
to the 
American Journal of Sociology 
and 
Harvard Business Review
. He is also the author of three books: 
Small 
Worlds: The Dynamics of Networks Between Order and Randomness 
(Princeton, 
1999), 
Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age 
(Norton, 2003), and, most 
recently, 
Everything Is Obvious (Once You Know the Answer)
 (Crown Busi
-ness, 2011). He holds a BSc in physics from the Australian Defence Force 
Academy, from which he also received his of˜cer™s commission in the 
Royal Australian Navy, and a PhD in theoretical and applied mechanics 
from Cornell University.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73
C Biosketches of Committee 
and Staff Members
Robert E. Kraut 
(Chair
) is the Herbert A. Simon Professor of Human-
Computer Interaction at Carnegie Mellon University. He has broad inter
-ests in the design and social impact of computing and has conducted 
empirical research on online communities, the social impact of the Inter
-net, the design of information technology for small-group intellectual 
work, the communication needs of collaborating scientists, the impact 
of computer networks on organizations, of˜ce automation and employ
-ment quality, and technology and home-based employment. His research 
in speci˜c areas examines in detail the challenges groups currently face 
in performing social tasks, explores designing new technology to meet 
some of these challenges, and evaluates the usefulness of the new tech
-nology. This cycle of needs assessment, technological design, and evalu
-ation involves both scholarly and applied products. His work on video 
systems for informal communication, technology for allocating human 
attention, and online communities follows this model. His recent research 
has focused on the analysis and design of online communities, such as 
Usenet groups, guilds in multi-player games, and the editors who write 
Wikipedia. With collaborators, he is writing 
Designing from Theory: Using 
the Social Sciences as the Basis for Building Online Communities. 
He also con
-ducts research on the Internet™s role in the interrelationships among ˜rms 
and on the dynamics of the family. These networks increase the ef˜ciency 
with which ˜rms can search for or exchange information with each other, 
but they also shift the type of information that can be easily exchanged, 
from personal to quantitative. The research examines how these shifts in 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
the cost and quality of communication may in˚uence inter-˜rm loyalties 
and market relationships. At the level of the family, the research examines 
how easy access to remote and personalized information sources and com
-munication partners changes the family™s dependence on local resources, 
among other topics. He wrote a biographical essay, ﬁRe-engineering 
Social Encounters,ﬂ in 2003 for the American Psychological Association. 
In 1980, his research on the evolution of the human face won a Proxmire 
Golden Fleece award. His biographical essay, ﬁWhy Bowlers Smile,ﬂ and 
Ed Diener™s essay, ﬁWhy Robert Kraut Smiles,ﬂ describe the legacy of that 
award. Kraut received his BA from Lehigh University in 1968 and his PhD 
from Yale University in 1973.
Alessandro Acquisti 
is an associate professor of information technol
-ogy and public policy at the Heinz College, Carnegie Mellon Univer
-sity. He is the co-director of the CMU Center for Behavioral Decision 
Research (CBDR), a member of the Carnegie Mellon Cylab, and a fellow 
of the Ponemon Institute. His work investigates the economic and social 
impact of information technologies, and in particular the economics and 
behavioral economics of privacy and information security, as well as 
privacy in online social networks. His research has been disseminated 
through journals (including the 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci
-ences
, 
Marketing Science
, 
Journal of Consumer Research
, 
Marketing Letters
, Information Systems Research
, 
IEEE Security & Privacy
, 
Journal of Compara
-tive Economics
, 
Rivista di Politica Economica
, and so forth), edited books 
(Digital Privacy: Theory, Technologies, and Practices
 [Auerbach, 2007]), book 
chapters, international conferences, and international keynote addresses. 
His ˜ndings have been featured in media outlets such as NPR, NBC, 
MSNBC.com, the 
Washington Post
, the 
New York Times
 and the 
New York 
Times Magazine
, the Wall Street Journal,
 New Scientist, CNN, Fox News, and 
Bloomberg TV. Acquisti has received national and international awards, 
including the PET Award for Outstanding Research in Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies, the IBM Best Academic Privacy Faculty Award, the Heinz 
College Teaching Excellence Award, and various best paper awards. Two 
of his manuscripts were selected by the Future of Privacy Forum in their 
best Privacy Papers for Policy Makers competition. He is and has been a 
member of the program committees of various international conferences 
and workshops, including ACM EC, PET, WEIS, ETRICS, WPES, LOCA, 
QoP, and the Ubicomp Privacy Workshop at Ubicomp. In 2007 he co-
chaired the DIMACS Workshop on Information Security Economics and 
the WEIS Workshop on the Economics of Information Security. In 2008, he 
co-chaired the ˜rst Workshop on Security and Human Behavior with Ross 
Anderson, Bruce Schneier, and George Loewenstein. His research has been 
funded by the National Science Foundation, the Humboldt Foundation, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 75the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and Microsoft Cor
-poration, as well as the CMU CyLab and the CMU Berkman Fund. Prior 
to joining CMU, Acquisti was a researcher at Xerox PARC in Palo Alto, 
California, with Bernardo Huberman and the Internet Ecologies Group 
(as an intern), and for 2 years at RIACS, NASA Ames Research Center, 
in Mountain View, California, with Maarten Sierhuis and Bill Clancey (as 
a visiting student). At RIACS, he worked on agent-based simulations of 
human-robot interaction aboard the International Space Station. While 
studying at Berkeley, he co-founded with other fellow students a privacy 
technology company, PGuardian Technologies. In a previous life, Acquisti 
worked as a classical music producer and label manager (PPMusic.com) 
and as a freelance arranger, lyrics writer, and soundtrack composer for 
theatre, television, and indie cinema productions (including works for 
BMG Ariola/Universal and RAI 3 National Television), and he raced a 
Yamaha TZ 125 in the USGPRU national championship. Acquisti has lived 
and studied in Rome (Laurea, economics, University of Rome), Dublin 
(M.Litt., economics, Trinity College), London (M.Sc., econometrics and 
mathematical economics, LSE), and in the San Francisco Bay area, where 
he worked with John Chuang, Doug Tygar, Florian Zettelmeyer, and Hal 
Varian and received a master™s and a PhD in information management 
and systems from the University of California, Berkeley.
Jon M. Kleinberg
 is a professor in the Department of Computer Science 
at Cornell University. His research interests center on algorithmic issues 
at the interface of networks and information, with an emphasis on the 
social and information networks that underpin the Web and other online 
media. He is the recipient of an NSF Career Award, an ONR Young Inves
-tigator Award, research fellowships from the MacArthur, Packard, and 
Sloan foundations, teaching awards from the Cornell Engineering College 
and Computer Science Department, the Rolf Nevanlinna Prize from the 
International Mathematical Union, and the National Academy of Sciences 
Award for Initiatives in Research. Kleinberg received a BS in computer sci
-ence from Cornell University in 1993 and a PhD, also in computer science, 
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1996.
Leslie Luke
 is the group program manager for the County of San Diego™s 
Of˜ce of Emergency Services, where he oversees the Planning Branch, 
Info/Intel Branch, Recovery Branch, and Support Services. Luke is the 
recovery coordinator for the County of San Diego and has been the recov
-ery operational area lead for ˜ve federally declared disasters and numer
-ous state-declared disasters. He coordinates the Continuity of Community 
Programs and is a liaison with schools, including child care resource 
centers; the business sector (leads the ReadySanDiego Business Alliance); 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
and faith-based initiatives. He oversees the of˜ce™s public awareness/
public education initiatives, special projects, and the student worker/
internship/volunteer program. Luke has worked for the County of San 
Diego for 22 yearsŠin the Of˜ce of Emergency Services since 2004; before 
that in the Public Safety Group, a division of the County™s Chief Admin
-istrative Of˜ce; and earlier as an investigator for the County Medical 
Examiner™s Of˜ce.
Richard G. Muth
, appointed executive director of the Maryland Emer
-gency Management Agency by Governor Martin O™Malley on June 1, 
2008, has devoted his entire professional career to safeguarding the lives 
of Maryland citizens by improving public safety and emergency manage
-ment practices on the federal, state, and local levels. Muth is a 33-year 
career and volunteer veteran of the Baltimore County Fire Department. 
He previously chaired the Governor™s Emergency Management Advisory 
Council, served as a two-term president of the Maryland Emergency 
Management Association, and was a committee member and subsequent 
chairman of the State Emergency Response Commission. In 1993, Muth 
was appointed as director of the Of˜ce of Emergency Preparedness in 
Baltimore County. In 1998, he served as the on-scene coordinator of 
Maryland resources while battling massive wild˜res in Florida and was 
awarded a Governor™s Citation for his efforts. That same year, he was hon
-ored by the American Red Cross for establishing new protocols between 
Baltimore County and the Red Cross. In 1999, he was chosen to chair 
the Baltimore Metro Council Y2K Contingency Planning Group. In 2003, 
Muth was appointed by Governor Robert Ehrlich to serve as Baltimore 
County™s director of homeland security and emergency management 
and oversaw the county™s Hazardous Materials Program, advanced tac
-tical rescue, ˜re department communications, and the Chemical Stock
-pile Program. He has chaired the U.S. Defense Department™s Weapons 
of Mass Destruction Program™s Domestic Preparedness Chemical team 
and has been recognized for his leadership roles in the aftermath of 
Hurricane Isabel and as Maryland™s emergency resource coordinator fol
-lowing Hurricane Katrina. As MEMA™s executive director, Muth oversees 
a staff of 75 people who work closely with state agencies and Maryland™s 
local jurisdictions, coordinating and planning Maryland™s response to any 
disaster. When a disaster occurs, whether it is man-made or natural, Muth 
has the primary responsibility for managing the emergency event and 
closely advising the governor on preparedness and response strategies. 
Muth holds a certi˜cate in religious studies from St. Mary™s Seminary and 
University, Ecumenical Institute of Theology, in Baltimore.
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 77Leysia Palen
 is an associate professor of computer science at the Univer
-sity of Colorado, Boulder, and a faculty fellow with the Institute for the 
Alliance of Technology, Learning and Society (ATLAS) and the Institute of 
Cognitive Science. She is the director of the Connectivity Lab and the NSF-
funded Project EPIC: Empowering the Public with Information in Crisis. 
She examines sociotechnical systems, including coordination in online 
settings as well as the impacts of social computing in off-line arenas and 
social structures. Her most recent work is in the area of crisis informatics, 
although she has worked in aviation, digital privacy behavior, personal 
information management, mobile technology diffusion, health care, and 
cultural heritage. Prior to her appointment at Colorado, she completed 
her PhD at the University of California, Irvine, in information and com
-puter science and her undergraduate education in cognitive science at the 
University of California, San Diego. In 2006, Palen was awarded an NSF 
Faculty Early Career Development grant for her ﬁData in Disasterﬂ pro
-posal to study information dissemination in disaster events. From 2005 to 
2006, Palen was a visiting professor at the University of Aarhus, Denmark.
Timothy L. Sellnow 
is a professor of communication at the University 
of Kentucky, where he teaches courses in risk and crisis communica
-tion. Sellnow™s research focuses on bioterrorism, pre-crisis planning, and 
communication strategies for crisis management and mitigation. He has 
conducted funded research for the Department of Homeland Security, 
the United States Department of Agriculture, and the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention. He has published numerous refereed journal 
articles on risk and crisis communication and has co-authored four books 
on risk and crisis communication. His most recent book is 
Risk Communi
-cation: A Message-Centered Approach.
 He is also past editor of the National 
Communication Association™s 
Journal of Applied Communication Research.
 Sellnow received his PhD from Wayne State University in 1987.
Michele Wood 
is an assistant professor in the Health Science Department 
at the California State University, Fullerton, where she teaches courses in 
statistics and program design and evaluation. She has 20 years of experi
-ence designing, implementing, and evaluating interventions. Through 
her af˜liation with the Southern California Injury Prevention Center in 
the UCLA School of Public Health, she managed a national household 
preparedness survey conducted as part of the National Center for the 
Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START) Program through 
the University of Maryland™s Center of Excellence, as well as a California 
household telephone survey of earthquake preparedness. Wood
 received 
her PhD in public health from the Department of Community Health 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge ...Copyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78 PUBLIC RESPONSE TO ALERTS AND WARNINGS USING SOCIAL MEDIA
Sciences at the University of California, Los Angeles; she also holds a 
master™s degree in community psychology.
Staff
Jon Eisenberg
 is the director of the Computer Science and Telecommu
-nications Board of the National Research Council. He has also been the 
study director for a diverse body of work, including a series of studies 
exploring Internet and broadband policy and networking and communi
-cations technologies.  In 1995-1997 he was an American Association for 
the Advancement of Science (AAAS) Science, Engineering, and Diplo
-macy Fellow at the U.S. Agency for International Development, where he 
worked on technology transfer and information and telecommunications 
policy issues.  He received his PhD in physics from the University of 
Washington in 1996 and a BS in physics with honors from the University 
of Massachusetts at Amherst in 1988.
Virginia Bacon Talati
 is an associate program of˜cer for the Computer 
Science and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. 
She formerly served as a program associate with the Frontiers of Engi
-neering program at the National Academy of Engineering.
  Prior to her 
work at the National Academies, she served as a senior project assistant 
in education technology at the National School Boards Association. She 
has a BS in science, technology, and culture from the Georgia Institute of 
Technology and an MPP from George Mason University, with a focus in 
science and technology policy.
Eric Whitaker is a senior program assistant at the Computer Science 
and Telecommunications Board of the National Research Council. Prior 
to joining CSTB, he was a realtor with Long and Foster Real Estate, Inc., 
in the Washington, D.C., metropolitan area. Before that, he spent several 
years with the Public Broadcasting Service in Alexandria, Virginia, as an 
associate in the Corporate Support Department. He has a BA in commu
-nication and theater arts from Hampton University.
