DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/166Information Technologies and Social Transformation184 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-03529-3 | DOI 10.17226/166National Academy of Engineering; Bruce R. Guile, editorInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Series on Technology and Social Priorities
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF ENGINEERING
InformationTechnologies and Social
TransformationBruce R. Guile Editor
NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS
Washington, D.C. 1985
iInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.National Academy Press
 2101 Constitution Avenue, NW
 Washington, DC
 20418
The National Academy of Engineering is a private organization established in 1964. It shares
in the responsibility given the National Academy of Sciences under a congressional charter granted

in 1863 to advise the federal government on questions of science and technology. This collaboration

is implemented through the National Research Council. The National Academy of Engineering rec-

ognizes distinguished engineers, sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs,

and encourages education and research.
Funds for the National Academy of Engineering's Symposium Series on Technology and
Social Priorities were provided by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation of

New York, and the Academy Industry Program. The views expressed in this volume are those of the

authors and are not presented as the views of the Mellon Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation, the

Academy Industry Program, or the National Academy of Engineering.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Main entry under title:

Information technologies and social transformation.
(Series on technology and social priorities)
Papers presented at a symposium held in conjunction with the 1984 annual meeting of the
National Academy of Engineering.
1. Electronic data processingŠSocial aspectsŠCongresses. I. National Academy of Engineer-
ing. II. Series.

QA76.9.C66I52 1985 303.4'834 85-4830

Copyright © 1985 by the National Academy of Sciences
No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic process, or
in the form of a phonographic recording, nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmitted, or

otherwise copied for public or private use, without written permission from the publisher, except for

the purposes of official use by the U.S. government.
ISBN 0-309-03529-5

Printed in the United States of America
iiInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SYMPOSIUM ADVISORY COMMITTEEChairmanJOSEPH V. CHARYK, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 
Communications Satellite Corporation
MembersSOLOMON J. BUCHSBAUM, Executive Vice-President, Customer Systems,
AT&T Bell Laboratories
HARLAN CLEVELAND, Dean, Hubert H. Humphrey Institute of Public
Affairs, University of Minnesota
N. BRUCE HANNAY, Vice-President, Research and Patents, Bell Laboratories
(retired)JAMES BRIAN QUINN, William and Josephine Buchanan Professor of
Management, Amos Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College
StaffBRUCE R. GUILE, 
National Academy of Engineering Fellow
PENELOPE GIBBS, 
Symposium Series Secretary
iiiInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ivInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceInformation technologies are perhaps the most aggressive technologies of
the current age, generating progress, change, and turbulence in many branches
of industry and in the lives of organizations and individuals. Microelectronic
systems are shrinking in size and cost, growing in performance, expanding their

range to the world level, and crossing cultural boundaries. As societies attain

higher orders of information handling, existing social institutions are faced with

the dual challenge of directing and accommodating social change driven by

technology. With this in mind the National Academy of Engineering (NAE)

held the second of its Symposia on Technology and Social Priorities, in

conjunction with its 1984 Annual Meeting, titled Information Technologies and

Social Transformation.The symposium, held on October 4, 1984, brought scholars of technology
and society together with technologists, social scientists, and representatives

from the industrial, legal, and public sectors to discuss the interaction of
information technology with social institutions. The topics addressed included a
review of recent developments and likely futures in information technology, a

comparison of information technology to historical developments in other

technologies, and discussion of the interaction of information technology with

businesses, homes, property rights in information, and various hierarchies of

social organization. The six papers presented at the symposium, with comments

by discussants asked to prepare remarks on the papers, make up this volume. It

is, I think, an exceptionally
PREFACEvInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.interesting collection of insights about the role of technology in society in
general and the likely impacts of information technology in particular.
The Council of the National Academy of Engineering voted to dedicate the
symposium to the memory of George M. Low, who died on July 17, 1984. In

his 27 years with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),

Mr. Low made major contributions to the Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo

programs as an engineer and an administrator. He became deputy administrator

of NASA in 1969 and served in that position until he became president of

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1976. Mr. Low was elected to the National
Academy of Engineering in 1970 and was the recipient of the Academy's
Founders Award in 1978. At his death Mr. Low was a member of the Council

of the NAE and chairman of the joint National Academy of Engineering-

National Academy of Sciences-Institute of Medicine Committee on Science,

Engineering, and Public Policy.Bruce Guile, a fellow at the National Academy of Engineering, was, in
large part, responsible for the symposium. Working with the advisory

committee, he helped formulate the content of the symposium, worked with the

speakers to ensure cohesion of the presentations, and served as an editor to

produce this volume.
The editor acknowledges with gratitude the counsel and help of several
Academy staff members. Jesse Ausubel, special assistant to the president of the

National Academy of Engineering, offered helpful advice and answered

questions throughout the process of holding the symposium and editing the

papers. Penelope Gibbs, in addition to typing correspondence and the

manuscript, handled the lists and labels that make a symposium happen.

Dorothy Sawicki of the National Academy Press offered sound editorial advice

and prepared the manuscript for publication.
Robert M. White

President
National Academy of Engineering
PREFACEviInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  Introduction
Joseph v. Charyk
 1  The Evolution of Information Technologies
John S. Mayo
 7  Comments
by Ernest S. Kuh
 33  The Information Age: Evolution or Revolution?
Melvin Kranzberg
 35  Comments
by Gunnar Hambraeus
 53  The Twilight of Hierarchy: Speculations on the Global Information
Society
Harlan Cleveland
 55  Comments
by Alexander H. Flax
 79  Property Rights in Information
Anne Wells Branscomb 81  Comments
by Jordan J. Baruch
 121  Information Technologies in the Home
Walter S. Baer
 123  Comments
by Roland W. Schmitt
 151CONTENTSviiInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Computers and Business
Theodore J. Gordon
 154  Comments
by Ruth M. Davis
 168  About the Authors 
171CONTENTSviiiInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ixInformationTechnologies and Social
TransformationInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xInformation Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IntroductionJoseph V. Charyk
The papers in this volume reflect an attempt to balance two competing
views on the way that information technologies and social institutions interact.

In particular, in designing the symposium upon which this volume is based we

tried to strike a balance between the optimism often generated by technological

potentials and the pessimism that sometimes accompanies a cursory

examination of how technology may alter the quality of life. If there is a single

theme to this volume it is a considered evaluation of the mutual adaptation

between information technology and social institutions. How do businesses,

families, and the legal system accommodate new technologies and what will

change as a result of their accommodation? To what extent are developments in

information technologies driven by the desire to do things differently in homes

or businesses? Will the flow of information across national bordersŠallowed

by advancing information technologiesŠchange the character of international

relations between industrialized nations?
In the abstract, questions concerning the rate and direction of mutual
adaptation between technology and society are of importance to the scholars of

technological evolution. On a less abstract level the same questions may be of

interest to individuals in two ways. First, in their capacity as representatives of

institutions individuals seek to understand the direction and character of change

in their institutions and in the world in which the institutions function. Second,

in their capacity as participants in society individuals are inherently interested

in the future they are likely to experience. It is our hope that the theme of
INTRODUCTION
1Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.accommodation between technology and social institutionsŠreflected both
within individual papers and between competing arguments in different papers

Šwill be of interest to those reading in either capacity.
In the first paper John Mayo reviews the recent history and probable
futures of several information technologies including integrated circuits,

computing technology, software, and photonics. Particularly interesting is the

overview of likely futures he provides by working through some relatively

simple calculations of the physical limits on existing technologies. Additionally,

Mayo discusses the forces that drive change (both social considerations and the
push of technological possibilities) and the gates (economic considerations and
social predispositions, for example) that control the rate of change. These

elementsŠthe driving forces and the gatesŠset the stage for discussing the

changing character and use of existing technologies and allow the elaboration of

possible scenarios for future development of emerging technologies.
In the second paper Melvin Kranzberg uses historical analysis to
understand the social and technological changes that may be brought about by

changing information technologies. Kranzberg compares the classical Industrial

Revolution to the potential information revolution in our own time. Kranzberg's

analysis leads him to conclude that we are indeed facing a social revolution and

that the revolution is driven not only by changing information technologies but

by interaction between social institutions and a wide range of technological
innovations. Information technologies will evolve in, and contribute to, a social
revolution brought on by rapid changes in energy, materials, and industrial

management technology and made up of changing social norms, economic

conditions, and attitudes toward science and technology.
Additionally, Kranzberg offers an interesting interpretation of cultural lag,
the slowness with which social institutions respond to changing technology. If

nothing else, cultural lag is evidence that culture imposes its willŠalbeit

unconsciously and in a somewhat disorganized wayŠon the development and

use of new technologies. The important insight that accompanies this

observation is that technology is a ''quintessential human activity ... it bears the

contradictionsŠthe 'goods' and 'bads'Što be found in all complex human

activities.''
Mayo and Kranzberg, taken together, lay the foundation for the volume.
Mayo focused specifically on changes in the technology of information

handling. His unit of analysis is a particular technology, and he is persuasive

about the direction of development of specific information technologies. Mayo

is a technological insider taking a very
INTRODUCTION
2Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.informed look out from the specifics of information technologies; the power of
his arguments comes from comparing the development of existing information

technologies to the likely development of emerging technologies, and from

comparing the potentials of competing emerging technologies. Kranzberg, in

contrast, chose as his analytical unit not the technology but rather the process of

change in the organization of social institutions. As a result, his paper places
changes in information technology in a broader perspective in terms of other
technologies and social institutions. Kranzberg stands somewhat outside the

specifics of information technology and looks broadly both at the place any

particular technology can hold in a social transformation and at the role that

information technology may hold in current social transformations.
Mayo and Kranzberg together identify the tremendous potentials of
information technologies and place those potentials in perspective both

historically and relative to other current technological changes. Each of the

other four authors takes a particular slice of the issue of interest by discussing

the interactions between information technologies and different specific social

institutions.The papers by Harlan Cleveland and Anne Branscomb are almost exactly
paired to explicate a debate over the adaptability of important social institutions.

Cleveland, in his paper on the twilight of hierarchies, takes a broad look at five

hierarchies that have served as means of social organization, and considers how

advancing information technologies may erode the forces that have historically

held those hierarchies together. He examines hierarchies of power based on

control, of influence based on secrecy, of class based on ownership, of privilege
based on early access, and of politics based on geography. He sees dramatic
potential for change in a wide range of human endeavor as a result of emerging

information technologies.
Anne Branscomb focuses on a specific social institutionŠthe U.S. legal
systemŠand examines how that institution will adapt to changing information

technologies, particularly the information-based property rights accorded to

individuals. Branscomb's focus is explicitly on the manner in which the legal

system adapts. She finds, in her analysis of recent case law and legislation

relating to property rights in information, evidence that the system is changing
in a way that is consistent with the existing structure. Branscomb seems
convinced that the current legal system will adapt effectively to changing

information technologies.
Cleveland and Branscomb appear to disagree, but, on close examination,
one finds that the disagreement is not over process but over degree. Both

recognize that social institutions will adapt; it is in the
INTRODUCTION
3Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.nature of institutions to change in response to changing conditions, and some
institutions, like the legal system, are specifically designed to be adaptive. The

disagreement comes in hypothesizing about whether the rules that have guided

and facilitated change in the past will be adequate to accommodate this

particular dramatic technological change. The question lies in whether the

changed form of an institution will be recognizable. Will it function in the same
manner and be capable of serving the same goals? Branscomb asserts,
implicitly, that the legal system is resilient and effective. Cleveland argues that

the adaptation required by this new technology will fundamentally alter the

character of many of our institutionsŠincluding how the U.S. legal system

vests individuals with information-based property rights. Their disagreement

over degree of adaptation will be settled, not surprisingly, only by time and

experience.Walter Baer and Theodore Gordon, like Anne Branscomb, work close to
the interaction between information technologies and a particular social system.

Baer, in his paper on information technologies in the home, divides the

activities in the home into four major typesŠworking at home, doing chores at

home, learning at home, and relaxing at homeŠand considers the impact of
more powerful and pervasive information technology on each type of activity.
In each of the four cases Baer is cautious about the effects of technological

advance. Particularly persuasive is his hypothesis that both time budgets and

money budgets play an important role in determining the use of information

technologies in the home. The time savingsŠrather than the money savingsŠ

realized by providing home buying services or financial services are perhaps the

most important force pulling these services into the home. Additionally, new

services brought to the home through emerging information technologies,

especially entertainment services, will compete with television, radio,

neighborhood softball games, and casual family conversation for a relatively

scarce minute of available leisure time.
Gordon, in his paper on information technologies in business, selects four
examples of the way that information technologies may affect business and

develops each example by explaining a likely path for development and then

hypothesizing about the consequences. Particularly interesting are Gordon's
discussions of the impact of programmable automation on employment and of
the implications of computer simulation for training. Though Gordon sees

substantial change in business operations due to information technologies, he

expresses some doubts that the character of business will change. In the end

business still "takes raw materials, adds value, and sells products."
INTRODUCTION
4Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This is fundamentally the same cautious note that Baer strikes by
consistently reminding the reader that information technologies are more likely

to follow the desires and predispositions of individuals than to lead them.
Though there are similarities between the likely experiences of businesses
and homes in adapting to information technologies, there are also important

differences. The most important difference in likely experience derives from the

fact that businesses are organized primarily for profit while homes exist to

satisfy a wide range of individual human needs. Businesses, since they are

organized to serve less diverse goals, may be more adaptive to opportunities
provided by technology than are individuals or family units. The potentials of
information technologies would seem to lie more, for example, in reducing the

cost of business operations than in improving the quality of companionship or

child rearing in the home.
Like any treatment of a broad topic, this volume does 
not address a number
of issues of great interest. In particular:
  How will emerging information technologies affect educational
institutions and federal, state, and local governments?
  How will international political activities be influenced through the
potential availability of secure voice and teleconferencing facilities and

data basesŠthe advent of sophisticated "hot lines"?
  Direct mail, made possible by the potentials of inexpensive computing,
has already revolutionized constituency contact and fund raising in

industry associations, professional societies, charitable organizations,

and political coalitions. How will continuing development of

information technologies affect the activities of these organizations in

the 1990s?  How will the merger of previously regulated telecommunications
entities and competitive unregulated information-processing firms

evolve? What will determine who will own, operate, and control high-

cost facilities serving multiple needs where duplication of facilities is

economically or operationally unrealistic?
  How will critical decisions be made as to allocations and use of
naturally limited facilities (frequencies and satellite orbital locations)?
  Will restrictions be applied to the kinds of services that various entities
are permitted to provide and, if so, is it possible to enforce them in the

totally digital environment that is rapidly emerging?
  What forces will guide the emergence of communications standards
and where will that guidance lead? What role will the standards that

emerge play in determining the direction for the research and

development that will bring us the next generation of information

technologies? What role will state utility commissions and local port

authorities play in determining what service will be available?
  As information flow across international boundaries explodes and
politicalINTRODUCTION
5Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.control becomes more and more impotent in the new information
technology world, what international organizations or mechanisms will

emerge or should be created to ensure international order and

cooperation?  Are there public interest or universal service considerations that should
be elements of U.S. information policy, and how will they be defined

and implemented?The list goes on. Nonetheless, the six papers in this volume, with the
comments offered by the discussant for each paper, provide an introductionŠ

and a few steps beyondŠto the manner in which information technologies are

forcing, and being shaped by, transformations in a range of social institutions.

Even more importantly, the papers in this volume may offer examples of a

manner of thinking about technology and social change that readers can use to
understand the technology-driven social transformation where they work and
live. That, anyway, is our hope.
This introduction would be incomplete without acknowledging the
invaluable role played by Bruce Guile in planning, organizing, and bringing

together the contributions represented in this volume. His energy and initiative

were crucial to the success of this program.
INTRODUCTION
6Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Evolution of Information Technologies
John S. Mayo
THE INTERACTION OF TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY
Humans were given capable and inquisitive minds, so they endlessly seek
better ways of doing things. This drive, coupled with an innate curiosity and a
strong drive to unlock the secrets of nature, has created a steady stream of

technical innovations over the ages.
These innovative efforts have focused on the means for survival, comfort,
and accumulation of wealthŠwith the hierarchy of needs extending from

physical basics of existence to higher-level wants associated with self-

actualization. A principal thrust of innovation today continues toward

technological advances that enhance the productivity of labor and free humans

of tasks done more economically by machines. An insatiable appetite for

convenience, comfort, and entertainment products and services, as well as for

means to overcome natural barriers like geography and travel time, creates a

constant pull on technology. The pull is especially strong in areas relating to the

quality of life, and there have been many technical innovations to meet that

need. But the opportunities are far from exhausted.
Among society's newest demands on technology is for the means to handle
the vast amount of information generated by modem life. This information
explosion stems from sophisticated business practices, new residential services,

substantially increased record keeping through extensive data bases, and the

globalization of our advanced society.
The information technologies have evolved over many years to assist a
growing portion of the work force devoted to the generation,
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES7
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.processing, transmission, storage, retrieval, and general use of information.

Bureaucracies generated during the major wars and the rapid growth of social

services in recent decades have helped increase the number of information

workers in the U.S. work force, producing a permanent change in our way of

life. Stimulated by these and other spurts of rapid growth, the percentage of

information workers in the U.S. work force has grown from about 10 percent in

1900 to about 30 percent in 1940 to about 50 percent in 1970. Since 1970 the

fraction has held at roughly 50 percent, probably as a result of the new

electronic information technologies that augment human efforts. The computer,

along with telecommunications, is making today's information work force more

efficient, much as the engine raised productivity during the industrial

revolution. In both cases, society's thirst for technology to reduce labor was met

in striking ways by a wide range of innovations of varying impacts.
This thirst for technology creates a steady pull on innovation. In addition,
the technologies themselves provide a push. From the families of all

technologically feasible innovations of all time has come an almost endless

reservoir of potential technology. However, between society's pull and the push

of technology are two powerful gates, as shown in 
Figure 1. The technology
available to society at any particular time is only that which can flow past the

technology gate, which is
Figure 1

The flow of innovation into society.

Source: AT & T Bell Laboratories.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES8
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.operated by a series of strong forces. Among them are R&D prowess,
characteristics of the embedded technology base, natural sequencing

constraints, and perceived standards limitations:
  The force of 
R&D prowess
 is the sum of all the contributions of
individual laboratories. The prowess of an R&D laboratory is limited

by the skills of its scientists and engineers and by the capabilities of its

support environment, including both financial and physical resources.

Laboratory prowess also clearly depends on the wisdom and judgment

of the R&D management team.
The 
embedded base of technology
, such as existing systems or
production facilities that represent a large investment, impacts the

characteristics of the R&D laboratories and the factories that make

their products. It often leads the R&D laboratories to seek innovations

that have great synergy with the embedded base, which can be either a

curse or a blessing. On the one hand, this force can limit the

introduction of new technology as well as discourage breakthroughs in
totally new directions. On the other hand, it brings focus and resources.
With good systems engineering, older technologies can be phased out,

current ones upgraded, and entirely new ones introduced, all in ways

that are synergistic with the embedded base.
Natural sequencing
 simply means that the invention of the integrated
circuit, for example, would have been unlikely before the invention

and development of the transistor.
  The imposition of 
standards prior to innovation can narrow the
technology gate by forcing R&D laboratories to focus on innovations

that meet preconceived standards, but which may in the long run not be

the best innovations at all.
Innovations that pass the technology gate must also pass the social gate.
The forces that operate the social gate include economics, the common good,

public receptivity, and regulation and legislation:The 
economic force
 depends not only on the marketplace, but also on
the national economic structure. Currently, we see a significant

difference in the way economic forces affect innovation in the United

States as compared to Japan.
  Closely related to economics, but not always in concert with it, is the
force that makes technology serve the 
common good
. Society will
eventually, for the most part, either ignore or legislate against

technology that does not serve the common good.
  The issue of 
public receptivity
 is related to that of the common good. In
the United States, the public defeated the supersonic transport and

appears to have nuclear power on its deathbed; however, it still

remains to be seen whether such innovations do not indeed serve the

common good.
Regulation and legislation
 have been and remain powerful forces at the
social gateŠforces very active in throttling technology on behalf of

society.THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES9
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Much social good has come from such actions, but not without frequent
adverse impact in the long run.
The forces operating at the social gate are extremely powerful in selecting
the innovations that actually succeed. They serve as a "tollgate" in the gap

between the push of technology and the pull of society. The gating forces will

be further examined, following the discussion of the information technologies

pushing at the gate.
Technologies that survive both gates have primarily three types of impacts
in the society they enter, depending heavily upon their character. First, of

greatest impact are the "killer" technologies such as the engine, which replaced

the horse, and the transistor, which replaced the vacuum tube. Their impact, of

course, extends far beyond these major replacements, to opening whole new

fields of opportunity. Included among these are opportunities to satisfy

previously unknown or unrecognized societal needs and wants, often of an

increasingly sophisticated nature.
Second in impact are the "new domain" technologies. Although they do
not replace earlier technologies, they do open up entirely new areas of

opportunity. An example of the new domain technologies is automatic speech

recognition and synthesis, a rapidly developing technology that will eventually

allow inanimate objects such as cars and appliances to speak and listen much as

humans do.
Third, there are the "niche" technologies, which play a very important role
in meeting society's needs. When they first appear, however, they are often

mistaken for killer technologies. For example, when broadcast television

became feasible, many expected it to kill newspapers, radio, and movies.

Instead, it found its own niche and satisfied a thirst in society not previously met

Šor perhaps even recognized.INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES AND THEIR LIMITS
The growth in information jobs cited above is but one major indicator of
the rapid transition of our society to an information base. Another major

indicator is the rapid growth in information technologies. George Stibitz's

invention of the first digital computer, the achievement of universal telephone

service, and the invention of solid-state electronics paved the way to the

Information Age. The technology of the Information Age is digital. The

information is represented as digits, which are generated, processed,

transported, stored, recovered, and displayed in order to do useful things for

humans. The key technologies for
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES10
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.manipulating digits are integrated circuits, computing technology, software, and
photonics, as discussed below.
Integrated Circuits
The most powerful force of technology today is the expanding capabilities
of silicon integrated circuits. A tiny chip of silicon can contain an electronic

circuit consisting of hundreds of thousands of transistors and all the necessary

interconnecting conductorsŠand its cost is only a few dollars. The circuitry on

that chip is equivalent to about 10 years of work by a person soldering discrete

components onto printed wiring boards. It is this tremendous improvement in

the economics of circuit assembly, coupled with similar improvements in the
reliability of individual circuit functions, that accounts for the power of this
technology.A common measure of progress in integrated circuit technology is the
number of components that can be squeezed into a single-chip circuit. 
Figure 2
shows the exponential growth in components per chip over the past two

decades, and a projection for the next decade. The number of components per

chip of silicon is still increasing by a factor of 100 per decade. Today the limit

is almost 1 million components on a chip; by 1990, it will be at least 5 million;

and by the year 2000, between 10 and 100 million.
Figure 2
Changes in component density for silicon production, 1960 to 1990.
Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES11
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The limits of integrated circuit technology as we know it today are
determined basically by how big we can make a chip and how small we can

make the line widths used to define a working transistor. These limits can easily

be estimated by assuming the largest practical chip to be about 1,000 square

millimeters, and the smallest transistor to be fabricated using 0.1-micrometer

(µm) line widths (a length of about 400 silicon atoms). When reasonable space
for electrical isolation and interconnections is allowed, the resulting limit is
easily derived to be about 100 million components per chip. For such a chip,

using known technology, electrical isolation and interconnections would

consume approximately 90 percent of the chip area.
The magic of the ever-expanding capabilities of integrated circuits will
therefore be with us for at least another decade. Component reliability will

continue to increase dramatically, and integrated circuit chips will perform

more and more functions, ever faster and cheaper. This progress will make

possible increasingly powerful, reliable, lower-cost digital systems and much
more flexible approaches to systems design. Integrated circuit progress is
making it possible to have digital systems everywhere, be they for computing,

robotic control, office automation, or telecommunications. Clearly, this force

will continue to be a major spur to further progress in the information

technologies.Computing Technology
Computing technology is a major beneficiary of the power of integrated
circuits. Figure 3
 shows the past trends in computer processing power and
forecasts the future. Processing power is expressed in millions of instructions

per second (MIPS), and each data point in the figure represents a specific
computer introduced into the marketplace. Most notable is the rapid progress in
processing power of the single-chip computer or microcomputer, which has

been doubling each year. Extrapolation of the trend of the last decade forecasts

that microcomputers will have processing power comparable to that of

minicomputers and large, general-purpose mainframe computers

(maxicomputers) by the early 1990s. Because the computer is the ''engine'' of

the Information Age, having the power of today's largest computers on a chip or

even a few chips of silicon to go in automobiles, appliances, toys, offices,

factories, and homes is a tremendous driving force.
The trend curve of components per chip in 
Figure 2
 showed that by 1990
integrated circuits will be within a factor of 10 of the physical limit of the

technology known today. That implies the maxicomputers, minicomputers, and
single-chip microcomputers as we now know them
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES12
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.have an ultimate limit of a few 10s of MIPS. However, the limit of chip
processing power is not a limit to the processing power of computing. For

computing is rapidly moving toward new architectures involving multiplicities

of processing elements such as single-chip computers. Multiplicities of such

chips, however, are inherently more expensiveŠlargely because of the high

costs and difficulty of interconnecting and programming them to function as
single systems. For automobiles, appliances, tools, home computers, and the
like, we can assume that most will operate with an ultimate computing power of

the order of 10 MIPS or less per computer. But an automobile, for example,

may eventually have a dozen or more computers.
Figure 3
Trends in processing power of computers, 1970 to 1990.

Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
SoftwareSoftware is vital not only to the operation of Information Age systems, but
also to their interlinking with each other, with data bases, and with people. The

demands for software are growing explosivelyŠfor tailoring systems to

customers' needs, for making them reliable, and for making them easier to use,

or "friendlier." These demands, in turn, are leading to increasingly complex

software, ironically, to achieve user simplicity.
Unfortunately, software is the "bottleneck" information technology.
Currently, it is generated principally by people, and most enterprises generate

more software by hiring more peopleŠa very difficult and costly approach. It

still takes a programmer approximately one year to produce a few thousand

lines of code. In telecommunications, a
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES13
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.large electronic toll switching machine uses more than 2 million lines, a local
electronic switcher more than 1 million lines, and System 85, a Private Branch

Exchange (PBX), almost 2 million lines. Industry has learned in the last few

years how to manage big software systems, developing them to meet cost, time,

and performance objectives. But it desperately needs an improvement in

programming productivity to sustain both the growth in complexity and the
increasing demand for software systems.
The rate of progress in improving programming productivity remains
extremely low. 
Figure 4
 compares AT&T Bell Laboratories' productivity
growth for producing software with that for design of silicon integrated circuit

chips and circuit packs. The bad news is common throughout the industry.

Software productivity is improving very slowly. The good news is the
increasing productivity of the electronics designers, and that is largely a
software success story. In fact, without computer-aided design, much of the

progress in today's most important technology would be impossibleŠand

tomorrow's tasks, hopeless. Even though chip complexity has increased 100-

fold over the past decade, computer-automated tools permitted us to use the

same design effort, as well as to significantly improve our ability to get error-

free chip designs.
There will eventually be dramatic improvements in programming
productivity. They will come from continued improvements in computer aids

for software design, leading eventually to automatic gen
Figure 4
Hardware and software productivity, 1975 to 1984.
Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES14
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.eration of applications programs. Such a breakthrough in software productivity
will first require development of durable and detailed technical standards, new

methodologies for requirements generation, and large software design programs

for structuring, generating, and testing code. Progress may first come through

greater development of reusable software components with standardized

interfaces. Even those standards do not exist and will be difficult to achieve.
Early circuit designers rapidly solved that problem for hardware components.
Clearly, it can also be done for software components.
There is an argument, based on the analogy of motors, that today's
software problems are transitory. When motors were new, users "hooked them

up" to grinders, saws, and numerous other elements to create functional tools.

But as that technology matured, users' needs were met by functioning systems

that contained motorsŠdrills, grinders, saws, washing machines, dishwashers,

cars, toothbrushes, toysŠan endless list. The analogy suggests that sooner or

later a wide spectrum of software systems will be available so that most users
will be able to buy functional Information Age products that perform the needed
tasks. These products will just happen to contain softwareŠmuch as

dishwashers and refrigerators, for example, just happen to contain motors. The

user could not care less, so long as the dishes are clean and the food cold. Such

functional software-based products are rapidly emerging in the marketplace, but

the trend has just begun.
PhotonicsPhotonics is the key Information Age technology for transmitting large
amounts of digital information. There are two key innovations: the laser and

ultrapure glass fiber. Combined, they provide a transmission capability that far

exceeds that of copper wire and radio to meet the most stringent needs of the

Information Age.Photonics technology has progressed rapidly. In about a decade the
technology has achieved some difficult technical milestones:
high-purity, ultratransparent, and high-strength glass fibers;
  Constructing long-life lasers that can operate at room temperature and
at the appropriate wavelengths:
  Optimizing the mode of lightwave propagation in the fiber and shifting
from multimode to single-mode fibers for many applications;
  Determining and exploiting the unique wavelengths at which fiber
transmission losses are the lowest;
  Developing means for wavelength multiplexing of multiple bit streams
onto the same fiber; and
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES15
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Developing single-frequency light sources which desensitize system
performance to wavelength dispersion in the fiber.
Where is innovation in photonics leading lightwave systems? The current
technical frontier is in increasing bit rates. The basic trend continues toward

higher communications capacity per fiber and greater distances between signal

amplifiers or repeaters. For example, since AT&T introduced the first full-

service commercial lightwave system in 1977, fiber capacity has increased

almost 10-fold, from 672 calls per fiber to 6,048. The corresponding amplifier

spacings have increased from about 8 kilometers to more than 30 kilometers. In

laboratory experiments described recently, AT&T Bell Laboratories set a
"distance record" by transmitting 420 million bits per second over 125 miles
without amplification. Also, 2 billion bits per second were transmitted over 80

miles using no amplification. That pulse rate can transmit the entire 30-volume

Encyclopaedia Britannica
 in a few seconds. Underlying these accomplishments
is healthy progress not only in glass fibers and lasers, but also in photodetectors

and many other system components.
The limit of loss in today's fibers is shown in 
Figure 5
. The two
wavelength bands at which the loss of practical fibers is both low and near the

limit are in the regions around 1.3 and 1.5 µm. Most new designs operate in

these bands. Actual signal losses achieved in these bands are close enough to

the theoretical losses that major new breakthroughs in silicon fiber performance

do not seem likely. On the other hand, advances in materials processing could

lead to entirely new materials systems for fibers. Also, the power output of

lasers will rise, and the sensitivity of signal detection subsystems will improve.

So getting from today's capability of 125 miles without amplifiers to a few
thousand miles without amplifiers may yet be feasible. The difference is not
spectacular for domestic communications. But the capability of sending signals

a few thousand miles without amplifiers is significant in globalizing the

Information Age, for it would enable us to span the oceans with passive

lightwave systems.
What is the limit of lightwave technology as we know it today, and when
will we reach that limit? Extrapolation of progress in the rate at which

information can be sent through fibers and the distance it can travel without

amplification, coupled with a little analysis, suggests the answers. 
Figure 6
shows that the product of rate in megabits per second (MBPS) and distance in

kilometers (km) has been doubling yearlyŠand this will probably continue for

the rest of the decade, at least. Each data point in the figure represents the

leading edge
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES16
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.accomplishment for a single wavelength channelŠcontinually dominated by
AT&T and the Japanese.
Figure 5
Lightwave communications technology.
Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
Simple detection theory can be used to estimate the physical limit of
today's lightwave technology. The estimate involves combining the theoretical
loss and nonlinear behavior of glass fiber with an assumed maximum allowable
laser power of approximately 1 watt and a minimum requirement of about 10 to

100 photons per pulse. This forecast suggests that the technology limits will

permit the development of lightwave systems with each channel operating 10 to

100 times faster than today's best. Wavelength multiplexing will extend this

limit by another factor of 10 to 100, giving an ultimate limit of about 109, or 1

billion, MBPS/km.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES17
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure 6
Lightwave technology capacity-distance achievements, 1975 to 1990.
Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
The next technical frontier in reaching this limit is probably sophisticated
multiplexing, modulation, and detection schemes. For example, quantized

frequency modulation of the laser and coherent detection in the receiver may

significantly expand the information carrying capacity of fiber systems.
TECHNOLOGIES LIKELY TO EMERGE
There is a vast reservoir of new technologies that will have significant
impact on further evolution of the Information Age. They are discussed here in

approximate rank order of importance. Among them is at least one potential

killer technology. There are also areas where possible breakthroughs could

extend today's technology into entirely new domains. And of more modest

impact are new materials systems and clever innovations that create the niche

technologies.Potential Breakthroughs in Silicon Circuits
As noted earlier, the limits of today's silicon technology are basically
determined by how small a working transistor can be made and by how large a

chip can be made. The first possible breakthrough would be at the small end,

where the current requirement is for a transistor defined by 0.1-µm line widths

(a length of about 400 silicon atoms). Perhaps we will find a way to break this

requirement and progress
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES18
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.into the domain of molecular electronicsŠcircuits based on ever-smaller
devices, possibly down to individual molecules.
The second possible breakthrough would be at the large end, now limited
by a chip 1,000 square millimeters in area. The ultimate breakthrough here

would be defect-free wafers so that the chip itself could consume the whole

wafer. Such wafer-scale integration would increase the number of components

per chip by perhaps a factor of 100.
A third possible breakthrough would be a new, reliable, but cheap way to
interconnect two or more integrated circuit chips so that they would operate as

if they were one. This would enable a mosaic of simpler chips to do as much as

or more than a single complex chip. Such a breakthrough would reduce the high

costs of interchip connections, which is the force that now motivates us to

squeeze increasing numbers of components on an individual chip. And it would

open up totally new opportunities for radically different approaches to systems

design and architecture. It would extend the magic of silicon technology beyond
the edges of the monolithic chip, and it would fold the burden of system
interconnection into the domain of photolithography and batch processing.
Integrated OpticsIntegrated optics is a potential killer technology lurking at the gate. There
is a possibility that most tasks currently done by electrons will someday be done

by photons. So huge amounts of information may someday be transmitted,

switched, and processed entirely by photons. Integrated optics systems are

almost sure to emerge for at least specialized jobs. Before such all-photonic

systems appear, however, combined electronic and photonic circuits will

increasingly be integrated into the same circuit and possibly onto the same chip.
Advantages include reduced parasitics, leading to higher speed, increased
sensitivity, and optical interconnections. These result in reduced packaging

limitations, less ground noise, and no induced noise in the optical elements.

Such opto-electronic circuits also interface gracefully with lightwave

transmission systems.
The next step, all-photonic integrated optics, is farther away. Much
innovation will be required before optics can come close to matching the

processing power of today's integrated circuits. Moreover, today's optical logic

requires relatively high power, with the associated problems of heat dissipation.

And optical logic is also physically large compared to integrated circuit logic.

AT&T Bell Laboratories and
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES19
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.others are working diligently to advance integrated optics technology. It may
well become the same kind of driving force in the future as integrated circuits

are today.New Computing and Software Architectures
New architectures for both computing and software are surely feasible.
Past thinking has been conditioned by the work of von Neumann and machine

designs centered around the limited computing resources of one main processor

and associated memory.
Vast new opportunities now exist for "nontraditional" computer systems
architectures. Designers may use multiple processors, and they have the

flexibility of distributing fast memory throughout the fabric of a machine's

logic. Microprocessor chips will increasingly be integrated into complex

distributed-processing architectures. This is a promising way to link a number
of low-cost, relatively low-power microprocessors into a single system with the
combined processing power of all the component chips.
Such a distributed-processing system, based on the limits of today's
integrated circuit technology, places an enormous burden on software. For

example, a good distributed-software operating system must coordinate all the

separate processing unitsŠperhaps as many as 1,000Šas one system, yet
permit each to work on a different problem. The software system must permit
access to remote files or other data storage in a way that is transparent to the

user, and it must permit remote execution of programs, independent of where

the data reside and of which particular processing unit is working on the

problemŠagain, transparent to the user. All this represents a very fine marriage

between the capabilities of integrated circuits and the needs of distributed-

software systems. The full potential of software architectures based on the

limits of integrated circuit technology is yet to be fully understood. But it is an

encouraging trend that distributed-software architectures are emerging at a fast

rate. And these architectures increasingly look like the structures of the world's

largest distributed computing networkŠthe U.S. telephone network of

thousands of interconnected switching machines.
User-Friendly Interfaces and Computer Speech
The full potential of the information technologies will not be realized until
it is easier for people to use software-based systemsŠto deal with computers on

their own terms and possibly in their own language.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES20
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It is interesting to note that even though the telephone network is the
world's most complex computing system, the power of that vast network is

available even to a child with virtually no training. Such powerful and simple

ways to access the new machines of the Information Age do not yet exist.
A major breakthrough is near at hand. Machines that recognize and
respond to human speech can now be built. Speech synthesis is well along, and

speech recognition is progressing nicely. Vocabularies for recognition are

currently limited, however, and some systems require "training sentences" from

all users in order to recognize their speech. But the growing capability of

integrated circuits is sure to produce eventually a few chips of silicon that are

equivalent to portions of the brain, the ear, and the voice box. Then most

machines and appliances will be able to speak and listen much as humans do.

But speech recognition is a demanding course: whole sentences require 100

times more processing and about 10 times more memory than isolated words.
Data NetworksAchieving the full potential of the information technologies requires the
interconnection of the physically separate computers made commonplace by

silicon technology. Increased digital networking is required to interlink the

computers not only with one another, but also with various large data bases.

And this networking must include local clusters of homes and offices, as well as

locations around the world. Fortunately, the telephone networks of the world

are rapidly moving toward end-to-end digital connectivity. But they must be

expanded to include more pervasive data packet switching. Importantly,

networks must extend their software control to interconnect with the user's

software, so that data network needs can be "dialed up" by the user and made

immediately availableŠavoiding the delays of manual order processing and

manual provisioning. There have been significant breakthroughs in such

technology. The DACS, or Digital Access and Cross-connect System, first

introduced some years ago by AT&T, is leading the way. Information Age

telephone switching machines such as the AT&T 5ESS 
* electronic switch are
adding even greater capability to meet the growing needs of automated data

networks.Integrated Circuits Based on Compound Materials
The integrated circuit industry is based mainly on silicon. A significant
start has been made in a potentially competitive materials system,
* ESS is a trademark of AT&T Technologies, Inc.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES21
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.gallium arsenide, which is but one of the many possible compound
semiconductor materials. Gallium arsenide has two features especially worthy

of note. First, electron speed is higher than in silicon, so gallium arsenide

devices of comparable dimensions are faster. Second, because gallium arsenide

is compatible with lightwave technology, there is the potential of combining

both electronic and photonic circuits on a single chip. 
Figure 7
 compares
laboratory results in gallium arsenide with the earlier production progress curve
for silicon. The rate of progress is impressive, but the leading edge of

complexity of gallium arsenide still has a long way to go to catch up with that

of silicon. Further, a saturation effect may set in, for as the feature sizes of

gallium arsenide integrated circuits become smaller and smaller, the material's

advantage of higher electron mobility diminishes with the corresponding

increase in electric field. It is simply too early to predict the ultimate extent to

which gallium arsenide will transfer significant production away from silicon.
The potential of large-scale integrated circuits based on other compound
semiconductor materials is largely unknown. However, AT&T Bell

Laboratories recently reported the world's fastest semiconductor integrated

circuitŠwhich operates at 90 gigabits per second. It is made of very pure

gallium arsenide and aluminum gallium arsenide in a multilayered, selectively

doped heterostructure configuration.
Figure 7
Trends in component density, silicon production, and gallium arsenide
announcements, 1960 to 1990.
Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES22
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Laser Materials Systems and Yields
The materials systems for lasers are in a relatively primitive state today,
resulting in rather low manufacturing yields. Improved materials systems and

structures would greatly lower the cost of lasers and, in turn, accelerate the pace

of advancement of lightwave technologies. Because molecular beam epitaxy

permits control of materials down to the atomic levels, it offers exciting and

expanding opportunities to custom-fabricate new materials that may lead to new
device concepts, including lasers.
TECHNOLOGY SELECTION AND THE PACE OF
INNOVATIONNow that we have a view of the key technologies, their limits, and
potential new technologies, let us further examine the gating forces that

determine how the winning technologies will be selected and the resulting pace

of innovation.
Marketplace Economics
The dominant force pulling innovations through the technology and social
gates today is the needs of the marketplace. For decades electronic technologies

have been pulled into the marketplace as fast as humanly possible. Today's

technology, however, is so rich that it can do more things than society might

find useful. Increasingly, marketing resources are required to sort out

innovations and potential innovations, to contain the scope of development, and
to focus investment on the applications that will win in the marketplace. This
growing force of marketing in the information technology arena is creating new

and challenging relationships. Such a give-and-take relationship between

marketers and technologists has long operated in low-technology fields such as

soaps and toothpaste. Today, there is a similar, rapidly evolving relationship in

fields of highest technology, especially in computers, software, and

telecommunications.
The pull of the marketplace rests largely on willingness to pay. To impact
society significantly, an innovation must be of sufficient intrinsic value that

users will not only pay the traditional manufacturing, sales, and related costs,

but compensate for the high cost of development as well. Information Age

products are very R&D-intensive. For example, R&D accounts for most of the
cost of software, and the viability of software in the marketplace more strongly
depends on sales volumes and copyright protection than do traditional

manufactured products.
Technology selection is strongly tied to cost trends. For example,
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES23
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the proliferation of digital systems ties directly to the falling cost of a digital
logic circuit, as shown by the curve in 
Figure 8
. With each passing year, new
digital systems become economically feasible because their costs drop below

what the user is willing to pay. The figure also shows that at 1 dollar per logic

gate, the telecommunications industry could economically justify two digital

systems: one called T1, for voice transmission on wire pairs, and a digital
controller for the lESS local electronic switch. At 10 cents per logic gate, the
4ESS electronic switch, a large digital toll machine, and the Dimension®

Private Branch Exchange became feasible. At 1 cent per logic gate, 5ESS

Information Age local digital switches became feasible, along with a wide

variety of microprocessor-based ''intelligent'' telephones and terminals. Digital

logic costs are now in the range of a tenth of a cent per gate and will be on the

order of a millicent per gate by 1990. Each year as these logic costs continue to

fall, the costs of a wide range of new Information Age products will drop below

the threshold of user willingness to pay. The result is a mushrooming family of

intelligent productsŠand the mushrooming phenomenon is not likely to slow

down before the year 2000. The resulting economic climate will create a wide

range of innovations, and economic forces will sort out the winners.
A user's willingness to pay is not an absolute. So technology selection is
strongly affected by public opinion and advertising. The case of
Figure 8
Digital integrated circuit costs, 1950 to 1990.
Source: AT&T Bell Laboratories.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES24
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.videotape recorders versus the videodisk is an interesting example, even though
they are not functionally equivalent. It seems that society has selected the

videotape machine as the winning technology, possibly because of its recording

capability. The totality of forces that produced that selection is very difficult to

characterize, but I suggest that the technologist needs help if he or she expects

to forecast the technology selection process.
R&D Economics
The force of economics is somewhat stronger at the social gate than it is at
the technology gate, but even so it is a powerful force behind our R&D

laboratories and even our university research centers. For at their limits the key

technologies are extremely expensive to develop.
The pace of innovation and, to a lesser extent, the direction of innovation
are increasingly controlled by R&D economics. Clean rooms, feature patterning

equipment, electron beam machines, and the like are terribly expensive at the

micrometer level of capability and will become even more expensive as we

move to submicrometer geometries. Small companies and universities are
increasingly becoming followers rather than leaders. Today most universities
cannot afford the requisite equipment, and even the wealthier ones are having to

form special alliances with industry to raise the needed capital. The situation

will ease somewhat as more universities find that complete fabrication facilities

are not essential for strong teaching programs or even specialized research. But

the trend is still there: the leading edge R&D that produces the significant

innovations that guide all of industry can be afforded by only a few institutions

in our society.
Government of course plays a large role in R&D economics. Of particular
importance are the general economic climate of the nation, tax incentives,

antitrust relief, and sharing of the output of the federal laboratories, as well as

technology initiatives in the Department of Defense and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration. Each of these forces is managed on its
own, but the sum of all the forces is not managed to speed the pace of

technology and optimize the nation's technical position.
R&D ProwessThe prowess of our industrial, government, and university R&D
laboratories remains a major factor in technology selection and the pace of

innovation. Competence and motivation of individual scientists
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES25
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and engineers are vital to R&D prowess, but management of those laboratories
also is very important. A prerequisite for innovation in a particular area is the

dedication of people and capital resources to that area, and creation of an

atmosphere conducive to innovation. AT&T Bell Laboratories is widely

acknowledged for having the winning combination, as well as for creating most

of the innovations for the Information Age. Their inventionsŠincluding solid-
state devices, lasers, and a wide range of telecommunications and information
technologyŠspawned new industries that have gained significant innovative

strength of their own.
The power of these innovations to meet social needs is so great that they
have forced change in some of society's major institutions. By opening up vast

new frontiers of business opportunity and spawning numerous competitors,

solid-state technology blended telecommunications and data processing and led

to the restructuring of those industries, just as the engine forced restructuring in

the industrial revolution. Industry structure, in turn, is a strong force in
technology selection and in pacing innovation.
We are dealing with extremely powerful technologies whose forces are at
best barely under our control. Continued U.S. industrial competitiveness is

heavily dependent on the prowess of our R&D laboratories. Without a superior

technical position, we could not be a force in technology selection or in the pace

of innovation. The breakup of the Bell System has created a national challenge
to ensure that the new environment has at least the R&D capabilities of the old.
Certainly, AT&T is fully dedicated to continuing the innovative strengths of

AT&T Bell Laboratories. However, the communications industry is much more

fragmented than it was, and there are no means for managing it collectively.

This is in sharp contrast to the major U.S. R&D competitor, Japan, which has

numerous mechanisms for guiding its collective R&D efforts at the national

level. Ironically, Japan has succeeded with its high technology by using

methods, including statistical quality control, largely copied from the old Bell

System.
Ensuring the future prowess of our R&D laboratories will take more than
blind faith that competition among our R&D enterprises will spur results that

are more innovative and cover wider domains than the collectively managed

enterprises abroad. Success will come from meeting two broad challenges

posed by the new environment. First, our industries in general must continue to

devote the needed resources to ensure steady streams of innovation from each
R&D laboratory. And second, in this new environment, each of the R&D
laboratories must continue to add its innovations promptly to the advancement of
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES26
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.science by continuing free and open dialogues within the technical communities.
RegulationFew actions can throttle the flow of technology and slow the pace of
innovation more than regulatory actions. In general, regulatory actions direct an

entire industry or the most able within that industry. Actions are usually based

on issues other than technology selection or pace, but the result may have

enormous impact on technology. Regulating an entire industry always has the
potential peril of handicapping every one of the affected domestic companies
and of benefiting every one of the foreign competitors. Regulators must

acknowledge that the nation's major innovations will continue to come from its

most able enterprises, and thatŠthrough their action or inactionŠthey often

have the power to throttle the outputs of these enterprises.
This throttling of technology comes from action as well as inaction. For
example, legislative action ruled AT&T out of the international satellite

business and thus led to the disbanding of the pioneering Telstar satellite

development team, an act that hardly accelerated the flow of satellite
technology to the marketplace. Regulatory inaction delayed the availability of
cellular radiotelephones to the public by a decade after AT&T had the

technology available.
At AT&T we are still experiencing a regulatory environment that restricts
information flow within our business and favors competitors who have not

contributed to the technology and have trivial R&D capabilities. Such
regulation places us in an environment that is insensitive to the funding of R&D
that can make a contribution not only to our business, but to the nation at large.

As hard as we try to offset these handicaps, they remain a factor in our ability to

maintain the flow of innovation.
Technical Standards
Technical standards are vital to the evolution of the Information Age. New
products must not only be compatible with each other, but also with older
products. And the standards must be firm enough to ensure compatibility, and
prompt enough to ensure rapid introduction of new technology. Indeed, rapid

progress seems to depend on prompt standards or no standards. Almost-at-hand

standards encourage developers to wait and discourage researchers working on

alternative options.THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES27
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the past, key industry leaders developed the technology and brought it
promptly to the marketplace. AT&T technology rapidly became the standard for

the telecommunications industry, and IBM set powerful standards in the

computing field. In today's new environment, no single enterprise can pioneer

the standards. For example, AT&T's UNIX
 operating system grew out of
telecommunications, but it is rapidly becoming a worldwide computing standard.
Furthermore, telecommunications has "shrunk" the globe, so standards
must increasingly be global. In working to set global standards, the technologist

has encountered severe political issues, such as "one nation, one vote."

Attention to the global marketplace has created an increasing tendency to set up

technical standards before new products emerge. That approach has great

impact on technology selection and is sure to delay the flow of new technology
because of the substantial risk in introducing products in parallel with the
standards deliberations. Unfortunately, these frustrations, which have plagued

the international standards scene for years, are now characterizing the domestic

scene. The political motivations in domestic standard setting are greatly

enhanced in the new environment, and the ability of domestic standards bodies

to handle the issues is yet to be proven. A major challenge is to try to separate

the political and technical issues, with the hope that the technical issues can be

resolved promptly.
The Embedded Technology Base
Three examples illustrate the force of the embedded base: silicon circuits,
lightwave systems, and magnetic bubbles.
The world's investment in silicon circuit fabrication facilities is estimated
to be $15 billion. Most electronic products in the field are based on silicon, and

the popular "direction" of the past decade has been, "If it can be done in silicon,

it will." Until recently, almost 100 percent of the integrated circuit R&D was

silicon based, partly due to the momentum of the embedded base, and partly

due to the power of that technology.
Lightwave is a counterexample. Although there was no embedded base,
enormous R&D resources have been devoted to that technology. The

marketplace views lightwave as a killer technology, and tends to favor it over

the embedded base.
Magnetic bubble technology was a potential killer that has been forced, at
least for the present, to a relatively minor role. The power of the embedded base

of magnetic disks and silicon random access memories drove cost reductions in

these technologies as steep as the
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES28
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.learning curve for bubbles. As a result, R&D in bubble technology diminished
over the years and its learning curve slowed. So it will be a long time, if ever,

before magnetic bubbles displace the embedded base. Josephson junction and

other cryogenic devices appear to suffer the same fate, though they have never

gotten as close to the competition as did magnetic bubbles. Both bubbles and

cryogenics appear to be niche technologies at best.
THE INFORMATION AGE
Let me conclude by looking ahead. Considering the information
technologies and their limits, pending new technologies, and forces controlling

selection and pace, we can construct a pretty good picture of the technology of

tomorrow. Whether this technology comes fast or slow, from our traditional

R&D laboratories or from Japan or elsewhere, it is clearly leading us quickly

into the Information Age.
What does this mean to society? This section considers some of the
expected changes when information technologies will assist the mind much as

the industrial revolution's technology assists the muscle.
Computers Everywhere
The industrial revolution produced the now mature age of motorsŠwhich
we take for granted. All of us are surrounded by motors, from the large ones in

our cars and boats to the small ones scattered about our households. As the

Information Age matures, we will increasingly be surrounded by computers,

from large ones handling major home or business tasks to a multitude of

microcomputers in our cars, appliances, toys, games, entertainment centersŠ
potentially everywhere. And we will think no more of computers lying idle in
gadgets we hardly ever use, than we worry about unused motors in our homes

today. Computers are becoming so widespread and low cost that we can afford

to take them for granted, too.
Overcoming Geography
The Information Age has another dimensionŠbridging distance or
geography. The interlinking of computers, people, machines, and data bases by

the telecommunications network adds a new dimension of excitement. The

Information Age will probably not offer electronic transport of matter, but it

will do the next best thing. It will sense and transmit the remote environment to
your presence via audio, video,
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES29
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and data. Such benefits depend in large part on the increasingly digital nature of
the electronic world, with digital connectivity becoming universally available.

Independent of geography, then, machines can talk to machines, machines can

talk to people and people to machines, andŠof course, as usualŠpeople can

talk to people, but with expanded options such as video conferencing.
It is increasingly feasible for people to conduct business from wherever
they happen to be by accessing more and more capable telecommunications

services and links back to their usual points of contact. One can even envision a

"telepresence" using sensor-equipped robots to transmit perceptions back to the

user. The user could "move" through scenes and even manipulate parts of the

environment at long distance.
New Services
Information technology makes possible an expanding family of services
such as financial transactions from home and office computersŠand

entertainment, shopping, and accessing of data bases by video and telephone

links. Electronic mail and the ability to leave telephone messages are

developing, though slower than the technology allows. Increasingly economical

equipment can control energy use in auto, home, and office; and it can monitor

security and report alarms by the automatic dialing of emergency services. A
wide range of direct-dialing, teleconferencing, and announcement services are
available on the telecommunications network.
The intelligent telecommunications network also makes it increasingly
possible for users to have designated calls forwarded to another location, to

have distinctive ringing identify calls from a specified set of telephone numbers,

and to activate traces on nuisance calls. The network's intelligence also makes

possible a wide variety of services such as the ability to dial one national

number from anywhere in the country to be connected to the nearest emergency

auto service, hospital, or any number of important services. Another potential
innovation is to assign telephone numbers to people rather than telephones. By
keeping the computer informed of the nearest telephone, you could designate

calls to be routed automatically to youŠwherever you might be, at your office,

home. car, or at some hotel while on a trip. The same network intelligence is at

the heart of cellular radio technology, which makes it potentially feasible for

every car to have a telephone. This mobile phone capability is now spreading

rapidly.THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES30
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Of course it works just as well for personal portable phones as for car
phones.Universal Information Service
Early telephone pioneers wisely and quickly realized that achieving the full
potential of the telephone depended on every phone being connectable with

every other one. That realization is remarkable because it came when few

people had phones, when phones were interconnected in small clusters to serve

neighborhoods and businesses. And it came, despite the clear fact that any

individual phone, over a lifetime of use, would actually need to connect to the

tiniest fraction of the total telephone population.
So it is for individual computers. The concept of universal information
service recognizes that every computer, data base, or smart terminal must be

connectable with every other, even though most of the possible connections will

never actually be needed. Today, clusters of data networks are growing in

selected neighborhoods and many businesses. Fortunately, the telephone

network is able to interconnect these clusters. But, for a variety of reasons, total
connectivity falls far short of what is needed for universal information service.
Achieving this goal will be a great challenge for the information technology and

service industriesŠperhaps more so than universal telephone service was in the

past.Video Data Bases
High-speed digital transmissionŠusing the ever-increasing information-
carrying capacity of lightwave systemsŠcould make video communications

and pictorial data bases as widespread as today's telephone service. And this

prodigious capacity could also be used to carry high-speed data for processing

by intelligent machines. These machines could search huge quantities of
transmitted data, selecting and storing only the particular informationŠperhaps
a news item, stock quote, message, or even a movieŠthat fits their users' needs

or interests.
Expert Systems
The combination of increasingly powerful integrated circuits, computing
technology, and software should enhance knowledge and allow increasingly

expert software to take over some tasks done by expert
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES31
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.humans. An example is the expertise required to generate more accurate
weather forecastsŠranging from global forecasting to the kind of area

forecasting that would permit us to manage crops better and to accurately

predict the landfall of hurricanes. These expanded technological capabilities

will often be applied to create "expert" systems in services ranging from legal

and financial advice to medical diagnosisŠnot necessarily to replace the doctor
or lawyer, but to make such services available conveniently and inexpensively
to large numbers of people. Expert systems exist today and perform specialized

tasks in the telephone network.
Engineering Perspective
From an engineering perspective, the electronic equipment of the
Information Age all looks much the same. It is digital systems made up mostly

of integrated circuits mounted on printed wiring boards. The equipment is

extremely compact in terms of number of gates per circuit board. Interface

equipment is usually a keyboard, telephone lines, cathode ray tube, and/or

liquid crystal display. Plasma panel and large liquid crystal displays will
displace some of the cathode ray tubes, but not for full-motion video for some
time. The equipment is increasingly reliable, and large systems will contain

extensive diagnostic subsystems for maintenance. Most reconfigurations and

rear-rangements will be made via software rather than by manual operations.

The equipment is increasingly lower in cost per function, so larger and larger

systems will be of the throwaway type, much as low-function pocket calculators

are today. The systems will increasingly be designed by machines through even

more powerful computer aids to design. And, of course, the software content of

the systems will grow, but hardware will also grow to ease software burdens.

The challenge for engineers will shift toward the two ends of the spectrum of

work: process development and computer-aided design systems to support

design on the one end, and systems architecture and higher-level design on the
other. The fast pace of technology, the exciting systems possibilities, and the
expanding product opportunities put the Information Age designer in an

enviable position.
CONCLUSIONThe information technologies are far from exhausted, though the limits of
the major technologies are well known. A number of new technologies are

emerging, and progress should continue at a fast pace
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES32
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for at least a decade or two. With the possible exception of integrated optics,
during this time evolution is not likely to be dominated by new killer

technologies. More likely, the rapid pace of current developments will continue

to create ever more favorable economics, and extend the known technologies

into new domains. The forces that control the pace of innovation and

technology selection are not likely to change substantially unless the
restructuring of the telephone industry produces unexpected results or overseas
competition forces government action. Good innovations will continue to be

rapidly pulled into the marketplace. The resulting richness of high-quality, low-

cost technology should help create a better societyŠan Information Age with a

host of new computing and telecommunications services to make life more

pleasant, productive, and interesting.
COMMENTSErnest S. Kuh
Professor of Electrical Engineering

University of California, Berkeley

I would like to begin by proposing a simpleminded model of technology
evolution for the mathematically inclined. Using the state-space analogy, which

is familiar to most young electrical, mechanical, and aerospace engineers, we
may represent the interaction of the four key elements of technology evolution
that John Mayo defines: (1) technology base, (2) research and development, (3)

sequencing, and (4) standards.
In my proposed model, the state of the dynamic system corresponds to the
technology base in Dr. Mayo's analysis; the input corresponds to R&D; the

dynamics of the system correspond to sequencing; and finally, the set of
constraints corresponds to standards. It might be possible then to use this
analogy to introduce, for some technologies at least, a quantitative analysis of

evolution through the technology gate. Models aside, the second part of Dr.

Mayo's presentation gives a brief account of recent and prospective innovation

in information processing technology. I would like to respond to that portion of

the presentation with three comments.
First, that which impresses me the most are advances in lightwave
technology. When I worked at Bell Laboratories 30 years ago, I was designing

repeaters for submarine cable using vacuum tube technology. The progress
made during the last 30 years in transmission is remarkable.
Second, the technologies John Mayo did not discuss were such mundane
things as the display technology, printers, and workstations. Though these
technologies already play a major role in today's markets, I believe that their
importance to scientific and engineering research and developmentŠto the

evolution of information technologyŠwill be profound. The synergy between
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES33
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.new technologies and research is immense. Just imagine that many engineers
and graduate students will have at their desks the immense computation power,

the convenience in communication of their ideas to co-workers, perhaps across

the continent, and the luxury of observing three-dimensional color pictures to

enhance their intuition. There is no question but that research and development

will dramatically benefit from technological advance.
Third, Dr. Mayo did not say too much about universities. We all know the
fundamental contributions made by the universities: the birth of computers, the

start of artificial intelligence, the advances in very large scale integration

(VLSI), and the excellent work in computer-aided design in microelectronics.

Universities will continue to play a major role in the evolution of information

technologies: the combination of expertsŠsome of the best minds in the fieldŠ
and young graduate students has proven to be a powerful force in basic
research. As educators we have the responsibility to organize our institutions to

preserve our strength in basic research and, in addition, to collaborate with

industry for creative exploratory development.
It is interesting to note that in almost all areas Dr. Mayo touched upon,
there exist physical limits, if research continues with the present mode of

operation, strategy, or materials. That is why scientific research, and especially

basic engineering research, is so crucial to us in order to make major

breakthroughs. We at universities and in research centers should keep our goals
high and far ahead in order not to fall into the trap of only working on problems
of immediate application. While working closely with industry is crucial, we

must maintain a balance, for our main aim is still to develop fundamental

knowledge that will then lead to major breakthroughs.
In some areas it will be difficult for even major universities to keep ahead
of industry because of the enormous cost of equipment and facilities. However,

I believe there is a way out if we compare what we are facing now with physics

research after the Second World War. Major research centers were created to

fill this need. Engineering research centers, recently proposed by the National
Science Foundation, are only a beginning. Certainly, many areas of high
technologyŠthe fifth generation of computers, the next phase of

microelectronics research, and the flexible manufacturing system, for exampleŠ

could benefit from major research centers associated with universities. It is up

to us, in conjunction with the government and industry, to see to it that we have

the research base we need.
John Mayo has laid the technological base for us by giving us a model for
thinking about technological evolution and by providing an overview of

information technologies and where they are headed. We must, of course, be

interested in the implications of the Information Age on lives of

nonprofessionals and workers in general, as well as in potential harms caused

by the information technology, for example, the problem of invasion of privacy.
THE EVOLUTION OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES34
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Information Age: Evolution or
Revolution?Melvin Kranzberg
Every time we pick up a newspaper or a journal or listen to the news we
learn about new technological developments heralding major sociotechnical

changes: ''Microelectronics Revolution,'' "Postindustrial Society," "Computer

Revolution," "Automation Age," and so on. Since all of these involve the

accumulation, manipulation, and retrieval of data by computerized electronic

devices and their application to many facets of human life, it is no wonder that

the headlines shout that computer developments are transforming industry and

society to produce a new "Information Age."
Is this transformation evolutionary or revolutionary? After all, most
technologies are evolutionary in the sense that they derive from prior
developments. The steam engine did not emerge full-blown out of James Watt's

brain, but was based upon Thomas Newcomen's engine, which in turn rested on

still earlier attempts. Similarly, Gutenberg's invention of printing derived from a

whole series of previous innovationsŠpaper, block printing, inks, and movable

typeŠwhich he put together in a new way. Indeed, virtually every major

technological innovation can be shown to have been the outcome of

evolutionary advance, in that historians can trace the elements comprising them

far back in time.
Computers, the basis of the Information Age, find their origins in earlier
devices, such as the ancient abacus, the seventeenth-century calculators of

Pascal, the work of Charles Babbage in the nineteenth
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?35
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.century, and Herman Hollerith's development of punched-card operations for
the U.S. Census in the 1890s.
1Even though such technologies evolve over a long period of time, they can
have revolutionary technical and social impacts even during the process of

reaching full development and application. However, history indicates that

changes in individual technologies do not by themselves have revolutionary,

sociocultural effects. Thus the medieval improvements in power sourcesŠthe

introduction of the windmill and the waterwheel on a wide scaleŠdid not

produce a "revolution" because they remained based in a small-scale agrarian
society. Most people continued to live in rural villages with farming as their
chief occupation; hence there were no major changes in where and how people

lived and worked.
Not until the eighteenth century did a whole series of technological
innovations come together to produce the classical Industrial Revolution.

Although popular opinion credits Watt's steam engine with starting

industrialization, many of its elements, such as power-driven machinery, the

factory organization of work, and specialization of labor, had already begun in

the textile industry long before Watt.
2 Concomitant changes were occurring in
mining and metallurgy, and transportation was being improved by the
development of canals and roadways. Furthermore, the foundation of a national

banking system and extension of joint-stock companies helped provide the

capital and financial requirements for technical investment and commercial

growth. The point is that a single major technical advance does not in itself

constitute a technological revolution. There must be other and related technical

advances plus major changes occurring in the political-economic-social-cultural

context of the times.
Nevertheless, scholars delight in labeling an era by its most advanced
technology, even when that technology is at first very limited in its application.

For example, even though the "Age of Steam" is said to have begun with James

Watt, for almost a century after Watt's engine more aggregate power was

generated in Britain by waterpower than by steam; and it took nearly 100 years

after Fulton' s creation of the "Steamboat Era" before sailing vessels

disappeared from oceanic commerce.
Similarly, the Wright Brothers at the beginning of this century began the
"Era of Flight," but then it was postponed for another 25 years until Lindbergh's

famous solo flight from New York to Paris; yet the "Aviation Age" really did

not take off until after World War II. In similar fashion, the ''Space Age" was

said to have dawned with Sputnik, but more than a quarter of a century has

elapsed since then,THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?36
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and we have scarcely begun to exploit space. That is indeed a long day' s
dawning!
Obviously, a single technological feat, no matter how much attention is
showered upon it, does not by itself constitute a complete technological

transformation. Indeed, one of the characteristics of a true technological

revolution is that a great many innovations take place at about the same time.

Their coming together creates a synergistic, indeed, explosive, impact upon the

production of goods and services.
But technology does not occur in a vacuum. Instead, it takes place in a
social matrix and interacts with society. Thus, despite the evolutionary nature of

its individual technical components, the British Industrial Revolution marked a

truly revolutionary transformation of society because it changed where and how

people worked, lived, thought, played, and prayed.
For millennia, agriculture had been the chief source of production. The
home-and-hearth was the center of work, education, social relationships,

recreation, and, indeed, all life. The Industrial Revolution changed all that.
With the Industrial Revolution the factory became the workplace, and the
city became the dwelling place. Family relationships changed as the father left

home each day to earn wages in a factory while the mother stayed home with

the children; other new social patterns emerged in the crowded cities, while

some traditional institutions, such as the church, saw their hold on people's lives

weakened in the urban environment. Technological and societal changes

interacted, overturning old patterns of living, thinking, and working, and

creating new institutional systems and cultural values.
Using the classical Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries as our criterion, we learn that an industrial revolution consists of two

chief elements: (1) a series of fundamental technical changes in the production

and distribution of goods accompanied byŠsometimes caused by, sometimes

reflecting, but in any event, interconnected withŠ(2) a series of social and

cultural changes of the first magnitude. Both elements must be present; a series

of technological changes alone would not constitute an industrial revolution,

nor would sociocultural changes without concomitant technological

developments produce a new industrial era.
3To see if the much-heralded, incoming Information Age is truly a
revolutionary phenomenon, let us analyze both the technological and

sociocultural changes in the classical Industrial Revolution and see if parallel

transformations are occurring today.
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?37
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CLASSICAL INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
Looking at the main technical features of the classical Industrial
Revolution, we find:
use of new basic materials, chiefly iron and steel;
  new energy sources, deriving from new prime movers and fuels, such
as coal and the steam engine, and, later, electricity, petroleum, and the

internal-combustion engine;
  mechanical inventions, such as the spinning jenny, the power loom,
and machine tools, which increased production with a smaller

expenditure of human energy;
  the centralized organization of work in the factory system, which
entailed the further division of labor and specialization of function, and

these, together with improved machines, making possible

interchangeable parts and mass production;
4  the quickening of transportation and communication through the
steamship, the steam locomotive, the automobile, and eventually the

airplane; and in communications, the telegraph, telephone, and radio;

anddevelopment of a science of technology.
5In the nonindustrial technological sphere, agricultural improvements
embodying many of the same technical changes made possible the provision of

food for a larger population. All these technological developments involved

larger use of natural resources, increased efficiency, and the low-cost, mass

production and distribution of food, manufactured goods, and accompanying

services.6Not so incidentally, all these technical advances also involved information.
After all, technology is a form of knowledgeŠknowledge of how to make and

do thingsŠwhich is why we sometimes refer to it as "know-how." Technology

implies hands and minds working together to produce more efficient machines,

processes, products, and services. All of these require the application of new

and better information or at least the bringing together of old items of

information in a new and different way. Thus, the industrial transformation of

the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries was based upon the application of new
and better information to improve traditional methods and machines and, in the
process, to create new products and services. And their synergistic interaction

accelerated the pace of change.
While political revolutions occur rather quicklyŠor at least can sometimes
be assigned definite datesŠsociocultural revolutions, involving deep-seated

changes in the ways in which people work, think, and live, require somewhat

more time for their effects to manifest themselves. Nevertheless, they too are

revolutionary in their impact.
We can see that in the nontechnical elementsŠthe economic-social-
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?38
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.political-cultural transformationsŠthat accompanied and became part of the
classical Industrial Revolution:
  the decline of land as the chief source of wealth in the face of the
immense wealth created by industrial production;
  political changes reflecting this shift in economic power, as well as
new state policies corresponding to the needs of an industrialized,

rather than agrarian, society; and
  sweeping demographic and social changes, including the growth of
cities, the development of working-class movements (indeed, the birth

of a whole new social class, the urban factory proletariat), and the

emergence of new patterns of authority within the family and at work.
7There were other broad cultural transformations. Workers were forced to
acquire new and distinctive skills, and their relation to their work shifted;

instead of being craftsmen working with hand tools, workers became machine

operators, subject to factory discipline. Also, there were major psychological

changes in people's confidence in their power over nature, and, of course, in

hedonistic satisfaction. For industrialization made possible a torrent of material

goods, which ultimately brought about a higher standard of living. Advances in

agriculture, combined with progress in medical knowledge and public health

measures, meant that hunger began to disappear as a major threat in the
industrially advanced nations. People lived longerŠand better, in terms of
material goods.This was indeed a revolution, because it transformed individual lives and
society. And it was an Industrial Revolution because the development of

industrial technology provided the basis for the sociocultural changes.
A CURRENT TECHNOLOGICAL REVOLUTION?
Are the technological and the sociocultural changes occurring in relation to
today's advances in computers of sufficient magnitude to hail ours as a

revolutionary "Information Age?"
Certainly the technical foundation has been built, including a change in
basic materials.
8 Let us remember that the introduction of new technologies
does not always mean the complete demise of older technologies, especially in

the case of materials. After all, wood continued to be a major material source

even when the Age of Steel developed. While today's improvements in materials

Šcomposites, plastics, synthetic fibers, sophisticated ceramics, and the

introduction of new alloys and lighter metalsŠdo not mean that iron and steel

are outmoded any more than the coming of the Age of Steel meant that
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?39
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.wood ceased being used, these do represent a transformation in and an
augmentation of materials resources affecting many other technical changes.

Furthermore, the development of these new materials is roughly concomitant

with the emergence of computer-aided design and manufacture. There is a

synergy between technological developments as new materials find use in

improving the operating effectiveness of the computers used to control
manufacturing of the materials and manufacturing processes that work with the
new materials.In terms of energy, with the exception of hydroelectricity, the nineteenth
century brought almost total reliance on fossil fuels. Within our own times, the

fear that finite fossil fuels will eventually be exhausted has been somewhat

alleviated by the possibility of almost limitless energy through exploitation of

the power within the atomŠalthough certain problems remain associated

therewith. Also, greater emphasis is being placed upon conservation, synthetic

fuels, renewable sources of energy, and greater and more efficient use of solar
power. So although recurrent "energy crises" might come about through
political and economic forces, we possess the requisite technical knowledge and

potential to produce an abundance of energy in different forms. This represents

a truly revolutionary technological advance over the fossil fuel era.
However, current changes in production mechanisms follow a somewhat
different, yet nevertheless revolutionary, pattern than those of the past. The

Industrial Revolution introduced power machinery and centralized production

by multitudes of factory workers, and the early twentieth century further

rationalized this process with Henry Ford's moving assembly line and Frederick

W. Taylor's Scientific Management. But nowadays, computerized information

devices form the heartŠrather, the eyes, hands, and mindŠof the machine and

allow for completely automated machinery, robots. Instead of a machine
operator, the human worker becomes a machine supervisor, overseeing a
multitude of dials while the robotized machineŠthe steel-collar workerŠdoes

the actual work and replaces many blue-collar workers. Robots can perform

dangerous operations, relieving humans from tasks that pose a threat to health

and safety. They can also perform the monotonous and routine tasks which,

some people claim, had made factory workers into machines.
9 The older
mechanical devices had taken the burden off man's back; computerized devices

also take the burden off man's mind.
In transportation too, information devices play a major role. Sophisticated
jet enginesŠhighly dependent upon electronic control and monitoringŠhave

enabled airplanes to grow larger and speedier,
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?40
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.replacing long-haul railroad and steamship passenger transportation. Also, we
have completed the first voyages of exploration and are beginning to utilize

space in new ways. These aerospace developments are linked with the

microminiaturization of computerized information devices and are, indeed,

dependent upon them. Still another example of the ubiquity of these

revolutionary information devices is their application to the workings of
automobiles and trucks performing very earthy tasks.
Communications too are being transformed, with satellite transmission of
instantaneous information from all parts of the world. But that is only the most

spectacular demonstration of how communication expertise has increased

apace. Indeed, revolutionary advances in the flow, storage, manipulation, and

retrieval of information, resulting from the improvements in computers, rightly
entitle the future to be known as the Information Age.
These contemporary major technical changesŠin materials, fuels and
prime movers, machinery, the organization of work, transportation, and

communicationŠall involve more knowledge and more information. Our

industrial and agricultural technologies are increasingly reliant upon the

newfound and enlarged technical capacity given us by computerized
information devices.
As long as computers relied on vacuum tubes and were bulky, balky, and
expensive, they had only a minor impact on industrial processes and structure.

However, with the invention of transistors and their refinement into today's

microchips, computers became omnipresent; their power was greatly multiplied,

and they found many applications beyond computational number-crunching. It
is this application of computerized information to all facets of life and
technology that makes it the centerpiece of the new technological revolution.
10The computer has repercussions far beyond the field of information and
computer science narrowly conceived. Civil, mechanical, textile, metallurgical,

chemical, ceramic, and, of course, electrical engineering also make full use of

our new informational capacity and expertise. The old slide rule hanging from
the belt of the engineering student has given way to the pocket computer.
Increasingly at every engineering institution in the country, the students have

access to desk computers wired into larger computer systems. Indeed, computer

literacy is no longer a monopoly of a small group of technical experts; instead it

is being taught at the elementary school level, and it is fast becoming a

necessary adjunct to liberal arts education, with personal computers becoming a

ubiquitous item in educated households.
Just as the old Industrial Revolution transformed agriculture as well
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?41
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.as industry, so today there have been revolutionary improvements in
agricultural production. Less than 3 percent of the American population now

lives on farms, and one American farm worker now produces enough food to

feed 84 people. This is because agriculture itself has become thoroughly

industrialized in methods and scale of production; like industry, it is being

computerized in the breeding and feeding of livestock and poultry and in the
growing of crops. Furthermore, the development of genetic technology to
improve varieties of vegetables, fruit, and grain, to say nothing of livestock,

rests upon biotechnological advances,
11 which in turn rely upon enhanced
computer capabilities, as do new chemical fertilizers and pesticides.

Agricultural technology is thus one of the chief beneficiaries of and contributors

to the new Information Age.
The R&D laboratory, which grew out of the German chemical industry in
the latter part of the nineteenth century, helped create a science of technologyŠ

or engineering scienceŠand that is reflected in the education and practices of

today's engineers.
12 Research and development, which has become
characteristic of all technologically advanced industry, has, of course, been

enhanced by our heightened informational capabilities. As a result our scientific/
technical knowledge increases apace.
In brief, the Information Age has indeed revolutionized the technical
elements of industrial society. But does it have similar revolutionary

implications for nontechnical institutions, values, and society as a whole?
A CURRENT SOCIETAL REVOLUTION?
Let us look at some of the nontechnical changes that are occurring, partly
as a result of the technological changes but also causing the advance of

technology because of the synergistic relationship between technology and

society. We can see that revolutionary changes are occurring in the pattern of

industrial society, just as it marked a vast transformation from the preceding
agrarian society.Certainly, formidable economic changes are taking place which depart
greatly from nineteenth-century industrial concentration. Although financial

concentration is now occurring on an unprecedented scale, the economics and

production technology of the older Industrial Revolution, which favored the

consolidation of production, are now giving way to decentralized facilitiesŠ
and on an international scale.Henry Ford's River Rouge plant represented the peak of the older
development: raw materials went in one end, and finished automobiles
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?42
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.came out the other end. It was a marvel for its time, and people came from all
over the world to see the wonders of "Fordismus." But no one ever built another

River Rouge; instead, it was discovered to be more efficient and economical to

disperse production facilities. Today's greater reliance upon more sophisticated

materials and technologies reinforces the tendency toward dispersionŠwith, of

course, profound impact upon the former centers of America's smokestack
industries.Similarly, when the first electronic computers were introduced some
decades ago, their complexity, size, and expense seemed to dictate that the

computerized information would perforce be concentrated and hence be

susceptible to control by relatively few individuals. Indeed, this appeared to

lend substance to George Orwell's vision of 
1984 when all informationŠand
hence all thoughtŠwould be controlled by "Big Brother." However, the
introduction of the transistor and the development of the microchip allowed for

the miniaturization of computing devices, so that today's small, hand-held

computer can rival the past giants in information capacity and activity. As the

young hackers at CalTech showed when they took over control of the

scoreboard at the 1983 Rose Bowl game, the problem is no longer that Big

Brother is watching you, but that "Little Brother" is messing up his program.
As a result, while the dispersion of information capabilities makes
impossible the centralized control of information and the power implied therein,

new problems regarding the secrecy of data, the patentability of software, and a

whole host of new socio-legal problems confront us. We are still engaged in the

process of discovering these new problems, and seeing if the old legal maxims
still apply or whether we must work out new legal mechanisms to ensure a
proper balance between private rights and the needs of the public.
Just as microcomputers make possible the diffusion as well as the
centralization of information control, so industrialization, which had begun first

on a regional, then on a national basis, is today being internationalized.

Advancing technologies have made feasible the creation of new production
centers, having different resource advantages, throughout the world. Partly this
is due to the geographical dispersion of natural resources: today's sophisticated

technology frequently requires exotic materials not available in the United

States, so that we are no longer a self-sufficient nation producing all we need

for our own uses and exporting to others. We even find it practical to import

relatively commonplace energy supplies such as oil. Another resource

advantage is lower labor costs, especially since some advanced manufacturing

techniques, including those of assembling electronic
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?43
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.devices themselves, oftentimes require only low skill levels on the part of
production-line workers. The result is an internationalization of production of

revolutionary dimensions, the implications of which are still not clearly

discerned. However, it has led to a debate on "industrial policy" dealing with

new mechanisms in order to provide training and gainful employment to those

thrown out of work by automated manufacturing processes or by the transfer of
production abroad.13Yet, while employment in traditional industries declines, the statistics on
the total number of employed people in the United States continue to mount.

For, while computerized production technology allows us to produce a cascade

of material goods with fewer workers, there has been an enlargement of the

service sector of the economy. As a result, for the past 30 years more people
have been employed in the service trades than in factory production, and the
service sector continues to grow.
One reason is the enlargement of administrative and clerical activities,
many of which derive from the heightened productive capability offered by

automated devices and the consequent enhancement of service activities.

Information automation in the office is proceeding apace,
14 and we historians,
while having 20/20 hindsight, do not possess 20/20 foresight about its social
impact.Other writers, however, apparently possess a clearer vision of the future.
For example, Alvin Toffler points out that computers will enable information

workers to do their work at home, being tied in with central computers at the

office.15 Yes, it is indeed possible for more people to work at home. But the fact
is that, with very few exceptions in certain occupations, such as editing and
writing and the piece-rate processing of insurance forms and the like, that is

simply not happening on a wide scale. The reason is that, as the ancient

philosophers pointed out, man is a social and political animal. People like to

congregate together; they derive intellectual stimulus and social satisfaction

from personal contacts. The workplace is not only a spot for making a living but

is also the site of the social interchange that is apparently a hallmark of our

human species.
16 So, just because computers might offer us certain capabilities,
this does not mean that we would want to take advantage of them, nor does it

mean that they would necessarily be advantageous for the social interchange

that, in the vast majority of cases, is essential for individual fulfillment.
Besides, Toffler neglects the fact that new technologies do not
immediately and completely replace older forms. Instead, as we can see from

the example of the classical Industrial Revolution, old technologies
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?44
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.do not immediately die, nor do they quickly fade away. Instead, the new
technologies are superimposed upon them and in many cases are used to

augment the older capabilities.
My own guess is that we will be in the midst of the ''Second-and-a-Half
Wave" for a long time before we reach Toffler's "Third Wave," by which time

the futurist scholars will already be talking about a "Fourth Wave."
Nevertheless, we can already foresee some possible changes in political
and economic power. The old Industrial Revolution shifted political and

economic power from the landed nobility, whose ownership of the land was the

key to power and wealth in an almost totally agrarian society, to the

industrialists. In England the new factory owners allied themselves with the old

landed nobility to control the political apparatus. Yet at the same time the
factory system, by concentrating workers, enabled them to organize and obtain
considerable economic clout, not as individuals, but as a group. Then the

enfranchisement of the workers in the industrially advanced states gave them a

share in political power. In brief, industrialization carried with it political and

social democratizationŠand the Information Age, by facilitating widespread

communication, might conceivably fortify democratic political control in the

advanced industrial nations.
Although we cannot be sure of that, we can be certain that governments
will continue to be involved in economic policy and hence in technological

activities. The nineteenth-century myth of laissez-faire blinded us to the fact

that governments did in reality play a major role in developing the industrial

economy: through tariffs to protect infant industries and by building or
financing roads, bridges, and other elements of the transportation network and
infrastructure. Indeed, the needs of a coordinated transportation system led not

only to the adoption of a standard gauge for railroads but also to standard time

zones. Furthermore, the increasing complexity of technology made

governments encourage the development of measurement standards, such as for

screw threads, and then safety standards. Today's sophisticated information

technology has required further government action, often on an international

scale, to assign radio frequencies and thereby allow for a freer flow of

communications. In addition, the widespread use of more powerful chemicals

and the fears of water and atmospheric pollution require governmental policing

of safety standards in many industries.
Added to the technological need for governmental action is a growing
public awareness of technology's importance to society, now and in the future,

and hence the desire for some measure of public control.
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?45
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Partly this is an outgrowth of a rising level of education, itself made
possible through previous technological advance. As the Industrial Revolution

began producing enough goods so that young children no longer had to be in the

work force, they could be sent to school. Besides, the increasingly complex

nature of technological devices required an educated work force.
As a result, we can trace the democratization of education throughout the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries in the industrially advanced nations as a

function of technological growth and complexity. At first elementary education

became compulsory, then secondary education, and in the twentieth century

America pledged itself to give equal access to higher education to all its citizens

(sometimes irrespective of their ability to take advantage of it).
The new Information Age requires even more complex and sophisticated
technology, so there is need for a still higher degree of specialized technical

skillsŠincluding social skills as well as manipulative ones. Educational

responses to the needs of the Information Age are already being discussed and

fought over throughout the educational establishmentŠincluding, and perhaps

especially, among engineering educators.
Still another revolutionary social change has been abetted by the new
Information Age: the entrance of women into the work force in unparalleled

numbers. Before the onset of industrialization, women worked alongside the

menfolk in the fields and in the home handcraft production of the times. With

the rise of the factory system and its regimen of disciplined work and hours,

men became the breadwinners, while the women remained at home and were

responsible for homemaking and child rearing.
However, machine technology has advanced to the point that brute
strength is no longer a special asset, so women no longer labor under any

physical disability. Machines do not know or care whether the hands that guide

them are those of a man or a womanŠor, for that matter, whether they are

white, black, blue, purple, or green. As a result, advancing technology means

that racial and gender distinctions scarcely matter in the actual production
processŠalthough, for social and cultural reasons such distinctions
unfortunately persist in many parts of the world.
Women possess the physical stamina, intellectual qualities, and moral
virtues that make them the equals of men in an Information Society where

burdensome physical work has been taken over by machines. Hence, we are in

the midst of a social revolutionŠsome call it a sexual revolutionŠthat is

closely linked with the technical
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?46
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.advances which have given women technical equality with men, even though
they may not yet have acquired the social and political power that goes with

their technical equality, to say nothing of wage equality.
Office automation will not only affect the clerical work that was the
domain of women for almost the entire past century. Rather, it will extend to all

aspects of production and distribution, since it allows for close monitoring of

production processes as well as clerical tasks of billing and the like.

Furthermore, it can give top managers fingertip access to information formerly

supplied them by the middle managerial group. Here again, we cannot foretell
with exactitude what will happen, but there will undoubtedly be further
rationalization in the office procedures inherited from an earlier age, while the

information user in the office will have more direct contact with the production

process itself.What is equally interesting to social historians and cultural anthropologists
is that many of the revolutionary information devices will be incorporated into

the mechanisms of our daily lives without our being aware of them. Already

microchips are being used in the thermostats for our home heating and air

conditioning systems and in the ignition and carburetion systems of our
automobiles. But we will still set our thermostat at 70° without awareness that
the microchip is increasing the energy efficiency of our heating and air

conditioning systems; and we will step on the gas or on the brakes without

realizing that the microchip enables us to achieve better control of the

automobile.Of much greater significance than simply catering to our creature comforts
are those major social changes occurring as an outgrowth of advancing

information technology which will have a powerful effect upon our country's

and the world's future. Among the most important are demographic changes
resulting from public health, medical, and nutritional advances deriving from
sophisticated computerized research in health technologies. As a result, people

are living longerŠand this is already changing the character of American

society.But there is a reverse side to this demographic coin, namely, rapidly
exploding populations in the developing nations, where more than half the

people are under 15 years of age. As a result, there are demands for

technological development to meet the material needs of the world's growing

population. At the same time there are apparently conflicting demands that this
be done without plundering the earth of its resources or damaging the
environment. In other words, the Information Age must stimulate technological

growth to meet these demands and do so by new kinds of technical applications

that will maintain the productivity and salubrity of our planet for future

generations.THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?47
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Finally, we come to the psychological changes, both social and individual,
effected by technological changes. Until the Industrial Revolution people had

always been fearful that the vagaries of nature would deprive them of life's

necessities. With the plethora of material goods and foods made available

through the technological advances of the nineteenth century, people were able

to keep hunger at bay, and indeed overcome many of the hardships inflicted by
nature through centralized heating and air conditioning systems, electrical
lighting, and the like.Not surprisingly, the world's fairs of the past century emphasized the great
accomplishments of science and technology. The notion that human technical

abilities would enable us to accomplish anything we attempted was given

further credence some 15 years ago when man first set foot on the moon. Here

was the culmination of the Scientific Revolution of the seventeenth century and

the Industrial Revolution of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the actual

fulfillment of one of man's most ancient myths and dreams. It is no wonder that
we could be accused of the old Greek sin of hubris, inordinate pride.
Paradoxically, however, at almost the very same time, we began
discovering that many of our previous technological triumphs were despoiling

the environment and that our military technology posed a threat to the

continuation of life on our planet.
As a result, the new Information Age has brought with it a somewhat more
equivocal view of the human relationship to nature. Instead of man's being the

master of nature, it is now realized that man is a part of nature and that our

future depends upon a fuller recognition of both nature's and humanity's

capabilities and limitations.
But, that does not necessarily mean that doomsday is forthcoming, nor
need it deprive us of hope. Unlike earlier ages when human technical capacities

were prescribed by the availability of certain natural resources, limited in the

forms of energy that might be applied, and constrained to do and to make things

in the same way as their ancestors had done, our new technology provides us

with many different ways of attacking problems. We now have many and

growing options in regard to the materials that we wish to employ, the energy

sources that we intend to utilize, and the ways in which we go about producing
and distributing food, goods, and services. Because the scientific technology of
the incoming Information Age offers us manifold choices, we can make

decisions about the future course of society with due concern for conservation

of natural resources, the preservation of the environment, and the well-being of

our fellowman now and in the future.
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?48
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGY AND CULTURAL LAG
However, just because we have the ability to do new and wonderful things
with our technology does not necessarily mean that we will actually do so.

Many years ago the great sociologist William Fielding Ogburn postulated the

concept of ''cultural lag" in terms of human response to technical capabilities.
17He pointed out that the technologies developed in the preceding century gave

mankind the opportunity to bring about a new and better social system,
allowing the vast quantity of material goods being turned out by an advancing
technology to redound to the benefit to all of mankind, rather than being

confined to a narrow few. However, he also stated that cultural systems and

human institutionsŠgovernmental, legal, and the likeŠtend to lag in

responding to new opportunities offered by these technical innovations.
Lewis Mumford's analysis, some 50 years ago, of the relations between
technology and culture seemed to reinforce Ogburn's thesis.
18 He claimed that
the latest technical innovations were still being employed to further the aims

and goals of the earlier industrial transformation based upon the exploitation of

nature and of human beings. In other words, while our technology might enable

us to make a better world for all, it was being employed in the service of

institutions and values belonging to an older and more selfish age, one that
considered neither humanity nor the natural world.
The analyses of both Ogburn and Mumford were provocative when
initially stated, but they appear simplistic in light of what actually happened.

True, our new technology gives us capabilities to do many wonderful things,

but we often continue to employ them in the service of institutions and values

belonging to an older age. Mumford hoped our bright new technologies would

point the way to a brave new world founded upon social justice and a concern

for nature. Ogburn too felt that technology could better humanity's lot, and he

deplored the "cultural lag" that prevented it from doing so. Both men implied
that technology could do wonderful things for mankind, but things went wrong
when we did not allow it to do so.
True, but what they forgot is that technology is a quintessential human
activity, so it bears the contradictionsŠthe "goods" and "bads"Što be found in

all complex human activities. It is designed for human use, but that means it is

also subject to human misuse and abuse. If technology were the sole

determinant of human actions, our current world might be a much betterŠand

certainly a differentŠplace.
Here is an example of how an advance made possible by technologyŠ
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?49
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.international goodwill through better communications and more contact among
different peoples throughout the worldŠbogs down under the "cultural lag"

afforded by nontechnical factors that take precedence over technical

capabilities. Electronic messages can flow across the globe in a fraction of a

second, irrespective of the political boundaries; hence the technical element of

modern communication is indifferent to national boundaries. Similarly, there
are no technical barriers to prevent airplanes from transcending national
borders. In other words, modern communication and transportation have made

nationalism technologically obsolete; however, any glance at the headlines

convinces us that while nationalism might be technically obsolete, it still

remains one of the most powerful forces affecting the future of mankind.
EVOLUTION AND REVOLUTION
Acknowledgment of this and similar facts has led me to reformulate the
concepts of my predecessors who pioneered in analyzing the interactions

between technical and sociocultural elements and has led me to formulate

"Kranzberg's First Law." Kranzberg's First Law reads as follows: Technology is

neither good nor bad, nor is it neutral.
By that I mean that technology's interactions with both the social and
cultural milieus sometimes lead to developments that are far removed from the

original goals of the technical elements themselves. For example, Henry Ford

thought of his motorcar as a means to cheapen transportation and make

personalized transport available to the masses. It did that of course, but it also

did much more than that, transforming where and how we work, play, live,

shop, eat, sleep, andŠfor those of you who remember rumble seatsŠeven

where we made love.
In accordance with Kranzberg's First Law, the Information Age will have
similar and unanticipated impacts, as the computer goes far beyond the task of

number-crunching and instantaneous communication of data. The variety of

functions that computers serve suggests that their consequences will be mixed,

unevenly distributed, and diffused, assimilated, and modified at uneven rates.

Hence, we still cannot foresee exactly what some of the consequences will be,

any more than the prophets at the turn of this century could foretell that the

automobile would lead to the suburbanization of American society, provide the

prototype for the mass production of all kinds of material goods, do away with
the old distinction between city and country dweller, and, with its related
industries, help produce the richest society in the world's history.
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?50
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Furthermore, as a corollary to Kranzberg's First Law, the same technology
can have quite different results when introduced into a different cultural setting.

Thus, some technologies developed in advanced industrial countries have quite

different effects when introduced into some developing nations. Because

technology functions in a sociocultural matrix and depends upon an

infrastructure that includes the educational level of the population, its political
and economic institutions, and its value system (including religious beliefs), it
can produce markedly different results when it interacts with a culture that

differs from our Western industrial society.
The point I am trying to make is that this new Information Age presents
mankind with many different possibilities. But because people differ

historically in their cultural and social institutions throughout the world, the

new technology can have quite different results when applied in differing

sociocultural settings. Besides, the technology itself is still evolving, and hence

might interact with our values, institutions, and attitudes along quite different
lines than expected.
Even so, the historical record gives us some cause for optimism. The
technical advances of the Information Age, if they follow the pattern of

previous technical changes, could provide us with more goods and services,

increase material well-being, and help do away with poverty and misery

throughout the globe. And by giving us greater knowledge of the human, social,
and environmental consequences of our technical options through the new
informational tools available for technology assessment and impact analysis, the

Information Age might help us avoid catastrophic assaults upon nature and

upon our fellow human beings. For computer technologyŠalong with its

associated cluster of increasingly sophisticated analytic software, simulation

models, and data basesŠpermits more complex analyses than have been

previously possible in the social sciences. Indeed, the more information people

have about nature, technology, and society, the more it might not only enable

them to improve their living standards but also to do away with hatred and

fanaticismŠalthough we cannot be sure of that.
One thing we do know. Despite the many defects we can find in highly
industrialized societies, including our own, the fact is that the most

technologically advanced nations are the ones that have abandoned cruel and

unusual punishments; have provided social welfare and medical services for all

segments of society; have allowed for the greatest measure of racial, religious,
and sexual equality; and have, in large measure, provided for freedom and a
humane life for all.
The Information Age promises to carry those hopes for the good
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?51
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.life even further. While it might be evolutionary, in the sense that all the
changes and benefits will not appear overnight, it will be revolutionary in its

effects upon our society.
NOTES1. Although it was written before some recent, major developments, Jeremy Bernstein, 
TheAnalytical Engine: ComputersŠPast, Present, and Future
 (New York: Random House, 1964)
provides a good popular account of computer history. See also Nancy Stern and Robert Stern,

Computers in Society
 (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1983). The 
Annals of the History
of Computing,
 published by the American Federation of Information Processing Societies,
contains articles about the recent as well as the "ancient history" of computers.
2. Terry S. Reynolds, "Medieval Roots of the Industrial Revolution," 
Scientific American,
 Vol.
251, No. 1 (July 1984):122Œ30.
3. Melvin Kranzberg, "Prerequisites for Industrialization," in Kranzberg and Carol W. Pursell,
Technology in Western Civilization
, 2 vols. (New York: Oxford University Press, 1967), Vol. 1,
Chap. 13.
4. Although Britain was the birthplace of the Industrial Revolution, these developments were
carried further in the "American System of Manufactures." See Otto Mayr and Robert C. Post,
eds., Yankee Enterprise: The Rise of the American System of Manufactures
 (Washington, D.C.:
Smithsonian Press, 1981); and David A. Hounshell, 
From the American System to Mass
Production, 1800Œ1932: The Development of Manufacturing Technology in the United States

(Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1984).
5. A major article on this topic is Edwin T. Layton, "Mirror-Image Twins: The Communities of
Science and Technology in 19th-Century America," 
Technology and Culture,
 Vol. 12 (Oct.
1971):562Œ80.
6. Standard accounts of the Industrial Revolution include David Landes, 
The Unbound
Promotheus: Technical Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to
the Present
 (London: Cambridge University Press, 1969); and T. S. Ashton, 
The Industrial
Revolution, 1760Œ1970
 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1943).
7. See E. P. Thompson, 
The Making of the English Working Class
 (New York: Random House
Pantheon Books, 1963); and Raymond Williams, 
The Long Revolution
 (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1961).
8. Melvin Kranzberg and Cyril Stanley Smith, "Materials in History and Society," 
Materials
Science and Engineering,
 Vol. 37, No. 1 (Jan. 1979):1Œ39; National Academy of Engineering,
Cutting Edge Technologies
 (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1983), part III; Philip
H. Abelson, "Materials Science and Engineering," 
Science,
 Vol. 225, No. 4675 (Nov. 9,
1984):613.
9. Larry Hirschhorn, 
Beyond Modernization: Work and Technology in a Postindustrial Age
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1984).
10. See Tom Forester, ed., 
The Microelectronics Revolution: The Complete Guide to the New
Technology and Its Impact on Society
 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981).
11. Charles J. Arntzen, "Biotechnology and Agricultural Research for Crop Improvement,"
NAE, 
Cutting Edge Technologies,
 pp. 52Œ61.
12. Melvin Kranzberg, "The Wedding of Science and Technology: A Very Modern Marriage,"
in John Nicholas Burnett, ed., 
Technology and Science: Important 
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?52
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Distinctions for Liberal Arts Colleges
 (Davidson, N.C.: Davidson College, 1984), pp. 27Œ37.
13. A good summation of the issues involved is provided in Bruce Babbitt, "The States and the
Reindustrialization of America," 
Issues in Science and Technology,
 Vol. 1, No. 1 (Fall
1984):84Œ93. Works featured in the debate include Lester C. Thurow, 
The Zero-Sum Society:
Distribution and the Possibilities for Economic Change
 (New York: Basic Books, 1980);
Bennett Harrison and Barry Bluestone, 
The Deindustrialization of America: Plant Closings,
Community Abandonment, and the Dismantling of Basic Industry
 (New York: Basic Books,
1982); and Robert B. Reich, 
The Next American Frontier
 (New York: Times Books, 1983).
14. J. David Roessner et al., 
Impact of Office Automation on Office Workers,
 4 vols., U.S.
Department of Labor R&E Grant/Contract No. 21-13-82-13 (Atlanta: Georgia Tech Research
Institute, 1983); Vincent E. Giuliano, "The Mechanization of Office Work," 
Scientific
American, Vol. 247, No. 3 (Sept. 1982):148Œ64.
15. Alvin Toffler, 
The Third Wave
 (New York: Morrow, 1980). Similar optimism about the
future role of information technology is to be found in John Diebold, 
Making the Future Work:
Unleashing Our Powers of Innovation for the Decades Ahead
 (New York: Simon and Schuster,
1984).16. Sherry Turkle, 
The Second Self: Computers and the Human Spirit
 (New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1984) provides an interesting discussion of this point.
17. William Fielding Ogburn, 
On Culture and Social Change: Selected Papers,
 edited by Otis
Dudley Duncan (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964).
18. Lewis Mumford, 
Technics and Civilization
 (New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1934).
COMMENTSGunnar HambraeusChairman
Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences

It is my firm conviction that we are only at the beginning of a tremendous
development which, in its effect on the individual and on society, will be more
far-reaching than anything that we have witnessed until now.
The following three facts support my belief. First, we cannot yet discern
any slackening of the pace in hardware development, as illustrated in Dr.
Mayo's paper. This pace is in speed of operations, storage capacity, and
reduction in price. Possibly we have not yet passed the point of inflection on the

traditional growth curve.
Second, we still only utilize a small fraction of the capabilities of our
hardware. The reason is, of course, the lag in software production and systems

architecture. Ultimately software improvements will increase the productivity
of present existing computers at least 10-fold. The combined effects of machine
and program development will indeed be dramatic.
Third, the computer in combination with instant communications will
multiply research and development productivity in all fields of science and

technology. Already, data logging systems make possible the harvesting and

interpretation of primary experimental data on a scale that we did not dare to
THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?53
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.dream of 20 years ago. In these vast collections of data, software can now trace
connections and interdependences in a multidimensional space hitherto

inaccessible to even the greatest giants of science. Hypotheses, theories, and

conclusions can then be instantly conveyed to other research centers to be

discussed, analyzed, and tested within days of the original new idea.
Also, computer modeling can, to a certain extent, substitute for real
experiments, thus further increasing the speed of discovery. The same

mechanisms also influence the application of knowledge in industry. Already

we have a set of tools for development, design, production planning, and

technology management that do for the engineers what numerical control and

automation have already done for the worker on the factory floor. Here again,

most of the opportunities are still before us.
The social consequences of this evolution will be far-reaching, to say the
least. The important social consequences are not only in the various aspects of a

cashless, paperless, and robotized future. There is the eternal struggle, political

and social, over powerful tools. If you doubt my words, just witness the Soviets'

frantic efforts to put their hands on information hardware. There are also

important social implications for the rights of the individual vis-à-vis society,
the questions of the integrity of the individual and the manipulation of people
by misuse of information technology.
Information technologies carry both enormous benefits and grave dangers.
We can have freedom or slavery, and a disturbing fact is that these options are

poorly understood by laymen, the public, mass media, and decision makers.

These issues are seldom the topic of serious discussion. I noticed with wonder

the total lack of discussion on these issues in the 1984 U.S. presidential election

race, and I find the same lack of interest in my own country. There is no more

important task for an academy of engineering than to bring these issues into the
open.THE INFORMATION AGE: EVOLUTION OR REVOLUTION?54
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Twilight of Hierarchy Speculations on
the Global Information Society
Harland Cleveland
THE INFORMATIZATION OF SOCIETY
It is still shocking, forty years later, to remember that the Manhattan
Project, the huge secret organization that produced the atom bomb during

World War II, did not employ on its staff a single person whose full-time

assignment was to think hard about the policy implications of the project if it

should succeed. Thus no one was working on nuclear arms controlŠthough I. I.

Rabi says he and Robert Oppenheimer used to discuss it earnestly over lunch.

We have been playing catch up, not too successfully, ever since.
The Manhattan Project was not an exception; it was the rule. For 300 years
until the 1970s science and technology were quite generally regarded as having

a life of their own, an inner logic, an autonomous sense of direction. Their self-

justifying ethic was change and growth. But in the 1970s society started to take

chargeŠnot of scientific discovery but of its technological fallout. The decision

not to build the SST or deploy an ABM system even though we knew how to

make them, the dramatic change in national environmental policy, and the

souring of the nuclear power industry bear witness.
The most prominent and pervasive consequence of the people's concern
about the impacts and implications of new technologies is what the French call

l'informatisatioqn de la société
. The made up
* Copyright 1985 by Harlan Cleveland.
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION

SOCIETY55Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.word, which we will Americanize to informatization, will serve as well as any
to describe what is happening to some of our key concepts and conceptions as

information becomes the dominant resource in postindustrial society. The new

word is certainly better than postindustrial, which describes the future by saying

it comes after the past.
The revolutions that began with Charles Babbage's analytical engine (less
than 150 years ago) and Guglielmo Marconi's wireless telegraphy (not yet a

century old) started on quite different tracks. But a quarter of a century ago,

computers and telecommunications began to converge to produce a combined

complexity, one interlocked industry that is transforming our personal lives, our

national politics, and our international relations.
The industrial era was characterized by the influence of humankind over
things, including nature as well as the artifacts of man. The information era
features a sudden increase in humanity's power to think, and therefore to

organize.The information society does not replace, it overlaps, the growing,
extracting, processing, manufacturing, recycling, distribution, and consumption

of tangible things. Agriculture and industry continue to progress by doing more

with less through better knowledge, leaving plenty of room for a knowledge

economy that, in statistics now widely accepted, accounts for more than half of

our work force, our national product, and our global reach.
A DOMINANT RESOURCE, A DIFFERENT RESOURCE
The size and scope of the information society are now familiar even in the
popular literature. We can take it as read that information is the dominant

resource in the United States, and coming to be so in other advanced or

developed countries. To take only one cross section of this startling shift, the

actual production, extraction, and growing of things now soak up a good deal

less than a quarter of our human resources. Of all the rest, which used to be
lumped together as services, more than two-thirds are information workers. By
the end of the century, something like two-thirds of all work will be information

work. Table 1
 shows one effort at describing the sweep of change.
1It is not only in the United States that the informatization of society has
proceeded so far so fast. A study by the Organization for Economic

Cooperation and Development (the club of richer nations, with head
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY56Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.quarters in Paris) puts the average information labor force of several of its
members' countries at more than one-third of the total during the early-to

mid-1970s, and rising: the information component of labor increased its share

of the total by 2.8 percent for each five-year period since World War II.
2TABLE 1 U.S. Work Force Distribution
18801920195519752000 (est.)
Agriculture & extractive50%28%14%4%2%
Manufacturing, commerce, industry3653372922
Other services1210201710
Information, knowledge, education
29295066SOURCE: © 1984 New Jersey Bell. Reprinted, with permission, from the Spring 1984 issue of 
NewJersey Bell Journal
.Farming, which in some people's vocabularies is the most primitive of
pursuits, is probably farther ahead than most industries in the embedding of

information in physical processes. Says agricultural economist G. Edward

Schuh: ''All of the increase in agricultural output from the mid-1920s through
the mid-1970s came about with no increase in the capital stock of physical
resources. It was all due to new knowledge or information. That makes clear the

extent to which knowledge is an output or resource."
3If information (organized data, refined into knowledge and combined into
wisdom) is now our "crucial resource," as Peter Drucker describes it,
4 what
does that portend for the future? Thinking about the inherent characteristics of
information provides some clues to the vigorous rethinking that lies ahead for
all of us:
Information is expandable
. In 1972, the same year 
The Limits to Growth
was published, John McHale came out with a book called 
The Changing
Information Environment,
5 which argued that information expands as it is used.
Whole industries have grown up to exploit this characteristic of information:
scientific research, technology transfer, computer software (which already
makes a contribution to the U.S. economy that is three times the contribution of

computer hardware), and agencies for publishing, advertising, public relations,

and government propaganda to spread the word (and thus to enhance the word's

value).The ultimate limits to growth of knowledge and wisdom are 
time (time
available to human minds for reflecting, analyzing, and integrating
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY57Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the information that will be brought to life by being used) and the 
capacity of
peopleŠindividually and in groupsŠto analyze and think integratively. There

are obvious limits to the time each of us can devote to the production and

refinement of knowledge and wisdom. But the capacity of humanity to integrate

its collective experience through relevant individual thinking is certainly

expandableŠnot without limits, to be sure, but within limits we cannot now
measure or imagine.
Information is not resource-hungry
. Compared to the processes of the steel-
and-automobile economy, the production and distribution of information are

remarkably sparing in their requirements for energy and other physical and

biological resources.
Investments, price policies, and power relationships which assume that the
more developed countries will gobble up disproportionate shares of real

resources are overdue for wholesale revision.
Information is substitutable
. It can and increasingly does replace capital,
labor, and physical materials. Robotics and automation in factories and offices

are displacing workers and thus requiring a transformation of the labor force.

Any machine that can be accessed by computerized telecommunications does
not have to be in your own inventory. And Dieter Altenpohl, an executive of
Alusuisse, has calculations and charts to prove that, as he says, "The smarter the

metal, the less it weighs."
6Information is transportable
. In modern communication systems
information travels at close to the speed of light. As a result, remoteness is now

more choice than geography. You can sit in Auckland, New Zealand, and play
the New York stock markets in real timeŠif you do not mind keeping slightly
peculiar hours. And the same is true, without the big gap in time zones, of

people in any rural hamlet in the United States. In the world of information-

richness, you will be able to be remote if you want to, but you will have to work

at it.Information is diffusive
. It tends to leakŠand the more it leaks the more
we have. It is not the inherent tendency of natural resources to leak: jewels may

be stolen; a lump or two of coal may fall off the coal car on its way east from

Montana; and there is an occasional spillage of oil in the ocean. But the leakage
of information is wholesale, pervasive, and continuous. In the era of the
institutionalized leak, monopolizing information is very nearly a contradiction

in terms. Information monopolies will exist, as time passes, only in more and

more specialized fields, for shorter and shorter periods of time.
Information is shareable
. Shortly before his death, Colin Cherry wrote that
information by nature cannot give rise to exchange trans
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY58Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.actions, only to sharing transactions.
7 Things are exchanged if I give you a
flower or sell you my automobile. When our exchange transaction is done, you

have it and I do not. If I sell you an idea, however, or give you a fact, we both

have it. An information-rich environment is thus a sharing environment. That

need not mean an environment without standards, rules, conventions, and

ethical codes. It does mean that the standards, rules, conventions, and codes are
going to be different from those created to manage the zero-sum bargains of
market trading and traditional international relations.
THE EROSION OF HIERARCHIES
I am not a scholar of information/communication theory, but in my
listening and reading as a practicing generalist I am struck with three seminal

ideas as containing the most nourishment for our purpose, which is to think

about how the new information environment is likely to modify our inherited

assumptions about rule, power, and authority.
One is that information (in its generic sense) is not 
like other resources,
nor, as some would have it, merely another form of energy. It is not subject to

the laws of thermodynamics, and efforts to explain the new information

environment by using metaphors from physics will just get in our way.
A second idea I find nourishing is that the ultimate purpose of all
knowledge is to organize things or people, arrange them in ways that make

them different from the way they were before. This is true of rearranging the

genes in a chromosome, and it is equally true of rearranging people's ideas to

create a movement. There is no such thing as useless knowledge, only people

who have not yet learned how to use it. This was the powerful message carded

in a 1979 article in 
Science by Lewis Branscomb, chief scientist of IBM. He
wrote that information is so far from being scarce that it is in ''chronic surplus."
There is still plenty for scientists to find out, but "the yawning chasm is between

what is already known by some but not yet put to use by others."
8A third insight, from the late British communications theorist Colin
Cherry, is the distinction between the information ("message") itself and the

service of delivering it. You may own the paper you hold in your hand, but you

do not own its contents, the facts and ideas in the paper. Neither, now that I

have written them down and you and I are sharing them, do I.
9The historically sudden dominance of the information resource has, it
seems, produced a kind of theory crisis, a sudden sense of having
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY59Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.run out of basic assumptions. This is only partially the product of information
and communication technologies and their fusion in the new systems that are

sprouting daily. Other dramatic extensions of scientific rationalism and

engineering genius such as nuclear fission and gene splicingŠall with an

indispensable assist from the new information technologiesŠhave also made

their contribution to the 
bouleversement of long-held social and political
convictions.But somewhere near the center of the confusion is the trouble we make for
ourselves by carrying over into our thinking about information (which is to say

symbols) concepts developed for the management of 
thingsŠconcepts such as
property, depletion, depreciation, monopoly, unfairnesses in distribution,

geopolitics, the class struggle, and topdown leadership.
The assumptions we have inherited are not producing satisfactory growth
with acceptable equity either in the capitalist West or in the socialist East. As

Simon Nora and Alain Minc wrote in their landmark report to the president of

France: "The liberal and Marxist approaches, contemporaries of the production-

based society, are rendered questionable by its demise."
10The most troublesome concepts are those that were created to deal with the
main problems presented by the management of thingsŠproblems such as their

scarcity, their bulk, their limited substitutability for each other, the expense and

trouble in transporting them, the paucity of information about them (which

made them comparatively easy to hide), and the fact that, being tangible, they

could be hoarded. It was in the nature of things that the few had access to

resources and the many did not.
Thus, the inherent characteristics of physical resources (both natural and
man-made) made possible the development of hierarchies of 
power based on
control (of new weapons, of energy sources, of trade routes, of markets, and
especially of knowledge), hierarchies of 
influence based on secrecy,
 hierarchies
of 
class based on ownership,
 hierarchies of 
privilege based on early access
 to
valuable resources, and hierarchies of 
politics based on geography
.Each of these five bases for discrimination and unfairness is crumbling
todayŠbecause the old means of control are of dwindling efficacy; secrets are

harder and harder to keep; and ownership, early arrival, and geography are of

dwindling significance in getting access to the knowledge and wisdom which

are the really valuable legal tender of our time.
Out of dozens of assumptions requiring a newly skeptical stare in the new
knowledge environment, these five seem to me to bear most
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY60Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.directly on leadership and management, because they are likely to affect most
profoundly the ways in which, and the purposes for which, people will in future

come together in organizations to make something different happen.
POWER BASED ON CONTROL: POWER AND
PARTICIPATIONKnowledge is power, as Francis Bacon wrote in 1597. So the wider the
spread of knowledge, the more power gets diffused. For the most part

individuals, corporations, and governments do not have a choice about this; it is

the ineluctable consequence of creatingŠthrough educationŠsocieties with

millions of knowledgeable people.
We see the results all around us, and around the world. More and more
work gets done by horizontal processŠor it does not get done. More and more

decisions are made with wider and wider consultationŠor they do not stick. If

the Census Bureau counted each year the number of committees per thousand

population, we would have a rough quantitative measure of the bundle of

changes called the information society. A revolution in the technology of

organizationŠthe twilight of hierarchyŠis already well under way.
Once information could be spread fast and wideŠrapidly collected and
analyzed, instantly communicated, readily understood by millionsŠthe power

monopolies that closely held knowledge used to make possible were subject to

accelerating erosion.
In the old days when only a few people were well educated and
knowledgeable, leadership of the uninformed was likely to be organized in

vertical structures of command and control. Leadership of the informed is

different: it results in the necessary action only if exercised mainly by

persuasion, bringing into consultation those who are going to have to do

something to make the decision a decision. Where people are educated and are

not treated this way, they either balk at the decisions made or have to be
dragooned by organized misinformation backed by brute force. Recent
examples of both results have been on display in Poland.
This is the rationale for Chester Barnard's durable theory of the executive
function: that authority is 
delegated upward
. As director of an organization, you
have no power that is not granted to you by your subordinates. Eliciting their

continuous (and, if possible, cheerful) cooperation is your main job as director;

without it, you cannot get accomplished the most routine tasks (for which others

are holding you, not your staff, responsible).
11 Indeed, nowadays in many
offices orders that used to be routinely accepted are now resisted or refused.
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY61Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In the modern American office, if you want a cup of coffee you do not take
that co-worker, your secretary, off her or his own work to get it for you.
In an information-rich polity, the very definition of control changes. Very
large numbers of people empowered by knowledgeŠcoming together in

parties, unions, factions, lobbies, interest groups, neighborhoods, families, and

hundreds of other structuresŠassert the right or feel the obligation to make

policy.Decision making proceeds not by the flow of recommendations up and
orders down, but by development of a shared sense of direction among those

who must form the parade if there is going to be a parade. Collegial not

command structures become the more natural basis for organization. Not

command and control, but conferring and networking become the mandatory

modes for getting things done. Planning cannot be done by a few leaders, or by

even the brightest whiz kids immured in a systems analysis unit or a planning

staff. Real-life planning is the dynamic improvisation by the many on a general
sense of directionŠannounced by the few, but only after genuine consultation
with those who will have to improvise on it. More participatory decision

making implies a need for much information, widely spread, and much

feedback, seriously attendedŠas in biological processes. Participation and

public feedback become conditions precedent to decisions that stick.
That means more openness, less secrecyŠnot as an ideological preference
but as a technological imperative. Secrecy goes out of fashion anyway, because

secrets are so hard to keep. And policy widens out to become what Paul

Appleby, that farseeing philosopher of public administration, called it a

generation ago. "Policy," he said, "is the decisions that are made at your level

and higher."12 But note that his vertical language is already obsolescent.
Most of the history we learn in school is so narrowly focused on visible
leaders that it may give us the wrong impression about leadership processes

even in earlier times. We learn that Genghis Khan or Louis XIV or ibn-Saud or

the emperor of Japan or George Washington said this and did thatŠas though

he thought it up by himself, consulted with nobody, and wrote it without the

help of a ghostwriter. But even in ancient, traditional societies I suspect that

effective leadership consisted in being closely in touch with where the relevant
publics were ready to be told to go.
Consensus is a prominent feature of many cultures now dismissed as
primitive. The Polynesians in the Pacific Islands with their circular village

councils and the American Indians around their campfires made
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY62Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(and in some degree still make) decisions by fluid procedures which may induce
more genuine participation than a modern meeting run by parliamentary

procedure. In the agora of Athens and the Roman "senate and public" (the

SPQR), there seems to have been lively participation by those (wellborn male

citizens) qualified to take part.
The difference in the current scene is the sheer 
scale of the relevant
publics. In democratic Athens slaves, women, tradesmen, and other noncitizens

did not presume to play in the decision games. The notion that all men, let alone

whole peoples, had inalienable rights came in only with the Enlightenment, a

scant three centuries agoŠand has been made effective, still in a minority of the

world's nations, only in the twentieth century. In Switzerland women 
stillcannot vote.Participatory fever is contagious. Public policy used to mean what the
government does. Now it includes corporate policies, collective bargaining

agreements, the cost of health care, the recruitment of university presidents,

lobbying practices, equal employment opportunity, environmental protection,

tax shelters, waste disposal, private contributions to political candidates, the sex

habits of employees, or just about any other insider activities that outsiders
think are important enough to engage their time and attention.
The biggest issues so far have to do with the quality of public
responsibility that shows forth in the actions of corporations, universities,

hospitals, and the thousands of other structures in which executives make the

decisions that serve people, cost them, anger or please them.
The rising tide of participation is reflected in dramatic organizational
changes. Big corporations now usually have a vice-president for keeping the

corporation out of trouble with nosy outsiders, or even with their own

stockholders and employees, who raise questions about what the company
ought to produce, who it ought to employ, and how it ought to invest its money.
Should my company, or any American company, make and market nerve
gas, even if the government does want to buy some? Should my company, or

any American company, promote nuclear proliferation by selling to developing

countries nuclear power plants that make plutonium, the fuel for nuclear

weapons, as a by-product of generating electricity? Shouldn't my company have
more women, and blacks, and American Indians in its employŠand especially
in its board and top management? Should a company whose stock I own invest

my money in South Africa? Should my company, or any American company,

pass the social costs of its profit seekingŠovercrowding, the paving of green

space, radioactive risk, dirt, noise, toxic waste,
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY63Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.acid rain, or whateverŠto the general public? Should our community hospital
perform abortions, splice genes, change people's sex, and invest in expensive

equipment that can help only a few affluent patients? Should our state

university do secret work for the Defense Department? Should the CIA recruit

our students for who-knows-what clandestine wars in other people's countries?
Such questions cannot be brushed aside without raising their decibel level.
There are ways to deal with all of them: shifts of policy, or consultative

processes, diversionary moves, or public explanationsŠin descending order of

probable effectiveness. But the visibly responsible leaders increasingly have to

build into their organizations, not as a public relations frill but as an essential

ingredient in bottom-line budgeting, staff members competent to help develop

strategy on such issues as these. And the visible executive now has to be
personally competent to defend the organization's public posture in public
debate.These public responsibility issues can make or break companies, products,
and executive reputations. If you do not believe that, take a Nestle executive to

lunch and ask him about marketing baby formula in the Third World.
INFLUENCE BASED ON SECRECY: DILEMMAS OF
OPENNESSThe push for participation by all kinds of people and the inherent leakiness
of the information resource combine to produce the modern executive's most

puzzling dilemma. The dilemma must have been familiar to the first cave

people who tried to bring other cave people together to get something done. But

for us moderns, the scale of the perplexity is without precedent. The dilemma

can be summarized in one question: How do you get everybody in on the act

and still get some action?
The contemporary clamor to be in on the act is certainly impressive. In
business, customers are feistier, more likely to complain; stockholders are more

numerous and less passive; policyholders are more inclined to follow through

on their insurance claims; union members and other citizens give advice on

what is wrong with the steel and automobile industries; employees assert the

right to judge whether their employers should make fragmentation bombs;

maritime unions decide whether shipments should go to the Soviet Union;

advocacy agencies excluded from the United Way organize their own
competing drive for community funds; ethnic groups keep a watchful eye on
investments in South Africa and business with the Arabs. More and more

parents have a world population policy; teachers organize to tell
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY64Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.school systems what ought to be taught; students want tailor-made courses of
study. Environmental groups, carefully avoiding questions about whom they

represent, are articulate (and effective) beyond the wildest dreams of Gifford

Pinchot and Teddy Roosevelt. New kinds and colors of people are breaking

through the oligopoly of influence long controlled by businessmen and male

lawyers from early-arriving ethnic groups. Even those deadly predictable
circuses, our national political conventions, become increasingly interesting as
minorities and women fill more delegate slots and live TV coverage enhances

the risk that a delegate will be seen making a deal, picking his nose, adjusting

her shoulder strap, or falling asleepŠin millions of living rooms at once.
Openness, then, is the buzzword of modernization. In its firmament the
dieties are the public hearing, the news conference, the investigative reporter,

"60 Minutes" and "20/20," Ted Koppel, Phil Donahue, and the 
NationalEnquirer. Its devils are also well known: smoke-filled rooms, secret invasions,
hidden or edited tapes, and expense account luncheons at which The
Establishment decides what to do next.
In consequence, compared with a generation ago most public officialsŠ
and a rapidly growing number of private executives conscious of their ultimate

public responsibilityŠare much more inclined to ask themselves, before acting,

how their actions would look on the front page of the 
Washington Post
 or the
Wall Street Journal
 or on the evening telecast. Even former Vice-President
Agnew has conceded that taking cash from contractors in his government office
might be wrong if judged by what he called post-Watergate moral standards. No

one doubts that raising the risk of public exposure will improve the private

behavior of executive leaders as they ask themselves, "How would I feel about

this action if everyone was able to see me take it?" The moral of Watergate is

plain enough: If the validity of your action 
depends on its secrecy, better decide
to do something else.
But the yen for wider knowledge and broader participation has gone well
beyond this sensitivity training for visible leaders and has raised new questions

about the cost-benefit calculation of more openness. A generation of experience

suggests that it is high time we faced the 
next question: How much openness is
enough?Since this is not a mystery story, I will reveal at the outset the conclusion
of the next few paragraphs. Experience teaches that the procedures of openness

are well designed to stop bad things from happening and ill designed to get

good things movingŠunless the consensus for action has been built-in private

ahead of time.
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY65Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.A practical benefit of openness is simply that complex social systems work
badly if they are too centralized. In managing their agriculture the Soviets have

put this proposition on public exhibit for more than half a century. The opposite

of centralization is of course 
not decentralization, which is simply an effort to
preserve hierarchical workways when your organization gets too large for

grandpa to know everything. The opposite of centralization is what Charles
Lindblom calls mutual adjustment: in a generally understood environment of
moral rules, norms, conventions, and mores, very large numbers of people are

adjusting their behavior by watching each other and modifying their behavior

just enough to accommodate the differing purposes of others, but not so much

that the mutual adjusters lose sight of where they themselves want to go.
13What makes mutual adjustment work is the wide availability of relevant
information, so each mutual adjuster can figure out what the others may do

under varied conditions and give forth useful signals about his or her own

behavior. The market principle does not guarantee smoothly working systems,

of course; perfect competition among buyers and sellers with full information is

to be found only in textbooks for sophomores. Yet very large systems, many of

them global in scale, based on massive information outputs and feedback
systems, have been developed in this century. In recent years systems
unimaginable before the marriage of computers and telecommunications are

accepted now as routine (currency and commodity markets, worldwide airline

and hotel reservation systems, global public health controls and weather

forecasting systems come readily to mind).
In other writings I have addressed the growing costs of openness. The very
great benefits of openness and wide participation are flawed by

oversimplification and confrontation, by apathy and nonparticipation, by

muscle-binding legalisms, by too many meaningless public hearings, by an

excess of voting and parliamentary process, by the nay-saying power of

procedural objection, by the protection of mediocrity, by the inhibition of

excellence in recruitment and the absence of candor in evaluationŠand by one
thing more. Mythology has it the other way around, but it seems clear now that
wide consultation 
early in a policy process tends to discourage innovation and
favor stand-pattism.
More openness in decision making is a radical litany, yet the multiplication
of those consulted tends to water down radical reform. During the Vietnam war,

I used to conduct seminars on this subject (among others) during the long hours

spent with student leaders on the barricades. Why, I asked them, do you

advocate openness with such passion when the reforms you want would be

voted down if youTHE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY66Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.put them to a big public meeting? They were regularly nonplussed by the
question; evangelists, in David Riesman's phrase, often ''mistake the

righteousness of their cause for its marketability."
14An action proposal, especially if it is new and unfamiliar, will seem
threatening, or at least postponable, to most of the experts who have not already

been involved. It is no accident that so many memorable U.S. public policy

initiatives (much of the New Deal and the LendLease idea in the 1930s, the

Marshall Plan and Harry Truman's Point Four in the 1940s, the Open Skies

proposal in the 1950s, the Peace Corps and Food for Peace and the War on
Poverty in the 1960s, the Nixon Doctrine and the Carter human rights initiative
in the 1970s) began as the products of leadership hunch and thinking-out-loud

rhetoric, with most of the professional staff work and the needed consultations

at home and abroad following after. In each case the executive leaders were

sensing a trend the American people would buy if a credible salesman came

forward to peddle it. But if all the relevant experts had been asked for their

opinions before launching them, some or all of these great ideas might well

have shriveled in the womb. Too many people, in Washington and abroad,

would have said, "Let's study it some more."
Bold initiatives for change can thus be killed by premature exposure to the
rough winds of public debate. Yet let us again remember that this cuts both

ways: timely openness is also well designed to stop foolish change. Earlier and

wider consultation would almost certainly have killed the ill-fated Bay of Pigs

operation, drastically modified the Vietnam escalation, and illuminated the

grotesquerie at Watergate for the foolish scheme everyone, including President
Nixon, later judged it to have been.
Whatever the costs and benefits of openness in particular cases, it is clear
enough that in every kind of hierarchy the winds of openness and participation

by new kinds of people are whistling through the cracks, blowing in the

windows, and knocking down the doors. The result in each case cannot be so

clearly judged in advance; it depends on how well those involved have analyzed
and balanced the openness equation. Openness, like technology, is not properly
an ideology. The answer to whether it helps or hurts basic human purposes is

the same as the answer to most of the interesting questions in the study of

society: it depends.CLASS BASED ON OWNERSHIP: THE OBSOLESCENCE OF
OWNERSHIPThe openness which the informatization of society brings in its train was
bound to raise fundamental questions about the idea that knowledge
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY67Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.belongs to a person or an organizationŠor a nation. The propensity of this
sharing resource to leak is eroding the doctrine that knowledge can be owned,

exchanged, and monopolized the way other resources can.
That you or I can own a fact or an idea, that a message of any kind belongs
to a person or a corporation or a government, is (for reasons already cited from

Colin Cherry's work) rather a peculiar notion to begin with. The person from

whom you got the message did not lose it; any right you acquire by receiving it

is at best shared with the sender, the carrier, and often a good many other nosy

people who are privy to it. Even if you paid to get the message (if, for example,
it was a piece of research you hired someone to do), or if someone paid to get it
to you (a friend who sent you a cable, a company that sent you a commercial), it

was the assembly or delivery service, not the information contained in the

message, that was paid for. The researcher could not own the facts and ideas

that she or he strung together for your use, and neither can you, even if you use

them as your own.
The new tide of information technologies makes the ownership of
intellectual property more detached from reality with every new invention.

Dynamic high technology keeps developing better and faster 
techniques of piracy
Šxerography, videotape, the backyard dish for picking up signals from

satellites. The knowledge explosion also produces new 
kinds of works
(computer software), new 
means of delivery
 (microfiche, videocassettes,
computerized videotext over a telephone line), and new 
ways to assemble
 great
complexities of facts and ideas in more readily accessible form (computerized

data bases, inventory controls, energy use data, on-line reservation systems for

airlines and car rentals).
In this environment, laws written to protect books and phonograph records
and broadcasts, the products of the past, are getting harder and harder to apply.

Laws that address technologies not yet invented are hard to write. The nervous

breakdown of copyright protection is now an open scandal. It may be retarded

in degree by technological fixes. Satellite broadcasters can scramble their
signals to prevent pirating. Elaborate codes have been devised by the creators of
some computer programs, though teenage computer hackers have been showing

how inherently porous they are.
When I first acquired a home computer, I found the ethical dilemma right
up front: in the instruction manual. On its cover sheet I was threatened with

litigious mayhem if I copied any of the software. On the very first page of the

manual I was told that before I did anything else I should make at least two

copies of the floppy diskette provided with the manual.
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY68Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The makers of software keep up their pitiful efforts to maintain a
proprietary interest in their products, but the happy-go-lucky free distribution of

copies of copyrighted diskettes has already become one of the friendly gestures

that makes the owners of personal computers feel like members of a new kind

of guild. The leakiness of the information resource seems destined to

overwhelm the backward looking efforts to imprison it. The history of arms
control, and the success of computer pirates, teach us that there is always a
technological fix for a technological fix.
Is the doctrine that information is owned by its originator (or compiler)
necessary to make sure that Americans remain intellectually creative? In most

other countries creative work is overwhelmingly controlled by organizations

and carried out by salaried people. In Japan even the most inventive employee

is likely to have a lifetime job and receive salary raises in lockstep with his age

cohort, his morale sustained not by personal ownership of his ideas but by

togetherness in an organizational family.
Most U.S. patents are held by organizations (corporations, universities,
government agencies), not by the inventors. Many copyrights, perhaps most, are

held by publishers and promoters, not by the authors and songwriters the

Founding Fathers may have had in mind when they sewed information-as-

property into the U.S. Constitution.
An author or songwriter who helps a publisher make money should
certainly participate in the proceeds. But direct agreements about profit sharing

or joint venture arrangements (the movie industry is already full of relevant

examples) seem a less fragile basis for such cooperation than the fraying

fictions that the author owns the words in a book and that shared information is

being exchanged.In U.S. universities and research institutes, creative work is already
rewarded mostly by promotion, tenure, and tolerant traditions about teaching

loads and outside consulting. We generate a respectably innovative R&D effort

in public-sector fields such as military technology, space exploration, weather

forecasting, environmental protection, and the control of infectious diseases

without the scientists and inventors having to own the ideas they contribute to

the process. In the private sector, the leaders of industries on the high-tech
frontier are already saying out loud that their protection from overseas copyists
does not lie in trade secrets but in healthy R&D budgets.
The notion of information-as-property is built deep into our laws, our
economy, and our political psycheŠand into the expectations and tax returns

and balance sheets of writers and artists and the companies, agencies, and

academies that pay them to be creative. But we had better continue to develop

our own ways, compatible with our own
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY69Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.traditions, of rewarding intellectual labor without depending on laws and
prohibitions that are disintegrating fastŠas the Volstead Act did in our earlier

effort to enforce an unenforceable Prohibition.
In international politics the notion that knowledge is owned by sovereign
states is in maximum disarray. Every newly miniaturized recording or

micrographic device and every new satellite launched for communication or

photography or remote sensing makes it more difficult to sustain the doctrine

that national governments can own, or even control, their information resources.
In 1979 the U.S. government sent two delegations to two world meetings
about the control of information. At a UNESCO conference in Paris, the

delegates righteously advocated the free flow of information, meaning

information furnished by U.S. news agencies, U.S. television producers, and

U.S. movie studios. A few weeks later, at the UN Conference on Science and

Technology for Development in Vienna, an equally righteous group of

Americans came out against the free flow of information, meaning information
as a technology we were anxious to hoard. Both principles are authentically
American: the right to choose and the right to own. In the international

discourse, we will hardly be able to have it both ways. Yet there is no evidence

that the two groups of delegates, and the government that instructed them both,

perceived the irony or the contradiction.
The U.S. State Department, which instructed both delegations, seemed
unusually disoriented by the new information environment when it ruled last

year that Western European owners of IBM computers could not move them

from, say, Birmingham to Manchester without first seeking U.S. permission.

This assertion of extraterritoriality, over equipment produced by a multinational

company with headquarters in the United States, was designed to prevent

strategic equipment from flowing indirectly to Communist countries.
Regardless of the merits of the case, the edict is simply unenforceable. In the
global information society, the long arms of ownership and control are

shrinking fast.
If information is inherently hard to bottle up, policies based on a long-term
information monopoly are likely to have a short half-life. For the 1980s and

beyond, the principle is clear: if the validity of your action depends on its

continuing secrecy, do not depend on it.
In our generation-long arms race with the Soviet Union, successive U.S.
administrations have managed to persuade themselves that each new U.S.

weapons system (its made-in-America technology a continuing mystery to our

adversaries) would enable us to stay ahead. In one of the most damaging of

these actions, in the early 1970s, the
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY70Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.United States decided to stuff multiple independently targeted reentry vehicles
(MIRVs) into single missiles. Despite elaborate secrecy on our part, the Soviets

soon figured out how to do likewise. But since they (for other reasons) had built

much bigger missiles boosted by more powerful rockets, they were able to stuff

more MIRVs into their canisters than we could. Thus did we outsmart ourselves

by taking an action that depended for its validity on technological secrecy, and
create the famous window of vulnerability instead.
In the management of mutual deterrence the overclassification of
information about what we could do, if we had to, may actually increase the

danger of war by miscalculation. The core of the nuclear deterrent, that

remarkably stable if unattractive substitute for peace, is the Soviet leaders'

uncertainty about what the U.S. president would do in the event of Soviet
moves against our allies or ourselves combined with their certainty that we have
the means to retaliate no matter what. Keeping our intentions credibly uncertain

is easy: we cannot know what we would do in a situation until we know what

the situation is. But keeping from our adversaries full knowledge of our

capabilities merely adds another element of madness to the nuclear arms race.
Our own government has for three decades engaged in halfhearted and
demonstrably ineffective efforts to control strategic U.S. science and keep

foreign nationals out of sensitive university research. In our mostly open

society, it never worked very well. Americans have no corner on the market for
brains; scientists talk quite freely across frontiers to each other; our European
and Japanese allies never had much enthusiasm for controlling transborder

information flows (because sales of equipment mean jobs for Europeans and

Japanese); and Soviet technological espionage, like our own, has long been a

thriving industry.Keeping our R&D to ourselves is a policy that depends for its validity on
secrecy. As informatization intensifies in the postindustrial world, strategic

secrecy can be expected to work less and less well.
Similar government behavior used to work better for dictators and
totalitarian bureaucracies in societies where keeping information from

spreading is honored by doctrine and practiced ad absurdum. The last time I

looked, Xerox machines still had to be licensed by the government in the Soviet
Union; in Bulgaria, even typewriters are closely controlled. Ideas are harder to
license: Russian youngsters readily learn about jeans and hard rock, and

scientists on both sides of the porous Curtain seem to know how far along their

peers are in unraveling (for example) the puzzlements of rocketry and space

travel.The good news is that information is leaky, that sharing is the natural
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY71Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mode of scientific discovery and technological innovation. The new information
environment seems bound to undermine the knowledge monopolies which

totalitarian governments convert into monopolies of power. In the horoscope of

the USSR and the Soviet bloc, a future looms where nobody is in charge.
PRIVILEGE BASED ON EARLY ACCESS: EQUALITY OF
ACCESS AND FAIRNESS
The informatization of society may destabilize more than the Soviet bloc.
It may help undermine the systems that keep 2 billion people in relative poverty

and more than a third of them in absolute poverty. In many ways the most

exciting, and puzzling, question about the new knowledge environment is

whether it will be good news or bad news for the global fairness revolutionŠ

and for that revolution's U.S. precinct, the upward mobility of women,

minorities, and the poor.
The most arresting trait of the information resource is that it is inherently
more accessible than other resourcesŠand that, once accessed, it unlocks the

other resources. What does that imply for access to the power and affluence that

knowledge brings in its wake? Theoretically at least, compared to things-as-

resource, information-as-resource should encourage:
  the spreading of benefits rather than the concentration of wealth
(information can be more equitably shared than petroleum or gold or

land or even water), and
  the maximization of choice rather than the suppression of diversity (the
informed are harder to regiment than the uninformed).
In the industrial era, poverty was explained and justified by shortages of
things; there just were not enough minerals, food, fibers, and manufactures to

go around. Looked at this way, the shortages were merely aggravated by the

tendency of the poor to have babies.
In the postindustrial era, the physical resources are joined at center stage
by information, the resource that is harder for the rich and powerful to hoard.

Each baby, poor or not, is born with a brain. The collective capacity of all the

brains in each society to convert information into knowledge and wisdom is the

measure of that society's potential.
But whether the informatization of the globe will actually mean a fairer
shake for those who have been the victims of discrimination depends mostly on

what they do. Most of the fairness achieved in world history has not been the

consequence of charity, goodheartedness, and noblesse oblige on the part of

those in power. Always in
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY72Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.history, it seems, fairness has been granted, legislated, or seized when there was
no alternative. And usually the reason there was no alternative was that those

out of power were determined (or at least perceived by those in power to be

determined) to cast off their shackles and take the law into their own hands.
Societies flexible enough to adapt to the pressure from groups out of power
(as the United States has been doing, not without conflict and coercion, on

school integration, voter fights, sex discrimination, and equal employment

opportunity) manage to keep change comparatively peaceful.
Societies that try to maintain rigid hierarchies (and especially those which,
like the Shah's Iran, at the same time encourage education for most of their

people) get blown out of the water. The Shah of Iran was brought down by the

marriage of convenience between two groups who harbored powerful
resentments: mullahs who had been bypassed and downgraded by
modernization were angered by the lack of respect for tradition, and Iranian

students, at home and abroad, were angered by lack of fairness. Afterwards the

tradition defenders and the fairness advocates went after each other, and the

fairness people lost.In other countries the mix is different, but part of the stew of resentments
is always the complaint we learn from infancy to make: ''It isn't 
fair."There will be less excuse in the future than in the past for depriving whole
populations of the benefits of development. There will also be less excuse for

the disadvantaged to blame their condition on the barons and bosses when the

accessible knowledge to even the score is already floating out there in the

noösphereŠthe sphere of human consciousness and mental activity.
The noösphere is an 
accessible resource that has many of the
characteristics of a commons. In considering the implications for fairness of

information as a resource, it is an intriguingly fresh thought, worth a moment of

speculation.In earlier times sharing arrangements for a common resource were
customary, for example in tribal ownership and nomadic practices. Vestiges of

the idea survive in the Boston Commons, the National Park system, and in the

way many major waterways in Europe and North America are managed. For

people in old England the commons, as Ivan Illich defines it, was "that part of
the environment which lay beyond their own thresholds and outside of their
possessions, to which, however, they had recognized claims of usage [not to

produce commodities but to provide for the subsistence of their households]."

The commons "was necessary for the community's survival, necessary for
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY73Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.different groups in different ways, but ... in a strictly economic sense, was not
perceived as scarce."
15The older commons, such as those for sheep and cattle, have disappeared
through enclosure. But the commons idea has now been revived in a big way, as

the basis for worldwide cooperation in the environments that by common

consent belong to no one or everyone (which seems to be about the same thing):

the deep ocean and its seabed, Antarctica, outer space and celestial bodies, and

the weather.The Mediterranean Sea, the arena of bloody ancient feuds and lethal
modern rivalries, has recently been formally recognized by all the coastal states

(including the Arab states and Israel) as so precious a shared commons that

reversing its degradation must be a matter for cooperation even among sworn

enemies. The resulting international agreement, intermediated by the UN

Environment Programme, is self-enforcing: violating its terms would be in a

literal sense self-defeating.
For the management of an information commons, a sharing environment,
these exotic precedents suddenly seem not so exotic. Illich, in a Tokyo speech

called "Silence Is a Commons," argued that electronic devices (from the

microphone to the computer) are a form of enclosure, reserving to the few the

privilege of breaking the silence otherwise available to the many.
16 I do not
know about silence; I have not had much experience with it. But on the
computer as a form of enclosure, I demur. In its general impact the forced
march of information technology, personal computers combined with global

telecommunications, seems to me to be taking us away from the idea of

enclosure. My hunch is that the fusion of computers and communications will

further empower the many to participate in making policy in domains to which

the few, with their moth-eaten monopolies of knowledge, will have to yield

more and more access.Neighborhood organizations are furnishing themselves with personal
computers to deal more effectively with the banks, developers, and government

agencies that will otherwise make the neighborhoods' decisions for them.

American Indian tribes might set up a computer teleconference to concert their

political clout on fast-moving legislation. A single individual with a personal
computer can even now get access to so much useful and timely information
that she or he can, with a week's homework and without leaving home,

intervene as an unusually knowledgeable citizen in almost any public policy

issue on the national agenda.
To chart these potentials is not to fulfill them. The trends in information
technology would make it possible to organize as a commons (with free though

not necessarily costless access thereto)
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY74Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.most of the world's useful knowledge. That is not to say it will happen. It just
helps remake the point that those who think "it isn't fair" will have plenty of

opportunity to get access to almost any information that is being withheld from

them to their disadvantage. But they will have to want to work at it, they will

have to prepare their brains for the task. In the information society as in its

predecessors, there is still no free lunch.
POLITICS BASED ON GEOGRAPHY: THE PASSING OF
REMOTENESSI have argued the mind-blowing implications of the informatization of
society for four of the old hierarchiesŠbased on control, secrecy, ownership,

and structural unfairness. Let's look at what is happening to the fifth of the old

hierarchies, those based on location.
The inherited idea is that the political importance of communities is based
on their geography. Cities usually developed because they were seaports or on

critical inland waterways, or (earlier) on important overland caravan routes and

(later) on important railway lines. It made a difference whether you were in the

city or in the country; if you lived in a rural area, you were remote. There was

no choice about it, you were just remote.
The importance of countries was often based on the natural resources they
had discovered, and developed, on their territory. The spices of the Orient, the

rubber and tin of Southeast Asia, the coal and iron of Central Europe, the

diamonds (and later, uranium) of South Africa, the fruit of Central America, the

petroleum reserves of Indonesia and Mexico and Venezuela and North Africa

and the Persian (or Arabian) Gulf and the North Sea, the soil that produced

those "waving fields of grain" in North AmericaŠthese crucial resources left an
indelible mark on the national sovereignties which happened to find them in
their backyards.
Then there was the sense of place in military strategy, summed up in the
once-popular word geopolitics. This was the idea that a nation's power

depended largely on its geographyŠhow vulnerable its land mass, how

defensible its frontiers, how rich its mineral deposits, how fertile its soil, how

plentiful its water, how extensive its coastline.
But communications satellites and fast computers are gradually erasing
distance, eroding the idea that some places are world centers because they are

near other places or near obsolescent natural resources or near old-fashioned

means of transportation, while other areas are bound to be peripheral because

they are remote from these centers.
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY75Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Octavio Paz, a poet, caught onto what was happening well before most of
the systems analysts and political pundits. "We Mexicans," he wrote in the

1970s, "have always lived on the periphery of history. Now the center or

nucleus of world society has disintegrated and everyoneŠincluding the

European and the North AmericanŠis a peripheral being. We are living on the

margin ... because there is no longer any center.... World history has become
everyone's task and our own labyrinth is the labyrinth of all mankind."
The passing of remoteness is one of the great unheralded macrotrends of
our extraordinary time. Once you can plug in through television to UN votes or

to a bombing in Beirut or a Wimbledon final; once you can sit in Auckland, or

Singapore, or Bahrein and play the New York stock markets in real time; once

you can participate in rule, power, and authority according to the relevance of
your opinion rather than the mileage to the decision making venueŠthen the
power centers are wherever the brightest people are using the latest information

in the most creative ways.
Distant farmsteads can, if they will, be connected to the central cortex of
their commodity exchanges, their political authorities, their global markets. The

fusion of rapid microprocessing and global telecommunications presents nearly

all of us with a choice (and an obligation to choose) between relevance and

remoteness. There will be costs and benefits to either choiceŠbut the necessity

to choose is new, and inescapable.
There is, of course, an alternative to geography as a principle of
organization. The revised proposition was recently formulated by futurist

Magda McHale: in the new knowledge environment, civilization will be built

more around communities of 
people, and less around communities of 
place.17That this trend is well advanced can be seen in a quick review of what is
happening to the great geographic hierarchies which in this last couple of

centuries have been dividing, and governing, the world.
The state is not withering away, as with their different motives Karl Marx
and the advocates of world government would have desired. But power is

leaking out of sovereign national governments in three directions at once. 
Thestate is leaking at the top
, as more international functions require the pooling of
sovereignty in alliances, in a World Weather Watch, in geophysical research, in
eradicating contagious diseases, in satellite communication, in facing up to
global environmental risks. 
The state is leaking sideways
, as multinational
corporationsŠprivate, pseudo-private, and publicŠconduct more and more of

the world's commerce, and operate across political frontiers so much better than

committees of sovereign states seem able to do. 
The THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY76Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.state is also leaking from the bottom
, as minorities, single-issue constituencies,
special-purpose communities, and neighborhoods take control of their own

destinies, legislating their own growth policies, their own population policies,

their own environmental policies.
And what has nation come to mean? Increasingly it means not a hierarchy
of power but ethnicityŠthe Frenchness of Quebec, the tribal loyalties of the Ibo

in Biafra, the separatism of the Scots, the rhetorical brotherhood of the Arabs,

the world's many diasporas, ranging from the Overseas Chinese to the Zionist

and non-Zionist Jews outside Israel.
And organized religion? All of the great religious traditions have had to
settle, so far in world history, for hegemony in one or another part of the world.

But in a world of people-communities, not place-communities, the parish

cannot be mostly geography-based. Now, even established religions are trying

to break free from their national and regional parishes. The Roman Catholic

pope's extensive travels and the terrorist outreach of Ayatollah Khomeini's
Shiites form a grotesque correlation: both are breaking loose from historic
geographic bounds to appeal to wider religiousŠand therefore politicalŠ

constituencies.The prospect of people rather than place as a basis for community has
interesting implications for universities trying to serve a local clientele, for

corporations that have bet heavily on regional organization, and for political

systems that have bet heavily on geography-based constituencies. It implies that

those institutions which exploit the electronic answers to remoteness may be

catching a wave in the twilight of hierarchy.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In sum, the informatization of society will force dramatic changes in some
long-standing hierarchic forms of social organization. The process of change,

the slow accumulation of small changes in the way various social functions are

performed, is far harder to discern than the ultimate result. Information

technology pervades our lives and institutions in the same way that termites

inhabit a house. As unseen termites consume the structural supports of a
building, so may information technology challenge the rules, norms, and
conventions that, in an earlier time, served to organize society by vesting

economic and social power in centralized leadership, secrecy, ownership,

resource control, and propitious geography. As with termite damage, we can be

caught unawares at the collapse of those structures we thought sturdy, with the

first visible sign of change serving also as
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY77Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.proof positive that it is too late for stop-gap solutions. Therefore, if we are to
avoid catastrophe, or a least avoid fighting the last war, we must both broaden

and lengthen our vision of the future.
Information technologies will be assimilated without turmoil only if
scholars recognize the need to rethink their disciplines in light of the erosion of

societies based on material resources and industrial production. Citizens will

have to get used to the responsibility that goes with the influence and power

almost casually available to them through access to information. Generalist

leaders will find themselves rethinking the nature of leadership. They more than
others will have to widen their angle of vision to take in an informed and
consulting public, and extend their focal length to take in the full implications

of the twilight of hierarchy, not in the next 100 years but in their own life and

work. We will need to changeŠwe are already changingŠthe negligent

procedures that left the Bomb unconstrained by hard thinking about causes and

effects. The informatization of society holds great promise, but will need to be

housed in a new intellectual home. The termites are at work on the old one, and

we had best not wait until we lean on its wall and it caves in without notice.
NOTES1. The statistics on the redistribution, between 1880 and 2000, of the U.S. work force were
culled from the research of G. Molitor, Public Policy Forecasting, Inc., by Henry M. Boettinger,

who headed AT&T's corporate planning before he joined E. F. Hutton as head of its Office of

Information Strategy and Technology. ''Information Industry Challenges to Management and

Economics," New Jersey Bell Journal
, Vol. 7, No. 1 (Spring 1984), pp. 12Œ21.
2. The OECD report, 
Information Activities, Electronics and Telecommunications
Technologies: Impact on Employment, Growth. and Trade
 (Paris: OECD, 1981), was one of a
series of reports OECD has conducted as it tries to trace the impacts of the Information Age on,
and its implications for, member countries.
3. G. Edward Schuh's comments were made in a note to the author.
4. P. Drucker, 
Managing in Turbulent Times
 (New York: Harper & Row, 1980).
5. The first report to the Club of Rome, which sold more than 3 million copies in many
languages, is available in book form as 
The Limits to Growth
, by Donella H. Meadows et al.
(New York: Universe Books, 1972). John McHale's book, 
The Changing Information
Environment
 (Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1976; first published in the United Kingdom in
1972) covers the changes in communications. resource use, education, business and

management, and political process that derive from the impact of information upon society.
6. Dieter Altenpohl discussed the role of materials development and their social, economic, and
ecological impacts (thus illuminating the role that information plays in materials substitution) in

his book 
Materials in World Perspective
 (Heidelberg, Germany; Berlin: Springer-Verlag,
1980). His chart relating the weight of materials to their degree of sophistication, can be found

on p. 201.
7. In his book manuscript entitled "A Second Industrial Revolution?," Professor Colin Cherry of
the University of London explained the "sharing" nature of messagesŠ
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY78Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.while making clear that 
meaning
 is not necessarily or even usually shared. The discussion here
is based on that manuscript and on talks with Professor Cherry about that draft in Aspen,

Colorado, the summer before he died.
8. Lewis Branscomb, "Information: The Ultimate Frontier," 
Science
, January 12, 1979, pp. 143Œ
147.9. C. Cherry, "A Second Industrial Revolution?" (unpublished manuscript).
10. Comments about the obsolescence of both liberal and Marxist approaches are found in the
influential examination of the effects of the new communication and computer technologies on

society by Simon Nora and Alain Minc in 
L'informatisation de la Société
. Originally produced
as a commissioned report from the two civil servants to President Giscard d'Estaing, it quickly

became a best seller in France and influenced the thinking of Giscard's successor, President
François Mitterand. The book was eventually translated into English as 
The Computerization of
Society
 (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1981), with an introduction by Daniel Bell. The English
version of the title misses the point that Nora and Minc were making in their bookŠwhich is

that the 
marriage of computer and telecommunication technologies is the new dimension of
society.11. Chester Barnard's theory of executive process is spelled out in 
The Functions of the
Executive
 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1938).
12. Paul Appleby, 
Policy and Administration
 (University, Ala.: University of Alabama Press,
1949), p. 21.
13. Charles Lindblom's book, 
The Intelligence of Democracy
 (New York: Free Press, 1965),
introduced the concept of "mutual adjustment" in the management of both public and private

organizations and institutions. He updated his thoughts in a lecture at the University of

Minnesota's Center for Strategic Management Research, "Incremental Strategy: Still Muddling
Through," on May 13, 1983.
14. The comment by David Riesman comes from my extensive correspondence with him on the
subject of openness in university governance.
15. Ivan Illich argued that computers are doing to communication what fences did to pastures,
in "Silence Is a Commons," 
The CoEvolution Quarterly
, Winter 1983, pp. 5Œ9.
16. See note 15.
17. Magda Cordell McHale, "The Feminist Model," Center for Integrative Studies, State
University of New York at Buffalo, 1984.
COMMENTSAlexander H. Flax
President EmeritusInstitute for Defense Analyses

Harlan Cleveland's paper, as befits the subject of this symposium, is truly
global in scope, not only geographically, but in its full sweep, in its

contemplation of human affairs, and in treating civilization as an integrated

whole. Its insights into the nature of changes in society being wrought by the

rapid pace of progress in information technology are profound and thought-

provoking.It would be very difficult indeed to do justice to this paper in a brief
discussion, but I think it would not be amiss to talk about a few things from
THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY79Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the standpoint of an engineer, this. after all, being a symposium of the National
Academy of Engineering.
It is heartening that Ambassador Cleveland sees the portents of the new
information technology for society as predominantly benign. There are some

doubts expressed, but mainly his is an upbeat appraisal, and thisŠfor engineers

who have lived through the traumas of the 1960s and early 1970sŠis a

welcome change. We all heard the dire predictions of unemployment that

Norbert Weiner made and that many others picked upŠyou may recall 
TheHuman Use of Human Beings
. We are once burned, twice shy.
We should not assume that society will naturally accept the benefits of new
technologies without our doing anything about it. We must remain aware of

those other voices saying that this new information technology may undermine

civil rights in the United States through invasions of privacy and that the very

openness of the information could result in pervasive data banks which could be

used for repressive and harmful activities. We need a countervailing logic and
this paper helps provide it, but I don't think it solves the problem for all time. In
fact, there are some real problems that engineering can help solve in the

handling of data to help prevent some of these abuses. We should always keep

those in mind.
Let me also comment on the fact that Ambassador Cleveland has
addressed, for the most part, the benign role of leaking information, or more

pervasive information if you like. He has talked about information leaking

primarily in the context of democratic societies. There are others who fear that

in a totalitarian or police state some of the new information technology can be
used to make repression more effective, much along the lines of Orwell's 
1984or Huxley's 
Brave New World
 or B. F. Skinner's 
Walden 2
, and we must be
aware of that dimension of the problem.
The other area that is of special interest to engineers is what the famous
structural engineer Hardy Cross called the third member of the trilogy of

engineering. The trilogy was, to paraphrase, science and technology,

economics, and social dynamics. This was long before the protest movements,

but nevertheless Cross counted the interaction of technology with society as

very important. We cannot ignore the role of economics in striking an
equilibrium. That is, any one of the elements of the trilogy cannot run wild
because another one will check it, and that is as true for social wants, needs, and

desires as it is for technology. We have seen that new information technology is

subject to the inexorable laws of economics in the marketplace. You only have

to recall the picturephone or the premature attempts to put computer-based

instruction in the schools in the early 1960s. Neither took hold. I assure you that

there will be more things that will not be accepted. That is how we discover

what things work: we try them. Economics is going to put bounds and limits on

how far we can go in any of these directions, although I think that we will go a

long way and very much along the line that Ambassador Cleveland has

described. Certainly this timely, wide-ranging, farsighted overview of where we

are going with this new information technology deserves careful study by
engineers.THE TWILIGHT OF HIERARCHY SPECULATIONS ON THE GLOBAL INFORMATION
SOCIETY80Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Property Rights in Information
Anne Wells Branscomb
The subject of this paperŠthe laws of the Information Age and, more
specifically, property fights in informationŠis a difficult one, but it is

absolutely essential to pursue if we are to enter the Information Age

knowledgeably and with an understanding of the consequences.
After an introductory section which presents definitions of property and
historical background on information protection, the paper reviews recent

developments with respect to property fights in information, analyzes several of

the major areas of concern, and develops some general principles to guide us in

the application of the law to the new technologies. For almost every fight in this

area there is an opposing claim or an adversarial relationship. Therefore, in each

individual case it is a matter of balancing equities and sensibilities that often

defy codification. As discussed in individual sections below, the rights include:
1. the right to know information about ourselves and the world we
live in
2. the right to collect informationŠthe investigative function
3. the right to acquire informationŠarchived by others
4. the right to withhold informationŠabout ourselves, personal,
corporate, or national
5. the right to control the release of information
6. the right to receive compensation for information
7. the right to protect informationŠthe security function

8. the right to destroy or expunge information

9. the right to correct or alter information
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION81
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10. the right to publish or disseminate informationŠaccess to the
marketplace of ideas
INTRODUCTIONMany scholars, including Colin Cherry,
1 Fritz Machlup,
2 and Harlan
Cleveland,3 rightfully argue that information has characteristics different from
those of natural resources and manufactured goods upon the exchange of which

our economic system rests. However, if we are to transform our economy into

one that relies primarily upon the economic value of gathering, storing,

processing, and distributing information, we must develop principles from

which we can derive economic value for such activities. Therefore, it is not very
helpful to the public debate to insist that information must by its nature be
shared or that it is naturally leaky or uncontainable.
In civilized societies, especially in information societies that are firmly
rooted in an educated citizenry and intellectual prowess, we will not tolerate the

unnecessary spilling of proprietary information any more than we will tolerate

oil spills polluting our oceans. Neither will we tolerate exclusivity with respect

to information upon which our livelihood as a nation depends. Inevitably we

must turn to our legal system to develop and to sustain those rights that we

consider inalienable and equitable and to delineate the boundaries between what
is considered public and what is to be protected by the law as private.
Definitions of Property
Property is a legal concept that dates back to the earliest history of
civilization and that is central to the efficient functioning of market economies.

The word deals with the boundary line between what is yours and what is mine,

or between what belongs to everybody and what belongs to nobody.
Property, according to 
Black's Law Dictionary
, is "that which is peculiar or
proper to any person: that which belongs exclusively to one; in the strict legal

sense, an aggregate of rights which are guaranteed and protected by the

government." The word is derived from the Latin word 
proprio meaning to
"own." The verb 
appropriate means "to make a thing one's own; to make a
thing the subject of property, to exercise dominion over an object to the extent,

and for the purpose, of making it subserve one's own proper use or pleasure.''
According to 
Webster's, the word 
property means, for tangible objects,
"something to which a person has legal title," and for intangible rights, that "in

which a person has a right protected by law." The
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION82
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.word proper itself is the root from which 
property is derived. 
Webster's defines
proper as that ''which is socially appropriate: according with established
traditions and feelings of rightness and appropriateness," or that which is

"sanctioned as according with equity, justice, ethics, or rationale," or that which

is "marked by rightness, correctness, or rectitude ... entirely in accordance with

authority, observed facts, or other sanction."
Our Founding Fathers followed John Locke's definition of property as
including "that property which men have in their persons as well as goods," and

James Madison concluded: "In a word, as a man is said to have a right to his

property, he may be equally said to have a property in his rights."
4In Spanish law the 
propios or 
proprios were certain plots of land reserved
as the unalienable property of the town, for the purpose of erecting public

buildings, markets, and so forth, or to be used in any other way, under the

direction of the municipality, for the advancement of the revenues or the

prosperity of the place.
In recent years international lawyers have become enmeshed in defining
the ownership of international public spaces. Antarctica is the world's only

landmass not territorially designated by proprietary ownership. However, the

ocean seabed and outer space have been subject to much debate over what

constitutes the "common heritage of mankind" or "the province of all mankind."
5Information is neither naturally proprietary nor naturally shared any more
than the earth, or ocean seabed, or space is naturally the province of mankind or

the property of individuals, nation-states, or other legal entities.
Although we have lagged behind the Japanese in our research and study of
the social impacts of the Johoka Shakai (the Japanese term for information

society,6 we have led the world in litigation, legislation, and judicial
interpretation of legal rights and obligations with respect to information. Public

discourse for many years to come will concentrate on defining property rights in

information that are marked by rightness and in accord with equity, justice,

ethics, or reason, and will focus especially on defining those rights that are
subject to an effective sanction.
History of Information Protection
The conflict between public and private information is as deeply rooted in
our historical documents as is the protection of both private and public real

estate. New England villages were built around a
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION83
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved."common," or public area, in which villagers gathered on public occasions,
much as the Spaniards promenaded around their central parks in the cool of

evenings. In both cases the open spaces were essential to the exchange of

information in communities that depended upon face-to-face voice

communications. Counterparts of such places include the ancient Greek agora,

or marketplace, and London's Hyde Park Comer.
We have protected our seacoasts for public access up to the high-water
mark and have developed a great national park system for the protection of

animals and for recreational activities. The concept of public ownership of

airwaves arose at the time of Teapot Dome scandals when the public was

outraged about the private exploitation of our great natural resources. There was

no natural obligation to make the airwaves a public asset, as lawyers could map
out private rights in spectrum resources just as easily as they have in land
masses. It was considered the right and proper way of handling the Tower of

Babel that existed on the airwaves and prohibited anyone from using that

resource efficiently.
The Constitution provides for Congress to protect patents and copyrights,
whereas the Bill of Rights in the First Amendment establishes an unregulated

marketplace of ideas. Thus the Founding Fathers pursued the contradictory

goals of protecting the work products of inventors and writers while at the same

time preserving the public interest in the availability of information. We have
tried to walk a tightrope between providing too much or too little protection for
information. Cases abound in the law with regard to what constitutes "fair use"

of information generated by another without his or her permission. The basic

philosophy was that facts and ideas could not be protected, but only the

composition (in the case of authors) and the embodiment of an idea in a product

or process (in the case of patents).
7 Consequently, we have preserved the open
access to laws of nature and to mathematical formulas that can be easily

replicated. At the same time we have attempted to provide authors and

inventors with legal protection for their expertise in order to compensate them

for their efforts, to encourage greater productivity, and to increase the body of

knowledge upon which human progress depends.
This concept of protection of intellectual property is not shared by all the
nations of the world, nor is it derived from any natural law. Other cultures have

their own concepts of propriety with respect to intellectual output. There is

nothing universal about copyright, patents, or trade secrets. These are devices
for reconciling the interests of society with those of the individual and of
linking intellectual producPROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION84
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.tivity with commercial gain. Their origins are in Western cultural history and
are deeply rooted in the development of the printing press and industrial

manufacturing societies. These are legal concepts designed to encourage a

positive attitude toward innovation and social change. These concepts began to

develop in the late Middle Ages; they have no logical counterpart in early

civilizations where the products of intellectual expertise belonged to the
community and not to their creators.
8All societies have developed an information policy, the most stringent of
which is exemplified by the burning of books in China in 213 B.C. and the

burying alive of some 460 scholars who were thought to be able to teach their

contents from memory. Throughout history knowledge has been closely

guarded, usually by a priesthood whose continuity depended on the
maintenance of secrecy concerning rituals, herbs, hieroglyphs, or, in the case of
American Indians, secrecy of the sand paintings used to heal the sick and bless

newlyweds.
Thus we can consider computer hackers a 
new breed of priests, whose
primary motive has been to disseminate information about new computer

software as widely as possible rather than to keep their expertise closely

guarded. It is a startlingly new concept, thereforeŠthat of considering

information as a natural resource which in its natural state will tend to permeate

the society. Such dissemination has always depended upon skills that must be
acquired, nurtured, and supported by social sanctions.
Knowledge can only be acquired by developing one's intellectual skills.
Thus, the protection of intellectual activity developed alongside the rise of a

class of individuals who had the leisure to produce artistic, literary, or useful

inventions. There is substantial evidence that early Greeks recognized the rights

of artists to be identified with their works and to have them performed or
presented as created.
9 The first adjudication of a copyright issue seems to have
taken place in the Middle Ages when a zealous clergyman visited his former

teacher long enough to make a hurried copy of his Book of Psalms, the copying

of which was not sanctioned by the king.
10 The elaborate rules that we are
attempting to follow today awaited the advent of the printing press in 1436 and

the rapid industrialization of Western Europe.
11The Constitution of the United States
12 endows the federal government
with the power to regulate copyrights and patents as a device to "promote the

progress of Science and useful Arts by securing for limited Times to Authors

and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries."

Thereby authors and inventors were encouraged to share their output with the

nation. Surprisingly,
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION85
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.there was little debate concerning this clause. The 
Federalist papers merely
reflect that "the utility of this power will scarcely be questioned. The copyright

of authors has been solemnly adjudged in Great Britain to be a right of common

law. The right to useful inventions seems with equal reason to belong to the

inventors. The public good fully coincides in both cases with the claims of

individuals...."13In both cases it was assumed that it was in the public interest to encourage
the widespread dissemination of knowledge and to nurture native intellect.

Interestingly enough, the copyright law that was enacted gave protection only to

American authors, denying any protection to imported works, which led to

widespread copying of English publications.
14 This had the opposite effect from
that of encouraging native talent allegedly intended by the legislation. As the
piracy and copying of English information products were far cheaper than
acquiring the original works of American authors, a flourishing publishing

industry developed primarily for textbooks copied from English sources. Thus

the Copyright Act of 1790, a high priority on the calendar of the First Congress,

was a cornerstone in the philosophy of the new nation to encourage literacy and

widespread dissemination of useful knowledgeŠan early development of

technology transfer. It took another century to amend the act to recognize

international copyright arrangements that gave mutual protection to American

authors from unauthorized reprints by foreign publishers.
15Despite the long and complex historical experience with copyrights and
patents developing protection for the production of information, it was only late

in the last century that we began to build a body of law limiting the use of

personal information.
16 In the last 90 years we have made great progress in
accommodating ourselves to the intrusion into our personal and political lives

of an independent press, both print and electronic media, and we are beginning
to forge a new law with respect to computer communications as well.
THE RIGHT TO KNOW
The right to know can involve either simple or complex matters, e.g., the
simple matter of the right of individuals to know of their origins and who their

true parents are, or the more complicated matter of the fight of the public to

information that provides the basis for public decisions. However, no such right

is absolute. For example, with the advent of amniocentesis, which permits
identification of the sex of an unborn child during periods of pregnancy when
an abortion can still be legally performed, it has become a controversial issue
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION86
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.whether or not the couple should be told the sex of the child. Relatives and
doctors withhold the information that a patient has a terminal disease where, in

their judgment, it would be psychologically damaging to the patient.
Geraldine Ferraro and her husband confronted a difficult decision with
respect to the release of information that Mr. Zaccaro considered would be

damaging to his business interests. His tax returns were not legally required by

the strictest interpretation of the campaign disclosure laws, but the public

believed it had a right to know the facts in order to pass judgment on Ms.

Ferraro's qualifications to be vice-president.
17"Anatomy of a Libel Suit," an excellent two-hour program produced for
public television by the Columbia School of Journalism, dramatized the

dilemma between the public's right to know and the private right to control

personal information. It contrasted the role of the press in acting as surrogate for

the public with the right of individuals to maintain secrecy about their personal

affairs and the right of corporations to protect internal memoranda and
documents that may prove embarrassing or damaging to their business. The rule
of law that has evolved, as enunciated in 
Times v. 
Sullivan18 two decades ago, is
that the public's right to know takes precedence over the personal right to

privacy. If one is a "public figure" (e.g., a public officialŠeven a policeman on

the beat) or a quasi or limited public figure (e.g., one who is well known in the

press already with respect to the controversy in question), then the press can be

held liable for misstating facts only where malice (e.g., intentional lying or

flagrant disregard for the facts) can be shown.
19THE RIGHT TO COLLECT INFORMATION
The fight to collect information is vested primarily in the government and
is differentiated from the right of journalists to investigate the facts. Many

businesses and institutions collect informationŠbanks, insurance companies,

credit institutions, hospitals, universitiesŠbut there is no legal fight to do so.

Most of the information is freely given or exchanged for services. In most cases

there is a quid pro quo for the disclosure of the information based upon either

an explicit or an implied contract. Having delivered sufficient consideration to
legitimize a contract, the institutions consider the information proprietary and
are loathe to release it even to the subjects of the information, be they patient,

customer, or student. It has taken federal and state laws as well as court orders

to require universities to make their records
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION87
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.available to students and their parents,
20 and universities are still troubled about
the consequences of having what they consider sensitive records open to

inspection because it will inhibit professors and other staff from being candid

about their observations. Also, a recent case holding that individuals have no

inherent legal interest in records concerning themselves held by others is quite

troubling.21States as well as the federal government have been forging a new
framework for privacy over the past several decades, and the effort has become

more intense since the 1960s. The primary federal privacy legislation now in

effect controls access of the public to government data banks in which

information is collected and aggregated.
22 However, the fight of the government
to collect information is fundamental to the survival of the nation. Its economic
health as well as its physical and political health is at stake. The census, which
was started in 1890, is a fundamental function of the federal government. In

order to collect demographic data and aggregate it for analysis, the government

must have the power to compel citizens to respond. This is a very sensitive area,

and many citizens do not agree that they should be compelled to release the

necessary data. However, allocation of public funds is based upon percentages

of identifiable groups, for example, children of the military living within a

school district. Also, market informationŠimportant to a healthy private sector

Šis gleaned from the economic statistics that are collected by the Bureau of

Economic Affairs in the Department of Commerce.
Stringent legislation exists to protect individuals from disclosure of
information that is identifiable as specific to an individual or corporation.

However, the access laws have made it extremely complicated to protect such

anonymity for large enterprises, and many corporations feel that their trade

secrets may be jeopardized even though one of the exceptions to the law is that
such disclosure may occur.
A very disturbing decision was handed down recently by the New York
State Court of Appeals. Under New York law domestic insurance companies

are required to keep certain books and records, including minutes of their

corporate board of directors' meetings. Such records have been voluntarily sent

to the State Insurance Department under a promise of confidentiality. However,
the court ruled that the agency must disclose the minutes of the directors'
meetings to the 
Washington Post
 under New York's Freedom of Information
Law, which defined "records" as "any information kept, held, filed, produced or

reproduced by, with or for any agency ..." and that an amendment to the act had

eliminated any reference to an exemption for records "confidentially disclosed."
23PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION88
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE RIGHT TO ACQUIRE INFORMATION
The right to acquire information is a public access issue that goes beyond
the right of the press to investigate and/or the right of the government to collect

information. It involves the right of citizens to acquire information already

collected by others. James Madison observed that "a popular government

without popular information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to a

farce or a tragedy, or perhaps both." Based upon that verity, the United States
has built its information policy upon a broad base of public education, public
libraries, public subsidies for newspapers and other printed materials, and a

government printing office that publishes the information gathered and

processed by the federal government. Strictly speaking, public access may be

difficult to conceive of as a property right. However, it is basically a legal

entitlement to use public property, e.g., that information which is gathered and

processed and published with federal funds and/or has become generally

available to the public.
Patents and copyrights are the legal means by which authors and inventors
are encouraged to share their creative endeavors with the public in exchange for

the legally protected right to control the use of their intellectual products.
24However, there has been considerable concern that many of these patents

become buried in government archives and are never turned to productive use.
This concern is especially pertinent for patents owned by the government,
where private enterprises have no incentive to develop the technology. Only 4

percent of the government's 30,000 patents have been developed and

marketed.25 In response to this concern, Congress amended the patent and
trademark laws in 1980 to permit universities, small business firms, and

nonprofit institutions to apply for patents on federally funded research and to

retain exclusive licenses on these patents for as long as eight years.
26 Although
this legislation has offered a cure for one problemŠthe loss of productivity
from development of government patentsŠit has created anotherŠthe concern
that the basic purposes of universities will be altered. In particular, there is

concern that university efforts to sponsor research jointly with industry, in

response to diminishing public funding of research, may change the public

availability of information produced in universities.
27For the general purpose of making information available to the public,
aside from the Government Printing Office (GPO), there are extensive federal

libraries including the Library of Congress (LC), the National Library of

Medicine (NLM), and the National Technical
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION89
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Service (NTIS). These organizations collect and disseminate
information developed with federal funds (as in the case of NTIS), registered

with the Copyright Office (as in the case of the LC), or collected because it is

pertinent to basic research being conducted by scientists and physicians both in

federal employment and around the country (as in the case of NLM).
In recent years there has been much turmoil about the dissemination of
information that has been processed by federally owned computers and is

available in machine-readable form. The most recent policy enunciated by the

present administration is that such information will be offered to private

contractors for electronic dissemination. Users will pay for the direct cost of

accessing the data from computer-based systems, but the federal government

will exercise no influence over the fees that contractors or subcontractors may
charge the public to access such on-line data.
28 Another pioneering project has
been undertaken by the Trademark Office, which has entered into barter

arrangements with private companies to exchange government data for services

in designing the computer graphics software and entering the data to access

trademark registrations on-line through an electronic data base. The ultimate

goal is to produce the paperless office in which manual files will no longer be

maintained.29 This is a far cry from the previous practice of agricultural data
being distributed freely and without charge by congressmen to their constituents

and from that of county agents offering their consulting services to local

farmers. Congressman Byron Rogers from Colorado's First Congressional

District used to send baby books to all new parents with his compliments, and

many useful publications are offered at a modest cost by the Government
Printing Office.
Public libraries agonize over the high costs of distributing information on-
line, as charges are not imposed on the the use of books unless they are

overdue.30 There is, of course, no natural rationale that requires public libraries
to permit readers to read books in their collections without charge. Indeed, in

former times libraries were very carefully guarded assets, access to which was

strictly regulated. Neither is there a natural rationale which requires that access

to computer-based information be subject to usage-sensitive charges. The main

difference is that it is more convenient to measure and collect the marginal cost
of computer access than it is for manual systems.
THE RIGHT TO WITHHOLD INFORMATION
The personal right to privacy is basically a right to withhold information
from public dissemination or disclosure. It is quite limited
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION90
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in a society that believes in the free flow of information. In the United States the
press is encouraged to serve as a watchdog and to seek out wrongdoing in

public and private institutions.
As the press has become more and more diligent in its role and the means
of surveillance and investigation have become more sophisticated, it is not

surprising that public agitation with respect to the advent of new information

technologies has sparked an interest in privacy laws. The most basic property

right is the protection and integrity of one's own personŠthe right to withhold

information about oneself that one considers to be one's own, the right to
disclose information about oneself at such time and place and under such
conditions as one chooses, and the complementary right to know of and to

correct information about oneself that is inaccurate and damaging to one's pride

or reputation.
Scholars of privacy insist that privacy is a natural instinct that has roots in
the earliest of civilizations. However, when one visits the pueblos and cliff

dwellings of the Southwest Indians it is difficult to believe that our early

forebears on this continent enjoyed very much privacy. And those of us who

grew up in small-town America also have serious doubts that privacy is so
deeply rooted historically. Indeed, it seems a newly won privilege of urban
civilization where the sheer numbers of citizens living together make it virtually

impossible for everyone to keep track of everyone else. Therefore, it comes as

something of a surprise that there is such commotion about information

technologies that have the capability to reimpose the surveillance that was

characteristic of small, tightly knit communities.
Nonetheless, it is a characteristic of our evolving civilization that we are
developing an increasing respect for the individuality and privacy of every

human being in addition to a recognition of proprietary rights in real estate and

other material possessions. Therefore, it follows logically that we will also

evolve a body of law to protect information about ourselves as well as

information concerning our corporate enterprises and public institutions.
Some rights have become universally accepted and require no legal
sanction. For example, many women in our society prefer not to tell their age,

and that preference is usually respected. The privacy of other information, such

as that about sexual behavior, is less universally accepted; e.g., we are only

recently beginning to accept overt homosexuality among those in positions of

power and influence such as the teaching profession and the judiciary.
Consequently, there has been a strong incentive to protect such information
from disclosure. Criminal activity, physical illness, psychiatric treatment, credit

history, and
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION91
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sources of income are all areas in which we have developed concerns about
disclosure if disclosure would be damaging to personal interests or if such

information would be damaging to the public interest. A case in point was

disclosure of the information concerning the psychiatric treatment of Senator

Eagleton, which affected his viability as a candidate for the vice-presidency of

the United States in 1972.
Trade secrets are protected under a very extensive body of law developed
through state legislation and the common law. However, trade secrets law is full

of contradictions and inconsistencies with the laws of copyrights and patents,

particularly with respect to the protection of proprietary interests in computer

software. The basic philosophy of both copyright and patents is to disclose

information in order to expedite the public dissemination of information but to
provide compensation to the authors or inventors, whereas trade secrets law
rests upon nondisclosure to the public. Attorneys for computer software

companies are in a great dilemma about whether to withhold, disclose, license,

release, or rely upon royalties. To cover all bases is very difficult, since reliance

upon one theory of law may foreclose use of another.
31Use of the social security number as a universal identifier has met with
great opposition from proponents of privacy. Thus, many people refuse to

disclose their social security number because they fear that the government will

misuse the personal information referenced by social security number in many

data banks. Nonetheless, social security numbers as identifiers have become

widely used by both the government and private organizations. The majority of

citizens seem to have no qualms about disclosing the number, and many feel
that the advantages of cross-referencing data bases far outweigh the dangers.
Another area of the law that is very controversial and rapidly developing is
the asserted right of journalists to withhold the identity of their sources. Here

the right of the public to know is in conflict with the right of those accused of

wrongdoing to know the source of the accusation. Investigative reporters claim

that they will be unable to obtain information from those with knowledge,

especially where their source's future may be jeopardized (e.g., by discharge

from employment for ''whistle-blowing" or by retribution at the hands of

criminals for "squealing"). This area of the law is still very much in a state of
flux.32The Supreme Court, when reviewing a journalist's plea for a special
privilege,33 noted that Congress might elect to legislate a special privilege for
those who inform the public, but it failed to restrict the category to journalists.

The Court included lecturers, pollsters, nov
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION92
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.elists, academic researchers, and dramatists among those who might seek or
merit the right to protect the confidentiality of their sources.
This right is greatly desired by most scientists, despite the seeming
contradiction between the philosophical basis of an open exchange of

information in the pursuit of knowledge and the closed system of individual

sovereignty of the researcher over the management of the data, subject to a peer

group review.
34 In 1971 Professor Samuel Popkin of Harvard University went
to jail for a week for refusing to disclose the sources of his research related to

issues in the Pentagon papers litigation.
35The only two areas in which scientific researchers can obtain protective
orders to protect their sources are in cases of psychiatric illnesses or drug

abuse.36 Efforts to persuade Congress to enact the protection alleged to be
required by scientific researchers in other areas have been unsuccessful.
37THE RIGHT TO CONTROL THE RELEASE OF
INFORMATIONThe corollary to the right to withhold information is the right to release
information at a time or place of one's own choosing. This right is recognized

for corporate products, and corporations carefully guard the release of

information about new products. Similarly, news releases are dated, and

publishers usually respect the embargo both as a matter of common practice and

in order to preserve the relationship with the source of the information for

future publication.The right to control the release of information is particularly important to
those engaged in scientific research. Traditionally (until recently), basic

researchers neither sought nor received much financial reward for their

discoveries, but they jealously guarded their rights of paternity. Dorothy Nelkin

summarized their position as follows:
Scientists resist external control as a threat to the quality and integrity of
research and as an infringement on their right to control the production and
dissemination of their work. From this perspective, the question of ownership
is unambiguous: the concept of individual sovereignty guides scientific
behavior.38There is nothing more zealously guarded by scientists than the peer group
recognition that comes from first publication of research results that may lead to

an esteemed professorship or even a Nobel Prize. In his study of scientists, R.

K. Merton concluded that a scientist's claim to intellectual property rights was

limited to such recognition and esteem.
39 However, with the changing economic
environment in which academic research is being conducted and with large

profits to be
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION93
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.claimed, especially in the field of genetic engineering, all this may be changing.
The incentive to claim property rights in scientific research that extend beyond

paternity is becoming more compelling.
Nelkin has astutely observed:
This assumption [that scientific sovereignty is in the public interest] leads to a
fundamental contradiction: the use of secrecy to maintain sovereignty within a
community whose work is based on open communication of research findings.
40Interestingly enough, at the same time that the incentive to control research
findings more efficiently has increased, the technological imperative is in the
direction of making it easier and easier to share scientific research. Computer

networking among scientists has become widespread, facilitating the

cooperative efforts of scientists from many parts of the world in joint research

projects. Such simultaneous and sequential exchanges in a dynamic electronic

environment often make it difficult to determine paternity with any kind of legal

validity,41 and the bits and bytes flowing freely via satellite from laboratory to
laboratory may make it difficult to trace what librarians call an ''intellectual

audit trail." Thus, the dilemma arises for scientists that the economic

environment in which they now work impedes the optimum use of a technology

that has the greatest promise for sharing their intellectual output with the rest of

the world.An additional problem has arisen with the public outcry to be able to see
the information upon which the scientist's judgment is based rather than to rely

upon the expert opinion of the research scientist as reviewed and validated by a

peer group. This is the primary reason for controlling the release of scientific

data. Research scientists check and recheck their data until there is reasonable

assurance that it is reliable before sharing it with the court of peers who will

judge its authenticity and validate it for public distribution. However, the data in

a university computer may not be as easily protected from premature release as

the research notebooks of a pre-computer period.
There are many other types of data bases where release of information
provided by individuals is routinely made available to the public or even sold

for profit by both private and public institutions. Have you noticed, for

example, how quickly you receive solicitations from boating magazines and

commercial houses after you have purchased a new boat and registered it with

the state authorities or documented it with the Coast Guard? Direct mailers are

notorious for the speed with which they sell your name to their colleagues after

you purchasePROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION94
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.an item. All of this is expedited by the use of computers for recording and
distributing addresses.
In most jurisdictions there is at present no legal right to require entities to
which you disclose your name and address to protect that information.

However, there seems to be a groundswell of increasing concern about such

use.42 A few states have acted to prohibit the use of motor vehicle registration
lists for direct marketing without the consent of the registrant,
43 and a number
of others have enacted legislation restricting the distribution of cable television

subscription lists.
44 Most companies are able to acquire such information quite
easily. Several companies specialize in the distribution of motor vehicle
registration lists, which are considered to be the most valuable and up-to-date

address lists. Some institutions, such as American Express, voluntarily inquire

whether you wish to have your name distributed to other commercial

enterprises, and the Direct Marketing Association promises to have your name

removed from all mailing lists if you so request. However, a trial run of this

system by the author merely precipitated a deluge of catalogs from many direct

mail houses that had not previously known the address.
Perhaps in an open society whose economy rests upon commercial
enterprise, some of us do not cherish the protection of our own names from

disclosure to third parties without our permission. Indeed, the telephone

company requires those who cherish privacy to pay extra for the privilege of an

unlisted telephone number. However, it should be a prime tenet of the right to

privacy that government agencies should not disclose personal information for

commercial purposes without prior consent of the person.
Credit agencies freely exchange information about one's reliability. The
legal status of such information within the care and within the files of another is

not entirely clear. However, some recent cases are troubling. A bank was held

legal owner of the information about a depositor, who had no right to enjoin

release of that information.
45 Medical doctors are usually held to be the owner
of their own files about patients, and attorneys are the custodian and rightful
owner of their own files about their clients. The attorney-client privilege
protects disclosure by the attorney of client information to third parties, and

doctors operate under an ethical mandate not to disclose medical information

about the contents of their files to outsiders. However, the ease with which

electronic files are being invaded today suggests that the law is not yet in place

that will protect such files in the Information Age and/or that neither public nor

commercial enterprises are willing to pay the price of data protection by

encryption.PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION95
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The case of material obtained illegally is another instance in which the
right to control release of information is important. Where criminal liability is

predicated upon such information, it has been a long-standing principle of U.S.

law that information obtained by illegal search and seizure is not permitted to

be used to convict.
46 However, recent Supreme Court cases suggests that this
rule may be weakened.
47In the case of publication of illegally obtained information, the law is not
so protective of the source, and the government was unable to obtain an

injunction against the 
New York Times
 to prevent publication of the Pentagon
papers.48 However, the formerŠthe case of material obtained illegallyŠrests
upon a basic principle of fairness to defendants and the latterŠthat of

publication of illegally obtained informationŠupon the overriding right of the
public to know. Consequently, in each case there is a balancing of public
against private interests in release of information. There is an implicit conflict

between the interests of the First Amendment in open and uninhibited

circulation of information and the rights of interested parties (whether

individuals, corporations, or governments) to prevent the disclosure of

information that they consider may be damaging to them.
The most interesting case to date in this area has been the Elizabeth Taylor
action to enjoin ABC from televising a docudrama about her life in which she

had enjoyed no participation nor had had any opportunity to review the

contents. It was Miss Taylor's argument that the story of her life was hers to

distribute.49 As she was an actress of note whose family fortune rested upon her
abilities as an actress and her resultant fame, it was a reasonable argument that
she had not merely a personal right of privacy not to be invaded by publication
of information about herself but that she had a commercial interest to be

protected from exploitation by an unauthorized commercial enterprise.
Usually the legal claims in such cases are based upon libel, privacy, or
false light, but Miss Taylor's claim was a more novel claim of misappropriation

of information rightfully belonging to her. She based her claim upon statutory

rights and the common law "right of publicity."
50Libel cases against producers of historical documentaries have been
dismissed on the grounds that certain events are of such historical significance

that the First Amendment confers "leeway" to permit the public to view the

reconstructed portrayal.
51 The problem is more critical with living subjects,
especially those like Miss Taylor whose livelihood is based upon the electronic
presentation that is also the vehicle being used for the historical representation.
Courts have held that the right to file suit for invasion of privacy would not be

availablePROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION96
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to descendants, although "merchandising rights" have been held to be passed to
subsequent generations.
52 Inevitably, in such cases there is a conflict of many
interests: those of the authors to the integrity of their creative freedom, those of

the public to view historical events in perspective and in the latest information

technology, and those of the subject or the subject's heirs either to protect the

integrity of information or to retain the right to receive compensation for
distribution of information that was generated through the efforts of the subject.
Rights of paternity and integrity have not traditionally been covered by U.S.

copyright law, but are established by contract.
53THE RIGHT TO PROFIT FROM INFORMATION
There are many mechanisms for supporting the creation of intellectual
products, such as the maintenance of monasteries, public universities, and

venture-capital firms or the patronage of wealthy families, for example, in Italy

during the Renaissance. Yet copyright and patent laws have been the mainstay

of public policy in market economies since the Statute of Anne was enacted in

1709.54 Basically, this first copyright law protected the right of authors to
dispose of their works in return for financial remuneration rather than for public
acclaim.55As this system was designed for the print media and primarily for the
protection of the financial interests of publishers rather than of authors, it has

been the subject of much controversy in the electronic age. The law had great

difficulty in accommodating itself to machines. Even as early as the days of the

player piano, the courts had difficulty in finding that the instructions to the

piano were a "copy" of the underlying work that could be perceived by the

human mind rather than a machine.
56 The author John Hersey, a commissioner
on the Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted Works
(CONTU), which advised the Congress on the applicability of copyright

principles to computer software, wrote an anguished dissent to the CONTU

recommendation that software be so considered:
Works of authorship have always been intended to be circulated to human
beings and to be used by themŠto be read, heard, or seen, for either
pleasurable or practical ends. Computer programs, in their mature phase, are
addressed to machines.... The computer program communicates, if at all, only
with a machine.57Hersey's colleagues on CONTU did not have as much difficulty coping
with computers as he did, and recommended to the Congress that computer

software be absorbed within the rubric of copyright protection.
58 Indeed, even
with doubts about the statutory protection,
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION97
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.lawyers have shown great ingenuity in devising methods to protect the interests
of their clients through licensing agreements, centralized royalty exchange

programs, and contractual arrangements.
Computer SoftwareŠApple v. Franklin
The arguments over legal protection for computer software have been
extensive and have only temporarily been resolved with the enactment of a

special amendment in 1980 to the Copyright Act of 1976. The amendment was

specifically intended to authorize copyright law to cover computer programs,
59although the Copyright Office had been accepting computer software for

copyright registration since 1964.
60 The Copyright Office had, in fact,
registered more than 2,000 such programs prior to the investigative hearings of
CONTU, primarily offered by IBM and Burroughs, two of the largest

developers of computer software.
61Much of the success of Apple in introducing the personal computer to the
marketplace rested upon its successful efforts to encourage the free exchange of

software programs by its users and the offer to facilitate the opportunity for

circulation. However, when the Franklin Computer Company copied its

operating program in order to facilitate the running of software designed for

Apple computers on Franklin hardware, Apple went to court to enjoin the
practice. There was no question about the source of the software, as the
Franklin version even contained references to Applesoft. The basic legal

argument was that object code, in which the Apple operating system was

written, was not copyrightable. The lower court, in the spirit of John Hersey,

was unable to cope with this "baffling" new technology and found no

infringement. Where were the original "works of authorship" in this electronic

gibberish? What was "fixed in a tangible medium of expression''?
The defendant also suggested that for the copyright laws to cover the
situation there must be some representation of irreparable financial harm.

Rather than harm to the plaintiff, the defendant argued that the irreparable harm

would ensue upon issue of an injunction against Franklin, a fledgling personal

computer manufacturer with only 1,000 machines sold, compared with Apple,
the then leader in the field, with 440,000 computers sold and sales of over $335
million in 1981. Franklin argued that equities and public interest were on its

side to foster competition in the industry and to keep a balance between

competition and protection. However, the appellate court disagreed. Although

finding that the underlying interest of the copyright law required a
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION98
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.presumption of irreparable harm to the plaintiff, the court said the copyright law
required no such actual showing. The court had no difficulty in finding that the

$740,000 invested by Apple in developing its operating system software

represented a substantial investment in jeopardy, which would satisfy the

underlying public policy considerations. It also found no difficulty in obviating

the necessity of discriminating between object and source code,
62 since one is
used to more readily get access to the other. In effect the two satisfy the same
functional purposesŠto tell the computer what routines it is to perform. The

Supreme Court agreed, or at least refused to enter the argument.
63However, the debate about the appropriate protection for software
continues.64 Some software firms, such as Freeware, offer their programs for a
contribution on the theory that wide dissemination is desirable and, at least in

their judgment, profitable. Other software houses, while attempting to protect

their intellectual efforts through licensing agreements to control unauthorized

copying, nonetheless admit that staying ahead of the competition in innovative
programs is what protects their financial investment. It remains doubtful
whether or not this will be true in the more stable economic environment when

software programs have matured and found their natural niches in the

marketplace. Indeed, some of the young geniuses who started their careers as

computer hackers have admitted to being devastated by the piracy of their work

product after hours and hours of labor expended in its creation. How public

policy addresses this issue will remain of high priority in the Information Age,

as economic interests become more and more tied directly to information

products and services.Videotape PiracyŠSony Corp. v. Universal City Studios
An even more difficult copyright issue, one that is no nearer resolution, is
that of videotaping television programs off the air through the use of

videocassette recorders (VCRs). As recently as the early 1970s, network

programs did not carry a copyright notice, because the law presumed that

broadcasting a program on television was not a "publication" but a private

performance to be governed by the contract negotiations and agreements
reached between the two partiesŠthe network originator and the broadcasting
station that aired the program. At the time there was no conceivable way a user

could record and resell the performance. Consequently, there was no "copy"

that could be the subject of copyright registration.
All that has changed with videotaping, which is flourishing. Some 4 to 5
million VCRs are now purchased annually
65 (13 percent of the
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION99
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.American public already owns VCRs
66 ), and more than 14,000 videotape
leasing outlets have cropped up all across America.
67 However, the receipt of
royalties from the rentals of such recordings is prohibited by law under the

doctrine of "first sale," which grants a copyright owner the right to transfer the

ownership but not to control the secondary uses thereafter.
68 As a consequence,
no royalties are collected on the millions of rentals of videotapes of popular
motion pictures. The sale of such tapes has not been large, but the market is
growing steadily. The release of 
Raiders of the Lost Ark
 just before Christmas
in 1983 precipitated a record of 500,000 purchases in less than a month.
69 The
rentals now reach close to a billion dollars annually and run about nine to one

over purchases.70Most of the litigation has involved the taping off the air of television
distributed programming. The time to resolve the issue has taken almost a

decade, as the initial suit was filed in 1976. Although the lower court did not

see a violation of the Copyright Act in the at-home taping of television

programs, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals agreed with the complainants that

their rights had been infringed and that they deserved relief. The Supreme Court

disagreed, admonishing the appellate court for enlarging the scope of "an article
of commerce" that is not the subject of copyright protection and beyond the
power authorized by Congress. In addition, the Court found that the widespread

primary use of VCRs was for "time-shifting" or otherwise viewing a program

that could not be seen at the time it was first televised. Thus, the respondent was

unable to "show that the practice has impaired the value of their copyrights or

has created any likelihood of future harm." Also, the Court determined that

VCRs were used for other, quite legitimate purposes in addition to that of

recording plaintiff's intellectual products.
71Taping of television programs for personal use appears to have become
accepted as a fair use of copyrighted material. This is not in accord with the

historical interpretation of fair use, since the programs are taped in their

entirety. The use of the doctrine in the past has usually been restricted to

copying portions of the work "for purposes such as criticism, comment, news

reporting, teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship,

or research."
72 The rationale of the court must have been the unlikely efficacy
of trying to put Pandora back into the box and the fact that no commercial use
of the tapes was either alleged or documented. The case might go quite

differently for the resale of programs taped off the air.
The holding was consistent with the photocopying case,
73 which had to
reckon with the efficacy of trying to hold back a technology that
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION100
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.had produced countless street-corner copying houses all over the countryŠa
development that makes it possible for any citizen to become an information

provider. Furthermore, the Williams & Wilkins case involved the photocopying

by the National Library of Medicine and National Institutes of Health (NIH) of

scientific articles (many of which were taken from the plaintiff's 37 professional

journals) in single copies for distribution to the NIH staff of 12,000 pius
satisfying thousands of requests from cooperating libraries around the country.
In each case the Court was concerned about dealing with a new technology
in a judicial context rather than leaving the legislative function to Congress, but

in both cases the justices were divided in their opinions.
The motion picture producers are now taking their case to Congress and
seeking repeal of the first-sale doctrine. They are also pursuing their legal rights

in the courts against all potential defendants in the videotaping industry but

without any redress being sought against users whose only videotaping is for

their personal use in the home.
74Insider InformationŠSEC v. Winans
Another concern of the public is that insiders not be permitted wrongful
financial gain from the use of information prior to its disclosure to the public.

The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulates the buying and

trading of stock by the executives and owners of businesses who have available

to them information that could affect the stock market price.
75 Historically,
financial information has carried monetary value second only to that of military
information. Indeed, the Rothschilds are supposed to have based their fortune
upon advance information of the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo brought to

them by their fleet of carrier pigeons.
In an open society such as ours, there has been considerable ferment about
manipulation of the stock market by those with sensitive jobs. The most recent

case and the most innovative one is the indictment of R. Foster Winans, a

former employee of the 
Wall Street Journal
 and columnist of "Heard on the
Street," for using the advance information that he controlled for personal profit

in stock market trading.
76 Indicted along with Winans were two others, another
former Journal employee and a former stockbroker from Kidder, Peabody, &
Company. Also expected to be indicted is an attorney who allegedly used the

information and profited therefrom. Over a million dollars in profits were

reputed to be gained by the four in the alleged conspiracy
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION101
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to defraud the readers of the 
Journal through a failure to disclose the financial
interest of the writer in the outcome of his articles.
Although the indictment contains allegations of securities, mail, and wire
fraud, it is this novel legal theory of a fiduciary obligation to his readers that has

precipitated much speculation among legal scholars. Proponents of the First

Amendment and defenders of the press such as Floyd Abrams deplore such

disclosure of financial interest as a forced speech that is inherently abhorrent to

the constitutional right of free speech. However, investors in the stock market

who rely upon such reputable sources as the 
Wall Street Journal
 for their
financial information must necessarily be concerned about the opportunity for
manipulation of the data and the stock market. This case presents an interesting

dichotomy for those who prefer an unregulated marketplace, since the integrity

of the information must necessarily rely upon either the ethics of the profession

or the rule of law. Certainly the dispatch with which Winans was released from

his employment by the 
Journal underlines the concern of the paper for its
reputation.Clearly the SEC insider rules were not originally intended to anticipate
such a situation. A basic sense of fairness to the stock-trading public suggests

where the equities lie. However, the legal situation is not so clear. While the

theory of a legally enforceable fiduciary duty has appeal to those concerned

with fairness in the marketplace, it may not technically lie within the Supreme

Court's restrictive definition of insider trading. Winans was not an officer of any

of the companies in which he traded. He was in the position of gathering

information about them and/or disclosing it at a time and place convenient to
his trading posture. The most solid legal argument may be that he embezzled
the information about the time of publication of his column from his employer

and released it to his coconspirators, who became thereby participants in the

alleged theft.The most expansive exposition of the legal position of the courts was
expressed in a 1968 case: "AnyoneŠcorporate insider or notŠwho regularly

receives material nonpublic information may not use that information to trade in

securities without incurring an affirmative duty to disclose.... [Federal securities

laws] created a system providing equal access to information necessary for

reasoned and intelligent investment decisions."
77 Prior decisions have
concluded that the fiduciary relationship necessary to bring the SEC rules into

action required direct responsibilities to the stockholders.
78 Consequently, the
government may lose the case on technical points. Nonetheless, the indictment
itself is a major step forward in focusing public attention upon the problem of

authenticating sources of infor
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION102
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mation and protecting the integrity of information upon which the public must
make decisions. Certainly. there will be amicus curiae briefs filed by

representatives of the working press, and publishers will argue that government

intrusion upon the self-regulation of the industry will do more harm than good.

However, where financial interests affecting the buying public are concerned, I

suspect that the scales will fall more heavily upon the side of regulation if the
courts fail to protect the integrity of financial information. One caveat,
however: When the state of Alabama enacted legislation requiting reporters

covering state government to disclose their economic interests that might

constitute a conflict, the reporters succeeded in obtaining an injunction against

its use.
79 There was no presumption of wrongdoing as in the Winans case, since
the dangers were prospective rather than retrospective. Certainly, this is one of

the areas in which the divergent thrusts of the First Amendment draw a clear

line of battle.
Other CasesAnother area for concern in the future is that of public officials
commercializing their memoirs or using information from their official

experiences for profit. However, public servants may argue that their "stock in

trade" is their intellectual output during their incumbencies much as Elizabeth

Taylor claimed a commercial interest in her professional persona and the right

to exploit her name, image, and reputation. The difference, of course, is that

public officials receive their financial support from public coffers, whereas
performers are dependent upon commercial exploitation of their performances
as the economic basis of their livelihood. The public policy question is whether

news gatherers are derelict in their duties to the public when they pay their news

sources for disclosure of information.
A more serious problem occurs in cases such as that of Watergate
defendants Haldeman and Ehrlichman, who were paid for their appearances on

television. Since Watergate, there is growing concern about the right of public

servants to financial gain from their public service, or especially for their public

disservice. However, there is very little case law on the subject. This is probably

because there is no one to represent the public interestŠno injured party to

litigate the issue. Several decades ago litigation arose over the right of Admiral

Rickover to claim a copyright in his speeches delivered during government
service.80 In another case, Richard Nixon was not permitted to claim executive
privilege to block the subpoena of the special prosecutor for the famous

incriminatory tape recordings.
81 MorePROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION103
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.recently, the Ford memoirs became the subject of litigation when 
The Nation
published excerpts or paraphrasings of some of Gerald Ford's observations

about Watergate and its aftermath prior to the publication date scheduled and

precipitating the cancellation of a contract with 
Time magazine to publish
portions of the manuscript.
82 The court held that 
The Nation's
 articleŠonly
2,250 words, of which at most approximately 300 were copiedŠwas a fair use
of facts contained in the 200,000-word manuscript and were ''the very essence
of news and of history." After reviewing cases holding that neither news events,

historical facts, nor biographical facts are copyrightable, the court summarized

its view that public events cannot be monopolized by participants in them.
83We have been asked to examine complex questions concerning the Copyright
Act and the memoirs of a public official. Throughout our consideration, we
have been guided by the conviction that the statute was not meant to obstruct

the citizens' access to vital facts and historical observations about our nation's
life. By far the greatest part of the article in The Nation was no more than the
reporting of information concerning political decisions at the highest level of
government. These facts were sown in and gathered from the shared ground of
our country's history. They are the "property of all"....
84Inroads are also being made into the quite disreputable practice of some
criminals committing their crimes for the purpose of gaining notoriety. Given

the enthusiasm with which publishers pursue the right to publish such stories, it

is not surprising that we have begun to think twice about the consequences of

promoting financial gain from antisocial acts as we become more dependent
upon information products for our economic health. A prudent and wise rule, it
could be argued, would not permit a criminal to profit from his or her own

wrongdoing. Proceeds should more equitably be allocated to the victims or their

families or be used to reimburse the government for the cost of incarceration.

The former has been addressed in the enactment of what are called the Son of

Sam laws. These were precipitated by the chain of murders committed by David

Berkowitz in New York several years ago.
85THE RIGHT TO PROTECT INFORMATION
There are many areas in which we have recognized a right to protect
sensitive information that has already been gathered, processed, and archived.

For example, the dockets of juvenile offenders are not available for public

inspection in many jurisdictions. Medical records
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION104
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.are not open to the public. Government documents are sometimes stamped TOP
SECRET, SENSITIVE, or EYES ONLY. Yet all of these protected areas are

suspect under the opposing theory of the public's right to know and the fear that

activities that take place in secret and that are not recorded in publicly available

documents will cover up actions that are not in the public interest or that reflect

negligence or incompetence.
Sunshine Laws and Freedom of Information Laws
Sunshine laws and freedom of information laws
86 have wreaked havoc
with the traditional practices of organizations to conduct their business in

private and to disclose actions to the public after debate is over. Universities as

well as industry smart under pressure to open up their inner circles to greater

representation from the public. Seats on college and university governing

boards now include student members as well as faculty and staff, and
corporations seek board members with public constituencies.
All of this is a very healthy and inevitable trend in an open and vital
information society. It may encumber decision making and render it more

costly, but democratic governance demands broad participation in making

public policy. Such participation necessarily requires widespread dissemination

of information upon which public decisions are predicated.
Strategic Information
However, sunshine laws and freedom of information laws also present new
obstacles to security agencies. Gathering of strategic intelligence by tradition is

assumed to operate in seclusion beyond the reach of public surveillance. Many

people are concerned that the new technologies make it even more difficult to

protect information of a sensitive nature because of the ease with which

invaders can break into the system. The movie 
War Games
 is a good example
of the fear that has been engendered concerning the potential for harm by
unauthorized entry into computerized defense systems. Yet advances in

computer cryptography have swung to the side of those who encrypt, if they use

sound methods. We are assured that breaking into the data bases of the

Department of Defense and the Central Intelligence Agency and National

Security Agency is far more difficult than is represented by Hollywood. Still, it

is a worrisome problem both from a technical and from a legal standpoint.

Recently officials werePROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION105
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.astonished to discover that wiretapping a voice line was prohibited by statute,
yet tapping into a digital transmission was not.
87 The law lags far behind the
technology.Other countries are more concerned than ours is about the vulnerability of
information that is gathered, processed, and/or maintained in data bases outside

their own boundaries. This is not entirely a specious argument, as the assets of

Iran were impounded during the Iranian hostage crisis. Also, the billions of

dollars whirling daily through the SWIFT computerized network from bank to

bank internationally are a good example of information of high value that
cannot by its nature be controlled physically within the confines of a single
nation. A country that tried to do so would become isolated from the

international economy and would have to fall back upon its own resources.
This has not inhibited countries such as Sweden from elevating the
question of national vulnerability to a high level of public anxiety.
88 In the case
of Sweden the concern was prompted initially by discovery that the Malmö fire

department processed its data in a computer timesharing service in the United

States. To be invaded by aliens and to discover that your strategic data were

stored in an enemy computer would certainly put an end to a war prematurely.
As a result of such fear, nation-states purchase and maintain computers for their
own essential information rather than use the more expeditious and less costly

route of time-sharing with other countries. However, this is the price of

maintaining national sovereignty over critical information in the absence of any

international protocols for such protection outside their own geographical

boundaries, within which they are presumed to have absolute jurisdiction.
Export Control of Technical Data
The current argument over new legislation to replace the old Export
Administration Act,
89 which has now expired, highlights the problems that
ensue when technical data are treated as a controlled commodity. Despite the

long-standing existence of the restrictive clauses contained in the earlier

versions of the act, it has only recently come to the attention of scientists that

much of their existing open practice concerning the exchange of unpublished
scientific data, in person, by mail, by conference, and by computer, is permitted
only by the notion of a General License by the Department of Commerce.
The Bucy Report of the Defense Science Board
90 recommended that the
export control system should reduce the number of controlled
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION106
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.items on the Controlled Commodities List and concentrate on the transfer of
applied technologies, the mastery of which would permit hostile nations to

replicate U.S. military manufacturing capability. Thus, they recommended

restricting only "arrays of design and manufacturing knowledge," and

"keystone" manufacturing equipment. However, although the Congress

incorporated the board's definitions into the 1979 act, it had left no guidelines
concerning how such determinations were to be made. The extensive proposals
of the Department of Defense, such as the highly controversial and secret

Militarily Critical Technologies List, have not yet been approved by Congress.
Because the proposed new legislation permits U.S. law to reach out and
control companies in other friendly countries to which technology has been

transferred, the European Economic Community (EEC) has filed formal

complaints through diplomatic channels deploring this intrusion upon national

sovereignty and noting that the economic sanctions of the U.S. government over

the Soviet pipeline had led to considerable "political and commercial damage."
91Transborder TelevisionŠProtection of Cultural Identity
Another example of protective policies has been initiated in Canada, which
is concerned more about cultural identity and its own economic independence

than about strategic security, since the main threat it suffers from the United

States is to its cultural and economic integrity. In certain respects Canada has

been ahead of the United States in entering the Information Age. Marconi's first

transatlantic radio transmission was from Nova Scotia rather than from Truro,
Italy. Morse's telegraphy found uses in Canada before it came into use in the
United States, and Canada orbited domestic communications satellites two

years before the United States was able to "get off the ground." Furthermore,

Canada has been years ahead of the United States in its anticipation of the social

impact of the new technologies and in integrating public policy towards the use

of new technologies into national priorities.
One of the primary concerns of the Canadian Department of
Communications has been the spillover of U.S. television stations across the

Canadian border and the widespread development of cable television to pick up

such stations.
92 As a consequence of these nearby sources of prime-time
entertainment, Canada is one of the most heavily cabled countries in the world.

The first reaction of the Canadian authorities was to propose not licensing cable
systems that undertook
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION107
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to retransmit foreign broadcasts.
93 However, the public response to this
proposal was so overwhelming that it was never put into action. The next effort

was intended to stop advertising dollars (estimated at $20 million to $25 million

annually) from going to U.S. television stations rather than their going to the

Canadian Broadcasting System. Canadian authorities in 1971 determined that

Canadian cable systems should delete the U.S. advertising from their
retransmissions of U.S.-originated television programs and substitute Canadian
advertising instead.
94This brought an uproar from border broadcasters who took their fight into
Canadian courts and began to agitate in the United States for retaliation. The

Canadian Radio-Television Commission (CRTC) suspended further

implementation of the commercial deletion policy, but initiated as an alternative

a rule that Canadian companies could not deduct the cost of advertising on non-

Canadian communications facilities.
95 This added fuel to the long-standing
controversy between U.S. and Canadian authorities that has yet to be resolved.
Variously, the U.S. Congress has tried to implement retaliatory measures that
would prompt the Canadian authorities to relent. An effort has been made to

enact reciprocal legislation, although there are no genuine economic sanctions

that would be comparable. Efforts have been made to restrict the deductibility

of U.S. attendance at conventions in Canada and to restrict the marketing of the

Telidon videotex system in the United States. A complaint filed with the

Special Trade Representative
96 resulted in a finding that the Canadian practice
was unreasonable, burdensome, and restrictive to U.S. commerce. Although

both Presidents Carter and Reagan have called for mirror-image legislation, no

practical solution has yet been reached.
This Canadian border spillover problem is a good example of a nation-
state's determination to protect information that it considers proprietary and to

exclude information that it finds objectionable. However, it is also evident that

the two countries have widely divergent philosophies underpinning their

information policiesŠthe United States is dedicated to a free marketplace for

information as protected by the First Amendment and best achieved through an

unregulated economy, whereas the Canadians look upon information policy as a

means to an endŠthe promotion and protection of their own cultural identity
and economic viability.THE RIGHT TO DESTROY OR EXPUNGE INFORMATION
Just as the Chinese more than 2,000 years ago resorted to book burning to
remove the collective memory of prior social systems,
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION108
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.governments today use less stringent but similar methods of changing the
course of history. It is usual to call attention to the Soviet practice of rewriting

history with a Marxist interpretation, but we are not as aware of efforts within

our own society to do the same thing. Frances Fitzgerald reports her findings

that textbooks used in American schools have changed their views of history on

the average every five years since the 1930s.
97 Little Black Sambo is no longer
black, and the 1930s version of 
King Kong
 with its fearful monster finally
overcome has turned into a 1970s version with the multinational oil company

exploiting the beast and destroying the island culture by depriving the natives of

their religious symbol. Each reflects the social concerns of its own generation,

and such reinterpretation of fiction is accepted as literary license. Aside from a

very real ethical concern about accuracy, objectivity, and reliability of

information, every society will accommodate its information policy to its own

political circumstances.
There are sound reasons for destroying some records when they have
served their purposes. Shredding machines would not sell so well were it not so.

In a society where the printed word is pervasive and copies abound, it is not so

easy to destroy all copies. However, within a centralized data base where it may

be more efficient to keep the source material on file and merely make copies at

the convenience of the user, we may need to worry about what is to be

expunged and when in order to avoid information overload or overspill and/or
to get rid of redundancy. With computerized archives being so roomy and so
cheap, it may become uneconomic to clean out the files. In addition, with so

many coauthors and coinventors, it may be difficult to determine who has the

right to expunge or delete.
THE RIGHT TO CORRECT OR ALTER INFORMATION
Public Records
As important as the right to acquire public information is the right of
individual access to personal information. This was the consensus of data

protection leaders from nine European countries attending a 1984 conference in

Bellagio. The mere existence of such right, they concluded, is likely to have a

salutary effect upon keepers of records.
98 Although many European countries
have centralized governmental authorities who license data bases and act as

ombudsmen to enforce the rights of citizens, the United States has no
counterpart. Such rights as are available are left to the courts to enforce. These
include the right to compel the correction of inaccurate or untrue data in

government files.
99PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION109
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BroadcastingThe broadcasting counterpart of the right of the individual to access
personal information in public records is the personal attack doctrine, which

permits the subject of an attack to obtain a copy of the offensive audio or video

broadcast and to reply.
100NewspapersThere is no right in the print media, comparable to the personal attack
doctrine, that permits an individual to reply to material already published. In

order not to chill the freedom of speech that the First Amendment seeks to

protect, the appropriate recourse to an inaccurate or untrue statement is a libel

action after the fact for money damages. However, in California, where many
libel actions are filed by prominent entertainers, the libel action may not be
pursued if the publication voluntarily published a retraction of the alleged

inaccurate information.
101 Also under the rubric of privacy protection (a
competing First Amendment right), an injunction may be obtained to prevent

publication of material that will place the plaintiff in a ''false light."
102Efforts to establish news councils to serve as watchdogs on such abuses
and to urge offenders to publish replies have not been very successful, as some

of the major news companies refuse to participate. The effort of the Florida

legislature to enact a right of reply for newspapers was struck down by the
Supreme Court as intrusive upon the editorial judgment of the news media.
103Consequently, the new technologies of both broadcast and computer have
come under more stringent rules than the old media. However, it must be

remembered that the abuses to be corrected at the time of the First Amendment

were strong government intrusions into news content, whereas today the greater

fear is the danger of private corporate control over the means of distributing
information.Many of the major newspapers and magazines regularly publish
corrections of items from previous editions. They should continue to do so in

their own interest and that of the public. As they enter the age of electronic

publishing (and many, such as Gannett, Time, Inc., and Dow Jones, are already

delivering their content via satellite or engaging in the delivery of videotex),
they may become subject to the laws governing the electronic media. However,
they may find that the public is more sympathetic with the later evolution of the

law as a more equitable and workable solution to balancing property rights in

information in the sophisticated technological environment. The First

Amendment shield, with which they so vociferously assert their right
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION110
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to be protected from public accountability, may not serve them well unless they
have themselves conformed to the tenets of its underlying philosophy.
THE RIGHT TO DISSEMINATE INFORMATION
None of the other rights would be very meaningful if there were no right to
send forth the information into the marketplace of ideas. However, such

dissemination carries an economic cost when any technology other than the

human voice is employed. Every community has some place that operates as a

public forum. In small-town America it was around the steps of the county

courthouse. Portuguese sailors who settled New Bedford met on street corners,

and some New England villages meet at the town dump. Most societies have
large squares in which great numbers of citizens can assemble for public
festivals and pronouncements of policyŠthe Mall in Washington, D.C., Red

Square next to the Kremlin in Moscow, St. Peter's Square in the Vatican, Red

Square next to the Forbidden City in Beijing, and Marcos Square in Manila.

Lafayette Square in Washington, D.C., may have once served that purpose, but

it has long since been landscaped with gardens and walks that discourage

protestors from marching near the White House.
However, the technologies of print, broadcast, and computer have made
this method of disseminating information obsolete except as a backdrop for

television versions that can be disseminated to many millions more than could

ever be accommodated in one place.
In the United States we accommodated our policies very rapidly to the
print media by establishing a system of post roads over which the mails and the

newspapers could travel. We have provided preferential rates to books,

newspapers, and magazines, and even to merchants' catalogsŠand a special

franking privilege to congressmen for expediting messages to their constituents.

A nationwide penny postcard made it possible for the constituents to reply with

low cost, and even to send their messages to each other.
The applicability of this principle of a public forum carries over into a
concept of common carriage for voice messages on telephone and telegraph.

The law has had great difficulty, however, in coping with the broadcasting

industry because content decisions and carriage media are both under the

control of a regulated broadcaster. Nonetheless, there is a limited public forum

responsibility in the fairness doctrine which requires that broadcasters devote
time to opposing viewpoints when issues of public importance are aired.
104Numerous efforts have
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION111
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.failed to establish a right to communicate over the broadcast media for the
purpose of responding to commercials on the basis that they were really

"infomercials"105 or to obtain a right of access to the electronic media for the
initiation of public issues.
106The courts have been very protective of broadcasters and only recently
reaffirmed the long-held view that television is not a public forum even if it is

controlled by a public agency.
107 Viewers have no right to compel any
particular kind of expression over the public airwaves. The Constitution

requires content neutrality only with respect to an activity that has traditionally
functioned as an open marketplace of ideas. However, the Supreme Court did
not view public television as assuming this role.
In renouncing the Federal Communications Commission's (FCC's) aborted
attempt to establish public-access channels on cable television, the Supreme

Court concluded that the FCC was attempting, without legislative authorization,

to create a public right that did not exist, and it commented that the right to
speak does not include a right to an audience in a nonpublic forum such as
newspapers, magazines, or on the Senate floor.
108However, the power of the press, as a surrogate of the people, is a
powerful tool for reform. As the movie 
Gandhi so vividly portrayed, the
presence of the 
New York Times
 reporter and that paper's publication of
Gandhi's fight for India's independence gave international credibility to the
separation movement, increasing its influence internally.
For the protection of human rights the exposure of violations to public
view may be the only way to impose sanctions upon the wrongdoers. The

student demonstrators and ghetto youth of the late 1960s understood this better

than did public authorities. As Arthur Clarke so eloquently expounded

concerning his brainchild, the geostationary orbital communications satellite:
The very existence of the myriads of new information channels, operating in
real-time, will be a powerful influence for civilized behavior. If you are
arranging a massacre, it will be useless to shoot the cameraman who has so

conveniently appeared on the scene. His pictures will already be safe in the
studio five thousand kilometres away; and his final image may hang you.
109Certainly, both the access of the news gatherer or researcher to the subject
matter and the availability of a means of distributing the information are

essential to the health of the public enterprise in a democratic society. How to

assure this access in an economy that puts high priority both on using private

businesses to provide the
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION112
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.technological means of access and on noninterference with freedom of speech is
a quandary of utmost importance to the legal profession and the public.
SOME OBSERVATIONS ON PRACTICAL PRECEDENTS AND
PHILOSOPHICAL PRINCIPLES
The newer information technologies have created some options and
opportunities that transform the environment for interactive communications.

They have also precipitated much soul-searching concerning basic principles

that should apply to their use. However, these technologies do not come to us in

a legal vacuum. As a nation we have many legal theorems and practical

precedents gleaned from a rich heritage of concern about basic rights in

information in other media to guide us.
We can, with some assurance, make several observations:
1. We are reluctant to reward wrongdoers for their wrongdoing.
2. We prefer to encourage and reward innovation even through novel
legal theories based upon notions of common sense, commercial

fairness, and human justice.
3. The courts will not do a useless thing like trying to curtail the
videotaping of broadcast material in private homes or to prohibit

the photocopying of published copyright materials for personal use.
4. The courts will not try to expand a legal theory that is ridiculous in
its application, e.g., attempting to differentiate between source and

object code as a means for determining copyrightability of

computer software.
5. The courts are reluctant to apply novel legal theories that have not
received the sanction of the administrative agency which has

jurisdiction over the subject matter, e.g., enunciate a judicial First

Amendment right of access to the broadcast media.
6. The law must conform to public acceptance of what is right and
equitable.7. The concept of property rights, whether applied to material goods
or to intangible information, is neither simple nor absolute. It

reflects the values of a society that equally cherishes individual

freedom of action and the sharing of information for the common

good.It is also possible to derive some basic principles that underpin our
philosophy of property rights in information.
1. We must have a public medium through which information may be
exchanged freely between information providers and information

users. This may be a common-carrier channel (for telephone,

telegraph, or electronic mail), a public-access channel for cable

television, an op-ed page in newspapers, or a public bulletin board

such as the Democracy Wall in the People's Republic of China. The

village green or public
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION113
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.auditorium simply will not suffice in the age of electronic
information highways.
2. Liability for content should rest upon the originators and producers
of information, not on the careers, unless they are one and the same.
3. The sources of information and the nature of their economic
interest must be appropriately identified and authenticated in order

to establish credibility and to permit those harmed by a message to

seek redress, unless there is some overriding public interest in

protecting the identity of the source who may be personally harmed

or put in jeopardy by the disclosure.
4. Proprietary rights in information generated for commercial
purposes should be recognized, legally protected, and

compensation provided through justiciable means.
5. The piracy, embezzlement, misappropriation, or misuse of
information should be punished.
6. Freedom of speech should not be impaired except in circumstances
in which there is a clear and present danger that the health and

safety of the nation is in question or that the health and safety of an

individual is in serious jeopardy. This should be true whether or not

the person in question is a public figure or private person.
CONCLUSIONSThe basic principles outlined above need not be circumvented in an
electronic age any more than they have been in the past.
110 They are derived
from a long legal history of concern about the integrity and independence of the

individual in a free society. What is needed is a commitment to preserve the

principles we hold dear in a digital environment no less than in a voice circuit

or on a printed page. The late Ithiel de Sola Pool, who devoted his last

intellectual effort to the preservation of First Amendment principles in the
Information Age, wrote:
The mystery is how the clear intent of the Constitution, so well and strictly
enforced in the domain of print, has been so neglected in the electronic
revolution. The answer lies partly in changes in the prevailing concerns and
historical circumstances from the time of the founding fathers to the world of
today; but it lies at least as much in the failure of Congress and the courts to

understand the character of the new technologies. Judges and legislators have
tried to fit technological innovations under conventional legal concepts. The
errors of understanding by these scientific laymen, though honest, have been
mammoth. They have sought to guide toward good purposes technologies they
did not understand.
111These good and well-intentioned public servants need the sound judgment
and sage guidance of scientists and engineers if the law is to
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION114
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.make reasonable sense in the Information Age. It is important that there be
mutual understanding among those involved in both legal and technological

innovations as these developments clash at the crossroads of change.
NOTES1. C. Cherry, 
A Second Industrial Revolution?
 (unpublished manuscript).
2. F. Machlup, 
The Production and Distribution of Knowledge in the United States
, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.. 1962.
3. H. Cleveland, ''Information as a Resource," 
The Futurist
, pp. 34Œ39, December 1982.
4. "Legal Lore," 
New York State Bar Journal
, pp. 49Œ50, May 1984.
5. Compare art. I of the 
Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the
Exploration and Use of Outer Space, Including the Moon and Other Celestial Bodies
, 18 U.S.T.
2410, T.I.A.S. 6347, 610 U.N.T.X. 205, signed at Washington. London, and Moscow on

January 27, 1967, and entered into force on October 10, 1967, with the Preamble of the

Information Composite Negotiating Text of the United National Third Conference on the Law of

the Sea
, A/Conf. 62/WP, 10 Rev. 2, done at Caracas on April 1, 1980, not yet in force and as
yet unsigned by the United States.
6. Y. Ito and K. Ogawa, "Recent Trends in Johoka Shakai and Johoka Policy Studies,"
KeioCommunication Rev. 5
:15ff, March 1984.
7. A. R. Miller and M. H. Davis, 
Intellectual Property: Patents, Trademarks and Copyright
, pp.
18Œ19, West Publishing Co., St. Paul, 1983.
8. E. W. Ploman and L. C. Hamilton, 
Copyright: Intellectual Property in the Information Age
,pp. 4Œ9, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1980.
9. These rights can be traced down to the so-called moral rights of "paternity" and "integrity"
contained in art. 6 of the Paris Convention of 1971 (the latest version of the Berne Convention).
U.S. copyright does not protect these rights, and the opposition of Hollywood producers to them
may explain the failure of the United States to ratify the Berne Convention. 
See generally
 R.
Brown, Kaplan and Brown's Copyright
 , p. 656, Foundation Press, Mineola, N.Y., 1978.
10. Ploman and Hamilton, 
op. cit., supra
 note 8, at 8.
11. Ibid., at 9.
12. Art. I, sec. 8, cl. 8.
13. B. Ringer, "Two Hundred Years of American Copyright Law," in 
Twenty Years of English
& American Patent, Trademark & Copyright Law
, p. 117, American Bar Association, Chicago,
Ill., 1977.
14. Ibid.15. Copyright Act of March 3, 1891. 26 Shat. 1106. 
See generally
 Ringer, 
op. cit., supra
 note
13, at 127.
16. S. Warren and L. Brandeis, "The Right to Privacy," 
Harvard L. Rev. 4
:193, 1890.
17. Dow Jones News Service documents 120827Œ0219, August 24, 1984; 120822Œ0348,
August 21, 1984; 120821Œ0312, August 20, 1984.
18. 376 U.S. 254 (1964).
19. B. W. Sanford, "Twenty Years of Actual Malice," 
2 Communications Lawyer
 1, Summer
1984. The definition of "public figure" has been greatly expanded beyond that of public

officials by the recent reversal of the $2.05Œmillion judgment awarded
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION115
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.by a jury in the libel suit of William Tavouleareas, president of Mobil Corporation.
Tavouleareas unsuccessfully argued that if he had become a "public figure" it was because of

notoriety brought about by the libel and was not due to any inherent public function of his

position. In announcing his intent to appeal his case to the Supreme Court, he said, "I am

appealing because I believe the law must not accord one institution in our society the

unrestrained power to so damage our leaders that it jeopardizes our society's ability to
function." Communications Lawyer 1(3)
:10, Summer 1983.
20. See, e.g.
, The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, P.L. 98Œ380 sec. 513, 20
U.S.C.A. sec. 1231g, and the Texas Open Records Act, sec. 7 of art. 6252Œ17a, V.T.C.S., and

Office of the Attorney General of Texas, Open Records Decision nop. 229, October 26, 1979.
21. U.S. v. Miller, 425 U.S. 435 (1976).
22. The Privacy Act of 1974, P.L. 93Œ579, December 31, 1974, 88 Stat. 1896, Title 5 U.S.C.
sec. 552a, as amended P.L. 94Œ394, September 3, 1976, 90 Stat. 1198, P.O. 95Œ38, June 1,
1977, 91 Stat. 179.
23. In the matter of the Washington Post Company v. State Insurance Department et al. No. 73,
State of New York, Court of Appeals, March 29, 1984.
24. In the case of copyrights for a period of the lifetime of the author plus 50 years, 17 U.S.C.
sec. 302(a); in the case of patents for a period of 17 years, 35 U.S.C. sec. 154.
25. "New Patent Bill Gathers Congressional Support," 
Bioscience 29
 :281, May 1979.
26. The Patent and Trademark Amendment Act, P.L. 96Œ517, December 12, 1980.
27. See generally
, D. Nelkin, "Proprietary Secrecy Versus Open Communication in Science,"
Science as Intellectual Property: Who Controls Scientific Research?
, pp. 9Œ30, Macmillan,
London and New York, 1984.
28. Department of Agriculture RFP 84-00-R0-6, March 15, 1984. According to remarks
reported in 
Commerce Business Daily
, February 28, 1984, the Office of Management and
Budget considers this RFP a prototype for distribution of electronic data by the federal

government. Examples include 
Market News Reports
 from the Agricultural Marketing Service
and Situations Reports
 from the Economic Research Service.
29. The authorization for this project contained in P.L. 96Œ517, sec. 9, requiring development of
a comprehensive plan for transferring the files to an electronic data base, and P.L. 96Œ247, Title
35 U.S.C. sec. 6, authorizing "cooperative exchange ventures," are being challenged by the

"cottage industry" of trademark searchers who use the hard-copy files without paying fees for

access.30. This was not always the case. The first public library in the United States was started by
Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia in 1731 as a subscription library. There were 50 original

members, who paid 40 shillings to join and 10 shillings per annum. Subscribers paid double for
books not returned. It was not until 1800 that the Library of Congress was started, and the New
York Public Library opened in 1837. M. C. Tyler, "The Historic Evolution of the Free Public

Library in America and Its True Function in the Community," in B. Taylor and R. J. Munro,

eds., American Law Publishing 1860Œ1900
 , Glanville, Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.. 1984.
31. D. M. Davidson, "Protecting Computer Software: A Comprehensive Analysis," 
Jurimetrics
Journal 23(4)
:339 at 400f, Summer 1983.
32. The leading Supreme Court case in this area is Branzburg v. Hayes, 408 U.S. 665 (1972),
which recognized the necessity to compel disclosure to a grand jury when
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION116
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.criminal behavior is involved. 
See also
 99 A.L.R. 3d 37 and P. L. Glenchur, 
Hastings L. J.
33:623Œ652. Courts will not countenance tortious behavior in the gathering of news. 
See Galella
v. Onassis, 487 Fed. 986 (2d Cir. 1973) where defendant was enjoined from approaching the

plaintiff closer than 25 feet.
33. Branzburg v. Hayes, 
supra note 32.
34. For an excellent discussion of this issue, 
see D. Nelkin, chap. 4, "Rights of Access Versus
Obligations of Confidentiality," in 
Science as Intellectual Property: Who Controls Scientific
Research?
 Macmillan, New York and London, 1984.
35. United States v. Doe (In re Popkin), 460 F. 2d 328 (1st Cir. 1972), 
cert. denied, sub nom
.Popkin v. United States, 411 U.S. 909, 1973.
36. Public Health Service Act, as amended 1974, 42 U.S.C. sec. 242(a) and the Comprehensive
Drug Abuse, Prevention, and Control Act of 1970, P.L. 95Œ633, 21 U.S.C. sec. 242a(b) and sec.
872(d).37. E.g., Privacy of Research Records Bill, S. 867 (April 4, 1979) and H.R. 3409 (April 3,
1979), 96th Cong. 1st Sess.
38. Nelkin, 
op. cit., supra
 note 27.
39. R. K. Merton, ed., 
The Sociology of Science
, p. 273. University of Chicago Press, Chicago,
Ill., 1973.
40. Nelkin, 
op. cit., supra
 note 27.
41. Pool & Solomon, "Intellectual Property and Transborder Data Flows," 
Stan. J. Int'l. L.
16:113, 1980.
42. The Direct Marketing Association has been monitoring some 80 pieces of proposed
legislation during the last several years.
43. E.g., New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Nevada, and Virginia.
44. E.g., Illinois, California, Connecticut, and Wisconsin.
45. Op. cit., supra
 note 21.
46. Miranda v. Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966); 
see generally
 30 A.L.R. Fed. 824. For cases
concerning illegal beepers, bugging, and wiretapping, 
see 57 A.L.R. Fed. 646, 59 A.L.R. Fed.
959, and 97 L. Ed. 237. 
See also
 M. Goldey, "Aspects of International Voice Communications
to and from the United States," 
Jurimetrics J. 24(1)
:8Œ12, Fall 1983, regarding electronic
surveillance of international mrs calls outside the United States and the admissibility of such

evidence in courts.
47. Minnesota v. Marshall, ŠŠU.S.ŠŠ, 79 L. Ed. 2d 409 (1984); New York v. Quarles,ŠŠ
U.S.ŠŠ, 81 L. Ed. 2d 550 (1984): Berkemer v. McCarty, 468 U.S.ŠŠ, 82 L. Ed. 2d 317

(1984); Massachusetts v. Sheppard, 468 U.S.ŠŠ, 82 L. Ed. 2d 737 (1984).
48. U.S. v. New York Times, 403 U.S. 713 (1971).
49. Elizabeth Taylor v. American Broadcasting Companies, Inc., 82 Civ. 6977 (S.D.N.Y. 1982).

50. New York Civil Rights Law, sec. 50Œ51; the Lanham Act for damage to protectable service
and trademarks, and unfair competition under New York General Business Law, sec. 368(d).
51. See Street v. NBC, 645 F. 2d 1227 (1981), 
settled and cert. dismissed
 , 70 L. Ed. 2d 636
(1981).52. Compare Hicks v. Casablanca Records. 464 F. Supp. 426 (S.D.N.Y. 1978) and Maritote v.
Desilu Productions, Inc., 345 F. 2d. 418 (7th Cir. 1965) with Lugosi v. Universal Pictures Co.,

Inc., 172 U.S.P.Q. 541 (Cal. Super. 1972) and Price v. Hal Roach Studios, Inc., 400 F. Supp.
836 (S.D.N.Y.).
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION117
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53. See, e.g.
, Gilliam v. American Broadcasting Companies, Inc., 538 F. 2d 14 (2d Cir. 1976).
54. 8 Anne, c. 19, republished in R. S. Brown, 
Copyright
, p. 851, Foundation Press, Mineola,
N.Y., 1978.
55. Ploman and Hamilton, 
op. cit., supra
 note 8. at 30.
56. White-Smith Music Publishing Co. v. Apollo Co., 209 U.S. 1 (1908). This inadequacy has
been cured by the 1976 act, which defines a "copy" as anything tangible from which the
author's work can be replicated. 17 U.S.C. sec. 102(a).
57. Final Report of the National Commission on New Technological Uses of Copyrighted
Works, 27Œ31, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C., 1979.
58. Ibid., at 12; subsequently enacted 17 U.S.C. sec. 101, 117, as amended P.L. 96Œ517, sec. 10,
94 Stat. 3028.
59. Computer Software Copyright Act of 1980: Act of December 12, 1980; L. No. 96Œ517, sec.
10; 94 Star. 3015, 3028; 17 U.S.C. sec. 101, 117.
60. Office of the Register of Copyrights, Announcement SML-47 (May 1964); Copyright
Office Circular 31D (January 1965).
61. CONTU Final Report, 
op. cit., supra
 note 57, at 85.
62. "Computer programs are the ordered set of instructions which can operate a computer....
Source code can be written in languages which are English-like, such as BASIC or

FORTRAN.... Source code instructions are either directly used by a computer or are first

translated into the computer's machine language as 'object' code. Object code is usually printed
as ones and zeros, but can also be printed as octal numbers (0Œ7) or hexadecimal numbers (0Œ
15), with A-F representing decimal (10Œ15). Object code can be directly translated into

'assembly' language, in which machine instructions are represented by mnemonics.... Object

code, the direct symbolic representation of the machine language, is intelligible to trained

engineers" (e.g., like the piano player that was only readable by experts). D. M. Davidson,

"Protecting Computer Software: A Comprehensive Analysis," 
Jurimetrics Journal 23
:339, 341
(Summer 1983).
63. Apple Computer, Inc. v. Franklin Computer Corp., 545 F. Supp. 812 714 F. 2d 1240 (3d
Cir. 1983), 
cert. den.
, 104 Sup. Ct. 690 (1984).
64. See generally
 the excellent article by Duncan Davidson, 
op. cit., supra
 note 31, which
discusses the various methods of protecting software and the concerns of lawyers about the

viability of each.
65. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 120118Œ0360, January 7, 1984.
66. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 120706Œ0544, July 6, 1984.

67. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 110512Œ1159, May 12, 1983.
68. 17 U.S.C. sec. 109(a).
69. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 120119Œ0661, January 19, 1984. Until that release
Flashdance
 and 
Jane Fonda's Workout
 had been the top-selling videotapes, with 200,000
copies each. 
See also
 "Hollywood Thriving on Video-Cassette Boom," New York Times,
Monday, May 7, 1984, pp. Al, C17,
70. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 110512Œ1159, December 5, 1983.
71. Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios, ŠŠU.S.ŠŠ(1984), 104 Sup. Ct. 774, at 778.

72. 17 U.S.C. sec. 107.
73. Williams & Wilkins Co. v. United States, 420 U.S. 376 (1975).
74. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 110512Œ1159, May 5, 1983.
75. Rule 10(b)(5).
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION118
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76. New York Times
, August 29, 1984, pp. A1, D4: 
New York Times
, Sunday, May 27, 1984,
pp. F1, F21.
77. S.E.C. v. Texas Gulf Sulphur Co., 401 F. 2d 833 (2d Cir. 1968).
78. See Chiarella v. United States. 455 U.S. 222 (1980), involving an employee of a financial
printing house who decoded documents about mergers and acquisitions; S.E.C. v. Dirks, 
cert.granted
, 459 U.S. 1014 (1982) involving a stockbroker: U.S. v. Newman, 664 F. 2d 12 (2d Cir.
1981) involving employees of Morgan Stanley who traded shares in a takeover target
represented by their firm; S.E.C. v. Thayer (pending) involving friends of LTV Corp. CEO who
may have benefitted from passing confidential information to his personal friends: and S.E.C. v.

Brant (the civil case against Winans and his friends). For a discussion of all of the above cases,

see L. Wayne, "Inside Trading by Outsiders," 
New York Times
, May 27, 1984, pp. F-1, F-21.
79. Lewis v. Baxter, 368 F. Supp. 768 (D.C. Ala. 1973).
80. Public Affairs Press, Inc. v. Rickover, 369 U.S. 111 (1962). The case raises interesting
questions about the copyrightability of the speeches, i.e., whether they were government

documents that cannot be copyrighted under Title 17 U.S.C. sec. 105, whether they were

already in the public domain because of their oral delivery and circulated copies, or whether
they were the private utterances of a public official in a nonofficial capacity. On remand it was
decided that the speeches were delivered in the admiral's "private capacity" and that the fact that

they were typed, duplicated, and cleared by the Navy was irrelevant, 268 F. Supp. 444 (1967).
81. Nixon v. Sirica, 487 F. 2d 700 (D.C. App. 1973).

82. Harper & Row, Publishers, Inc. and the Reader's Digest Association, Inc., v. Nation
Enterprises and the Nation Associates, Inc., 723 F. 2d 195 (1983).
83. Time, Inc. v. Bernard Geis Associates, 293 F. Supp. 130 (S.D.N.Y. 1968); International
News Service v. Associated Press. 248 U.S. 215 (1918); Hoehling v. Universal City Studios,

Inc., 618 F. 2d 972 (2d Cir.) 
cert. den.
, 449 U.S. 841 (1980); Rosemont Enterprises, Inc. v.
Random House, Inc., 366 F. 2d 303 (2d Cir. 1966) 
cert. den.
, 385 U.S. 1009 (1967).
84. 723 F. 2d 195.
85. "Fifteen states have passed 'Son of Sam' laws freezing proceeds from moneymaking
ventures such as book sales of those locked up for capital crimes until claims by victims of their
survivors are satisfied." 
Christian Science Monitor
, April 5, 1983, p. 1.
86. The Government in the Sunshine Act, P.L. 94Œ409, September 13, 1976, 90 Stat. 1241,
Title 19 U.S.C. sec. 420, Title 5 U.S.C. sec, 551f., and the Freedom of Information Act, P.L. 89Œ
487, July 4, 1966, 80 Stat. 250, Title 5 U.S.C. 552, as amended, P.L. 90Œ23 sec. 1, June 5, 1967,
81 Stat. 54, P.L. 93Œ502 sec. 1Œ3, November 21, 1974, 88 Star. 15Œ61.
87. 18 U.S.C. sec. 2511 arguably might not include such transmissions.
88. Commission on New Information Technology, 
New Views: Computers and New MediaŠ
Anxiety and Hopes
 (1979). 
See also
 J. Freese, "The Vulnerability of Computerized Society,"
Transnational Data Rep. 4(5)
 at 21 (1981).
89. 50 U.S.C. sec. 2402 
et seq.
, as amended.
90. Defense Science Board Task Force on Export of U.S. Technology, 
An Analysis of Export
Control of U.S. TechnologyŠA DOD Perspective
 , Office of the Secretary of Defense,
Washington, D.C., 1976.
91. Dow Jones News Service, Doc. no. 110325Œ0319, March 24. 1984.
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION119
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92. For an excellent discussion of these transborder issues, 
see Cultures in Collision: A
Canadian-U.S. Conference on Communications Policy
, Praeger, 1984. esp. chaps. 3 and 6.
93. CRTC Public Announcement, 
The Improvement and Development of Canadian
Broadcasting and the Extension of U.S. Coverage in Canada by CATV
, Ottawa. December 3,
1969, p. 1.
94. CRTC Public Announcement, 
The Integration of Cable Television in the Canadian
Broadcasting System
, Ottawa, February 26, 1971. 
See also
 CRTC Policy Statement, 
CableTelevision: Canadian Broadcasting: A Single System
, Ottawa, July 16, 1971.
95. Canadian Bill C-58, An Act to Amend the Income Tax Act, September 1976.
96. Under sec. 301 of the Trade Act of 1974. The complaint was filed on August 29, 1978, and
hearings were held in November 1978.
97. F. Fitzgerald, 
America Revised
, Atlantic Little Brown, Boston, Mass., 1979.
98. Transnational Data Report
, vol. vii, no. 4, p. 195, JuneŒJuly 1984.
99. Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C.S. sec. 552a(g) and (1) (A); 
see also
 R.R. v. Department of
Army, 482 F. Sup. 770 (D.C. 1980).
100. 28 U.S.C. sec. 315, (a); 47 C.F.R. sec. 73.123, 73.300, 73.598, 73.679.
101. Sec. 48a of the California Civil Code n2 provides in part: ''1. In any action for damages for
the publication of a libel in a newspaper, or of a slander by a radio broadcast, plaintiff shall

recover no more than special damages unless a correction be demanded and be not published or

broadcast, as herinafter provided...." The California court hearing the Carol Burnett libel suit

against the 
Enquirer
 cleared the way for the record $1.6-million verdict by ruling that the
publication was a magazine not a newspaper.
102. Seattle Times v. Rhinehart, 82Œ1721, is on the Supreme Court docket to determine
whether the Washington State Supreme Court was correct in upholding an injunction for

defamation and invasion of privacy by the leader of a religious group who sought to suppress

publication of information obtained during preparation for trial, 
National Law Journal
, October
17, 1983, p. 5. Injunctions are more often sought to protect so-called merchandising rights or
the right to publicity. 
See, e.g.
, Haelan Laboratories, Inc. v. Topps Chewing Gum, Inc., 202 F.
2d 866 (2d Cir. 1953) 
cert. den.
 346 U.S. 816. "This right of publicity would usually yield them
no money unless it could be made the subject of an exclusive grant which barred any other

advertiser from using their pictures."
103. Miami Herald v. Tornillo, 418 U.S. 241 (1974).
104. 47 U.S.C. sec. 315 (1976), 
aff'd, Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC, 395 U.S. 367 (1969).
105. Friends of Earth v. FCC, 449 F. 2d 1164 (D.C. Cir. 1971).
106. Columbia Broadcasting Systems, Inc. v. Democratic National Committee, 412 U.S. 94
(1973).107. Muir v. Alabama Educational Television Commission, 688 F. 2d 1033 (5th Cir. 1982) 
cert.den., ŠŠU.S.ŠŠ, 75 L. ed. 2d (1984).
108. Midwest Video Corp. v. FCC, 571 F. 2d 1025 (8th Cir. 1978).
109. "Beyond the Global Village." Address on World Communications Day, United Nations,
New York, May 17, 1983.
110. Which is only to say that we have sometimes been more and sometimes less successful in
preserving and protecting them.
111. 
Technologies of Freedom
, Belknap Press, Cambridge and London, 1983.
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION120
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMENTSJordan J. BaruchJordan Baruch Associates

What a joy it is for an engineer to have the last word after a lawyer! In this
case, however, that joy is tempered by awe at Anne Branscomb's thorough and

scholarly treatment of the 10 fundamental rights she associates with

information. Hesitantly, I would like to add an eleventh right that also merits
our concern even if it is not clearly a property right. I shall call it the right to
aggregate and act upon information.
When John Mayo talked about the growing number of elements on a chip,
he neglected to mention that the power of a chip is not linearly related to the

number of those elements. That is an important characteristic of information as

well. In information, when we have one piece of information it may be worth
but little. A second piece that adds to the picture makes the total value greater,
and the third piece, even greater. Indeed, the last keystone bit of information

often increases the value enormously. In other words, if we were to plot the

value of an information collection against the number of pieces of information

in the collection we would often find a curve that grew more than linearly. In

information collection, the whole is truly greater than the simple sum of the

parts. Information becomes more powerful as we aggregate it, and the authors

of these papers recognize that power of aggregation. Certainly Melvin

Kranzberg spoke about the aggregation of knowledge in connection with the

formation of Gutenberg's printing press.
I would like to point out that since the value of information is nonlinear,
many of the things being discussed here get rather fuzzy and much more

complicated. For example, bits and pieces of information about a commercial

company may have little value taken independently; but when they are

aggregated by somebody smart enough to put them together they become very
important and very valuable. How do we protect the property value in the
aggregate of a collection where the individual elements may each belong to

others and have little value in themselves? If, in fact, we watch a smart friend

use his computer in this process, what do we see? First of all, he gets his

information from a large number of places through a little digital window. He

knows tools to put those pieces together and draw conclusions. He builds

models, examines those models, and tries to predict the near-term future.

Information aggregation, model, and prediction all fuse to become a new piece

of information. Its primary protection, because it is likely to be evanescent, rests

with the subsequent action that it triggers. If our smart friend works well, he

will prosper by acting and by protecting the value in the model whereby he acts

on information aggregates.Mel Kranzberg took the liberty of giving us Kranzberg' s First Law. I
would like to suggest two other laws that have a beating on the information era

because of the nonlinearity of information. First, power in a society will reside
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION121
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.with those capable of imparting to a body of information the largest coefficient
of nonlinearityŠthose who can take 3 things and get 12 or 17 or 93. These

peopleŠthe manipulators and concluders rather than the ownersŠwill have

enormous influence. The second law, related to the first, may make Harlan

Cleveland unhappy. In the first law I tried to state what would determine power

in our society, namely, the ability to produce a large coefficient of nonlinearity.
The second law simply says that 
whatever determines power in our society will
be found to be nonuniformly distributed and therefore unfair. Some people in

our society are simply going to be better at aggregating information and at

drawing conclusions from it than others, and they will be considered to be

taking unfair advantage of the new society just as those who were strong

unfairly took advantage of neolithic society and those who had early access

unfairly took advantage of colonial society. Whatever determines power will be

nonuniformly distributed, and the haves will be looked at as unfair by the have-

nots; I am afraid that will be as much a state of the information society as it was

of the neolithic.
PROPERTY RIGHTS IN INFORMATION122
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information Technologies in the Home
Walter S. BaerINTRODUCTIONDespite the frenetic life-styles of 1984 America, most of us spend more
time at home than anywhere else. We sleep, eat, and take care of our personal
needs at home. We cook, clean, and do other household chores, take care of

children, pay bills, prepare taxes, and sometimes shop from home. Some of us

earn part or all of our living at home. We entertain, talk on the telephone, play

games, read, watch television, and otherwise relax at home. These home

activities are all affected by the electronic technologies we have developed for

communications, information gathering, and entertainment. Which technologies

we use in the home and how we apply them to home activities are the topics of

this paper.
The television set and the telephone are today the most important
electronic information technologies in the home. They represent two broad

categories of home information technologies that are worth distinguishing: (1)

stand-alone, or one-way, receiving units, and (2) communicating, or networked,

units. Besides television receivers, the first group includes radios, audio

systems, microprocessors in appliances, videocassette recorders (VCRs) and

players, videodisk players, videogames, cable TV converters, satellite TV

receivers, hand calculators, and stand-alone personal computers (PCs). The

second category includes telephone peripheral equipment such as answering

machines and automatic dialers, interactive cable TV terminals, and PCs with
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME123
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.two-way communications capabilities. The number and percentage of U.S.
households with these technologies are shown in 
Table 1.Stand-alone units generally show higher penetrations and faster growth
than those linked to networks, for obvious technical, economic, and political

reasons. It is easier to design, make, and sell new products that can be taken

home and used independently than equipment that must interact compatibly

with a network or with units in other locations. Moreover, networks are

regulated by federal, state, or local governments, while stand-alone technologies

generally are not. Consequently, the time needed for successful commercial
introduction of a new stand-alone technology is measured in years, while new
network technologies may require a decade or more for regulatory as well as

consumer acceptance.Nevertheless, the trend is toward interconnecting traditionally stand-alone
units within the home and then linking them through communications networks

to the outside world. Personal computers provide a good illustration. In 1983

only 7 percent of home computers sold were equipped with modems for

external communications (Yankee Group, 1984). Only about 15 percent of the

"high end" and "medium" PCs sold in 1983ŠPCs with memories of 64K and
moreŠhad modems. These machines, however, are rapidly displacing ''low
end'' units in current sales (
Table 2
). By 1988 more than half of the home
computers sold should have communications capability, allowing them to

exchange messages with other PCs and to interact with external information

services. The trend toward networked PCs in the home thus seems
TABLE 1 Information Technologies in the Home, 1983
ItemNumber of HouseholdsWith Equipment
(millions)Percentage of U.S.
HouseholdsTelephone8398

TV receiver8499
Color TV7589
Cable TV3339

Two-way cable TV0.3<1
Satellite TV receiver0.4<1
Videorecorder/player911
Videogame2125
Home computer89

With telephone hookup or

modem0.4<1SOURCE: A. C. Nielsen Company, Paul Kagan Associates, The Yankee Group, AT&T.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME124
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.well under way. Companies such as IBM, AT&T, CBS, and Times Mirror are
all betting that networks of home PCs will present large and attractive markets

by the end of this decade.
TABLE 2 U.S. Computer Sales to the Home (in thousands)
Estimated19801981198219831984High end1161451414601,470
Medium31551801,0802,440
Low end25601,9403,545685
Total units1443602,2615,0854,595

Installed base1445042,7657,85012,446SOURCE: The Yankee Group. 1984. Yankeevision. Boston, Mass. May:35Œ37. Reprinted with
permission.TABLE 3 Perceived Uses for Computers in the Home, 1983
Percentage of Those
Interested in Acquiring
a ComputerPercentage of Actual

PurchasersHome budgeting/management5327
Education/learning3941
Entertainment/games2141

Run business from home198
Programming1235
Do office work at home108

Word processing/writing810
Accessing information74
Record keeping/cataloging65

Home banking52
Self improvement42
All others714

Don't know/none94SOURCE: The Yankee Group. 1984. Yankeevision. Boston, Mass. May:35Œ37. Reprinted with
permission.How will individuals and families use their home computers? 
Table 3
shows the results of a recent survey of perceived applications. Home computer

purchases through 1983 were predominantly "low end" machines used primarily
for games and for learning about computers themselves. Purchasers are now
insisting that PCs also be useful for word processing, home management, and

other more sophisticated and serious applications. As a result, the number of

home PCs sold in 1984 may fall below the 1983 level, but the mix has shifted

dramaticallyINFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME125
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.toward more expensive and capable devices including larger memories, disk
drives, printers, and modems.
Recent studies show growing consumer interest in and acceptance of
information technologies for the home (Yankelovich, Skelly, and White, 1984).

These trends in the 1980s differ markedly from the antitechnology, away-from-

home attitudes of the late 1960s and 1970s. Demographics are changing as well,

with significant trends towards smaller households and more working adults per

household. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, more than half of

all married women now work outside the home, up from about 30 percent in
1960. Time is thus at a premium for more Americans, and household activities
must change accordingly. For middle-class U.S. households, time budget

choices are at least as critical as income is in determining the purchase and use

of information technologies.
In addition, more Americans seek individual, customized life-styles. We
want more flexibility in our working hours and more choices among the foods

we eat, the trips we plan, the magazines we read, and the television programs

we watch. A central theme of this paper is that information technologies

facilitate these choices but do not themselves determine them. Rather, how

individuals choose to spend their time largely determines the information

technologies they acquire and use. The sections that follow discuss four

significant uses of time at homeŠworking at home, doing chores at home,
learning at home, and relaxing at homeŠand the ways in which information
technologies support these activities.
Some limits on the paper's scope and intent deserve mention. It is not
intended as a technological forecast, but is rather a discussion of how

information technologies are being used in the home, of current trends, and of

some expected developments. Technologies that will be used in the home in the

next decade have already been invented and are in various stages of

development, field testing, or use in business, government, and other

nonresidential environments.
The paper deals with developments in the United States and assumes a
business-as-usual scenario both internationally and domestically. This implies

that individuals and families will continue to purchase information products and

services in commercial markets. There is little discussion of equity issues or

possible government programs such as subsidies for cable television and home

computers.Finally, the paper focuses on technologies for electronic communications,
information distribution, and entertainment in the home. It largely neglects the

interesting developments under way in the print media. It is the author's strong

contention that the new electronic
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME126
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.media will change the old without supplanting them, just as television has
changed radio and newspapers without destroying the viability of either.

Newspapers, magazines, books, and other forms of print media will remain

viable for the foreseeable future, but ongoing changes in technology,

demographics, and life-style all favor the growth of electronic information

technologies in the home.
WORKING AT HOME
Personal computers provide greater opportunities to earn a living at home,
especially for self-employed professionals and independent contractors such as

computer programmers, consultants, writers, typists, and accountants.

Individuals in these occupations generally work independently, control their

own work pace, and have measurable output. Many of them could work at

home without a computer, of course, but the computer's word processing,
financial modeling, and record-keeping capabilities enhance their productivity.
The "expert system" software now emerging from R&D will further support

professionals' work at home (Hayes-Roth, 1984).
The use of space at home need not change dramatically to support such
professional work. If a separate office or study is not available, most people can

place a computer and related equipment in their bedrooms. The bedroom can be

used for work during nonsleeping hours, with reasonable privacy and relatively

little interference with other home activities.
TeleworkMany employees in white-collar occupations could work at home with
communications networks linking their personal computers to company data

bases and to co-workers. As one illustration, a 1976 study found that the

insurance industry could decentralize much of its underwriting and

administrative operations by using workers at home or at dispersed sites near

home (Nilles et al., 1976). Besides saving commuting costs, "telework" opens

up employment opportunities to those who find it difficult to travel to work,
such as parents with child care responsibilities and the physically handicapped
(Olson, 1983).Salespeople could conduct more work at home if they had ready access to
customer records, as well as means to send in their orders electronically.

Software programs for personal computers are available to facilitate such order

entry processes. Mobile telephones using cellular radio technology also help

salespeople work more effectively outside the office.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME127
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Despite these technical advances, predictions from the 1970s and early
1980s of significant shifts to working at home have not come to pass (Harkness,

1977; Nilles et al., 1976; Toffler, 1980; Williams, 1982).
* Nilles now estimates
that "today there are between 20,000 and 100,000 telecommuters of all sorts in

the U.S." (Krier, 1984). Some forecasts simply extrapolated too far from the

1973Œ1974 energy crisis and concluded that skyrocketing gasoline prices would
dramatically reduce commuting. Others were based on an either-or fallacy that
employees would fully substitute working at home for working at an office.

This is clearly not correct. Most individuals want to spend a good part of their

working time among colleagues. They like the change of scene, the work-

related interactions, the socializing, and even the distractions of an office

environment.
However, many employees would like the freedom to work at home part of
the time. Just as face-to-face contacts at the office enhance job performance, so,

too, may the ability to concentrate at home, free from meetings, colleagues'

visits, and business telephone calls. This paper, for example, was written largely

at home, where I can find more uninterrupted time than at my office. Other

employees prefer the added flexibility that part-time work at home offers for
child care or other activities. Part-time work at home illustrates the customized
life-styles sought by so many Americans in the 1980s.
The reporters at the 
Los Angeles Times
 provide an interesting example of
how information technologies open new opportunities for part-time work at

home. In 1982, the 
Times installed a sophisticated "front end" computer system
for the editorial staff. More than 550 microcomputer terminals are linked to 21

computers in Washington, D.C., and three Southern California locations. In

addition to typing and editing stories, each reporter can maintain his or her own

electronic files, as well as send and receive electronic messages through the
system.
The 
Times' editorial computer system was carefully designed to carry
heavy peak loads, since most reporters use the system during
* Few quantitative data exist on the number of Americans working at home, with or
without computers and communications networks. A 1984 
Futurist article cites a U.S.
Chamber of Commerce report indicating that "10 million businesses list home addresses

as their place of business" (Wolfgram, 1984). A 
Wall Street Journal
 editorial states, "A
recent AT&T study reportedly found that 11 million Americans work at home; 7 percent
of the total labor force work at home full time and 6 percent pursue part-time jobs at
home" (Wall Street Journal, 1984). And a recent article in 
Reason cites the AT&T
estimate, as well as a figure of "5Œ10 million, reported in 
Consumer's Digest
" (Rubins,
1984).INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME128
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the same hours before deadline. The editorial staff helped design the terminal
configuration and functions so that the system would serve the needs of its users

rather than its technical developers. Although some reporters expressed initial

apprehension, most adopted the computer system eagerly within a few months

and have discarded their old typewriters. This has been the general newspaper

experience with editorial computer systems (Johnston, 1984).
Dial-up access was an important part of the system design so that reporters
outside of Washington and Southern California could file their stories remotely.

But the design did not anticipate the local reporters' enthusiasm for using the

computer system from home or on assignment. Even during 1980Œ1982 when

the system was designed, using computers for work at home was not widely

accepted outside the computer field itself. Moreover, truly portable computers
with built-in modems and enough capacity for serious word processing were not
yet available.All this has changed in the last two years. More than 100 
Los Angeles
Times reporters regularly use portable computers or PCs at home to write their
stories and then send them electronically to the central computer system. The

reporters can plan their time more flexibly, spend more time on assignment, and

work closer to deadline. An increasing number of reporters now work part-time

at home.The 
Los Angeles Times
 experience seems likely to be replicated as other
businesses install computer systems for their professional employees and permit

them to interact with the systems at home. Financial and accounting staff will

access corporate data bases, perform analyses, and write reports from home.

Managers will use electronic mail systems from home to keep in touch with

their co-workers, as well as to substitute for some office correspondence and

telephone calls. Professional and other white-collar workers in the academic,
government, and nonprofit sectors will do the same. Information technologies
make it easier for information workers to do at least some of their work at home.
Barriers to Computer-Based Telework
Significant nontechnical barriers to work at home remain, however, for
those who are not self-employed. From the employer's viewpoint, there are

several disadvantages:  Part-time work at home does not save office or administrative costs, at
least in the short run. The 
Los Angeles Times
 reporters still want their
own desks in the office, each with a computer terminal, of course. In
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME129
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.principle, an employer could reduce office space requirements if
employees spent an appreciable part of their work time at home but, in

practice, office space sharing appears difficult to implement.
  Work at home will cost employers more if they must pay for the home
computer, communications, and other work materials. These added

costs are usually easier to measure than the productivity gains

attributable to work done at home. Employers' liability insurance costs

will also increase if they must cover working at home.
  Many employers believe that face-to-face interactions in the office are
essential, both for efficient functioning of the business and for

effective use of the company's human resources. They argue that high

morale, loyalty, and effective communications among employees come

from working together in an office rather than from working

individually at home.
  Data security problems arise when sensitive information is available at
home. Processing insurance claims or conducting financial analyses

requires access to confidential data. The security problems include not

just wiretapping and unauthorized access to computer data bases, but,

more importantly, physical security in the home environment. Homes

do not have guards, locked files, or other physical protections that

offices employ. Establishing these safeguards in employees' homes
would impose huge costs and administrative burdens on both
employers and employees. Tolerating a lower level of data security in

the home may be acceptable at present, but not in the future if part-

time work at home becomes widespread.
In general, management control is more difficult in multiple home
locations than in a centralized office. Except at senior managerial and

professional levels, working at home runs counter to established control

mechanisms and policies of most corporations and government agencies.
Organized labor also opposes computer-based work at home. In the 1930s
unions successfully fought against homework in the apparel industries, arguing

that the minimum wage and other labor standards could not be enforced for

work at home. Under the authority of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, the

U.S. Department of Labor in 1943 banned homework for women's garments,
knitted outerwear, glove and mitten manufacturing, embroidery, handkerchief
manufacturing, jewelry making, and button and buckle manufacturing. The

Reagan administration's efforts to end these bans have so far been rejected by

the courts (Taylor, 1983).
Unions believe that the same issues surrounding garment making will
apply to computer-based homework. While agreeing that part-time work at

home may be appropriate for managers and some
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME130
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.professional employees, they contend that clerical and support workers will be
paid less than minimum wage, lose benefits, and otherwise be exploited in

"electronic sweatshops" (Chamot and Zalusky, 1983). The 780,000-member

Service Employees International Union has banned homework by its members

(Rubins, 1984). The AFL-CIO, at its Fifteenth Constitutional Convention in

October 1983, formally adopted a resolution against computer homework:
RESOLVED: That the AFL-CIO calls for an early ban on computer homework
by the Department of Labor as a measure of protection for those workers
entering the market for the fastest-growing occupation in the United States.
Government Policies Affecting Work at Home
Some government regulations and policies also discourage the use of
information technologies for work at home. Tax policies represent a prime

example. Over the last several years, the Internal Revenue Service has tightened

its position on deductions for home offices and home computers. It is now very
difficult for an employee to deduct such costs if the employer provides work
space and equipment at the office. An employee's ability to deduct work-related

costs certainly influences his or her decision about whether to work part-time at

home.Zoning laws also affect the kind and amount of work that can be
performed in a residential area. In Los Angeles, for example, I may legally use

a computer at home to conduct business, either for myself or for my employer.

However, I may not have any employees working at my home office, nor may I

see any customers or suppliers at home. Chicago has a much more restrictive
zoning ordinance, which prohibits professional work at home involving
"installation or use of any mechanical or electrical equipment customarily

incident to the practice of any such professions." The Chicago ordinance has

actually been invoked to stop a teacher and his wife from writing a textbook or

developing software programs on their home computer (Rubins, 1984).
Zoning laws can, of course, be changed to suit new circumstances, but
only after many hearings, much effort, and a great deal of time. Like changing

corporate policies and union rules, it takes longer to change zoning laws, tax

regulations, and other government policies than to develop new information
technologies.In summary, technological developments, as well as changing lifestyles,
favor bringing more work home from the office. But the institutional policies of

government, unions, and business make the
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME131
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.shift more difficult. Businesses particularly are conservative organizations.
Even though more than 100 U.S. corporations have tested the telework concept,

with generally positive results, most companies still appear reluctant to change

established practices to encourage its widespread application.
DOING CHORES AT HOME
Not everyone earns a living by working at home, but virtually all of us do
housework. In 
housework, I include sedentary chores such as bill paying and tax
preparation, as well as the physical tasks of cooking, cleaning, and home

maintenance. Information technologies aid us in doing chores at home in three

principal ways: (1) by controlling the appliances we use for housework, (2) by
establishing local networks for home communications and control, and (3) by
directly providing electronic information and transaction services from the home.
Controlling Appliances
"The technological systems that presently dominate our households were
built on the assumption that a full-time housewife would be operating them ..."

(Cowan, 1983). That assumption, of course, no longer holds true in most

American households. Information technology in the form of the
microprocessor permits more flexible control of appliances, thus supporting the
life-styles of busy people who work outside (or perhaps inside) the home.
Even as families contemplate the purchase of a home computer,
microprocessors are entering their homes as control components of stand-alone

appliances. Microwave ovens, refrigerators, washers, and sewing machines

contain microprocessor-based controls that can proceed through a complex
series of steps and respond more accurately to the surrounding environment.
Ovens can be preprogrammed to defrost, brown, and heat sequentially so that

dinner is ready 15 minutes after the last family member comes home from work

or school. Refrigerators monitor their own operations and signal if a door is not

closed tightly or a mechnical malfunction occurs.
Limits to what microprocessor-controlled appliances can do are set more
by available sensors than by the microprocessors themselves. For example, it is

not too farfetched to anticipate a cleaning robot in the 1990s that can vacuum

automatically without stumbling into furniture. Achieving this, however, will
require substantial advances and cost reductions in sensor technologies as well
as processing capabilities.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME132
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The diffusion of microprocessors in the home is somewhat analogous to
the home use of electric motors. Before the 1930s, electric motors were too

large and expensive for most home applications. The development of cheap,

fractional-horsepower motors led to the proliferation of small motorized

appliances after World War II. Middle-class American households today have

literally dozens of electric motors in blenders, grinders, can openers, knives,
power tools, hair dryers, toys, and toothbrushes. In a similar way, inexpensive
microprocessors are becoming commonplace in everyday household appliances.
Home Networks
Local networks within the home allow even more flexible control of
appliances, as well as security and other home management functions.

Microprocessor-based controllers use the home's electrical wiring to signal

appliances from a central panel in the kitchen or bedroom. The television set

can also serve as the central panel, controlled by a hand-held device similar to a

remote channel switcher. With these home networks, lights or appliances can be

turned on and off from another part of the house, or remotely from outside the
home with a telephone call. Home networks can also help in energy
management by, for example, allowing you to call home to turn on the heat in

an empty house just before arriving.
"Smart telephones" and telephone peripheral equipment also support busy
life-styles and aid home management functions. Thirteen percent of Los

Angeles households have a telephone-answering machine, although the extent

to which these devices improve the quality of life for either the caller or the

answering party remains open to question. Home security systems linked to the

telephone or to cable TV networks also are in demand. AT&T now offers a
microprocessor-based smoke alarm connected to the telephone that, when
triggered by smoke, dials a preprogrammed number and announces, "Fire! at

[the specified address]." Developers commonly offer microprocessor-controlled

intrusion alarm systems as amenities in newly constructed apartments,

condominiums, and houses.
Home Information and Transaction Services
Personal computers and home terminals linked to external data bases will
encourage more electronic information gathering and transactions from the

home. The telephone, of course, has provided such services for more than a

century. Although similar computer-based
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME133
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.services for banking, shopping, ticket ordering, and information gathering have
been relatively slow to develop, several now appear near the takeoff point:
  Electronic banking at home is available from more than 30 financial
institutions. Bank of America and Chemical Bank together have more

than 20,000 electronic home banking customers. Bank customers use

these electronic services to write checks, review account balances,

compare current interest rates, and move funds among their accounts,

as needed. Customers particularly like the ability to review their

account balances at any time, without waiting for a monthly statement

to arrive in the mail.
  Securities transactions and airline reservations now can be made
electronically from home PCs via CompuServe and The Source, two

popular computer information services.
  Videotex offers better color, graphics, and user-friendly interfaces for
home transaction and information services. Consumer videotex

services with high-quality graphics are now operating in Miami,

Florida, and Orange County, California.
* The Times Mirror Gateway
service in Orange County offers its subscribers electronic home

banking, financial planning, ticket ordering for entertainment and

sports events, travel booking, catalog ordering, and home shopping

from department stores and other retailers.
  Stock and commodity price quotations are available at home from Dow
Jones, Commodity News Service, and several other vendors. Most

customers of these financial information services use the two-way

telephone network to transmit queries from their home computer to a

central data base, which then sends the requested information back to

the home. If two-way transactions are not required, however, the

information alone can be broadcast as a one-way service. Individual

stock and commodity quotations are currently available via FM radio

subcarrier and direct broadcast satellite. These services are now priced

so high that they appeal only to active investors, but their costs should
drop within the next few years to make them accessible to more
households.  Financial management draws considerable consumer interest (
Table 3
),although few individuals as yet use their home PCs very effectively for

budgeting, tax preparation, or other financial planning tasks. As more

and more people become familiar with spreadsheet software programs

in business, their use in the home for financial management will

undoubtedly increase.These home transaction and information services are still in their infancy.
Fewer than 1 percent of the nation's households subscribe to
* These videotex services use the North American Presentation Level Protocol
Standard (NAPLPS), which provides more colors and higher-resolution graphics than
alphamosaic services such as Prestel in the United Kingdom, or text-only, ASCII
services such as Dow Jones News Retrieval, CompuServe, or The Source.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME134
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.any of them. Yet consumer attitudes toward electronic transactions from the
home have turned decidedly more positive within the past year (
Table 4
).Acceptance has moved beyond the small number of early adopters, who are the

first to try anything new, toward a broader segment of the public. From the field

trials and commercial experience to date, both information and transaction

services appear necessary for the commercial success of videotex and similar
electronic services to the home. Neither pure information nor pure transactions
seem viable without the other.
Home transactions appeal especially to adults working outside the home,
for whom time is at a premium. Consumer surveys show that busy adults highly

value information that saves them time or money (Yankelovich, Skelly, and

White, 1984). Consumers also prefer the flexibility of electronic transaction

services that are available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. They do not want to

depend on traditional banking or shopping hours.
With electronic transaction services at home, consumers will do more of
the work themselves and rely less on middlemen such as bank tellers, order

clerks, and travel agents. Banks' increasing use of automatic teller machines

(ATMs) already portends this trend. The next step will be to move from the

ATM to a home terminal for all but cash transactions. As a result, employment

opportunities for tellers, clerks, and other service agents may be squeezed as

home transaction services expand.
Electronic transaction services in the home will not replace retail stores or
service businesses, however. As they do when earning a living, people like to

mix with other people and are not likely to avoid
TABLE 4 Consumer Perceptions of Information Technologies for Transactions at
Home, 1983 and 1984
Percent Responding
19831984Computers that allow for at-home purchasing

ŠMake life better1626
ŠMake life worse2320

Bank at home via personal computer or cable TV
ŠMakes life better2130
ŠMakes life worse
2018SOURCE: Yankelovich, Skelly, and White. Inc. 1984. The Yankelovich Monitor. New York.
Reprinted with permission.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME135
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.all shopping trips. Their buying habits may change, though, with more
electronic ordering of commodity products and services done from home.
LEARNING AT HOME
Parents express great interest in using personal computers to teach their
children at home. As indicated in 
Table 3
, more than 40 percent of the home
computer buyers surveyed expect to use them for learning and education.

Computer manufacturers know these statistics, too. Their advertising

emphasizes the importance of computer literacy and exhorts parents to prepare

their children for success in the classroom and the job market. Software

packages clearly labeled as educational stay on the best-seller lists at home
computer stores. Educational software accounted for about $100 million, or just
under 10 percent of all software sales for home computers in 1983 (Holden,

1984).It is important, however, to distinguish between learning and formal
education. Computers and other information technologies unquestionably can

aid learning at home, especially when the educational content is entertaining.

Flight simulation programs, for example, effectively teach elements of aviation

even though they are designed as games. Some educational software programs

are fun to use as well, for example, ''Rocky's Boots,'' which introduces concepts
of computer logic, and "Green Globs," a game that teaches analytic geometry.
But many more programs are pedestrian and dull. Like earlier examples of

educational technology, they will be put on the shelf and soon forgotten.
Personal computers are not the only information technology for learning at
home. Videotapes such as "Jane Fonda's Workout" have considerable learning

potential. So do conventional broadcast television programs, as "Sesame

Street," "Mr. Rogers," the National Geographic specials, and Bill Moyers' "A

Walk Through the Twentieth Century" attest. Research confirms the layman's

perception that television is a particularly powerful medium for learning. As
Patricia Greenfield reports in her recent review of media effects: "Children tend
to learn what they see on television more thoroughly than what they read or

hear on radio or tape" (Greenfield, 1984).
Whether computers will move the locus of education toward the home is a
far different question. Several factors militate against the change:
  We have heavy investments in schools' physical plant and in teachers'
human capital. The educational establishment is unlikely to show much
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME136
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.enthusiasm for moving formal learning from the schools into the home,
even if technologies permit or favor the change.
  Few parents want to transfer education from the school to the home.
Working parents count on the schools to take charge of their children

during the day. If anything, adult life-style changes imply heavier

reliance on the schools for activities once carried out at home.
  Children, like adults, want face-to-face contacts with their peers.
Schools facilitate these relationships and the learning that accompanies

them.  We remain in large part a credential society, demanding certificates
from schools as prerequisites for jobs and advanced education.

Although home-based degree programs exist, they generally do not

substitute for the credentials given by the schools.
Still, America's current disenchantment with the schools and the calls for
educational reform undoubtedly will stimulate more parents to buy computers

and educational software for learning at home. The educational consequences

are likely to be mixed. One probable result will be to widen the knowledge gap

between children from affluent and lower-income homes. According to a recent

review of a National Institute of Education conference on the topic, "the vast
majority of computer buyers are well off, well educated and white. Sixty
percent of those purchasing computers costing over $500 have incomes over

$40,000" (Holden, 1984). In addition to learning with their computers at home,

children from these affluent families will be more comfortable using computers

at school and eventually on the job.
The home computer should not be branded the villain, however. This same
gap-widening problem has occurred for every important new learning tool,

including paperback books, telephones, and television. Each of these

developments began by helping the affluent more than the nonaffluent.

Although "Sesame Street" was created principally to teach verbal and number

skills to children from low-income families, which it did very successfully,

children from affluent homes ended up learning even more (Cook et al., 1975).
Computers in the home simply add another dimension to the knowledge gap
between children from different socioeconomic backgrounds.
One partial solution to the computer learning gap at home is to provide
computer instruction to all children at school. Although more than two-thirds of

U.S. public schools have at least one microcomputer, they still are not widely

available for student use (Market Data Retrieval, 1984; Shavelson and Winkler,

1984). A 1983 study, cited by Shavelson and Winkler, found that the ratio of

students per microcomputer averaged 183 to 1 in elementary schools, 181 to 1

in junior high schools, and 125 to 1 in public high schools. Parental purchases of
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME137
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.home computers thus may place increased pressure on the schools to add more
computers in the classroom.
Opportunities also may exist to coordinate home and school use of
microcomputers. Word processing provides a good illustration. As Seymour

Papert pointed out in his celebrated book 
Mindstorms, computers enable
children to improve their writing markedly through editing and reworking their

thoughts on the screen:For most children rewriting a text is so laborious that the first draft is the final
copy, and the skill of rereading with a critical eye is never acquired. This
changes dramatically when children have access to computers capable of
manipulating text. (Papert, 1980)
Children can be introduced to word processing at school and then reinforce
and extend their writing skills on a home computer. Coordination would

leverage the educational impact of both home and school computing.
Unfortunately, there seems little precedent for effective coordination
between school and home in the use of other information technologies such as

television. The conceptual foundations exist for involving parents in teaching

critical television viewing skills to children (Dorr et al., 1980) or for

incorporating prime-time television programs into the school curriculum, but

little implementation has occurred. Perhaps computers in the home will be

different from other educational technologies and will offer better opportunities

for home-school coordination.
RELAXING AT HOME
Home is the principal place for leisure-time activities, including
entertaining, talking on the telephone, reading, and watching television. Time
budget studies show that television viewing dominates the use of free time at

home (
Table 5
). Adults in 1975 watched television as a primary activity 2.2
hours a day, on average, a substantial increase from the 1.5 hours recorded in

1965 (Robinson, 1977, 1981). More recent data show a slight decline in adult

viewing since 1975, but it still averages more than 2 hours a day (Juster,

forthcoming).These data fall below other figures cited by the Television Information
Office and the rating services (A. C. Nielsen, 1984; Roper, 1984). According to
recent Nielsen data, home television sets are turned on an average of more than
7 hours a day. The differences result from two factors: different household

members watch the same television set at different times during the day; and

individuals often watch television as a secondary activity during time primarily

devoted toINFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME138
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.eating, personal care, housework, reading, or other leisure activities. The
Nielsen data show average daily TV usage continuously increasing from 5.5

hours in 1965Œ1966 to 7.5 hours in November 1983. Households with three or

more people, as well as those with pay cable services, watch more than 8.5

hours per day (
Figure 1
). Television viewing declines with increasing
household income, although the difference between high-and low-income
households is relatively small.
TABLE 5 Time Spent in Leisure Activities, 1965 and 1975
Minutes per Day
Activity19651975Study1523
Organizations1616
Entertainment2117
Visiting (and meals out)6454

Active leisure1822
Leisure travel2124
Television89132

Reading3531
Other2424
Total303343SOURCE: Adapted from "Television and Leisure Time: A New Scenario." by John P. Robinson in
the Journal of Communication. Vol. 31. No. 1.
The growth of television viewing has clearly affected other activities in the
home. Since 1950, television has taken time away from sleeping, housework,
reading, and conversations with friends (Comstock, 1982). President Reagan,

someone quite familiar with the medium, observes that television substitutes for

face-to-face visits:We watch a lot of television, seeking continuity and reassurance in the regular
and predictable appearance of our favorite TV stars and programs. They visit us
Šas if they were a friend or relative coming by for the evening. TV is
increasingly becoming the American neighbor. (Reagan, 1984)
Just as the automobile transformed the ways in which individuals and
families deal with distance, so television has profoundly changed their use of

time. We still do not understand the full personal and social implications of this

shift to television viewing in the past generation.
Technical Improvements in Television
Given the vast market that television represents, much technical and
economic activity is directed toward expanding and improving it.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME139
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Figure 1
Hours of TV usage per week by household characteristics, November 1983.
Source: A. C. Nielsen Company. 1984. Nielsen Report on Television.

Northbrook, Ill. Reprinted with permission.
Twenty years ago, only 8 percent of U.S. households could receive nine or
more television stations, while today 61 percent can do so (A. C. Nielsen,

1984). Cable television brings even more viewing options, including 24-hour-a-

day channels devoted to movies, sports, news, weather reports, government

events, and contemporary music. Many cable systems built-in the past five

years have the technical capacity to deliver 50 or more TV channels to the

home, but not yet enough programming to fill them.
Continuing technical development, along with deregulation of the
electromagnetic spectrum available for television, will make more channels of

television available to U.S. households via several distribution means:
Low-power television
 (LPTV) uses directional antennas to broadcast
additional television signals at conventional VHF and UHF

frequencies without interfering with existing stations. Although few

LPTV stations are yet on the air, the Federal Communications

Commission (FCC) has awarded more than 200 licenses by lottery and

continues to process the several thousand applications it has received.
Multichannel, multipoint distribution service
 (MMDS) broadcasts at
microwave frequencies previously reserved for instructional television.

MMDS services can bring at least eight new television channels to

homes in metropolitan areas. The FCC is also holding lotteries to

award MMDS licenses.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME140
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Direct broadcast satellite
 (DBS) could beam 12 or more television
channels to the home by the end of this decade. Although some early

entrants have withdrawn from the field, DBS service still holds

promise, especially for rural households that are not well served by

conventional broadcast and cable television.
Fiber optic systems
 may in the 1990s overtake coaxial cable for video
distribution to the home. The wired video distribution networks of the

twenty-first century probably will be switched, digital, and fiber optic.

Both the telephone and cable television industries are positioning

themselves to provide fiber optic systems in the future (Baer, 1984).
Efforts are also under way to improve the image and sound quality of
television receivers:Stereo sound reception
 is already available in top-of-the-line receivers.
Only a few TV stations are as yet broadcasting in stereo, but the

industry expects consumer demand to accelerate and to prove a boon to

TV set manufacturers. Some TV programs will carry bilingual sound

tracks instead of stereo.
Digital TV sets
 contain a few digital chips that replace several hundred
analog components. They might be more accurately termed

"digitizing" TV sets, since they convert an analog TV signal to digital,

process it digitally, and then reconvert it back to analog for display.

Digital sets improve image and sound quality by simplifying TV signal

alignment, reducing ghosts and noise, and compensating for aging

components. The built-in digital circuitry should lower the cost of

teletext and videotex decoding, as well as provide new features such as

freeze-frame and splitscreen viewing. Already available in Europe,
digital TV sets will be on the market in the United States by early
1985. Many industry experts expect digital sets to capture the bulk of

the television receiver market within a few years.
Component video systems
 separate the television display monitor and
audio speakers from the tuner and other picture and sound processing

components. Component systems appeal primarily to serious

videophiles who want better image and sound quality, particularly

when playing videotapes and videodisks.
High-definition TV
 (HDTV) would replace the 525-line NTSC
standard, which has prevailed in North America since the 1940s, with

images containing 1,000 or more lines. At this resolution, the

perceived image quality is about the same as that of 35mm film. In

addition to more lines, HDTV also will have a wider aspect ratio,

multichannel sound, and a better technical method of transmitting the

brightness, color, and sound information within the available TV

bandwidth. Technical groups are now studying the issues surrounding

HDTV and hope to reach agreement on international standards for

HDTV systems. Digital signal processing within the TV receiver can
help deal with compatibility problems between HDTV
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME141
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and existing television standards. However, because digital signal
processing can clean up lower-resolution images from existing

standards and make them look better to viewers, digital TV sets may

actually hold back the demand for HDTV.
Projection TV
 and other large-screen displays are improving in quality
but remain limited in consumer appeal by the low resolution of NTSC

television images. Digital signal processing or high-definition TV will

make largescreen display much more attractive to consumers. Work on

fiat panel displays is also progressing, although these new technologies
still find it difficult to compete in cost with the venerable television
CRT.Consumer purchases of videocassette recorders (VCRs) have surpassed
even optimistic projections of a year ago. The installed base of home VCRs has

grown from less than I million in 1979 to 9 million by the end of 1983. Sales in

1984 are up over 60 percent above 1983, with no signs of leveling off. The

industry estimates that 16 percent of U.S. households have VCRs now, and

projections are for 30 percent market penetration by 1986, and perhaps 50

percent by 1990. Consumers want VCRs both to record programming from

broadcast or cable TV for viewing at more convenient times and to play
prerecorded tapes. The prerecorded tape rental business has grown as rapidly as
VCR sales, giving VCR owners an even wider range of program choices. The

impact of VCRs on home activities is discussed below.
Videodisk players may make a comeback in the home, despite RCA's well-
publicized exit from the business after losses of nearly $600 million. Optical

videodisk players offer better image and sound quality than VCRs or the CED

videodisks that RCA marketed. The anticipated success of "compact"

audiodisks using similar technology for highquality sound reproduction may

reawaken interest in optical videodisks as well. So, too, may the use of the

optical videodisk's interactive capabilities for games and, eventually,

information retrieval. Following their success in video arcades, several

companies are developing videodisk games for the home. Still, videodisk
players are likely to have a narrow appeal to affluent early adopters rather than
appealing to the mass home market.
These technical developments in distribution systems, television receivers,
VCRs, and videodisks continue the trend toward making more video channels

available in the home with technically better image and sound quality. The

number and variety of available video programs also are increasing, although

not as rapidly as the channels for distributing them. Opinions differ widely as to

whether the 
quality of video programming available in the home has improved.
Survey data suggest that consumers perceive the new video technologies more
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME142
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.positively than conventional television programming, which more respondents
think has worsened rather than improved in the past year (
Table 6
). However,
the ratio of "worsened" to "improved" responses has changed from nearly 3 to 1

in 1980 to about 3 to 2 in 1984. By comparison, the perceived change in cable/

pay TV quality in 1984 is positive by more than a 3-to-1 ratio. Consumer

attitudes toward videotape recorders have remained much more positive than
negative over the past four years.
New Technologies' Challenge to Television
Other information technologies seek to challenge television for the
individual's leisure time. Videogames have been the principal diversion,

especially for children. Videogames have been purchased by onequarter of

American households, or nearly 40 percent of all households with children. But

enthusiasm for action videogames is declining, at least among adults who
respond to surveys (
Table 6
). More people now think these games "make life
worse" than "make life better," a reversal of attitude in the past two years.
Interest is turning away from videogame-only consoles to more
sophisticated games played on home computers. They range from software

versions of Trivial Pursuit to board games (Scrabble, backgammon, chess) to

interactive fiction in which players create their own
TABLE 6 Consumer Perceptions of Home Entertainment Technologies, 1981Œ1984
Percent Responding
1981198219831984Quality of TV programming
ŠImproved19162227

ŠWorsened55544842
Quality of cable/pay TV
ŠImprovedŠŠŠ47

ŠWorsenedŠŠŠ15

Videotape recordersŠMake life better25221926
ŠMake life worse9111010
TV gamesŠMake life better24221920

ŠMake life worse
12172324SOURCE: Yankelovich, Skelly, and White, Inc. 1984. The Yankelovich Monitor. New York.
Reprinted with permission.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME143
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.characters and participate in an adventure story (Zork, Witness). A recent book
on the psychological implications of computers describes how compelling

interactive fiction games can be for children and teenagers (Turkle, 1984)Šand,

I suspect, for adults.
Up to now, electronic games in the home have been stand-alone units
connected to the television set or to the computer display. Downloading games

via telephone, cable, or satellite is technically feasible and may prove

economically attractive to consumers. Several companies are now testing the

commercial prospects for downloaded games. Games are also a prominent
feature of videotex and other interactive home information services. Videotex
games are now played interactively between a player at home and the host

computer. However, technical advances in microprocessor hardware, software,

and communications are proceeding to a point where multiplayer interactive

games may be offered commercially within the next two or three years. Such

games would link players in separate households via cable television or the

telephone network, with the host computer acting as referee. As Robert Lucky

of AT&T Bell Laboratories has suggested, videotex and communications

companies' new advertising theme may be "Reach out and play someone"

(Lucky, 1984).
Videotex brings information on demand, including (for leisure activities)
news, sports, and other features. It also enables subscribers to send messages

and chat electronically. Electronic bulletin boards on such topics as movie

reviews, recipes, and dating have proved very popular in videotex and other

home information services around the country. Videotex will not replace the
telephone for person-to-person communications or supplant newspapers and
other print media for most information needs, but it seems likely to find a niche

among media uses in the home.
Will any of these new, more interactive services displace television
viewing? If they are to have significant impact on leisure activities, they must

take some time away from television. There is simply very little time in other

home leisure categories to replace.
Social commentators often criticize television viewing as a passive, lowest-
common-denominator activity. Despite more program options and better

technical image quality, most intellectuals still consider television a "vast

wasteland." They would like to see television viewing replaced by more active

pursuits, such as learning, conversing with others, and even game playing. But
the critics' concerns are not really relevant here; individual preferences are the
real issue.Prospects for displacing television with other activities are supported
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME144
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.by studies showing that television provides relatively low consumer
satisfaction. Robinson reports the results of a 1975 survey in which respondents

rated various activities on a scale from 0 (dislike a great deal) to 10 (like a great

deal):While the average score of 6.1 for TV viewing did fall on the positive side of
the scale, it was well below the scores of almost all other free time activities....
Television was rated about the same as housework for women (but not for

men) and well below work. (Robinson, 1981)
Opinion surveys conducted over three decades show growing consumer
dissatisfaction with television. Half of a sample surveyed in 1980 agreed that

"television seems to be getting worse all the time," compared to 24 percent in

1960 (Bower, forthcoming). These results are consistent with the Yankelovich

findings shown in 
Table 6
. More consumers consistently say that the quality of
television programming has "worsened" than that it has "improved.''
Other media experts contend, however, that television precisely meets the
needs of tired individuals who seek relaxation at home. They want passive,

undemanding entertainment during their evening leisure hours. Watching

television is habitual, Russell Neuman concludes after reviewing studies of

viewer behavior:The viewer plops down in front of the set, spins the dial, examines the
programs available, and selects the least objectionable. Surveys repeatedly

confirm that most viewers report "watching whatever is on." . . . Close analysis
of viewing behavior indicates there is almost no correlation between expressed
preferences and actual viewing behavior. (Neuman, forthcoming)
Television may generate a low level of viewer enthusiasm, but it has a high
level of acceptance.
Videogames may be displacing some television viewing time among
children, although the data are still quite sparse (Greenfield, 1984). In one study

reviewed by Greenfield, children watched less television after they received

home videogames. Whether this change will persist after the novelty of the

videogame wears off is not really known.
With the possible exception of videogames, there is no convincing
evidence as yet about the mass entertainment appeal of other information

technologies and services. Multiplayer interactive games have largely been

confined to computer hackers and students with access to powerful mainframes.

Videotex may over time prove popular for leisure-time activities, as well as for

transactions and information gathering, but videotex will not be a mass market

service for severalINFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME145
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.years to come. In general, the most enthusiastic users of interactive services are
likely to be infrequent users of television. Consequently, the burden of proof

still falls on those new activities that would displace the time individuals now

spend watching television.
A separate but related question is the significance of the shift toward
watching videotapes rather than television. Consumers use their VCRs to shift

viewing times to suit their convenience. Time shifting of daytime soap operas

for evening viewing is a frequently cited example. Some viewers even prefer to

record sports events for later replay. They must then avoid listening to the
results on the radio or reading them in a newspaper before watching their tape.
Viewers also like the choice of content available from tape rental stores. Tape

rentals further fragment the viewing audience and contribute to the trend toward

watching less network programming.
Television advertisers already are concerned about VCR viewers who fast-
forward through commercial breaks. Such ''zapping" is evidently widespread.

An A. C. Nielsen survey last fall found that 65 percent of VCR owners use their

fast-forward button to zap commercials.
* Although one cannot extrapolate too
far from these data from relatively affluent households, zapping cuts to the heart
of advertiser supported television in the United States. The impact could be
great as VCR ownership moves toward 50 percent of U.S. households.
Videotape and videodisk players also permit a form of "browsing" through
video materials that cannot be done with conventional television. Viewers can

speed up or slow down a sequence, stop to watch a still frame, and go back to

take another look at a sequence of particular interest. Video browsing seems
confined to a small number of serious videophiles today, but it could become a
routine way to watch video programming when VCR ownership becomes

widespread.THE IMPACT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES ON
HOME ACTIVITIES
How information technologies will affect these four broad categories of
home activitiesŠworking, doing chores, learning, and relaxingŠis
* I recall one recent evening when a TV viewer pressed the fast-forward button on his
VCR controller as a commercial appeared, and nothing happened! "You mean we're
watching in real time?" he said with impatience and incredulity.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME146
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.summarized in 
Table 7
. Up to now, technology has had a modest influence on
working at home. That may change, since computer and communications

technologies make it possible for more people to substitute working at home for

working in an office. For most workers, however, the substitution will be partial

rather than complete. And it will be slow. Information technologies have the

potential to transform work at home, but decisions by individuals and
institutions seem likely to bring about far more modest changes in the next
decade.Households make relatively modest use of information technologiesŠ
principally the telephoneŠfor doing chores. However, the trend seems clear for

significantly increased use of microprocessor controls, home networks, and

electronic transaction services over the next decade. Yet their long-term impact

on household productivity or on the perceived quality of life may be quite

modest. These technologies primarily support the life-styles of busy people

seeking to minimize the time and toil of household chores. They do not change
the nature of these chores materially, nor do they elevate them to more
satisfying pursuits. Rather, just as electricity and the telephone moved from

being household luxuries to being necessities, so these newer information

technologies will gradually become integrated into routine home management

tasks.Technology's impact on learning at home is much less clear. Past
experience with other educational technologies should make us skeptical about

extravagant claims for the computer. But computers just might be different.

Some of the recent studies of kids and computers hint that, over the long term,

computers might really bring about profound changes in learning. The field is

moving so rapidly that we have little notion of what state of the art learning

software will be even a few years from now, in either the school or the home
environment.
Television already has significantly influenced leisure time at home. The
new technologiesŠcable, direct broadcast satellite, VCRs, interactive games,

and videotexŠwill not displace conventional TV. Nevertheless, they seem

likely to fragment further the mass audience for
TABLE 7 Impact of Information Technologies on Home Activities
Home ActivityPresent Impact
Likely Impact in
Next Decade
Potential LongTerm

ImpactWorkingmodestmodestsignificant

Doing choresmodestsignificantmodest

Learningmodest?significant
RelaxingsignificantsignificantsignificantINFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME147
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.television and otherwise significantly affect leisure-time habits for a substantial
number of people.
These specific activities in the home raise broader questions of how
information technologies may affect personal relationships, family structures,

and the overall concept of the home itself. Certainly information technologies

give individuals more options as to what activities they can perform at home:
a living

  Communicating with others

 and relaxing
They encourage our efforts to customize our activities and our lifestyles.
Information technologies also expand our links with other people beyond
the physical limitations of home, city, and even nation. Scientists and engineers

well recognize that our communities of interest extend throughout the United

States and into other countries. The telephone has been the principal technology

permitting us to build networks of colleagues and friends, largely independent

of geography. We have established what Melvin Webber called "communities
without propinquity." Computer networks available at home as well as in the
office will enlarge the range and scope of these relationships, enabling us to

share common interests and experience.
But technology, a neutral force, could also serve to isolate rather than to
unite us. Max Frisch explains: "Technology is the knack for organizing the

world so we don't have to experience it." As is often the case, novelists have

seen these issues long before technologists. Seventy-five years ago E. M.

Forster gave us an apocalyptic vision of information technologies in the home

in his short story "The Machine Stops":
Imagine, if you can, a small room, hexagonal in shape like the cell of a bee. It
is lighted neither by window nor by lamp, yet it is filled with a soft
radiance . . .. An armchair is in the center, by its side, a reading deskŠthat is

all the furniture. And in the armchair there sits a swaddled lump of fleshŠa
woman, about five feet high, with a face as white as a fungus. It is to her that
the little room belongs.
There were buttons and switches everywhereŠbuttons to call for food, for
music, for clothing. There was the hot bath button, by pressure of which a
basin of (imitation) marble rose out of the floor filled to the brim with a warm

deodorized liquid. There was the cold bath button. There was a button that
produced literature. And there were, of course, the buttons by which
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME148
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.she communicated with her friends. The room, although it contained nothing,
was in touch with all that she cared for in the world. (Forster, 1968)
This is the nightmare of information technologies used not to enhance
experience, but to avoid it. Technology 
could be used to create wholly artificial
environments and to substitute for human interaction. Technology could reduce

the electronic cottage to the electronic isolation booth.
Forster's nightmare stands diametrically opposed to Orwell's nightmare,
with which we are more familiar, of information technologies used by a

malevolent government to spy on individuals in their homes. Although it might

be technically feasible for Big Brother to watch us at home via two-way

television, we have not chosen that direction. The Orwellian nightmare of

information technology used to entrench despotic authority and stamp out

individual freedom does not seem a likely possibility today in the United States
or other democracies. We recognize that technology need not determine our
destiny.Perhaps we should pay more attention to the Forsterian nightmare of
electronic isolation, although it, too, does not seem a likely prospect. Humans

are still largely social beings. Despite the solipsistic possibilities offered by

television, videogames, and electronic shopping at home, people like to be with

people much of the time. Americans believe that technology makes it easier, not

more difficult, to maintain close, personal contact with other people

(Yankelovich, Skelly, and White, 1984). Nevertheless, we must remain aware
of the possibilities for misuse of information technologies as we seek to develop
and commercialize them.
The key feature of information technologies in the home is that they give
more control to individuals. They permit us greater freedom to control where

and when we work, do chores, learn, play actively, and are entertained. They

offer us more choices of materials in more convenient forms, for entertainment

and learning. They provide us with more flexibility in obtaining information,

making transactions, and communicating with individuals and institutions. They

may even over time replace some passive television viewing with more active
pursuits.Of course, how these technologies will be used in the home and how the
home itself evolves depend far more on nontechnical than technical factors.

Technology largely supports ongoing changes in individual life-style choices,

family structure, and the relationships among the home, the school, the office,

and other societal institutions. It is probably not correct to say that information

technologies them
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME149
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.selves will transform the home environment. They are more responsive than
causal. They do, however, support distributed decision making more than

centralized authority, and they encourage some transfer of control from

entertainment producers to viewers, from bosses to workers, and from

instructors to learners. By empowering individuals' decisions at home,

information technologies can enhance the functions of the home in an
information-rich society.
REFERENCESA. C. Nielsen Company. 1984. Nielsen Report on Television. Northbrook, Ill.
Baer, Walter S. 1984. Telephone and cable companies: partners or rivals for video distribution? In
Competition of Video Media, Eli M. Noam, ed. New York: Columbia University Press.
Bower, Robert T. (Forthcoming) The Changing Television Audience in America. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Chamot, D., and J. L. Zalusky. The Electronic Sweatshop: The Use and Misuse of Work Stations in
the Home. Paper presented at National Executive Forum, National Academy of Sciences,
Washington D.C., November 9Œ10, 1983.
Comstock, G. 1982. Television and American social institutions. Pp. 334Œ348 in Television and
Behavior: Ten Years of Scientific Progress and Implications for the Eighties, Vol. 2.

Rockville, Md.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Cook, T. D., H. Appleton, R. F. Connor, A. Shaffer, G. Tomkin, and S. J. Weber. 1975. Sesame
Street Revisited. New York: Russell Sage.
Cowan, R. S. 1983. More Work for Mother. New York: Basic Books.

Dorr, A., S. B. Graves, and E. Phelps. 1980. Television literacy for young children. Journal of
Communication. Vol. 30, p. 71Œ83.
Forster, E. M. 1968. The machine stops. Collected Tales of E. M. Forster. New York: The Modern
Library. First published in Oxford and Cambridge Review, 1909.
Greenfield, P. M. 1984. Mind and Media. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

Harkhess, R. C. 1977. Technology Assessment of Telecommunication/Transportation Interactions.
Menlo Park, Calif.: Stanford Research Institute.
Hayes-Roth, F. 1984. The machine as partner of the new professional. IEEE Spectrum, June:28Œ31.

Holden, C. 1984. Will home computers transform schools? Science, July 20:296.

Johnston, D. 1984. A newsman's view of technology. IEEE Spectrum, June:112Œ113.

Juster, F. T. (Forthcoming) A note on recent changes in time use. In Time, Goods and Well Being,
F. T. Juster and F. P. Stafford, eds. Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan, Survey
Research Center.
Krier, B. A. 1984. Futurists compute the influence of computing. Los Angeles Times, September
21:V1, V24.
Lucky, R. 1984. "Entertain me": television's omnipresence. IEEE Spectrum, June:85Œ89.
Market Data Retrieval. 1984. Microcomputers in schools, 1983Œ84: a comprehensive survey and
analysis. Education Week, September 5:L45.
Neuman, W. R. (Forthcoming) The media habit. In Electronic Publishing Plus, Martin Greenberger,
ed. White Plains, N.Y.: Knowledge Industry Publications, Inc.
Nilles, J. M., F. R. Carlson, P. Gray, and G. J. Hanneman. 1976. The Telecommuni
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME150
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.cations-Transportation Tradeoff: Options for Tomorrow. New York: Wiley Interscience.
Olson, M. H. 1983. Remote office work: changing work patterns in space and time.
Communications of the ACM, March: 182Œ187.
Papert, S. 1980. Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. New York: Basic Books.
Reagan, R. 1984. Remarks at the Presentation Ceremony, 1983 Young American Medals for
Bravery. Presidential Document. Administration of Ronald Reagan, August 28.
Robinson, J. P. 1977. How Americans Use Time. New York: Praeger.
Robinson, J.P. 1981. Television and leisure time: a new scenario. Journal of Communication,
Winter: 120Œ130.
Roper, B. W. 1984. Trends and Attitudes Toward Television and Other Media: A Twenty-Four Year
Review. New York: Television Information Office.
Rubins, D. 1984. Will the plug be pulled? Reason, October:
24Œ32.
Shavelson, R. J., and J. D. Winkler. 1984. Realizing the potential of information technology in
American education. MITI Journal, October.
Taylor, S., Jr. 1983. Court reinstates federal rules affecting industrial home work. New York Times,
November 30:A25.
Toffler, A. 1980. The Third Wave. New York: William Morrow.
Turkle, S. 1984. The Second Self. New York: Simon & Schuster.

Wall Street Journal. 1984. No work place like home. February 23:23.

Williams, F. 1982. The Communications Revolution. Beverly Hills, Calif. : Sage Publications.

Wolfgram, T. H. 1984. Working at home. The Futurist, June:31Œ34.

Yankee Group. 1984. Yankeevision. Boston, Massachusetts, May:35Œ37.

Yankelovich, Skelly, and White, Inc. 1984. The Yankelovich Monitor. New York.
COMMENTSRoland W. Schmitt
Senior Vice-President, Corporate Research and Development

General Electric Company

I think Walter Baer's paper is an excellent overview and delineation of this
field of information technologies in the home. It codifies and defines the terms

of reference for discussion of this topic probably better than any I have seen in

the past. The issues he raises have two dimensions. He has highlighted one of

these dimensionsŠthat of working, doing chores, learning, relaxing. There is

also that other axis of issues that he discussedŠthe question of how certain is

the likely future? When is it going to happen? What surprises are going to be

there? I want to dwell on a couple of topics pertaining to this second axis. First,
however, let me say that one of the key observations that Dr. Baer has made is
that when you are looking at information technologies in the home, the key

parameter is not discretionary dollars, but discretionary minutes and

discretionary hours. I think that is something you must keep in mind when

talking about this topic.
I would like to deal with two issues. First, markets. You might say it is a
little dangerous for a technical person to deal with markets, but frankly, it is my

experience that the marketing people do such a poor job of dealing with
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME151
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.high-technology markets that I do not fear to tread on that ground. Second, I
will make a few comments on what is known as user-friendliness.
Home information technology markets have some interesting
characteristics. First, the user and the buyer of these technologies are really very

closely linked. Most often they are the same person. That is a little different

from the situation in a factory or office environment. A great number of

noneconomic, nonfunctional considerations go into the reaction of the

consumer; things like taste, fashion, curiosityŠmany of the factors that Walter

Baer commented onŠare very important. Therefore, I believe that these
markets are really very hard to predict, and they are especially hard to
mastermind. There is a lot of buying one and buying it onceŠthe Hula-Hoop

example, if you like. Consider the evolution of videogames. The first ones

really did not impress people very much, and most people dismissed them as a

minor novelty. Suddenly, videogames came of age, and all at once we were

hearing sweeping statements about a Pacman culture. We heard that

videogames were the prototype of the industry of the future. You may

remember that phrase, not heard very often anymore, Atari democrat. The pop

sociologists told us that the videogame was either saving or ruining our youth,

depending on whom you listened to. I recall a widely publicized seminar, held

at Harvard University, on the educational impact of videogames. Remember

how towns were slapping curfews on video arcades? Look at it today. The
arcades are going broke. Those same prophets who were wrong on the two
previous rounds are confidently predicting that the videogame is dead, and I

suspect that they are just as wrong this time.
Another example is the videocassette recorder (VCR). There was a very
long period of latency before the VCR really hit its stride and became the major

industry it is today. One of the big factors in that growth was the emergence of

a mom-and-pop industry, the videotape leasing and renting industry. Suppose,

for a minute, that someone in a large corporation had been smart enough early

on to have envisaged the whole synergistic system that would be required to
make the VCR industry boom. Suppose they had seen the necessity of
establishing a network of video rental outlets and had put the ideas and

scheduling together in a business plan. The answer from the top would have

been that the investment is too high and the payback is too long. It just would

not have gone. The present boom and growth has truly emerged, in my opinion,

from the patient offering of a new technology, from experimenting with it out

there in the real market, depending on the vision, on the interest, on the

entrepreneurship of a lot of people who are trying things, finding out what

happens, and finding out what combinations will work. Given this background,

I think we have to realize that as we go down the path of evolving information

technologies in the home, it is going to be a highly experimental path, one of

trial and error, and one where there are going to be a lot of contributions from a
lot of different people. Therefore, again, I do not think that these markets will
be easily masterminded.
I would now like to turn to the topic of user-friendliness. It is a phrase we
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME152
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.hear time and time again, and to which we attach a lot of emphasis and
importance. Frankly, I think we are doing a poor job of it today. I think we

really do not understand the full dimensions of what is needed for user-

friendliness. We have heard much about home computers, and I share the

frustrations and experiences of everyone who has pushed a disk in and had the

screen read "Disk Read Error," "Error 11," or whatever else can happen. I
contend that you can fix those things and still not be user-friendly by a wide
margin. I believe that the key to widespread diffusion of the technologies that

Walter Baer has been talking about is for us to get to a new level of

understanding and appreciation of what user-friendliness really means. Frankly,

I think that TVŠlow enthusiasm but very high acceptanceŠis a good standard

for user-friendliness.
I want to dramatize what I mean by user-friendliness. Let me take the
example of the telephone. Think for a minute what happens to you when you

want to make a call on the telephone to someone whose number you do not

know and whose number is not in that list of 30 numbers you can store in your

telephone today. You pull out a big, thick volume that you have tucked away in

some obscure spot to keep it from being unsightly, open it up, and run your
finger down fine print to try to find the person you want. Then, of course, there
is no space to lay the book near the telephone, so you balance it on your knee,

hold one finger on the name, pick up the receiver, try to hold it to your ear and

dial, and halfway through you drop the telephone book and receiver. I submit

that that is not user-friendly.
I believe that we do have to get to a new level of understanding and
comprehension of user-friendliness in order to make many home technologies

come about. There are a number of technologies on the horizon that can help do

that, but the biggest gain will come if we perfect voice input and voice

recognition. If we move forward to a state where voice input is low cost and

sophisticated, user-friendliness will be just around the corner.
Finally, I agree, by and large, with the assessments that Walter Baer has
made. The only one that I would question is whether the impact of learning in

the home will be quite as large as he thinks it will be unless we solve the

problem of user-friendliness. Moreover, I think that the technologies required to

improve user-friendliness are only now emerging and being developed. The

software related to such things as expert systems and artificial intelligenceŠif

they come along as dramatically as many of us expect them toŠwill
significantly improve our ability to build truly user-friendly products.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGIES IN THE HOME153
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computers and Business
Theodore J. Gordon
Computers and automation are so irrevocably entwined with business that
it is hard to imagine what business would be like without them. These

technologiesŠcomputers and automationŠare ubiquitous, expected, and

necessary, appearing in almost every facet of business enterprise: from

recruitment through layoff, from raw material ordering through the

manufacturing of products, from identifying sales prospects to order entry and

delivery, from competitive analysis to strategic optimization, and from

innovation to design applications of computers and automation. They permeate

business life, and in doing so have changed it for all time. Yet there is more to

come, not only with respect to business applications of computers and

automation, but perhaps more importantly with respect to their impact on

business itself and on the people who run it.
This is a vast and literally boundless topic, so some structure is necessary
if we are to discern even the highlights of prospective change. A three-

dimensional space serves as the organizing principle for this paper: Business

functions comprise one axis; on another axis lie the technologies; and on the

third, the impacts. For convenience, I have divided 
business functions
 into
management, manufacturing, selling, planning, training, and professional

support. For 
technology I have defined three major facets: computer hardware
and software; programmable automation, which includes robotics; and

telecommunications. And in the third dimension, the 
impacts fall on three
elements of business: people, those who define and execute the intent of

business;COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS154
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.structure, the organization of the business enterprise; and self-concept, the view
of what business is about and is capable of attaining.
This structure leads to a set of interesting questions. For example, How
will future developments affect people in management? For this discussion I

have selected only a few of these intersections, on the basis of their

significance, the number of people affected, and the likelihood of the

developments in the next 10 to 15 years. This is certainly not a complete set,

and it relies heavily on judgments about what is possible and about the complex

processes of acceptance and response to new technologies. The changes we
have seen to date are staggeringly significant. What is coming, however, not
only extends the trends of the past but includes massive changes that, in the

aggregate, will define the very nature of business and the relationships between

those who serve and are served by it.
My approach will be to set the stage with a discussion of some
characteristics of emerging technologies and then to describe some of the

changes that seem likely at four intersections in our three-dimensional (business

function/technology/impact) space. The intersections and their respective

changes are as follows:
  At the intersection of training, computers, and people, the discussion
centers on simulation as an aid to training;
  At the intersection of manufacturing, automation, and people, on
factory automation and robotics;
  At the intersection of selling, telecommunications, and structure, on
retail electronic funds transfer (EFT); and
  At the intersection of management, computer, and self-concept, on
modeling in management decision making.
SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
First, the stage setting. There are three principal hardware trends that
characterize electronic hardware today: reduction in cost, improvements in

reliability, and increases in packing density (the number of components that can

be packed into a given volume). Each of these characteristics of the technology

Šcost, reliability, and densityŠhas been changing by approximately a factor of

100 each decade since 1960. Studies by The Futures Group indicate that these

trends can continue for another two decades or so. As limits are reached during

this period, new technologies will offer potential for further breakthroughs. For

example, photolithography (the technology required for printing microcircuits

on silicon) is limited at present by the distance between lines that can be drawn

optically. This, in turn, is fixed by the wavelength of light. Once this limit is
reached, conventionalCOMPUTERS AND BUSINESS155
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.photolithography impedes further progress toward miniaturization. However,
just behind this conventional technology lies the possibility of using shorter-

wavelength energy in these processes; for example, electron beam or X-ray

imaging.
In addition to these more or less continuous trends of improved reliability,
reduced cost, and increased packing density, it is worth noting two other

developments of significance; these are discontinuities that can significantly

affect the application of electronics in the future. First, the same techniques that

are being used to produce very large scale integrated circuits are also being
applied to the manufacture of small mechanical devices. For example, a mass
spectrometer, a device for determining the constituent elements of gases and

other fluids, has been ''printed'' on a chip. This is more than simply printing the

electronics on a chip, as is commonplace in very large scale integrated circuitry.

Rather, the whole machineŠvalves and allŠis part of the printed apparatus.
1An example of the future use of microsystems in industry is the potential for

process instrumentation that floats with a stream of chemicals and telemeters

process control data (rather than being point-fixed on the well of a pipe).

Another industrial example is temperature and pressure instrumentation built

into a grinding wheel or cutting tool to control a feedback system that optimizes

metal removal rates, improves precision of manufacture, and extends tool life.

In the office these micromechanical devices can be useful in constructing
extremely small microphones for dictation, telephones, or security systems
(also, micro eavesdropping bugs), or feedback instruments for chairs, printers,

and personal, local air conditioning. With this technology, buildings can be

instrumented to detect incipient mechanical failures, and quiescent

manufactured products can telemeter their state of functioning or readiness in

response to an external radio trigger signal. In short, micromechanics not only

will permit replication of macromachines on a tiny scale but will stimulate the

innovation of entirely new applications that benefit from small size, low price,

dispersion, and decentralization.
The second development is the coming of ageŠprobably within the next
decadeŠof artificial intelligence (AI), the simulation of human intelligence by

computers. Artificial intelligence requires the ability to sense, operate on sensed

information, draw inferences from observations, and perform adaptively in view

of these inferences and changing circumstances. AI programs have two general

attributes: search and knowledge. Search comes from "defining a space of
possibilities large enough to contain the sought-for solution," and "knowledge is
necessary to guide the search through the space."
2COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS156
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The initial entries in this field are expert systems that capture pragmatic if-
then rules of analysis followed by human experts in a given field. Examples of

expert systems that are functional or in development abound. Medical

diagnostics, personal financial services, geological exploration, legal strategy,

and software design are some examples. In these fields and in others yet to

come, computers will produce practical and functional answers to real problems
better than answers that could be produced by a random sample of professionals.
When expert systems can learn from experience, the decision rules
incorporated in the knowledge portion of the program can be much more

extensive, and a transition will have occurred from programs that merely

emulate the behavior of experts to creative artificial intelligence routines. These

routines will arrive at answers better than those that might be created by most
human experts. This will not happen tomorrow, but it is reasonable to expect
self-learning systems to be in operation within 15 years.
This image of the growth of electronics and its applications and spinoffs
depends, of course, on the market. Given demand, the capability of electronics

and all of its derivatives grows; without demand, nascent applications wither.

Business fosters demand both by offering new products to consumers and by
becoming a consumer itself. In either mode business touches and is touched by
these technologies and thus is changed, not only in how it does business, but in

what it believes business to be. Let us turn now to some intersections in the

three-dimensional space discussed earlier.
INTERSECTION: TRAINING, COMPUTERS, PEOPLE
Simulation as an Aid to Training
Take as a starting point high-density TV (in the more distant future,
perhaps holographic TV) driven by rapidly accessed videodisks, excellent and

sensitive computer simulation programs, and much more effective input-output

systems. Put them together and imagine a worker-training system 10 to 15 years
hence. The key here is softwareŠsuperb simulation techniques that permit the
creation of accurate environments that stress the student and promote learning.

With such software, the emphasis in education switches from teaching to

learning. Pilot training serves as a current example. In the future, decreasing

equipment costs, better software, and realistic input-output systems mean that

applications will be far less monumental and will certainly be applied in

business for training of production workers, managers, salespeople,
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS157
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.repairmen, and anyone likely to benefit from the stress of practice. Simulation
in the context used here means that the user determines the plot of an unfolding

story through his or her decisions. This is computer game playing carried to its

logical end. In schools you can be with Napoleon or serve as a lieutenant to

Washington. In leisure at home, TV becomes active rather than passiveŠhere

you can be with Cleopatra or J. R. Ewing. In the workplace you can direct field
operations to put out oil well fires, or learn, as a potential manager, how it feels
to deal with labor grievances and the chess game of a strike.
ConsequencesPersonnel training and education will be substantially changed, with
competitive advantage falling to the best corporate simulators. Imagine the 
newcase study approach in management education: "Have you played Continental

Illinois yet?" Grading of personnel in corporations may be according to their

successes or failures in simulations. ImagineŠin awed tonesŠ"He made

Continental survive." Perhaps boredom will become a problem when the game

environment makes the adrenaline flow more easily than reality does.
New products and markets will be built around interactive on the job
experience. When the simulation tools are very good they will also serve as

decision-aiding tools. For the repairman not quite sure about which wire to

connect, a quick run on the simulator will show the consequences of connecting

the wireŠa working machine or a blown fuse. The analogous situation for

management dilemmas is obvious.
INTERSECTION: MANUFACTURING, AUTOMATION,
PEOPLEFactory Automation and Robotics
When computers were first introduced, there was a great deal of concern
that unemployment would result. In fact this was not the caseŠwherever

computers were used, more jobs were created. Common wisdom holds that this

situation will always continue, but it might not be so. Factory automation is

likely to advance so far beyond current capabilities that the net effect of

introducing such new technologies may be to improve total output with less

labor required in both a relative and an absolute sense. I will explore the
potential for such technology-induced unemployment in this section.
Artificial intelligence will allow machines to perform cognitive
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS158
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.functions; robotics will move from specialized to general-purpose applications.
Recent studies at The Futures Group have resulted in projections of robot

technology that illustrate the enormous potential for this field. As 
Table 1
shows, robotic accuracy, repeatability, mean time between failures, time to

repair, and speed are expected to increase significantlyŠmore than an order of

magnitude in most casesŠin the next 15 years.
TABLE 1 Forecasts of Robot Technology
State of the Art
Feature19832000Accuracy ofmanipulation(Electric)0.02 inches0.001 inches
(Hydraulic)0.2 inches0.020 inches
Repeatability of

placement(Electric)0.005 inches0.001 inches
(Hydraulic)0.050 inches0.010 inches
Mean time between

failures1,000 hours5,000 hours
Fault detection and
repairMostly humanMostly self-check
Speed for standardpattern4 seconds1 second
ProgrammingExternalExternal and
selftaughtSensingŠvisualSilhouette3-dimensional
Memory capacity
and typeMagnetic mediaVastly expanded
magnetic and
optical media
Information
processingSequential
architectureParallel architecture
SOURCE: The Futures Group.
Within the next decade or so we also can expect to see very simple means
for programming robots and, with the advent of artificial intelligence, robots

that learn through experience. For example, a robot could be adaptively

programmed to change its positioning or sequence in order to minimize

rejection rates.
A distinguishing feature of robots is their versatilityŠtheir ability to be
used in a multiplicity of applications. In the future, robots will become more

general-purpose, in the sense that their implements can be utilized in a variety

of jobs without much cost penalty. Vision and sensing will improve to make

three-dimensional perceptions commonplace.
The number of robots to be employed in the future is not certain by any
means, but large increases seem likely. The number of robots in manufacturing
quadrupled between 1979 and 1981.
3 Forces encouraging growth includeCOMPUTERS AND BUSINESS159
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Improvements in the technology itself, which increase the number of
applications possible with these machines;
  Diminishing costs for given robotic capability as a result of learning-
curve improvements:
 human labor; and

  Growing sophistication on the part of management, facilitating the
switch to robotics.
On the negative side, factors that limit the speed of diffusion of this
technology include
 size of the required investment,
  Institutional inertia that slows the adoption of automated technologies,
and current equipment.
Now the question is: Will progress in robotics and factory automation in
general create jobs or eliminate them? The answer is, of course, it will do both.

At constant levels of output it will eliminate jobs, because the robots will

perform jobs that human workers currently perform, and automation, properly

applied, will improve productivity through increasing output per man-hour.

Some people argue that as automation progresses more people will be required

to produce the machines and that as people are freed from dull, repetitive,

boring, and sometimes dangerous activities, unemployment will not diminish
but, in Parkinsonian response, the scope of work and perhaps its quality will
increase to occupy the new capacity for work. While this has generally been the

case in the past, robotics and the new wave of automation have some new

attributes. They promise to be very good, very cheap, and untiring. They can

yield manufacturing quality higher than that produced by their human

counterparts. Instructing these machines (programming) will be efficient and,

through AI, they will be adaptive; thus as creative as the initial programming

may be, the machines will progress and learn to do even better. The machines

will self-diagnose, learn of impending internal failures through "introspection,"

andŠwhen necessaryŠself-repair, to a small extent initially and to a major

extent later. More than that, when programmed to do so, they can self-replicate.
Just how many jobs will be displaced by continuing factory automation
and robotics? The situation is summarized in 
Table 2
. We have created a
scenario with several critical assumptions. The U.S. Department of Labor

expects the labor force to grow from its present level of 110 million to about

134 million by the year 2000.
4 We assume that real productivity grows at about
1.5 percent per year as a result
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS160
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 2 Employment Scenario: 1982Œ2000YearLaborForce(millionsofpeople)GrossNationalProduct(billionsof 1984dollars)Productivity(dollars ofGNP/employee,inthousands)RequiredEmployment(millions ofpeople)Number ofRobots(thousands)PersonEquivalentof EachRobotDisplacedEmployment(millions ofpeople)NetRequiredEmployment(millions ofpeople)SurplusLaborForce(millionsofpeople)PercentUnemployed19821103,05930.90*99520.019911.0110.0119833,14231.3610019843,22631.8310119851153,31432.311033020.0610212.5110.8819863,40332.8010419873,49533.2910519883,58933.7910619893,68634.2910719901223,78634.8110910030.3010813.5411.1019913,88835.3311019923,99335.8611119934,10136.4011319944,21136.9411419951274,32537.5011525041.0011412.669.9719964,44238.0611719974,56238.6311819984,68539.2111919994,81139.8012120001344,94140.4012250052.5012014.1810.58NOTE: Assumptions: GNP growth rate, 2.70 percent; productivity growth, 1.50 percent.* 1982 productivity figure calculated based on total employment of 99 million people.SOURCE: The Futures Group.COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS161
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of automation and that real Gross National Product (GNP) grows at 2.7
percent per year. Furthermore, the number of robots is assumed to grow from a

currently installed base of about 5,000 to 500,000 by the turn of the century. We

suppose, further, that the effectiveness of each robot also grows; today a robot

is equivalent to about two persons, and we have assumed that by the turn of the

century a robot can replace five workers. With these assumptions, as 
Table 2
shows, the contribution of robots is relatively minor. Only about 2 percent of
the labor force expected in the year 2000 will be displaced by robotics.
While the picture presented in 
Table 2
 is a homogeneous representation of
the labor force as a whole, certain industries will be more affected by robotics

than others. In general, these are industries in which mechanization of

production yields lower cost, higher quality, diminished production time,

improved efficiency, or improved worker safety. In these industries, the impact

of robotics on job displacement will be considerable. For example, the

production of passenger automobiles has involved a labor force of about
270,000 over the last seven years. On average, this labor force produced about
30 automobiles per employee, while production during this interval varied from

6.2 million to 9.2 million units per year. Now, assume that the number of

individuals available for passenger automobile production grows at the same

rate as the labor force as a whole. The employees required, however, are

affected by level of production of automobiles and by improvements in

productivity resulting from factory automation and the introduction of robots. If

we assume (1) that production grows at 3 percent a year (so that by the year

2000 more than 10 million units are manufactured in the United States), (2) that

productivity grows at 1.5 percent per year (as previously assumed), and (3) that

the number of robots used by the industry grows from 5,000 in 1985 to 25,000

in the year 2000, less than half of those who might ordinarily have been
assumed to be available for employment in this industry will be required. A
major public policy concern, of course, is that those displaced may be the least

able to find new employment. Whether this is a barrier to the spread of factory

automation depends on many factors, such as the job security provisions of

labor contracts in affected industries and the state of the economy. My guess,

however, is that robotics and programmable automation will spread rapidly as

the return on investment in such systems grows.
ConsequencesThere is likely to be a growing emphasis on the job security issue and
retraining in industries likely to experience displacement. Also,
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS162
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.there may be the return to the United States of some jobs previously located
outside the country to take advantage of low-cost automated production.

Product quality will improve and a new class of employmentŠsuch as the blue-

collar programmerŠwill emerge. Factory automation and robotics will

constitute a new technological frontier on which the battles for international

markets will be fought, since the products these technologies yield will be of
lower price, higher quality, and more predictable performance.
INTERSECTION: SELLING, TELECOMMUNICATIONS,
STRUCTURERetail Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT)
There is an unusual and, to some extent, unexpected confluence of
technological and consumer trends that may affect the retailing environment in

the immediate future. I believe that automated debit purchasing may come on

the scene faster than many people expect. Here are some of the factors that lead

to this position:
  Automatic teller machines (ATMs) have spread (47,000 units in place
in 1983) and have become much more widely accepted by consumers.
5  The principal use of ATMs has been to withdraw cash from personal
accounts.  Many retail establishments are considering or are installing ATMs on
their premisesŠsmall bank branchesŠin order to provide a means for

their customers to obtain cash in their stores.
  The communication networks required to support the ATMs and the
software necessary to properly debit accounts exist and are proven.
It takes only a small step of imagination to move the ATM 
into the cash
register so that at time of purchase consumers can simply insert the ATM card

into the proper slot, punch in their personal identification number, and be

charged for the purchase directly, just as if they had gone to the ATM and

withdrawn cash. In this view, there will be no such thing as a special debit card.

The bank-issued ATM card takes its place and the era of electronic fund

transfers at the retail level will have come on the scene smoothly, with

minimum fanfare, and with relatively high consumer acceptance. More than just

a convenience to shoppers, this is a crucial and catalytic step to a society that,
while not cashless, certainly functions with much less cash.
An important by-product of this development for business will be the
availability of really exquisite information about who buys what, where, and

whenŠthe basis for a potential revolution in marketing research. Where will

this trend surface first? Probably in supermarkets
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS163
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and gas stations. It then spreads in the retail environment wherever population
density and purchase traffic are high enough to warrant the investment. Then it

may spread to vending machines of this new era. These vending machines will

be operated by coins as well as by ATM cards. What better way could be found

to reduce store theft? The image for these vending machines will be upscale,

and I would guess that these machines will typically carry much higher-value
items than do machines of today. One feature of these machines that will make
them unique is their ability to be easily programmed to offer a wide variety of

merchandise (sweaters, socks, small electric appliances, stationery). In this way

the machines can be generic, and the price can be set for whatever merchandise

the retailer wants to sell.
ConsequencesThe rate of growth in the number of checks written and processed will be
greatly reduced, as will the amount of mail. There will be a major new role for

secure telecommunications networks, and today's credit cards will be

transformed into their debit-credit equivalent. Once the networks have linked

consumers with their accounts at points of sale, whole markets can go

electronic, allowing buyers and sellers to meet electronically, and bid and

auction until deals are made remotely. It seems to me that this kind of market,
based on network connections, could be very well suited to real estate, tax
shelters, and any other high-value transaction in which "feeling the

merchandise" is not essential.
INTERSECTION: MANAGEMENT, COMPUTER, SELF-
CONCEPTModeling in Management Decision Making
The goals of a business are, by and large, determined by what management
believes is feasible at acceptable levels of investment and risk. These

perceptions are, in turn, informed by data available to management about their

customers, about competing business, and about the environment in which they

operate. The sensory capacity of the business to determine what is happening

around it has improved and will continue to improve. Beyond this, the ability to

distill nuggets of pertinent information out of such data enhances not only
decision making capacity but the goals on which such decisions are based. The
secret here is not knowledge about customers, competitors, and the environment

Šreal knowledge about such matters is restricted to the
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS164
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.pastŠbut rather the quantification of uncertainty and risk. New analytic
techniques will facilitate the introduction of uncertainty into decision processes,

and from the beginnings that are already in place today, corporate actions will

be weighed not only on the basis of expected return but on levels of acceptable

risk.Here is an example. Suppose that a forecast of demand for an existing
product has just been made. Using probabilistic tools, the forecast recognizes

irresolvable uncertainties: the potential entry of competitors, the emergence of a

new technology that could overtake the product, the potential for a fad that

could spark unprecedented demand. Such factors produce two scenarios for the

future. Suppose further that the first scenario requires building a new plant and

the second does not. Has quantification of the level of uncertainty helped make
the decision about the plant? Of course. One could reason as follows. Case 1: I
believe the first scenario and build a plant, but the second scenario occurs. Case

2: I believe the second scenario and do not build the plant, but the first scenario

occurs. Clearly one situation is better than the other, and even in this simple

example of risk analysis, quantification of uncertainty helped resolve the issue.

For risk analysis to become very accurate and helpful, models must improve

and be trusted by managers, and data about environmental factors, competition,

and customers must be collected regularly. All of these developments are

happening and will accelerate.ConsequencesThe use of corporate intelligence gathering, not as espionage but as a
routine and accepted business function, will increase. Decision making will

become explicitly risk-conscious, and decisions will be evaluated not in terms

of return on investment (ROD but in terms of ROI probability distributions.

Intuition and the "gut call" will remain, of course, but in a probabilistic context

Šsome high-risk opportunities will be seen as worth taking, while some lower-
risk options will be judged not worth it. For better or for worse, probabilistic
methods will make decision making more explicit and management more self-

conscious and more accountable for its performance.
CONCLUSIONThis has inevitably been a very rapid tour of some of the more important
intersections in the functionŠtechnologyŠimpact space, but several more cells

deserve some mention.
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS165
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Computer-Aided Design and Computer-Aided Manufacture (CAD/
CAM). The design shop and the shop floor are being modified in
function and form to capture the advantages of efficiency, quality, and

accuracy afforded by the new technology. CAD/CAM went from a $1-

million industry in 1973 to $1.2 billion in 1983. It is expected to grow

by a factor of 10 between 1985 and 1995.
Electronic Mail.
 Imagine an electronic typewriter that is likely to be on
the market in 5 years or so. It has a matrix printer, memory for several

lines, built-in word processing, built-in spelling correction, and several

other easy-to-accomplish software features. This typewriter is sold not

as an office word processor or computer peripheral, but simply as a

consumer-oriented portable. Its price is less than $100, and it is a
standard gift to high school graduates about to leave for college. It is
not difficult to imagine the sale of several million of these devices,

perhaps several scores of millions, within the next 10 years. With a

modem chip these machines can be plugged into standard telephone

jacks. Electronic mail, for better or worse, will have arrived overnight.
Group Decision Making.
 Automated voting machines currently exist
(e.g., the CONSENSOR) that permit participants in a meeting to

provide judgments in response to questions posed by a monitor. In

some of these machines, an individual's input can be weighted on the

basis of expertise or knowledge. With improved expert systems and

artificial intelligence, group interactions can be computer-augmented.

Individual weights can be set by experience or testing, and the group
itself can be integrated with expert systems and judgments drawn
particularly against the profile of issues being addressed. Also, of

course, on-line data can be called up if necessary to provide

background for the group as a whole. These techniques tend to subdue

the normal psychological problems that accompany group interactions

and to promote smoother, more precise, and probably more accurate

decision making. The consequence will be that teams, even teams

composed of individuals located at remote places, become more

important, at the expense of the individual.
The way business does its work is being profoundly and permanently
changed. On the factory floor it is being changed by numerically controlled

machines, analog and digital sensing devices, automated testing gear, design

systems, material-handling systems, inventory control systems, and automated

stockrooms. In the office changes are being driven by electronic filing,

automated scheduling of meetings, direct access to information, word

processing, and, soon, idea processing. The computer affects almost every job
and every worker. The nature of the jobs, where they are done, the way they are
accomplished, the expectations of job supervision, and the skills required to

perform the tasks are all changing. Additionally, the
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS166
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information available for doing tasks and the precision and timeliness with
which they can be done are changing.
Granted business processes are changing, but is business itself changing?
After all, business takes raw materials, adds value, and sells products. At this

level, is anything likely to be different? Early critics of computersŠcomputers

using cards that warned against folding, mutilating, or spindlingŠwere

concerned about the way that computers would regiment and standardize us all,

force us into providing rigid inputs that computers could understand. Now it is

clear that computers provide the ability to manipulate and track information,
and a variety of individual needs can be easily accommodated. Computers do
not standardize; they promote diversity. We are coming closer to the time when

the user can design the product and when, in sensitive and high-quality work
environments, the worker can change his or her environment and utilize an

array of information that makes that person's contribution unique. Through the

computer, business gains diversity.
Business may also gain responsibilities. The prescription to take raw
materials, add value, and sell products may be too simple for a future age. For

all of its elegance, accomplishments, and promise, the computer can cause

human obsolescence, displacement of workers, and unemployment. The role

that business will have in accommodating these discontinuities is ideological as

well as economic, and it is far from clear how that role will evolve. Somewhere
in this chaotic, complex, and uncertain mix lies business of the future.
NOTES1. J. B. Angell, S.C. Terry, and P. W. Barth. 1983. Silicon micromechanical devices. 
Scientific
American, April:44Œ55.
2. Committee on Science, Engineering. and Public Policy; National Academy of Sciences;
National Academy of Engineering, and Institute of Medicine. Cognitive science and artificial
intelligence. In 
Research Briefings 1983
. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, p. 25.
3. S. A. Levitan, and C. M. Johnson. 1982. Future of work: does it belong to us or to the robots.
Monthly Labor Review,
 Vol. 105:10Œ14.
4. H. N. Fullerton. 1980. The 1995 labor force: a first look. 
Monthly Labor Review,
 Vol. 103,
No. 12:11Œ21.
5. R. M. Garsson. 1983. Fast growing ATMs are now as ubiquitous as Xerox machinesŠ
Georgia firm aims new computer at bank calling officers. 
American Banker,
 December 21,
1983:8ff.COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS167
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMMENTSRuth M. Davis
President
The Pymatuning Group

In spite of the scope of the papers presented here I still do not have the big
picture of how information technology is going to affect us. In fact, I believe

that I am fortunate in not understanding it; I may embody the discontinuity that
is going to allow technology and people to get along together. Like everyone
else, I need more time to adapt than advancing technology normally permits.

Admission of the need to gradually make the necessary moves to adapt and to

learn how to use this technology is going to be the key to its Success.
Ted Gordon has offered some superb insights into one of the arenas where
this technology is making the greatest change. It is interesting, though, that
behind this facade of change there are some very subtle inferences. For
example, as we have heard, it is very easy for managers to believe they are

making changes in a company without actually doing anything. They

manipulate the information, talk about it, tell people, simulate it, and generate

interaction; they do this without making a single change in the company. We

can all generate a tremendous number of information activities without any real

activity in the marketplace. The result can be a different version of ''much ado

about nothing''Šthat is, "much ado 
with nothing." I think we have to be terribly
careful that we do not jump from what we know how to doŠto work where we

can see results in real timeŠto manipulating results faster than real time in

terms of people's abilities to react.
One of the most interesting points that emerges from the combination of
Walter Baer's and Ted Gordon's papers is the blurring of the differentiation,
which I have always been uncomfortable with, between work and leisure. That

differentiation is rapidly disappearing. Many times I would rather sit at a

computer at home and play with a simulator than sit on the patio and smack

mosquitoes. There will be many instances when the kind of work that we did in

the past is going to be replaced by fun because of the manner in which the result

is attained. If we cannot differentiate between leisure and working, however, we

will really have to adjust to a tremendous change in the near future. From the

anticipated confusion will evolve the real world of tomorrow. I think the papers

in this volume give you all the background that you need to determine your role

in the mixed marketplace and the mixed business/ leisure world of the future.
Much has been said here about information technology and business; Ted
Gordon has helped focus this picture. I commend to you his concept that will
lead you through the spectrum of technology in business, from the board of

directors on one side of the marketplace to the consumer on the other side. You

can use it in your own business to see where lies the real power for
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS168
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.change. It has been difficult to bring technology to play in the boardroom and to
determine what companies should do to improve their market position and

products. It is also very difficult to simulate a marketplace and the effects of

policy decisions. I can tell when I have crashed my simulated airplane into a

simulated Sears Tower, but I cannot tell when I am making a bad prediction in

the boardroom.It is also important to consider young consumers, those individuals on the
other side of the marketplace from the boardroom. We really cannot predict

their behavior even though they are already consumers of information

technology. At three or four years of age they use their terminals and watch

video, cutting out commercials and listening only to what they want. As those

young consumers, who are now making the process of learning and buying
continuous, grow older, they are going to be utilizing information technology to
lead them to many decisions immediately, and they are going to grab hold of

the marketplace and swing it around like a child swinging a lion by the tail. For

a long time we have had a more homogeneous consumer group that the selling

side of the marketplace could manipulate: a group that ranged from the age of

15 to the age of 60. The information technology that you have heard about is the

technology of the individual, and it will result in dramatic changes in the

consumer marketplace that will, in turn, force changes in business.
COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS169
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTERS AND BUSINESS170
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.About the Authors
WALTER S. BAER is director of advanced technology at the Times
Mirror Company, Los Angeles, California. Prior to joining Times Mirror in
1981, he was director of the Energy Policy Program at the Rand Corporation in
Santa Monica, California. He has published widely in the fields of energy,

telecommunications, and science and technology policy. His book 
CableTelevision: A Handbook for Decision making
 received a 1975 Preceptor Award
from the Broadcast Industry Conference. Before joining Rand Dr. Baer served

on the staff of the Office of Science and Technology in the Executive Office of

the President and as a White House Fellow with Vice-President Hubert

Humphrey. Dr. Baer holds a B.S. degree from the California Institute of

Technology and a Ph.D. degree in physics from the University of Wisconsin.

He is currently a member of the faculty of the Rand Graduate Institute.
ANNE WELLS BRANSCOMB is a lawyer specializing in
communications law, a fellow of the Gannett Center for the Study of the Media
at Columbia University, and a recent chairman of the Communications Law
Division of the American Bar Association Science and Technology Section.

Mrs. Branscomb serves on the Steering Committee of the Annenberg Scholars

Program of the Annenberg School of Communications at USC and on the

Advisory Committee of the Communications Law Program of UCLA. She is a

contributing editor of 
The Information Society
 and the 
Journal of
Communication, and a trustee of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. She is
currently writing a book, 
Teletribes and Telecommunities,
 on the social and
political impact of communications technologies and is editor of 
Toward a Law
of Global 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS171
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Communications Networks
. She is a member of the Commission on Freedom
and Equality of Access to Information. Mrs. Branscomb is an honor graduate of

the George Washington University Law School and holds degrees in political

science from Harvard University and the University of North Carolina.
HARLAN CLEVELAND is dean of the University of Minnesota's Hubert
H. Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs, and professor of public affairs; he has

been at Minnesota since August 1980. A Princeton University graduate, he was

a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University in the late 1930s; an economic warfare

specialist in Washington, D.C., and United Nations Relief Administrator in Italy
and China in the 1940s; and a foreign aid manager, magazine editor and
publisher, and dean of the Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at

Syracuse University in the 1950s. Mr. Cleveland served as Assistant Secretary

of State for International Organization Affairs in the administration of President

John F. Kennedy, and as U.S. ambassador to NATO under President Lyndon B.

Johnson. From 1969 to 1974 he was the president of the University of Hawaii,

and from 1974 to 1980 he was director of the Program in International Affairs

of the Aspen Institute for Humanistic Studies. He is author or editor of 13

books. His latest book, from which his paper for this volume is derived, is 
TheKnowledge Executive: Leadership in an Information Society
 (New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1985).
THEODORE J. GORDON is president of The Futures Group, which he
founded in 1971. The Futures Group is a management consulting firm in the

fields of planning, futures research, policy analysis, and project implementation.

He has been associated with futures research and policy analysis for many
years, and has made substantive and methodological contributions to both
fields. He is one of the innovators or co-innovators of several methods of

forecasting, including cross-impact analysis, trend impact analysis, and

probabilistic system dynamics. Mr. Gordon helped establish the Institute for the

Future, where he served as vice-president and senior research fellow prior to

1971. Before joining the institute, Mr. Gordon directed engineering programs at

the McDonnell-Douglas Astronautics Company, serving variously over 16

years as chief engineer of the Saturn Program, test conductor for the THOR and

THOR-Launch Systems, and director of Advanced Space Systems and Launch

Vehicles. Mr. Gordon earned a B.S. in aerodynamics from Louisiana State

University and an M.S. in aerodynamics from the Georgia Institute of

Technology.ABOUT THE AUTHORS172
Information Technologies and Social TransformationCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MELVIN KRANZBERG is the Callaway Professor of the History of
Technology at Georgia Institute of Technology. He is the principal founder of

the Society for the History of Technology; edited its quarterly journal,

Technology and Culture,
 from 1959 to 1981; and became president of the
society in 1983. Dr. Kranzberg was one of the original members of the History

Advisory Committee of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration,
serving as its chairman from 1966 to 1969; in 1984 he was reappointed
chairman of that committee and made a member of the NASA Advisory

Council. In 1979Œ1980 Dr. Kranzberg was national president of Sigma Xi, the

Honorary Scientific Research Society. Professor Kranzberg received his A.B.

from Amherst College, and his M.A. and Ph.D. from Harvard University.
JOHN S. MAYO is executive vice-president, Network Systems at AT&T
Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, New Jersey. Since joining Bell Laboratories

in 1955, Dr. Mayo has been director of the Oceans Systems Laboratory,

executive director of the Ocean Systems Division, executive director of the Toll

Electronic Switching Division, and vice-president of Electronics Technology.

He assumed his present position in May 1979. Dr. Mayo received his B.S.,

M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from North Carolina State
University. He was elected to the National Academy of Engineering in 1979.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS173
