DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/17019The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: AFocus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a Symposium180 pages | 8.5 x 11 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-30157-2 | DOI 10.17226/17019Kathie Bailey Mathae and Paul F. Uhlir, Editors; Committee on the Case ofInternational Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries;Board on International Scientific Organizations; Board on Research Data andInformation; Policy and Global Affairs; National Research CouncilThe Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA: A FOCUS ON DEVELOPING COUNTRIES   PROCEEDINGS OF A SYMPOSIUM 
  Kathie Bailey Mathae and Paul F. Uhlir, 
Editors   
 
 
 Committee on the Case of International Sharing of 
Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries 
Board on International Scientific Organizations 
Board on Research Data and Information  
Policy and Global Affairs  
 
 In collaboration with the Committee on  
Freedom and Responsibility in
 the Conduct of Science  International Council for Science                                  
   
 
 
 
 THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS 
Washington, D.C. www.nap.edu   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS        500 Fifth Street, NW        Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE:     The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the 
National Research Council, whose members are draw
n from the councils of the National Academy of 
Sciences, the National Academy of 
Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.  The members of the 
committee responsible for the report were chosen fo
r their special competences and with regard for 
appropriate balance. 

 This study was supported by the National Science Foundation (Award No. OISE-0614728 and OGI-
1040898).
  Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recomme
ndations expressed in this publication are those 
of the authors  and do not necessarily reflect the views 
of the organizations or agencies that provided support 
for the project. 
 
International Standard Book Nu
mber  13: 978-0-309-30157-2 (Book) 
International Standard Book Number  10: 0-309-30157-2 (Book) 

 Additional copies of this report are available from the 
National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Room 
360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313
; http://www.nap.edu.  
Copyright 2012 by the National Academy 
of Sciences.  All rights reserved.  
Printed in the United States of America 

   
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
   
 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The National Academy of Sciences
 is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating so
ciety of distinguished scholars engaged in 
scientific and engineering research, dedica
ted to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general 
welfare.  Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by th
e Congress in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it t
o advise the federal government on scientific 
and technical matters.  Dr. 
Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the National Academy 
of 
Sciences. 
The National Academy of Engineering
 was established in 1964, under the charter of
 the National Academy of Sciences, as a 
parallel organization of outstandi
ng engineers.  It is autonomous in its administ
ration and in the selection of its members, sh
aring with the National Academy of Sciences
 the responsibility for advising the federal government.  The National Academy of 
Engineering also sponsors engineering prog
rams aimed at meeting national needs, 
encourages education and research, and 
recognizes the superior achievements of engineers.  Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the Na
tional Academy of Engineering. 
The Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the Na
tional Academy of Sciences to s
ecure the services of eminent 
members of appropriate professions in the examination of policy 
matters pertaining to the health
 of the public.  The Institute 
acts 
under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal
 government and, upon its own initiative, to identify issues of medica
l care, research, and education.  Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg i
s president of the Institute of Medicine. 
The National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of Scie
nces in 1916 to associate the broad community 
of science and technology with the Academy™s purposes of 
furthering knowledge and advising the federal government.  
Functioning in accordance with general polic
ies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating 
agency of both the National Academy of Sciences and the Na
tional Academy of Engineering in providing services to the 
government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communitie
s.  The Council is administered jointly by both Academies 
and the Institute of Medicine.  Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and vice chair, respectively, of the 
National Research Council. 
 www.national-academies.org 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.v  COMMITTEE ON THE CASE FOR IN
TERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA: 
A FOCUS ON DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 
  FAROUK EL-BAZ
 (Chair), 
Boston University BARBARA ANDREWS
, University of Chile 
ROBERTA BALSTAD
, Center for International Earth Sciences 
JOHN RUMBLE, JR.
, Information International Associates, Inc. 
WILLIAM WULF
, University of Virginia 
TILAHUN YILMA, University of California, Davis 
 
 
Staff  
KATHIE BAILEY MATHAE
, Study Director 
PAUL F. UHLIR
, Study Director 
LYNELLE VIDALE
, Program Associate 
CHERYL WILLIAMS LEVEY,
 Senior Program Assistant 
  
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vi   BOARD ON INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC ORGANIZATIONS 
 Cutberto Garza, MD (IOM), 
Chair, Boston College Marvin Geller, Stony Brook University 
Daniel Goroff, 
Alfred Sloan Foundation
 Priscilla Grew, 
University of Nebraska State Museum Melinda Kimble, United Nations Foundation
 Dennis Ojima, Colorado State University
 Kennedy Reed, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
 John Rumble, Jr., Information International Associates, Inc.
  Karen Strier (NAS), 
University of Wisconsin
 Tilahun Yilma (NAS), University of California, Davis  EX OFFICIO Roberta Balstad, Retired Michael Clegg (NAS), University of California, Irvine
 Dov Jaron, Drexel University
 J. Bruce Overmier, 
University of Minnesota     The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. vii   BOARD ON RESEARCH DATA AND INFORMATION 
 Francine Berman, Cochair, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute 
Clifford Lynch
, Cochair, Coalition for Networked Information 
Laura Bartolo, Kent State University Philip Bourne, University of California, San Diego Henry Brady, University of California, Berkeley Mark Brender
, GeoEye Foundation Bonnie Carroll, Information Intern
ational Associates 
Michael Carroll
, Washington College of La
w, American University 
Sayeed Choudhury
, Johns Hopkins University Keith Clarke
, University of California, Santa Barbara 
Paul David, Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research 
Kelvin Droegemeier
, University of Oklahoma 
Clifford Duke
, Ecological Society of America 
Barbara Entwisle
, University of North Carolina Stephen Friend, Sage Bionetworks Margaret Hedstrom
, University of Michigan 
Alexa McCray, Harvard Medical School 
Alan Title, Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center Ann Wolpert, Massachusetts Institute of Technology  EX OFFICIO Robert Chen, Columbia University 
Michael Clegg, University of California, Irvine Sara Graves, University of Alabama in Huntsville 
John Faundeen, Earth Resources Observation and Science Center 
Eric Kihn, National Geophysical Data Center (NOAA) Chris Lenhardt, Oak Ridge National Laboratory Kathleen Robinette
, Air Force Research Laboratory Alex de Sherbinin, Columbia University 
     The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix   PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
Scientific research and problem solving are increasingly dependent for successful outcomes on access to 
diverse sources of data generated by the public and academic research
 community. Global issues, such as disaster mitigation and response, international enviro
nmental management, epidemiology of infectious 
diseases, and various types of sustainable developm
ent concerns, require access to reliable data from 
many, if not all, countries. Digital networks now prov
ide a near-universal infrastructure for sharing much 
of this factual information on a timely, comprehens
ive, and low-cost basis. There also are many 
compelling examples of data sharing in different rese
arch and application areas that have yielded great 
benefits to the world community, although ma
ny more could be similarly facilitated. 
 
Many countries that are members of the Organi
sation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
(OECD) and some emerging economies already have
 implemented national policies and programs for 
public data management and access, while others are 
in the process of developing them. Nevertheless, 
many developing countries do 
not have formal mechanisms in place. The topic of ﬁdata sharingﬂ is broad 
and complex, and developi
ng countries have different infrastructure, human resource, and access needs 
that must be addressed. (For purposes of this re
port, ﬁdevelopingﬂ countries are defined as non-OECD 
countries, recognizing that there is a broad ra
nge of economic development among the non-OECD 
nations.)  

 
There are various specific barriers to the access and shar
ing of scientific data collected by governments or 
by researchers using public funding. Such obstacles 
include scientific and technical, institutional and management, economic and financial,
 legal and policy, and normative and sociocultural barriers, as well 
as limitations in digital infrastructure. Some of these 
barriers are possible to diminish or remove, whereas 
others seek to balance competing values that impo
se legitimate limitations on openness. Despite such 
challenges, however, there could be much greater value 
and benefits to research and society, particularly 
for economic and social development, from the broade
r use and sharing of existing factual data sources.  
 Many researchers in developing countries, in particul
ar, lack the norms and traditions of more open data 
sharing for collaborative research and for the development of common research resources for the benefit 
of the entire research community. Moreover, the govern
ments in many developing countries treat publicly 
generated or publicly funded resear
ch data either as secret or commercial commodities. Even if 
governments do not actively protect such data, many lack policies that provide guidance or identify 

responsibilities for the researchers they fund c
oncerning the conditions under which researchers 
should make their data available for others to use.
 Finally, developing countries frequently do not have 
data centers or digital repositories in place to which 
researchers can submit their data for use by others. In 
those cases where such repositories do exist, they tend
 to be managed as black archivesŠthat is, not open 
to most researchers or the general public. 

 Because of the importance of data access and sharing 
in the developing world, an ad hoc committee of the 
Board on International Scientific Organizations (BIS
O) and the Board on Research Data and Information 
(BRDI), in consultation with the Committee on Fr
eedom and Responsibility in
 the Conduct of Science 
(CFRS) of the International Council for Science (ICSU
), organized a 2-day international symposium in 
Washington, D.C., on April 18Œ19, 2011. The main objective of the symposium was to gain better 

understanding of the data access and sharing situation in
 the developing world, with a focus on barriers, 
opportunities, and future actions.  
 
Part One of the proceedings addresses the following 
questions: Why is the international sharing of 
publicly funded scientific data important, especially 
for development? What are some examples of past 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x                                                                      THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA
   successes, and what are the types of global research 
and applications problems that can be addressed with 
more complete access to government data co
llections and government-funded data sources? 
 Part Two provides an overview of the status of public data access internationally, particularly in 
developing countries. Part Three explores the principa
l barriers and limits to sharing public data across 
borders. Finally, Part Four discusses the rights and r
esponsibilities of scientists and research organizations 
in providing and getting access to publicly funded scie
ntific data. It also provides some insights on how 
international scientific organizations
, government agencies, and scientists can more successfully improve 
sharing of publicly funded data to address global cha
llenges, particularly in less economically developed 
countries.  
This proceedings contains edited versions of the sym
posium presentations. As such, they vary in length, 
formality, and style. Some are more scholarly than ot
hers. In addition, language usage varies, since many 
of the international presenters are nonnative English speakers. 
 The proceedings is intended primarily for governme
nt policy makers, researchers in the developing 
world, and managers in public and private instituti
ons that fund research and development activities in 
developing countries. We hope it will enrich their 
understanding of the importance of data access and 
reuse from publicly funded research,
 especially in the developing world, and that it will advance 
discussions about future actions.  
 This volume has been reviewed in draft form by i
ndividuals chosen for their technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the Nationa
l Research Council™s Report Review Committee. 
The purpose of this independent review is to provi
de candid and critical comments that will assist the 
institution in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for quality. The review co
mments and draft manuscript remain confidential to 
protect the integrity of the process.  

 
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of 
The Case for International Sharing of 
Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries Proceedings of a Symposium: 
 William Anderson, Praxis 101; Peter Arzberger, Univ
ersity of California, San Diego; R. Stephen 
Berry, University of Chicago; Anita Eisenstadt
, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association; 
and Kamran Naim, University of Tennessee. 

 Although the reviewers listed above 
have provided constructive comments 
and suggestions, they were not 
asked to endorse the content of the individual papers
. Responsibility for the final content of the papers 
rests with the individual authors. 
       Farouk El-Baz, Chair, Committee on the Case for          International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on  
     Developing Countries 
 
      Kathie Bailey Mathae, Director, Board on International  
         Scientific Organizations  

      
      Paul F. Uhlir, Director, Board on Research Data and   
         Information 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi  CONTENTS 
  1. Welcoming Remarks 
 Charles Vest, National Academy of Engineering
 United States   1 PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE
 3 2. Background and Purpose of the Symposium: Historical Perspective 
Farouk El-Baz, Boston University
 United States  4 3. Why Is International Scien
tific Data Sharing Important? 
Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman, UNESCO Science Laureate
 Pakistan  7 4. Discussion of Part One by Symposium Participants
 15 PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 17 
5. Overview of Scientific Data Policies  Roberta Balstad, Columbia University United States   18 
6. Implementing a Research Data Access Policy in South Africa 
Michael Kahn, University of Stellenbosch
 South Africa
  21 7. Access to Research Data and Scientif
ic Information Generated with Public 
    Funding in Chile Patricia Muñoz Palma, National Commission for Scientific and 
Technological Research Chile  24 8. The Management of Health and Biomed
ical Data in Tanzania: The Need for a 
    National Scientific Data Policy
 Leonard E. G. Mboera, National Institute for Medical Research. 
 Tanzania  27 
9. The Data-Sharing Policy of the World Meteorological Organization:
    The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data
 Jack Hayes, U.S. Permanent Represen
tative to the World Meteorological Organization United States   29 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA
   10. Discussion of Part Two by Symposium Participants
 32 
PART THREE: COMPELLING BENEFITS  
 37 
11. Developing the Rice Genome in China
Huanming Yang, BGI
  China  38 
12. Data Sharing in Astronomy
 ”eljko Ivezi, University of Washington
 United States   41 
13. Sharing Engineering Data for Failure Analysis in Airplane Crashes: Creation of    
      a Web-based Knowledge System 
 Daniel I. Cheney, Safety Program at the Federal Aviation Administration
 United States   46 14. Integrated Disaster Research: Issues Around Data
Jane E. Rovins, Integrated Research on Disaster Risk Program of ICSU
 China   49 15. Understanding Brazilian Biodiversity: Ex
amples Where More Data Sharing     
       Makes the Difference Vanderlei Canhos, Reference Center on Environmental Information (CRIA) Brazil  54 
16. Social Statistics as One of the Instruments of Strategic Management of 
      Sustainable Development Processes:  Compelling Examples
 Victoria A. Bakhtina, International Finance Corporation
 United States   58 
17. Remote Sensing and In Situ Measu
rements in the Global Earth Observation       System of Systems
 Curtis Woodcock, Boston University
 United States   65 18. Discussion of Part Three by Symposium Participants
 69 
PART FOUR: THE LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING 
  73 
19. Data Sharing: Limits and Barriers and Initiatives to Overcome Them Œ An 
      Introduction 
 Roger Pfister, Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences Switzerland   74 20. Consideration of Barriers to Data Sharing
Elaine Collier, National Institutes of Health
 United States  78 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS                                                                                                                       
                                            xiii 
 xiii 
  21. Artificial Barriers to Data Sharing Œ Technical Aspects
Donald R. Riley, University of Maryland
 United States   81  22. Scientific Management and Cultural Aspects
 David Carlson, University of Colorado
 United States    85 23. Political and Economic Barriers to 
Data Sharing: The African Perspective
Tilahun Yilma, University of California, Davis
 United States   89 
24. Discussion of Part Four by Symposium Participants
  93 
PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE
   97 
25. Government Science Policy Makers™ and Research Funders™ Challenges to 
      International Data Sharing: The Role of UNESCO
 Gretchen Kalonji, UNESCO
 France   98 
26. International Scientific Organizations: Views and Examples 
Bengt Gustafsson, CFRS/ICSU
 Sweden  102 27. Improving Data Access and Use for Sustainable Development in the South
Daniel Schaffer, Academy of Sciences for the Developing World
 Italy  107 28. How to Improve Data Access a
nd Use: An Industry Perspective
John Rumble, Information International Associates
 United States   112 29. Production and Access to Scientific Da
ta in Africa: A Framework for Improving 
       the Contribution of Research Institutions Hilary I. Inyang, African Continental University System Initiative
 University of North Carolina, Charlotte 
 United States  115 30. The ICSU World Data System
 Yasuhiro Murayama, National Institute
 of Information and Communication 
Technology   Japan  118 31. Libraries and Improving Data Access and Use in Developing Regions
Stephen Griffin, National Science Foundation 
 United States 120 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA
   32. Developing a Policy Framework to Open up the Rights to Access and Reuse 
      Research Data for the Next Generation of Researchers 
 Haswira Nor Mohamad Hashim, Qu
eensland University of Technology
 Australia        125 33. Discussion of Part Five by Symposium Participants
     143  
  APPENDIXES          147 
 A: Symposium Agenda         148 
B: Biographies of Symposium Chairs and Presenters     151 
C: CFRS Advisory Note         162
   LIST OF FIGURE AND TABLES 
            FIGURE 3-1  Distribution of Approved Project Cost      10 

FIGURE 3-2 Articles Downloaded        11 

TABLE 3-1  Ph.D. Output in Pakistan        13 
FIGURE 15-1  speciesLink Network Architecture      55 
FIGURE 15-2  Access to CRIA™s Online Systems in 2010     56 

FIGURE 16-1  HDI Index Adjustments Due to Inequality     59 

FIGURE 16-2  Six African Countries: Overall Satisfaction with Life    60 

FIGURE 16-3  Multidimensional Poverty Index of Six African Countries    61 

FIGURE 16-4  Six African Countries: Overall Satisfaction with Life    62 
TABLE 17-1  Image Acquisitions by Country       65 
FIGURE 17-1 Landsat Web-enabled Monthly Statistics      66 

TABLE 19-1  Daily Newspapers 
per 1,000 People      75 
TABLE 19-2  Television Receivers 
per 1,000 People      75 
TABLE 19-3  Radio Receivers pe
r 1,000 People       75 
TABLE 19-4  Internet Growth 2000-2010       76 
TABLE 21-1  2010 Internet World Statistics       81 

FIGURE 21-1 World Internet Penetration Rat
es by Geographic Region in 2010   82 
FIGURE 21-2 The International Reach of the Internet2 Network     83 

FIGURE 21-3  Sample Bandwidth for African Universities     84 
FIGURE 31-1  The World™s Capacity to Store Information               121
    
 
 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONTENTS                                                                                                                       
                                            xv 
 xv    
   FREQUENTLY USED ACRONYMS 
  BISO  Board on Internationa
l Scientific Organizations BRDI  Board on Research Data and Information 
CERN  European Organization for Nuclear Research 
CFRS  Committee for Freedom and Responsibility in the Conduct of Science 

CODATA Committee on Data for Science and Technology 

GEOSS  Global Earth Observation System of Systems 

HDI  Human Development Index 
ICSU  International Council for Science 
ICT  Information and Communication Technology 

ICTP  International Center for Theoretical Physics 

IPY  International Polar Year 

IRDR  Integrated Research on Disaster Risk 

NIMR  National Institute for Medical Research 
NOAA  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
NREN  National Research and Education Networks 

OECD  Organisation for Economic
 Co-operation and Development 
SDSS  Sloan Digital Sky Survey 

TWAS  The Academy of Sciences for the Developing World 
USGS  United States Geological Survey 
WMO  World Meteorological Organization 
    
    
   
 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1  1. Welcoming Remarks 
 Charles Vest  
National Academy of Engineering, United States 
 Welcome to this International Sympos
ium on the Case for International Sh
aring of Scientific Data, with a 
focus on developing countries. This symposium is 
one of over 200 activities organized each year by the 
U.S. National Academies. In the United States we 
have three academies: the National Academy of 
Sciences, the National Academy of E
ngineering, and the Institute of Medicine. These academies together 
operate the National Research Council (NRC). We ar
e chartered by the U.S. Congress to provide 
objective advice on matters of science, technology, medicine, and health. 

 
The theme of this international symposium is the prom
otion of greater sharing of scientific data for the 
benefit of research and broader development, particularly in the 
developing world. This is an 
extraordinarily important topic. Indeed, I have devoted
 much of my own career to matters related to the 
concept of openness. I had the opportunity to promote and help build 
the open courseware program at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). This pr
ogram has made the teaching materials for all 2,000 
subjects taught at MIT available on the Web for anyone, anywhere, to use anytime at no cost. In countries 

where basic broadband was not available, we shipped it
 in on hard drives and compact disks. Its impact 
has been worldwide, but it has sure
ly had the greatest impact on the developing world. I am also a trustee 
of a nonprofit organization named Ithaca that opera
tes Journal Storage (JSTOR) and other entities that 
make scholarly information available at very low cost. 

 
Even more to the point, however, is the fact that th
e culture of science has been international and open for 
centuries. Indeed, the scientific en
terprise can only work when all 
information is open and accessible, because science works through critical analysis and replication of results. 
 
In recent years, as some scientific data, and especia
lly technological data, have increased in economic 
value frequently has caused us to be far less open 
with information than business and free enterprise 
require us to be. Indeed, the worldwide shift to wh
at is known as open innovation is strengthening every 
day. 
 
Finally, since the end of World War II, the realities 
of modern military conflict and now terrorism have 
led governments to restrict information through classifi
cation. This is important, but I believe that we 
classify far too much information. The last thing we
 need today, at the beginning of the twenty-first 
century, is further arbitrary limitations on the free 
flow of scientific information, whether by policies 
established by governments and businesses, or by lack of information infrastructure.   
 
For all these reasons, the international sharing of scientific data is one of the topics of great interest here at the National Academies and has been the subject of
 many of our past reports. This is the primary 
reason why this symposium has been
 co-organized by two of our boa
rds, both within the NRC™s Policy 
and Global Affairs DivisionŠthe Board on Internationa
l Scientific Organizations (BISO) and the Board on Research Data and Information (BRDI). 

 
The purpose of BISO is to oversee and coordinate th
e work of more than 20 U.S. national committees 
corresponding to the International Council for Scien
ce (ICSU) and its different international scientific 
unions. It is the National Academies™ lead on relations
 with the international scientific, engineering, and 
medical organizations. The Board chair is Dr. Cutberto
 Garza of Boston College, who is a member of our 
Institute of Medicine. One of the former member
s of BISO and a National Academy of Engineering 
member is Professor Farouk El-Baz of Boston University
, the chair of this symposium. The director of 
BISO and the principal co-organizer of this symposium is Kathie Bailey Mathae.   
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 The mission of BRDI is to improve the stewardship, po
licy, and use of digital data and information for 
science and broader society. It undertakes studies, wo
rkshops, symposia such as this one, and many other 
activities in pursuit of that change. The current chair 
of the Board is Professor Michael Lesk of Rutgers University, also a member of the National Academy 
of Engineering, and the vice chair is Dr. Roberta 
Balstad of Columbia University, who is on the steer
ing committee of this symposium. Other members of 
the symposium steering committee include Professor Ba
rbara Andrews of the University of Chile in 
Santiago; Dr. John Rumble of Information Interna
tional Associates in Oak Ridge, Tennessee; Professor 
Tilahun Yilma of the University of California, Davi
s in Sacramento, California, and a member of the 
National Academy of Sciences; and Professor William Wulf
 of the University of Virginia and the former 
president of the National Academy of Engineering. Paul
 Uhlir, the director of the Board on Research Data 
and Information, is the other main co-organizer of this symposium. 

 
Both boards are cooperating on this project with 
the Committee on Freedom and Responsibility in the 
Conduct of Science (CFRS), organized under the Inte
rnational Council for Science (ICSU). ICSU was 
founded in Paris in 1932 as a nongovernmental organi
zation dedicated to strengthening international 
science for the benefit of society. The CFRS was founded in 1963 with a mandate to promote the ICSU 

principle of universality of science, which enco
mpasses the freedom of movement, association, 
expression, and communication for scientists, as well as equitable access to data, information, and 

research materials. Professor Bengt Gustafsson of the Un
iversity of Uppsala in Sweden is the chair of the 
CFRS, and Professor Roger Pfister of the Swiss Academ
ies of Arts and Sciences is the executive director. 
Both are here today and will be actively participating in the symposium. 

 
We all share the same world. We share its environment, its natural resources, and our common humanity. 

We must also share our knowledge. Addressing the gr
eat global challenges of sustainability, health, and 
prosperity are all well served by opening access to 
and sharing scientific and technological data and information. 
 
 
 
     
 
   
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3    
   
 PART ONE:   
SETTING THE STAGE  
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 2. Background and Purpose of the Symposium: Historical Perspective 
 Farouk El-Baz  Boston University, United States 
 To help people improve their lives, it is essential to
 contribute to the research processes and practices. 
Many examples exist demonstrating how the sharing 
of scientific data has improved people™s lives and 
living standards. For example, these include better health and food safety data, but such improvements are 
not yet widely available in the developing world.   
 American and European researchers, and very recently
 researchers in the Middle East, have undertaken 
initiatives to promote data sharing with the developing 
world, for example, the sharing of remotely sensed 
environmental data. Also, there are similar examples
 from the United Nations organizations, such as the 
World Health Organization (WHO) and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). These certainly 
have been very good developments, but they are insufficient.  
 
I will give some examples from my country of origin, 
Egypt. In 1990 the Egyptian minister of agriculture 
asked, ﬁWe have heard about satellite images that can measure the area of land used for a specific 
purpose. Is this true?ﬂ He continued: ﬁI have asked 
three agencies in Egypt a simple question: How much 
land in Egypt is under agriculture? When I received 
the results, however, these varied from 7.2 million 
acres to 5.5 million acres.  How am I going to plan if I do not know whether it is 5.5 million or 7.2 

million acres?ﬂ So, my team superimposed the satellite
 images of the same area in 1972 and in 1990, and 
showed the minister the amount of land that was used
 for agriculture on both dates. We also discovered 
something that was even more important: how much of
 that land has been transferred into urban areas in 
the 18 years since 1972 (i.e., the encroachment of ur
ban areas over agriculture), which is even more 
dangerous. The Ministry of Agriculture began using 
that data. They trained their own people, and my 
team worked with them on proper procedures.  

 
Then in 2009, this group of Egyptian researchers w
ho knew how to use the data raised a warning to the 
Egyptian government. They said that in the past 20 year
s, the average loss of fertile land to urban growth 
in Egypt equaled 30,000 acres per year, which is obviously
 a very large number. If this were to continue 
unabated, then the agricultural land in Egypt would disappear in 183 years. The government then took 

very dedicated steps to change this situation. The 
researchers were able to raise the warning because of 
data and knowledge sharing. The images they used 
in this analysis were from the series of Landsat 
satellites that were started by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) in 1972, 

and those satellites continue to produce images with even better resolutions to this day.  
 There is another critical point here, however: the da
ta were shared freely and the Egyptian researchers 
were able to continue this work 
by themselves. This benefit was due
 to the fact that the scientific community worked with NASA (and more recently, 
the U.S. Geological Survey) for years. In 2008, 
NASA agreed that this satellite image data would be
 freely available, and from the time the use of the 
Landsat data has increased a hundred-fold.
1    
The barriers to sharing of data are many and, in my
 experience, can be stronger in developing countries. 
One barrier is a national attitude of protectionism. 
Many researchers in less-developed countries will say, 
ﬁWe have worked on this data. This is information 
about us. Why would we make it available to people 
everywhere?ﬂ A second barrier is the cost. Those sa
me researchers would say, ﬁWe spent a lot of money 
on research and development on this system. After spe
nding all of this money,
 why should we share it 
with others?ﬂ A third barrier is national security. 
There are many types of data behind a secure door, 
                     1 For a presentation about the Landsat data 
use, see Chapter 17 by
 Curtis Woodcock. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE                                                                                                    
                           5 
 5  because the data appear to be related to national security. Yes, there are certain things that should be 
classified, but these should be limited and should include
 only the data that really relate to national 
security rather than just based on the indiscriminate 
perception of their importance to national security. 
 When data have been developed well, and then made available, this can make a huge difference in the 
lives of people or the economy of a developing country. For example, radar images from space were 

developed by NASA™s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and 
the radar imager flew on the space shuttle for the first time in November 1981. My team applied the 
new technology to locating ancient water resources in 
Egypt. The images that were brought back confirme
d that radar waves could penetrate through desert sand, because it is fine grained and dry. Because of
 that, these images gave us a view of the land surface 
beneath the sand. That was the first time we could actually
 prove that there were channels of former rivers 
that are now dry and covered by sand. The radar gave 
us a map of all of those channels. When my team 
drew the maps of the channels, we knew that wate
r was moving from one elevation to a lower one. We 
assumed that we would find groundwater sites, because
 water collected there in the past. Some of that 
water would evaporate and some of it would seep through
 the rock and be locked up as groundwater. That 
was our speculation, and it made sense 
to us, geologically and topographically.   
 
Based on these findings, my research team picked a place in
 the southern part of Egypt and began to talk 
to the people there, including the Ministry of Agricultur
e. It took me 13 years to convince the minister to 
test drill. He finally approved two wells, and ther
e was a great deal of clean water from around 20,000 
years ago, where ancient rivers flowed over a sandst
one substrate. Sandstone does not have much salt; the water is cleaner and sweeter than that of the Nile Ri
ver. It comes out of the ground cool and clean, as if it 
has been refrigerated. As a result of that discovery, 
there are now 200,000 acres of land that are viable for 
agriculture. In that location they have now drilled ov
er 1,000 wells, and are producing much of the wheat 
that is used for bread making in southern Egypt.   
 This is an example of something that happened when
 a group of scientists shared and studied data, and it has made a huge difference in the economy and knowle
dge base of Egypt. I also published an article on a 
proposed development corridor that is parallel to th
e Nile River. The data, including topographic maps, 
geological data, and space images became readily availa
ble on the Internet, which made it easy for others 
to utilize them. Egyptian geologists and geographers 
began to pick pieces of my proposal to use as 
research topics.  

 
Similarly, data from NASA™s Shuttle Radar Topograp
hy Mission (SRTM) provide very good feedback 
about the topography of an area. Using topographic da
ta, researchers can see all kinds of places, including 
former rivers, channels, and more 
of the potential lakes where water collected in the past. My team did 
that for the area of Darfur in Sudan. We shared the data with the Ministry of Water of Sudan and the 
people in Darfur. This information is truly important
, because the disaster in Darfur started with conflict 
over scarce water resources. This new information gave 
hope to the people of Darfur that they could have 
more water. Some of the places where there were no we
lls now have the potential of plentiful water.    In another example, the U.S. government, through 
the National Academies and the Civilian Research and 
Development Foundation (CRDF Global), made many
 scientific journals freely available to all 
universities in Iraq, and in 2009 the Iraqi government 
took over the funding responsibility. Computers and 
other infrastructure have been provided, so that the journals can be easily accessed. After the project 
began, the publication rate of Iraqi scientists increased significantly, based simply upon the fact that the 
researchers were able to read the literature and see the 
data that were available to them. As a result, they 
were able to figure out what they could contribute.
 The increase in the publication rate was immediately 
visible and recognizable. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 In my view, therefore, scientists ought to continue to
 campaign and lobby governments to make more data 
freely and easily available, and only classify documents
 that raise legitimate national security concerns. 
As the three examples that I have described illustrate
, the sharing of scientific data can produce a great 
deal of good, particularly in the developing world.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE                                                                                                    
                           7 
 7   3. Why Is International Scientific Data Sharing Important? 
 Atta-ur-Rahman 
UNESCO Science Laureate, Pakistan
2  It is a great privilege and an honor for me to be ta
lking to you today. I will be speaking about the world in 
which we live: the digital age, an age where truth is 
often stranger than fiction. I will also talk about the 
knowledge explosion and the new cha
llenges and opportunities that this 
is offering. I will try to address 
how countries in the developing world need to 
transition from largely low-value-added agricultural 
economies to knowledge economies. A key factor is ho
w they work together, how they share data, and 
how they collaborate on a regime of openness that crosses geographical boundaries. Then I will focus on 

Pakistan and what we have been able to accomplish in these areas. 

 We live at a time in which distances have become much less meaningful. The opportunities of networking 
have created huge new vistas for cooperation. Info
rmation and communication technologies (ICTs) have 
been driving growth, whether it is commerce, te
lemedicine, governance, or geographic information 
system (GIS) mapping. I am a professor of organi
c chemistry, and I have 12 superconducting nuclear 
magnetic resonance spectrometers in my center, fro
m where I am speaking now. These can be controlled 
remotely. Sometimes, when we need to fine-tune th
em, we no longer we need to come here; we can 
operate them from a distance. 

 
The blind are today able to see with their tongues. Ho
w do they do that?  They have a little device on their 
glasses, and this takes the optical signals, which are then converted into electrical signals by a device in 
their pocket. These electrical signals are then transm
itted to a lollipop-like device in the tongue, and this 
then sends the signals to the brain. They can disti
nguish between a knife and a fork, and distinguish lift 
buttons. We now have paralyzed people able to move wh
eelchairs with thought control. They wear a skull 
cap, and then encephalographic signals and blood pressu
re changes are sensed. They think about, for 
example, moving their wheelchair to another location,
 and it does that. Stem cells are transforming the 
way medicine is going to be practiced in the future
. I could go on and on.  All this is connected to 
research, and research is connected to da
ta and the free availability of data.  
 
In the world that we live in now, the key require
ments for socioeconomic development are as follows: 
 Human capital, with the necessary knowledge and skills. 
 Technology. 
 A society where innovation and entrepreneurship can flourish. 
 Mechanisms for all this to be put into pl
ace, through data sharing, knowledge generation, 
and application. 
 ICTs are reducing the gap between the richer and poo
rer countries. The ICTs are offering opportunities to 
developing countries that did not exist before.   

 
What are the challenges? Many of the advanced c
ountries have diminishing numbers of young people 
who are opting for careers in science or in education.
 In the developing countries, however, we have a 
different set of issues, starting with the serious l
ack of vision among the leadershipŠthey do not realize 
the importance of knowledge in the process of socioeconomic development. 
 
In a world where innovation drives progress, it has become 
easier to catch up, given the political will. We 
have the case of China, for instance. Never before 
in the history of humankind have so many people™s 
                     2 Presentation given by videoconference. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 lives been transformed so quicklyŠa billion-plusŠas h
as happened in China. This is an example at the 
country level. At an institutional level, the Massac
husetts Institute of Technology (MIT) highlights what 
one high-quality institution can accomplish. From
 MIT alone, some 4,000 companies have sprung up, 
with annual sales of $240 billion and employment of more than 1 million people. All these companies 
would constitute the 18th largest economy in the world
3.   
 
What are the constraints, from the point of view of a developing country, on using and sharing 

knowledge, and progressing toward know
ledge economies? As I said before, it is mainly the lack of 
vision, strategy, and an action plan on how to tran
sition to knowledge economies.  The efforts of most 
developing countries are diffused, as the countries attemp
t to do too little in too many areas. The result is 
that the impact is not there. Also, they are unable to 
use the data that may be av
ailable because they lack: 
 A critical mass of quality researchers.  
 A robust ICT infrastructure.  Adequate funding for research and libraries.  
 Compelling incentives for academics to publish.  
 We also find that there is a new wave, which is 
fairly big and growing, of open-access journals. 
Governments, institutions, or authors can either subs
idize the journals or pay in advance and get their 
articles published and be viewed by millions, instead 
of a few thousand or even just a few hundred who 
may subscribe to those journals. Similarly, th
ere are open-access booksŠcomplete books or chapters.  
Even lectures are becoming open access, as with MIT, as 
described by Dr. Vest in Chapter 1. Of course, 
we have the issue of quality, as in all publications. It is important that we pub
lish only in those journals 
that are properly peer reviewed, so that quality is not compromised. 
 Take again the example of the MIT open-course initia
tive. I think this is an excellent initiative from 
which the Pakistanis have benefited considerably. We created the MIT mirror Web site within Pakistan, 
and all of MIT™s open-access materials became quickly 
downloadable to all students in the country. I 
wish that other universities would follow suit and make 
some of their materials available. Apple iTunes U 
is another excellent initiative, where we can go to the Web sites of many universities in Europe or the 
United States and listen to some excellent lectures. 
There are many other similar initiatives, and all of 
these are then providing new opportunities.  

 
We live in a world where the only constant is change
. The challenge is change 
management. Do we guide 
this change, or do we get buried under it? 
 Let me now talk about Pakistan. I was appointed as th
e minister for science and technology and, later, the 
federal minister responsible for higher education. 
For about 9 years, from 2000 to 2008, I was involved in 
trying to boost science and technology and higher education in Pakistan. 
 I managed to convince the government that if they ar
e serious about progress and about transitioning to a 
knowledge economy, then they have to invest. We pers
uaded the government to give us a 6,000 percent 
increase in the budget for science and technology and 
a 2,400 percent increase in the budget of higher 
education. I know it sounds too good to be true, 
but it is. This allowed us to undertake a variety of 
different reforms, in which access to data and its use w
as critically important in all that we did. The first 
step was to prepare a national strategy and action pl
an. Where are we going?  In 20 years, will we be 
building ships, specializing in computer chips, or 
a world-class manufacturer of pharmaceuticals? What is 
the roadmap for developmentŠa national vision, strategy, and action plan? 

 
The cabinet asked me to prepare a comprehensive pl
an to transition to a knowledge economy. Then we 
                     3 Available at http://web.mit.edu/
newsoffice/founders/Founders2.pdf 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE                                                                                                    
                           9 
 9  looked at different sectors and specific programs and proj
ects that would be conducted in all these sectors, 
and came forward with a very clear strategy. I had 
12 colleagues with Ph.D.s in economics to help me 
establish priorities. We scientists often think that our ow
n subject is the most important in the world; for a 
reality check, we got external inputs. As a resu
lt, we set up a number of committees. There were 
interactions with thousands of scientists and engin
eers and economists within the country and across the 
worldŠour own diaspora, other specialists, government 
planners, people in different ministries, people in 
the provincial and federal government
s, and people involved in different organizations. After doing a 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats analysis
 and identifying the specific strategy, we came 
forward with a very clear and crisp action plan. 
 One of the instructions that I had given was that I do 
not want a long wish list, because the last thing that 
we want is to have long lists of th
ings that cannot be done. I said, just
 prioritize and give me half a dozen 
or, at the most, a dozen top priorities in each sect
or that will have maximum impact on the process of 
socioeconomic development. This involved identifi
cation of the technology gap, the policy gap, the 
innovation gap, and then a strategy for how to fill t
hose gaps. These were the key questions we tried to 
answer: 
 What specifically is to be done in each area? 
 Who are going to be the players? 
 In what time frame? 
 What are the human resource requirements? 
 What are the costs? 
 What is the international rate of return and the impact on the national economy? 
 
The 300-page plan was approved by the cabinet a few years later. This then linked up everything to a 

national strategic action plan.  The second constraint for using data 
and for benefiting from it is the lack of a critical mass of high-quality 
researchers, the people who are going to be using this
 data and employing it for publications or for a 
variety of different purposes. For this, we had to 
invest massively in the process of human resource 
development, so that we would develop the national abilities in different fields.  
 In Pakistan, we have a population of about 160 m
illion, of which 85 million are below the age of 19 
years. Here is a country where 54 percent of the p
opulation is a young population. This presents both a 
challenge and an opportunity. How do we educate 
these large numbers of young people? How do we 
provide schools, colleges, and universities, as well as jobs
, after they graduate? It is a huge challenge.  It 
is an opportunity also, because if you tap into this pool, then something wonderful can happen.  
 But how do we utilize this pool of people? First, we
 have to excite young minds about the wonders of 
science.  In fact, I write articles every Sunday in 
our leading national newspa
per, titled, ﬁThe Wondrous World of Science.ﬂ I have done that for the last 2 year
s, where I am basically saying, ﬁHey, science is fun.  
It is not about a 9-to-5 job. You are going to be paid 
to have a love affair with science, if I may put it that 
way. You are really going to enjoy life, because it is 
exciting. There are so many exciting things that are 
happening around it. Just feel the buzz and be a part 
of this buzz.ﬂ We have to excite young minds about 
the wonders of science. 
 
We then have to select the brightest. In this pool of
 85 million, surely there are hundreds of thousands of 
geniuses. Can we pick them out and polish them and then
 train them at top institutions abroad and let the 
light of knowledge then pour from them? For that to 
happen, we have to attract them back from abroad, 
not by legal bonds, but by creating an enabling en
vironment, which involves 
good salaries; access to research funding, literature, and instrumentation; a
nd the creation of clusters. Just having a certain 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 number of colleagues with whom they can talk 
and discuss their problems is important. If you are 
working in biotechnology or in information technology 
or in some other area, it is important to have a 
clustering of good people. 
 Perhaps the most dramatic step we took was to pers
uade the government to completely change the salary 
structures and make the salaries of professors in universities five times the salaries of federal ministers in 

the government. We introduced a new tenure-track sy
stem; however, we linked this to performance. 
There is no point in paying weak people high salaries. Th
at would be just a waste of money. We told them 
that they will be on contract for 3 years, and then 
they will be renewed for another 3 years, after initial 
assessment by peers. They have to be evaluated again 
after 6 years, by an inte
rnational panel of experts before their position is made permanent. The tax stru
cture was also reduced from 35 percent to 5 percent.  
 
We then started identifying the brightest through 
a national examination, and sending many of those 
abroad. Nearly 11,000 fellowships we
re awarded during that time. The world™s largest Fulbright Scholar 
Program was initiated, half funded by our government 
and half by the U.S. Agency for International 
Development. Each returning scholar was offered a gr
ant of up to $100,000. When they return, however, 
they often come back to barren environments. It is 
critically important that we give them a red-carpet 
welcome and provide them with the opportunities to 
start productive work as fast as possible. They could 
apply for a research grant, but one condition was that there should be a foreign collaborating academic as 
a Co-Principal Investigator. In fact, they can apply fo
r a research grant a year before they are to return. 
This has also led to many linkages with their own uni
versities. They were guaranteed jobs in advance: A 
year before they returned, they had jobs to come back
 to. It was all very well thought out. It was a billion 
dollar program of foreign scholarships in various fiel
ds of science and engineering, social sciences, et 
cetera. 
 Figure 3-1 shows how the money was spent: The largest
 part of the distribution was for human resource 
development, and the rest was for infrastruct
ure, research, and access to instrumentation. 
   FIGURE 3-1 Distribution of approved project cost. 
SOURCE:
 From the speaker™s presentation at the symposium
.  First, we invested in the development of human re
sources, but then we needed
 to build the knowledge highways. We need to have the infrastructure on whic
h data can be shared and data can travel. These are in many ways far more important than the motor high
ways we are used to. I was also the minister for 
information technology and telecommunications. We di
d a number of things to widen these highways and 
to make them efficient. For instance, we placed 
a satellite in space, Pakistan™s educational satellite, 
PAKSAT-1, which has footprints over parts of Africa
 and Asia, and the Middle East. We also established 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE                                                                                                    
                           11 
 11  a virtual university with its own recording studios
 and used our satellite for communication purposes. 
Moreover, we rapidly spread the Internet. In 2000, 
only 29 cities in Pakistan had access to the Internet. 
This increased to 2,000 towns, cities, and villages that had Internet facilities in 2003. Fiber optic was rapidly expanded from 40 cities to 1,000 cities betw
een 2000 and 2005. Internet usage exploded and 
continues to do so. The costs of bandwidth were br
ought down from $87.00 U.S. dollars per month for a 2 
Mb line to only $900 per month, and they are among the cheapest in the world today. 

 
Mobile telephony has also expanded. From 300,000 
mobile phones, the number suddenly exploded to 110 
million-plus mobile phones, as a result of some of the 
steps that we took. This became the foundation for 
the establishment of the Pakistan Education and Research Network, which connected all universities 
together with high-speed Internet access. That has b
een further expanded with a 1-gigabit connectivity to 
every university, which is then connected 
to 10-gigabit loops around major cities. 
 
A very robust system of knowledge highways developed.
 The next constraint was the question of content 
and useful, meaningful data that researchers can u
se. In response, we established the digital library.
4 If you walked into a library 10 years ago in Pakistan
, you would have found perhaps half a dozen of the 
latest international journals. Today, as shown in Figure
 3-2, every university in the public sector and most 
universities in the private sector have free access to 
25,000 journals and to so
me 60,000 textbooks from 
more than 220 international publishers. These are 
keyword searchable and downloadable. When I say 
free, I mean that the government, and specifically, the higher education ministry, pays for this vast 
repository of knowledge. They are also available to st
udents, not just from the universities, but also from 
their homes, so that if they are working until late
 in the evening, they 
can access these databases. 
  FIGURE 3-2 Articles downloaded 
SOURCE:
: From the speaker™s presentation at the symposium. 
Credit: Higher Education Commission for Pakistan™s National Digital Library Program 
 There are 75,000 e-contents, whether it is Springer or 
McGraw-Hill or the ISI Web of Science. We also 
introduced a search engine, SciFinder Scholar. We work
ed with the University of Lund in Sweden to 
develop a one-window search engine so that users do not 
have to go to different Web sites; they can just 
search all these journals or books through one window
. That has worked very well for the last 6 or 7 
years. The usage statistics grew very qu
ickly, and they continue to increase.  
 
One excellent teleconferencing facility that we bu
ilt is the one that I am speaking from now.  Such 
facilities are available in every public-sector university. 
Here in Karachi University, we have five such 
                     4 Available at 
www.digitallibrary.edu.pk.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 facilities.  We started a series of lectures and cour
ses, which are developed by top professors from across 
the world and are benefiting other developing count
ries as well, such as Sri Lanka, Thailand, and other 
countries. They are delivered through these videoconf
erencing facilities. The professors then supervise 
the exams, which are held by the local partner in 
the department. They also supervise the marking of 
papers. Then the universities recognize these as part of their programs™ credit requirements. This is 

allowing us to link up both with the best of the best in
 the West and with our own top people in Pakistan, 
and share faculty and resources with one another. 

 
Pakistan™s telemedicine program was also based on an
 initiative that I had started in 2001, when we sent selected doctors to the United Stat
es. When a massive earthquake occurred in the north of the country, the 
telemedicine program proved invaluable, because we coul
d deploy remote services to the affected regions 
in a timely fashion. More than 4,000 teleconsultations
 have been held and  this continues to grow. These 
repositories of knowledge (i.e., the databases and the lite
rature) are all freely available in Pakistan.  
 One problem that we had to address was controlling th
e improper use of data.  With access to data and 
publications growing, the menace of plagiarism has 
to be controlled. We set up a national plagiarism 
policy and distributed the required software. This is 
available in all universities and research institutions, 
and all theses and research papers are carefully 
checked before the universities process them.  
 What has been the impact of all this provision of da
ta, this development of human resources that share the 
data, and this access to knowledge
? Between 2003 and 2009, we had a tripling of students enrolled in 
higher education. This continues to grow, but is s
till very low. Only about 5.2 percent of our youth 
between the ages of 17 and 23 have access to higher educa
tion. It should be about 15 or 20 percent. In 
South Korea it is almost 90 percent. The enrollment h
as to grow in Pakistan, but there are challenges. The 
number was well below 2 percent when I took over. 
The number of public-sector universities also grew 
from 59 in 2000 to 127 universities in 2009. There are 
132 today, in both the public and private sectors. 
 
One of the most remarkable things is that there w
as a 600 percent increase in ISI-abstracted publications 
in the 5-year period between 2004 and 2009. There was 
more than a 1,000 percent increase in citationsŠ
after removing self-citationsŠin The T
homson Reuters Science Citation Index5. There also was fast 
growth of papers published.  
 
As shown in Table 3-1, the Ph.D. output also grew
 phenomenally, although it still is very low for a 
country the size of Pakistan. In the 55 years between 1947 and 2002, Pakistan produced about 3,200 

Ph.D. degrees, and in the subsequent 7 years, about
 as many Ph.D. degrees were produced, a little more 
than 3,000. 
  
 
 
   
 
                      5 Available at http://thomsonreuters.com/products_servi
ces/science/science_products/
a-z/science_citation_index/. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE                                                                                                    
                           13 
 13    
 TABLE 3-1
 Ph.D. Output in Pakistan 
Discipline 
1947 Œ 2002 
[55 years] 
2003 Œ 2009 
[7 years] 
  Number Number 
Agriculture & Veterinary Sciences 363  450  
Biological & Medical Sciences  589  601  
Engineering & Technology  14  131  
Business Education  11  58  
Physical Sciences  688  677  
   
Social Sciences  899  739  
Arts & Humanities  663  377  
Honorary  54  4  
Total 3,281
  3,037
   SOURCE: 
From the speaker™s presentation at the symposium.Credit: Higher Education 
Commission for Pakistan™s National Digital Library 
 
However, numbers without quality can do more damage 
than good. We introduced a system in which all 
doctoral theses had to be reviewed by at least two or 
three experts in technologically advanced countries, 
and only when there was unanimity of opinion that the work was of high quality could the thesis be 

processed further. We now have several universities in 
Pakistan that are among the top 300 in the world, 
including the National University of Science and Technology. 

 Nature, one of the world™s leading science journals, has published a number of editorials on what 
Pakistan did. The first of these was on November 
27, 2007, which was titled ﬁThe
 Paradox of Pakistan.ﬂ 
In this strange country, which is torn by terrorism an
d bombings and all sorts of difficulties, there also is a 
wonderful program in higher education, science, and 
technology. On August 28, 2008, when President 
Musharraf had left, the editorial was entitled ﬁAfter Mu
sharraf.ﬂ  It said that we must not go back to the 
same Stone Age that existed previously. Something 
exciting has happened in Pakistan, and it must be continued. 
 
The last Nature article was on September 22, 2010, which talk
ed about what we had done.  I was humbled 
and somewhat amused when it called me ﬁa force of na
ture.ﬂ I also won the highest civil award from the 
government of Austria for these changes and the TWAS
 Prize, which was given to me for institution 
building. The Royal Society of London, of which I am a fellow, has come forward with a book on what is 
happening in the Islamic world. It is entitled 
A New Golden Age. It talks about Pakistan and says that it is 
the best practice model to be followed by other developing countries. 

 
The future of our country lies in our
 youth. It is only through the unleash
ing of their creative potential that 
we can hope to move forward. We picked 12 students
 who appeared to have high aptitudes in local high 
school examinations, and sent them to international 
Olympiads in mathematics, physics, chemistry, and 
biology. One of them came back with a silver me
dal and two came back with bronze medals. This was 
only after a couple of months of preparation. There is
 a huge potential that we have in countries such as 
Pakistan, but it will only be possible to tap into it if we
 realize that our real wealth lies in our children. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 When I came to Pakistan after 9 years at Cambridge
 University, I dreamed that I would try to set up a 
center in Pakistan that would be so good that students from the West would come to study here. In my 
center here in Karachi, we have 350 students doi
ng Ph.D.s in organic chemistry, biochemistry, 
pharmacology, and other related areas. In the last 5 
years, we have had 120 
German students who have come to study chemistry and science. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART ONE: SETTING THE STAGE                                                                                                    
                           15 
 15    4. DISCUSSION BY THE SYMPOSIUM PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT: What kind of planning is Pakistan doing for the next decade? 

 
DR. ATTA-UR-RAHMAN: In my speech, I mentioned th
at I was asked by the government to prepare a 
national roadmap. We prepared a 15-year roadmap for 
Pakistan. The plan was divided into three 5-year 
periods, for planning purposes, so that we can genera
te employment, transition to a higher value-added 
economy, and use our most important resource, our yout
h, for future development. We have had some 
serious problems in the last two and a half years,
 with the new government facing many financial 
constraints and freezing some of these programs, but 
the new education policy, which was approved by 
the present government, promises a fourfold increase 
in the budget for higher education and science-
related disciplines. If that materializes, I hope that things will start changing again rapidly. 
 PARTICIPANT: One of the things that seismologist
s hear from their colleagues in Africa and South 
America is that the mineral exploration industry ofte
n hires their best students, who then do not go into 
academia. That is quite surprising to us in the Unite
d States, because here it is regarded as a good synergy 
that industry and academia work together, and it cont
ributes to the strength of academic programs. I am 
wondering what is your view about this sort of 
back-and-forth of students going into industry?  
 
DR. ATTA-UR-RAHMAN: The problem in Pakistan and 
many other developing countries is that we do 
not have strong private-sector research and developm
ent partnerships. Most of our institutions do not 
have research facilities. What worries us is not students being taken away by local industry. I totally agree 

that we need to have synergy and interaction, bu
t they are being taken abroad, and we are losing a 
valuable treasure that we have. For that, we have to
 create the enabling structure that I talked aboutŠthe 
research facilities, the salaries, and so on. They do not
 have to work in any government institution, as long 
as they come back and work in Pakistan. It could be
 in the private sector. So our problem is a different 
one. For innovation to flourish in a country like Paki
stan and other developing countries, you need to 
have a number of things in place. This includes 
ease of doing business, access to venture capital, 
intellectual property right regimes, presence of technolo
gy parks, legal infrastructure, and the provision of 
greater incentives for private-sector research and de
velopment so that innovation can take off. All these 
measures have to come together before the developmen
t, innovation, and entrepreneurship can take place. 
That is still largely missing in Pakistan and in most other developing countries. 

 
PARTICIPANT:  I would like to address one of the po
ints you made regarding the volume of publications 
emerging from the developing world as a share of the world total. You mentioned that it had risen from, I 
think, 21 percent to 32 percent. This assumes that the 
actual database of publicati
ons that is being counted 
is a constant, and it is not.  Since 2005, the Thoms
on Reuters Web of Knowledge has quite dramatically 
changed the volume of publications that it accesses fr
om developing countries, which is a very important 
change. For example, the number of South African journa
ls that are indexed has gone up nearly threefold. 
The same is true of Brazil. I took the liberty of lo
oking at the numbers for Pakistan during your talk; there 
were only two Pakistani journals on the Science Cita
tion Index in 2005. That rose to 14 in 2010. So 
without detracting from the achievements of ourselves in 
the developing world, we need to be sure that 
we benchmark correctly.  

 
DR. ATTA-UR-RAHMAN: What I was talking about was not the number of scientific journals that are 
published from these countries. The two journals that
 you are talking about are the two journals from  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Pakistan that are included in ISI Web of Science and ha
ve an impact factor. There are, I think, about four 
or five journals. I was talking a
bout international publications in
 international journals from the 
developing world. 
 The data that you talked about also needs to be tweaked a little, because although there is an increase, this increase is largely because China is counted as a developi
ng country. If you take away China, then I think 
you will not find that there would be much of a change 
in the rest of the developing world. This data was 
taken from the United Nations Educational, Scie
ntific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 2010 
World 
Science Report, which has grouped the developing countries together, including China.  
 PARTICIPANT: There has been some news recently
 about the Pakistani government™s interest in 
devolving some of the responsibility from the centra
l government to the provinces for higher education 
and other research activities. Could you comment on that?  

 DR. ATTA-UR-RAHMAN:  This has been an impending di
saster in Pakistan in the last few weeks. What 
has happened is that because the Higher Education Commission was an honest and merit-based 
organization, it would not bow to political pressure. The Commission found that about 50 of our 

parliamentarians had forged degrees, and it reported 
it.  Another 250 parliamentarians™ degrees were in 
the process of being investigated. Certain young people
 in the government then decided to cut this 
organization to pieces. I took a very strong stand and 
wrote a number of articles in national newspapers. I 
went to the Supreme Court last week, and the decisi
on from the Supreme Court of Pakistan was that the 
Higher Education Commission is protected under th
e constitution. This is where it stands now. I 
understand that there are reverberations. The government is
 thinking of changing the law, so there may be 
more to come. 

 PARTICIPANT: This is one illustration of the fact that if governments are not working for the good of 
the people, they can create all kinds of problems. We
 have to watch for that, but things are changing 
drastically. I just came back from Egypt. I have been
 talking to groups of young revolutionaries. Indeed, 
their outlook is very positive. They know exactly wh
at the corruption within the government was like and 
what the results were. They are looking forward to 
new ways of doing things, both with the government 
and by themselves. The one thing they asked me to c
onvey to the world is that they are ready and willing 
to work with anybody, especially in science and technol
ogy. They need help and they are willing to work 
harder than anyone else. 
  
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17    
   
 
 
 
   PART TWO: 
STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  5. Overview of Scientific Data Policies 
 Roberta Balstad  Columbia University, United States  We have heard a lot about the practical economic a
nd applied implications of having open access to data, 
but we should not lose sight of the benefits to science
. One of the reasons that access to data are becoming 
so important is, of course, that the technology has ch
anged, and that we can deal with massive databases 
in a way that we could not have dealt with them 20 or
 30 years ago. Another reason is in the very nature 
of the scientific process itself. What is science? For ma
ny people, it is simply e
xperimentation and testing. That narrow definition has been modified in recent 
years to include experimentation, observation, and 
testing. For other people, science is really a matte
r of modeling and projections. If you cannot project 
something accurately, many believe, it is not scien
ce. So you need data for projections, too. 
 Equally important, scientific research is increasingly 
evolving into ﬁdata-intensive science.ﬂ You read 
about it in the field of health care, for example, where scientists combine data from 20, 30, or 100 

different studies to get a larger base in order to analyze and investigate topics that are impossible to 
pursue in a small, intensive study of perhaps 20 individua
ls. This is also true in a number of other fields. 
Data-intensive science relies on open access to data from
 all sectors, because only then are scientists able 
to combine datasets to ask new types of questions. 

 
Scientists are able to address much broader questions 
in data-intensive science than they could if they 
were responsible for collecting their own data for 
every study that they conduct. Increasingly, for 
example, we find that governments collect much of 
the scientific data that we use. These databases in 
many countries are open. We would like to see them become more open in even more countries so that 
scientists can use them. 

 
Open access to data advances science. It improves d
escriptive, comparative, and observational science; it enriches modeling and prediction; and it makes it easi
er to test and retest propositions using the same databases. That, of course, goes back to the philosophe
r of science Karl Popper, who said that true science 
is science that can be tested, that is falsifiable, and that you can prove wrong. To do that, you have to have 
access to data. 

 
A second reason for providing better access to scientific da
ta, in addition to advancing science, is that it 
levels the playing field for scientists from smaller or
 less-developed countries so that they are able to 
conduct data-intensive science using publicly available data. In shor
t, data access makes a principal 
resource of scientific research available to all. 

 
Traditionally, data access policies were quite restrictiv
e in terms of both policies and practices. Data were 
held to be the private property of a scientist. At the 
end of doing a dissertation, we had a body of data that 
we could mine for a long time. That was considered to
 be the property of the scientist and that was what 
made his or her work significant. In other cases, 
the kinds of data that Professor Farouk El-Baz was talking about (e.g., remote-sensing data) were often 
seen as a national asset that had to be protected. 
 
Data were also seen as a commodity that had economic
 value for the scientist or, more often, for the 
government that sponsored the data collection. Wh
en science becomes a commodity, obviously, those 
who collect data begin to think about marketing the da
ta, and then they easily slide into charging for data 
in a for-profit or even not-for-profit setting. 

 
To summarize, the benefits of changing from rest
ricted to open data access policies are as follows: 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   19 
   Open access
 to science contributes to innovation and economic growth.  
 Scientific advances, both substantive and methodological, are now data intensive and 
require open access to scientific data. 
 The cost of research is reduced. This is very important right now in most countries, 
because there is often less money available for r
esearch. To keep science alive and vital, open 
access to data is a real advantage. 
 
Limiting access to dataŠthe other side of that coinŠr
esults in higher research costs, lost opportunities, 
barriers to innovation, less less-effective scientific 
cooperation, suboptimal quality of the data (since no 
one is working with them and cannot provide correc
tions to them), and a widening gap between the 
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Deve
lopment (OECD) countries and the developing 
countries.  
 
In pushing for open access to data, however, we must ac
knowledge that there are some legitimate reasons 
for limiting access to public data: 

  National security and public safety.   
 Personal privacy and confidentiality, which are protected in many countries. 
 Proprietary rights of private-sector parties. 
No one is talking about forcing open access on 
research that a company has done in order to advance its product. 
 
Internationally, there have been a number of activiti
es that have advanced open access over the past 50 or 
60 years. A big impetus to open access to data was th
e International Geophysical Year (IGY) in the 
1950s, a massive global-scale data-collection effort 
that stressed open access to the scientific data 
collected under the aegis of the IGY. One of the resu
lts of the IGY was that the International Council for 
Science (ICSU) formed the World Data Centers. In orde
r to become a World Data Center, a center had to 
agree that it would provide scientific data to whoeve
r asked. That does not seem to be required anymore, 
but it was at the time, particularly because a major goal 
was to make sure that data were available both to 
scientists in the West and scientists in the Soviet bloc. The Iron Curtain divided scientists as well as 
politicians, and the World Data Cent
ers were meant to overcome the lim
its to exchange of data among 
scientists.  
 
When the Group on Earth Observations formed th
e Global Earth Observation System of Systems 
(GEOSS) in 2005, it established the following open data principles: 
  There will be full and open exchange of da
ta, metadata, and products shared within 
GEOSS, recognizing relevant international instru
ments and national policies and legislation.  
 All shared data, metadata, and 
products will be made availa
ble with minimum time delay 
and at minimum cost.  
 All shared data, metadata, and 
products being free of charge or no more than cost of 
reproduction will be encouraged fo
r research and education.  
 In 2007, the OECD made a strong stand on behalf 
of open data access, recommending that data policies 
show openness, flexibility, transparency, legal confor
mity with existing laws, protection of intellectual 
property, formal responsibility for the data, professiona
lism, interoperability, data quality, data security, 
data efficiency, accountability, and sustainability. 

 
There has been gradual movement toward even more 
openness in data in the United States as well.  In the 
1980s, the Reagan administration proposed a policy of 
commercialization of all data that were collected 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 under grants supported by the National Science 
Foundation (NSF). That would have meant that 
investigators would have to sell their data to anyone
 who wanted to use it. One division in the NSF, the 
Division of Social and Economic Science, establishe
d a policy of not making a grant to anyone who 
would not agree to put their data in a publicly accessi
ble data archive before receiving the grant. If the 
grantees did not follow through with what they had 
proposed, they would not receive another grant.  The 
policy had limited success because it only covered one divi
sion, and it went counter to the national policy. 
However, in 1991, the U.S. Global Change Research
 Program, backed by the White Houce Office of 
Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) established a policy of open access on data related to global 
change. In 2005, the National Institutes of Health required data management plans for all of its large 
grants. And this year the National Science Foundation 
promulgated a new data management policy, which 
requires all grant proposals to include a data manageme
nt plan. In sum, the role of dataŠand policies for 
dataŠare changing rapidly. 

   
   
     
   
   
  
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   21 
 6. Implementing a Research Data
 Access Policy in South Africa 
 Michael Kahn 
University of Stellenbosch, South Africa
  Today I am going to speak about three things, broadly: South Africa as the gateway for the BRICS 
Group, whose members are Brazil, Russia, India, Ch
ina, and South Africa; its innovation system and 
policy; and prospects for research data policy. 

 It is safe to say that South Africa represents, by wo
rld standards, a relatively small innovation system that 
is quite dynamic. In the apartheid years, it engineered all sorts of bad things, but also some good things, 

especially in the fields of health, plant and animal 
science, ecology, and environment. Those deep skills prevail into the present. That is essentially why South A
frica can play an important role of being a higher-
education hub for the rest of Africa. 
 The story in Africa is very interesting. There are many African countries that are among the fastest-

growing economies in the world. This morning CNN re
ferred to China as growing at a mere 9.7 percent 
per year at the moment. The country that comes immediately after that is Ethiopia, at 8.5 percent. Angola, 

Chad, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Mozam
bique, and Zambia will all have growth projected 
over the next 5 years well in excess of 7 percent. 
 
South Africa is currently growing around 3 percent and is struggling to break out of what appears to be a 

natural confine of around 4 percent. But I want to dr
aw your attention to scientific production in South 
Africa.  If we take the country™s scientific article 
production, as recorded on Thomson Reuters Institute for Scientific Information (ISI), South Africa is the 
clear leader in Africa. The real question is whether 
growth can be driven by science and research and de
velopment (R&D), or whether growth is driven by 
industrialization.  

  
Among the universities in Africa, the top 10 are all South AfricanŠhence, the higher-education hub. 

Also, there are a number of fields in which South A
frica has scientific impact somewhat above the world 
average, such as immunology and space science.  There is also a high level of particular expertise and 
activity, and therefore, necessarily, a great volume of 
research data in agriculture, environment, ecology, 
and geosciences. Furthermore, I should mention th
e increasing number of domestic journals that are 
indexed to Thomson Reuters ISI.   

 
When talking about data policy, you can only talk ab
out it in the context of your entire innovation system. 
In the case of Pakistan, mentioned this morning, the pr
ivate sector plays a very small role.  In the case of 
South Africa, the private sector is the largest performer of R&D, but also the smallest producer of 
scientific output in the form of articles, unlike Jap
an and even the United States, where many articles 
emanate from private-sector addresses. 

 When you talk about an innovation system, you talk 
about the main actors: business, higher education, 
and government. These operate in the pursuit of innova
tion activity, of which R&D is but one activity. 
You also have to look at your financial system
; your cultural and political norms; the regulatory 
framework; the legal framework, incl
uding intellectual property; and information policy. If any one of 
these is suboptimal, the others are not going to flourish.   

 In South Africa, we have the National Research and 
Development Strategy of 2002, which brought about 
some reorganization of the science system related to 
reporting lines, which may or may not be significant. 
It did lead to the development of changes to inte
llectual property law, as well as the introduction of a 
forward-looking incentive for R&D, which rewards R&D,
 much as happens in the United States, with a 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 150 percent deduction in taxation. It also led to some
 initiatives in human-resource development, such as 
a research chairs project modeled on that of Canada, 
and the introduction of centers of excellence in the 
universities in various fields. 
 This has been followed by an innovation plan in
 2008, which plays into the same theme of grand 
challenges that you find in many countries. The fi
ve grand challenges identified are all highly data-
intensive areas: 
1. Space science (i.e., remote monitoring and telemetry).  
2. Energy, the hydrogen economy, and new materials or catalysis.  
3. Farming to pharmaceuticals and biotechnology, plant and animal science.  
4. Global dynamics (i.e., climate change) and remote sensing.  
5. Human and social dynamics (i.e., social sciences). 
 
Then we have the introduction of the Technology 
Innovation Agency in 2010, with a mandate of 
converting R&D findings into commercial prospects.
 These initiatives, of course, operate within the larger context of other national laws on employment equity as well as immigration law. These various 
thrusts are now being driven forward through an in
dustrial policy. South Africa is a very important 
gateway in Africa, through its work with the New Pa
rtnership for Africa™s Development. We have also 
been active in promoting international networki
ng through our centers of excellence in high-speed 
computing. 
 
What about the prospects for research data policy?
 The country has a science systemŠarguably going 
back a century and a halfŠto the onset of large-scale mi
neral exploitation, so it is not a newcomer. There 
are many countries in Africa where science systems date 
back perhaps 50 years or less. We have been at it 
for a long time, in the same way that Braz
il has been at it for a very long time.  
 South Africa is data rich at the system level. We
 have well-quantified data on R&D and innovation, and 
educational statistics. Bibliographic information is 
held in a private database, which is not unusual. 
Thomson Reuters, after all, is also private. We 
have good data on higher educa
tion, although this is 
inadequately exploited, and we are busy buildi
ng a new database called the Research Information 
Management System, which will hopefully lead to be
tter research management, both in our research 
councils and in the universities. 

 
What about data held by regulators? 
We have a clinical trials register. 
We have gene banks. We have data on plant breeders™ rights, biodiversity, and indigen
ous knowledge compliance, and we have an ethical 
clearance system built into the funding awards pro
cess. We also have the Promotion of Access to 
Information Act, which allows access to this info
rmation. The Patent Amendment Act has introduced 
some potential dysfunctions into the system, in that
 it might well constrain people from taking out patents 
in South Africa as opposed to exporting their knowledge 
abroad, which is the exact opposite of what the 
drafters of the act intended. 
 We are also data rich at the sector level. We have
 the South African Earth Observation Network. We have radio astronomy data; seismic data
; oceanographic, geological, and mete
orological data; social science 
data; and biodiversity data, including about aquatic diversity. We ha
ve an extremely able statistics 
service. 

 
The question is, who gets access to this and how 
can it actually be used? Regrettably, there is 
fragmentation by default. Although Statistics South A
frica has a mandate to coordinate national surveys, 
that is as far as it goes. The national Department 
of Science and Technology (DST) has a mandate to 
coordinate science budgets, but not to coordinate 
information. Indeed, it has experienced extreme 
difficulty even in the attempt to coordinate scien
ce and technology budgets across government. Silos rule 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   23 
 in the government domain. Originally the DST mandate
 was to coordinate R&D budgets. It turned out to 
be impossible, so it was widened to cover science and technology. That has been even more difficult. 

 We have a National Advisory Council 
on Innovation, but it lacks the authority to carry out its mandate. It 
is currently undergoing its third review. We have 
the problem of management information systems being 
designed for one task, but being forced to address other 
tasks; there are resource limitations of inadequate 
metadata and training. 

 
So, what are the prospects for coordination? I would li
ke to be optimistic and say they are reasonable and 
perhaps improving. There is a commitment to monito
ring and evaluation at the highest level. We now 
have in the presidency a minister for monitoring a
nd evaluation. That minister has required each of the 
ministers of state to enter into an indicator-based
 performance agreement. This, unfortunately, might 
bring about perverse behavior. If you are asking me to account for myself, it is in my interest to set the 

bar as low as possible, because then I will be sure
 to succeed, and I will get a pat on the back.   
 We also have a commitment to big science, and that 
necessitates a lot of work on data coordination. South 
Africa has given strong support to the African Uni
on™s work on science and technology policy, in the 
form of promoting high-speed, wide-area networking 
and data sharing, and supporting the development 
of suitable infrastructure. We also have a commit
ment to the Organization for Economic Co-operation 
and Development guidelines for access to publicly fu
nded research. A review of the science system is 
currently under way, which provides an opportunity to accelerate progress. 

 
I must also draw your attention to the United Nati
ons Educational, Scientific
 and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) study on the social sciences, 
Knowledge Divides,
 which was published in 2010. It looks quite 
critically at the issue of social data. 
 To conclude, I would like to focus on the North-South 
relationship. I parody this relationship as one of 
academic hunters exploiting data gatherers. With due respect to my hosts: ﬁWe from the North are the 
hunters, and you in the South are the gatherers. Colle
ct the data, and we will process it for you. We will 
keep the datasets, because we cannot trust you 
to manage or to exploit them properly.ﬂ 
 These kinds of interactions lead to mechanisms that
 restrict inquiry. There are many African countries 
that have been exploited because they have very in
teresting archaeological or anthropological resources, 
and people from other countries wish to come in and 
get their Ph.D.s, carry out interesting research, and 
get the credit for that. As a result, hardly surprisingly, 
many countries have closed their doors. In addition, 
these unbalanced relationships are used to restrict other kinds of research, particularly social science 
research that might turn up unwelcome findings.  
 
Finally, there is a large amount of information that
 has not been digitized, and therefore is not easily 
accessible. The promotion of legislation for data cu
ration and archiving, and for open-access publication, 
would be desirable as well. 
  
 
 
 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 7. Access to Research Data and Scientific Info
rmation Generated with Public Funding in Chile 
 Patricia Muñoz Palma 
National Commission for Scientific 
and Technological Research, Chile 
 INTRODUCTION The progressive and significant increase of public fund
ing for the development of scientific research in 
Chile, while advancing new technologi
es and international institutions, im
pose a new challenge: to insure access to and promote the reuse and preservation over 
time of scientific and technological data generated 
using public funds. I will describe some policy init
iatives addressing to the access to research data and 
scientific information that are currently under study in Chile.  

 
The situation in Chile can be summarized as follows: 
Over 80 percent of research activity is supported by 
public funding, and these funds are oriented mainly to
 researchers, universities, and research institutions. 
The results of the research are published in scientific 
journals and proceedings, and are available in both electronic and print format. Most research data are 
not available for access or consultation, and commonly 
are managed by the researchers themselves.  

 
In order to design and implement a policy initiative ad
dressing the access of data, besides the practices of researchers and institutions, other aspects must be 
considered, such as legal frameworks, agreements 
between beneficiaries and funding agencies, intellectua
l property, copyright, and transparency law, and 
international recommendations of instituti
ons such as the OECD, ICSU, and CODATA.  
 
In this context, CONICYT (National Commission of 
Scientific and Technological Investigation) takes 
into account the country™s needs to have an adequate 
infrastructure and to generate policies that facilitate 
access to research data and scientific information. Fo
r this reason, we have developed the following three main initiatives, as described below.   THE FIRST INITIATIVE: A Program for Management of Research Data and Scientific 

Information  The principal objectives of the proposed program are 
to manage, strengthen, and guarantee access to data 
and scientific information collected and produced 
in Chile from public funding, in order to: 
  Facilitate and promote access to, and excha
nge of, data and scientific information 
generated in the country; 
 Preserve the scientific patrimony (i.e. specific elements of agreed national importance); 
 Promote utilization of international standards 
for management of data and scientific and 
technological information in pu
blic and private institutions; 
 Create information products and services as a
dded-value tools for scientific, productive, 
and economic development of the country; 
 Systematize the process of management of da
ta and scientific information with the goal to obtain data, which will allow the creation a
nd improvement of national indicators regarding 
investment, transference, and impact of public investment in the national system of science and 

technology.  
 The program has considered four strategic items: 

 1. Institutional framework:  Respond to the needs 
of the country with a broader vision for 
development of science and technology and innovation. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   25 
 2. Specific studies: Generate basic inputs for 
decision making and generation of policies. 
3. National and international linkages: Create
 incentives for development of national and 
international networks. 4. Human capital: Develop instruments allowing for specialization of professionals in these 
areas. 
 
The most important product of this program will be
 the design of a National Platform for Access to 
Science, Technology, and Innovatio
n Knowledge. This platform w
ill allow consulting and access to research data and information, and will enable their 
storage and preservation. This platform will involve 
all the relevant institutions, such as universities a
nd technology research centers, participating in the 
process of production of technological and scientific
 knowledge, including the collection of data, 
processing, production of specific reports. 

 THE SECOND INITIATIVE: Study State of the Art of
 Access and Management of Research Data and Scientific Information Generated with Public Funding
   This initiative was the first step for the implementa
tion of the above-mentioned program. Its goal was to 
gain basic understand about international and national practices on access to data and information.  
 The specific objectives of this study were to: 
  Identify the international state of the art on these topics; 
 Describe the practices and policies for access to 
research data and scientific information  
in Chile; and  Generate recommendations related to mana
gement of research data and scientific 
information for the Chilean institutions, 
considering the international context. 
 This study covered several deficiencies of the Chilean
 practices, such as the ones explained in more detail 
below:  
 
Institutional framework: 
 Lack of institutional awareness at all institutional levels, about the relevance of keeping 
adequate data management practices. 
 Responsibility for the management of data
 and scientific information is spread 
throughout organizations, lacking one specifi
c organizational unit in charge of it. 
 Data management within the organizations is
 financed through individual projects, rather 
than considered an activity that requires continuity, therefore a permanent source of funding. 
 Patrimony is not seen as an institutional a
nd national asset, but as researchers™ personal 
resources. 
 Lack of standardization of data and 
the formats of scientific information. 
 
Human capital: 
 Lack of critical mass of human resources specialized in data management. 
 Scant supply of formal and specialized academic programs focused on data management. 
 Lack of incentives to create upward career paths in the field. 
 No leadership or national references in the field. 
 Unstable and short-term work positions. 
 Patrimony:  
 Lack of or weak valuation of patrimony. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Patrimony scattered th
roughout organizations. 
 Patrimony considered personal, rather
 than institutional or national.   Preservation and formatting according to individual criteria. 
 Lack of initiatives for sharing or exchanging.  No culture of giving access to patrimony. 
Policies:  Lack of institutional policies addressing 
access to research data and scientific 
information. 
 THE THIRD INITIATIVE: Development of a Policy on Management of Research Data and 
Scientific Information   The goal of this policy for the main Chilean public 
funding institution (CONICYT)
 will be to implement 
a series of standards for capture, registration, and mana
gement of data and information systems to be by 
all beneficiaries of public funding.  
 
The principal objectives of this activity are to: 
 Optimize and rationalize use of public res
ources involved in generating and managing 
scientific knowledge;  Increase access to research data and scientific information; and 
 Adopt and attain international standa
rds, including OECD recommendations. 
 In order to implement this new policy fo
r CONICYT, the next steps will be to:  
 Generate awareness in the scientific community, and among academics, public 
employees, and public agencies about the re
levance of having access to research data and 
scientific information; and 
 Develop a network of institutions and individual professionals
 interested and willing to collaborate to the implementation of this policy. 
 CONCLUSIONS 

These initiatives represent a significant challenge for C
ONICYT. As the main Chilean funding agency for 
scientific and technology research, it is aware of the va
lue that the access to research data and scientific 
information adds to the process of knowledge producti
on. The implementation phase that comes next will 
encounter resistance at different levels, from legal ba
rriers to deeply established notions of ownership of 
the data produced by researchers. We trust CONICYT 
will be able to gather the support of the scientific 
community and political leaders, and be able to a
lign them around the goal of boosting the quality and 
quantity of the national scientific and technological production.  

 
 
   
 
 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   27 
 8. The Management of Health and Biomedical Data 
in Tanzania: The Need for a National Scientific 
Data Policy  Leonard E. G. Mboera National Institute for Medical Research, Tanzania  
Sound statistics are a key component of evidence. This
 is the main reason that we see that scientific 
research is increasingly dependent on successful outcom
es of access to data. In particular, the research 
findings that have been conducted in one place can be
 well utilized or relevant somewhere else. Many 
developed countries have created some initiatives wh
ereby they have established national policies and 
programs for data management and access, but the situ
ation is different for developing countries. This 
includes Tanzania. Most of those countries either ha
ve a weak or nonexistent policy for management of 
data and access. 

 However, there have been some initiatives taking place 
in the African region that are worth mentioning. 
For example, the Algiers Declaration (2008) aims at improving 

   The availability of relevant and timely hea
lth information, and access to global health 
information;  
 The management of health information through 
better analysis and interpretation of data;  
 The availability of relevant, ethical, and timely research evidence;  
 The use of evidence by policy makers and decision makers;  
 The dissemination and sharing of information, evidence, and knowledge; and   
 The use of information and communication technologies.  
 As for the current situation in Tanzania, we have 
developed guidelines on data transfer, but there is no 
policy on research data sharing yet. Difficulties also 
exist in accessing and sharing the scientific data that has been collected by different r
esearchers. Specific barriers to the access and sharing of scientific data 
collected by researchers using either
 public or donor funding include scientific and technical, institutional 
and management, economic and financ
ial, legal and policy, and normative and sociocultural aspects.  
 The National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR) play
s a great role in health research and data sharing 
in the country. For example, the Parliamentary Act No
. 23 in 1979 gives the institution a mandate to work 
on some key issues: (1) to establish a system to re
gister the findings of medical research carried out 
within Tanzania, and promote the practical applicati
on of those findings for the purpose of improving or 
advancing the health and general welfare of the pe
ople of Tanzania; and (2) to establish and operate 
systems of documentation and dissemination of inform
ation on any aspect of the medical research carried 
out by or on behalf of the institute. This is th
e basic mandate that the NIMR has had since its 
establishment more than 30 years ago.  
 Regarding management of health research in the coun
try, the situation is not very good. Researchers in 
Tanzania, like in other developing countries, lack 
the norms and traditions of open data sharing for 
collaborative research. If you go to individual institut
ions within the country, you will find that many 
institutions are treating their data either as a secret 
or as commercial commodities.  They are not really 
open to say, for example, ﬁHere™s the data.  Let™s do 
something with it.  Let™s make sure that we inform 
the world about the research we have been doing.ﬂ Also, although the government does not actively 
protect such data, it lacks policies that provide guida
nce or identify responsibilities for the researchers in 
making research data available for others to use.  Mo
reover, Tanzania does not have a central data center 
or digital repository in place where researchers ca
n submit their data for use by others. This is a key 
challenge. We are saying that researchers are not willi
ng to submit their data, but if they are, where are 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 they going to put it to share with other institutions or with other people? 
 
Next, I would like to talk about the issue of research 
data transfer in the country. What are the guiding 
principles for data-transfer agreements in Tanzania? 
Tanzania introduced a procedure for data transfer 
between Tanzanian and foreign institutions in 2010. 
The Data Transfer Agreement (DTA) is used as the 
only legal document by institutions in Tanzania to regulate
 the uses of data they provide to specific research projects inside and outside the country. It al
so provides opportunity for institutions to claim co-
ownership of the improvements made from data the re
cipient has acquired.  Upon approval of the DTA, 
the agreement becomes valid and the recipient is gr
anted unique access for a period of time, depending on 
the duration of the project, after which the data are placed in the public domain. 
 
Before concluding, I want to inform you about pub
lication procedures in the country. No research work 
can be published without getting permission from the 
National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR). 
The procedure is simple. When you want to do resea
rch in the country, you need to get ethical clearance 
from the NIMR. 
 
Finally, I want also to tell you about some new initia
tives within the Institute for Medical Research. The NIMR is in the process of establishing a Web-based National Health Research Data Repository. The 
primary purpose of this project is to provide a storag
e database for all health research work that has been conducted in the country. We want to put together 
all research work conducted in different places in the 
country in a central database, whereby it can be accessed. 

 
This has not been easy, and we still have a number of 
challenges. The financial challenge is the big one. Also, issues of human resources are a challenge, especia
lly regarding technical staff. Furthermore, we 
have challenges related to infrastructure. We did not 
give up, though. The NIMR has different centers and 
stations around the country. Each station or center 
has a purpose for conducting particular research. Some 
centers focus on malaria; others focus on tuberculosis
 or neglected tropical diseases. The data repository 
for the NIMR will collect informati
on from these centers and stations
. Once we are done with them, we 
can move on to other institutions.  

 To conclude, with the increased need for data- and 
information-sharing globall
y, it is time now for 
Tanzania to develop and implement a national research
 data policy. This policy, among other things, will 
oversee the generation, storage, data transfer, and use of research among local, and between local and 
international, users of different research findings. Also
, we need to have a formal mechanism established 
to govern the accessibility and u
se of created research data. 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   29 
 9. The Data-Sharing Policy of the World Meteorological Organization: The Case for International 
Sharing of Scientific Data 
 Jack Hayes 
U.S. Permanent Representative to the World Meterological Organization,  
NOAA Assistant Administrator for Weather Services, and 
Director, National Weather Service  
The mission of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Weather Service 
is to use the information that science has equipped us
 with to provide forecasts and warnings to protect 
life and property and enhance national economies.
 This will be the focus of my talk.  
 
From the U.S. perspective, we have
 long believed that free data sharing is a benefit to the United States, 
and from a perspective of the use of information created
 using the U.S. tax dollar, it must benefit society 
and must be made available to people. My focus will 
be on how it benefits the United States today. I will 
conclude with some additional th
oughts about where free and open access can benefit capacity building in 
developing countries, and then, as a weather servi
ce operator, how I see that benefiting society. 
 
If you are not familiar with the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), it is a specialized agency of 
the United Nations that was created after World War II,
 in 1951, although it existed in various forms since 
the 1870s. The WMO has 190 members. Its mission is
 to focus international partnerships on the 
collection, production, and exchange of weather, wate
r, and climate information in order to protect life 
and property, enhance national economies, and preserve
 environmental quality. There are two important 
WMO resolutions related to data sharing:   Resolution 40: ﬁWMO commits itself to broadening and enha
ncing the free and unrestricted international exchange of meteorological and related data and products.ﬂ
 This resolution was passed by the WMO 
Congress in 1995 to provide free and unrestricted inte
rnational exchange of me
teorological and related 
data and products across the world.  In 1999, Reso
lution 25 established the same basic policy across the 
190 members for hydrological data and products.  

 Resolution 25: This resolution calls for ﬁcommitting to broade
ning and enhancing, whenever possible, 
the free and unrestricted international exchange of hydrological data and products, in consonance with the 
requirements for WMO™s scientific and technical programs.ﬂ 

 
The way this policy is implemented across the globe 
is through giving the national owner of data and 
products the ability to discriminate between the data th
at are essential to the core missionŠto protect life 
and propertyŠand the data that are called supplementa
l. Generally the protect-life-and-property data and 
products are free and open, and supplemental data have variable degrees of openness, depending on the country. 

 U.S. data policy has its foundations in the O
ffice of Management and Budget™s Circular A-130: 
ﬁ–government information is a valuable national res
ource, and – the economic benefits to society are 
maximized when government information is available 
in a timely and equitable manner to all.ﬂ What we 
have found in the United States is that free and unr
estricted data sharing ma
ximizes the value for the 
information we collect and create within the National 
Weather Service. We also find that the reverse is 
true. Where we have barriers, we underutilize the data that we collect and produce.  Fundamentally, the 
more people use our information, the more value it has.   
 
To fulfill our mission to protect life and property and to enhance the economy, we collect and produce 

information that can be used to do that, but this da
ta can be used for other purposes as well. There is a 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 commercial weather sector that uses our data, adds va
lue to it, and provides products and services for very specific needs. This, we find, has aided 
economic growth within the United States. 
 Let me give some specific examples.  When an F5 
tornado hit the community of
 Greensburg, Kansas, in 
2007, the National Weather Service detected it. The to
rnado occurred at night. It formed in northern 
Oklahoma and moved across the border into Kansas, 
where it leveled Greensburg. While the community 
expected hundreds of people to lose their lives, the number was about 10. This was possible because the 
National Weather Service detected the tornado and, in partnership with the media, alerted people via 
television, radio, and NOAA weather radio, so that 
they had plenty of advance warning. It was a 
partnership that we had with the emergency manageme
nt community that worked with the hospitals, so 
that we had moved ambulances outside of the town that
 was going to be struck to a position where they 
could be of more use. 

 
What did the commercial weather sector do in this inci
dent? At that time, there was a train headed right 
into the path of that tornado outbreak. There 
was a commercial weather company that used the 
information we collected to relay a warning to the 
dispatcher in Omaha, Nebraska. They put a hold on 
that train several miles east of the path that we pr
ojected for the tornado outbreak. That train stopped and 
the company saved the lives of that train crew and the train itself.     

 To emphasize the value of data sharing in this inci
dent, I would like to compare it with a very similar 
tornado outbreak in the early 1950s in Udall, Kansas. In
 that incident, a very similar tornado moved out of 
Oklahoma into Udall at night and destroyed the city. As
 a result, 100 people lost their lives. I would say 
that the free and open data exchange, and the partne
rship created between the private and public sectors in the United States, has allowed us to reduce th
e loss of life over the past 30 to 40 years. 
 Here is another example. There are various motor 
raceways across the United States. In the partnership 
we have with the private sectorŠfor example, the Pocono Raceway in PennsylvaniaŠour job is to 

monitor severe weather and to ensure that the raceway
 has the warning it needs to get the people attending out of harm™s way. The private sector will use information we collect about temperature, humidity, 

windŠanything that might affect the conduct of the race or the comfort of the people there, add value to 
it, and give it to the raceway officials, to the racers, an
d to the people in general.  
That is a partnership that increases the value of the information. 

 
In one last example, in partnership with the Fe
deral Aviation Administration and the Department of 
Defense, we have roughly 150 Doppler 
radars spread across the United St
ates. We use the data from these 
radars to detect severe weather and to warn others
 of severe weather. The commercial weather industry 
provides applications. If you have a BlackBerry or
 a cell phone that has an imagery capability, you can 
get access to that imagery. 

 
I will switch to a discussion of Europe now. Different
 countries in Europe have different models.  In 
general, however, many countries supplement thei
r federal budgets by charging for some data and 
products that they produce. Protect-life-and-property 
data and products are generally freely available, and 
their warnings and observations are too. The warni
ngs, in general, are simple cartoons, not as vivid as 
what we can produce in the United States. The observati
ons are generally conveyed as text rather than as 
a visual representation.  
 
Let me talk about capacity building in developing 
countries and give you an example of where a united 
effort sponsored by the WMO is certainly going to enhance the capacity within developing countries. In 
the wake of the December 2004 tsunami in the Indian
 Ocean, nations of the world got together, through 
the WMO and the International Oceanographic Commissi
on, and created a tsunami warning system that 
is used internationally. It is that free and open exchan
ge of information that aided and helped us move that 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   31 
 along. One effort that I have been personally involved 
in is in southern Africa, called the Severe Weather 
Forecast Demonstration Project. I have long objected 
to the use of the word ﬁdemonstration,ﬂ because 
basically it means that we take model informati
on based on geophysical equations and apply it to 
predicting and warning citizens.  I do not think we need to demonstrate that; we have seen that for 30 or 
40 years in the United States. It is a matter of growing actual predictive capabilities in developing 

countries. 
 
What we have done is allied with other similarly in
clined developed countries and created in South Africa 
the ability to bring in global model data. The gove
rnment of South Africa runs a regional very-high-
resolution model, combines it with satellite information,
 and creates products and data that it distributes to 
16 developing countries in the Southern African De
velopment Community. Similar initiatives have been 
undertaken in East Africa, Northwest Africa, the S
outhwest Pacific, and Southeast Asia, as well as the 
Caribbean. These initiatives are regionally driven, in which a subregion or a region makes a statement 
about its environmental threats, needs, and prioriti
es. Under the WMO auspices, developed countries help 
to develop capacity so that we can transition to those 
countries things that we have become used to in the 
United States. 

 
Looking at a world picture over the past 50 years, 
increased data sharing has contributed to a major 
reduction in loss of life. In the 1956-to-1963 time 
frame, 2.6 million people lost their lives due to 
environmental disasters related to weather, water, 
and climate. Fast-forward to 1996 through 2005, when 
220,000 lost their lives. This is still too many, but it is
 an order-of-magnitude reduction in loss of life due 
to weather, water, and climate. 

 
Looking to the future, initiatives such as the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) is an 

attempt to create data sharing for future scientific and 
operational benefit.  As we look to the nine societal 
benefit areas in GEOSS, we are already seeing the scien
tific interrelatedness. It will only grow. From my 
perspective, free and open data ex
change helps us advance the vision of GEOSS faster, cheaper, and 
further than we could if we did not have that capability. 
 To conclude, from a U.S. perspective, free and unrestri
cted data sharing in our country has created great 
value that we realize today. We strongly support initia
tives to sustain and broaden it, both in the United 
States and internationally. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 10. DISCUSSION OF PART TWO BY THE SYMPSOSIUM PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT: I have a question for Dr. Hayes. When
 you mentioned the less-than-optimal policies of 
certain European countries in data sharing, do you 
see an improvement in recent years in that respect? 
 
DR. HAYES:  The answer is yes. In the 1990s, th
ere was very strong opposition to more free and open 
data exchange policies. However, there is a trend in many of those countries today to adopt our model, if 
not formally, at least informally. 

 PARTICIPANT:  My question is to Dr. Kahn. Do 
you have any divisions between locally published 
articles versus internationally recognized journalsŠ
Nature, Science, and even specialized journals? 
 
DR. KAHN: That is indeed the very problem of utiliz
ing Thomas Reuters or Sc
opus or any international 
repository to measure publication output. It is natura
lly biased in three ways: language, field, and against 
locally published journals. It is a restricted view, but 
it has become the gold standard. Garfield gave us the 
ISI nearly 50 years ago, and it has retained its status
 up to the present time, but it has to be used with 
caution, which is why I made the remark I did. If we 
take any country outside the core of the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), ther
e will be a host of local journals in the local language, particularly in the social sciences, law, econom
ics, and so on, that are not counted. To get a true 
picture of the contribution to the 
knowledge pool, you have to extend
 what is included. We can assume, 
of course, that these local journals are subject to peer review and have an appropriate frequency of 
appearance. Plus, in the social sciences, publication 
channels differ. Books are more common than journal 
articles. 

 
PARTICIPANT: I have one partial correction for you 
and then a question. The correction is that the 
implementation guidelines that you showed for 
the Global Earth Observation System of Systems 
(GEOSS) are no longer proposed; they are actually accepted by the GEOSS plenary. That is progress.  

The group is still working on pushing that further. Th
ere are a lot of issues that those guidelines and the 
original principles do not address.  
 My question is that there were a lot of very in
teresting presentations about the responsibilities of the 
developing countries™ governments to coordinate and 
get their data policies and act together. We have 
heard less about what the responsibilities of devel
oped countries should be, having had a tradition of 
being hunters. From your perspective, how shoul
d developed countries behave
? What practices should they adopt for acting respectfully toward developing countries™ efforts? 

 MR. MAYALA: I think that there is a need for the 
developed countries to focus on what developing 
countries are doing. Of course, if there is any suppor
t they can provide, then they should provide it. We 
need to learn from each other. From there, we can move together.  

 
DR. BALSTAD: A few years ago, the International Council for Science sponsored a study of various 
priority areas in international science. One of them w
as data and information. The report that came out on 
data and information was not intende
d to be a manual or a policy prescription, but something in between 
that discussed major issues in data and information a
nd some of the responses that have been developed 
in the developing world. Part of it is that we are 
all learning in this new area, and we need to work 
together.  Some countries have gone farther down this ro
ad than others. It is vitally important that they 
share information about how to do it. 
 DR. KAHN: Remember the medical oath of Hippocrates:
 First, do no harm. That is what doctors agree to 
do when they are sworn into the profession. In asking 
developing countries to make data available, we 
should expect that there would be reciprocity from
 the North. The reciprocity should include an 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   33 
 understanding of the defensiveness that might be encount
ered from the South, which is a residue of many 
years of a lopsided set of relati
onships.  A book like John Le Carré™s 
The Constant Gardener does not come out of nowhere. There is lopsidedness and often 
a legitimate concern that we in the South are, as 
one cabinet minister put it, a giant zoo for the benefit of others. The important thing is that the barriers 
need to be negotiated away, lest the 
general scientific enterprise suffers.  
 PARTICIPANT: I would like to share some of our ex
periences and the challenges that we face with this. 
Our project does computer modeling of infectious 
disease transmission, and for that, we typically use 
high-resolution surveillance data from governments. For th
is, we tried to form partnerships with countries 
in Southeast Asia (Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, and 
Thailand), and in Africa (Niger and Nigeria). Our 
approach has been to make agreements with ministries 
of health to use data collaboratively and then build 
capacity inside the ministries to manage data, where 
needed, digitize paper records, and then put them up 
in repositories that can be used, and also train peopl
e in modeling. In some countries, like Thailand, that 
has worked very well. In other countries, we can make
 agreements with ministries to share and coauthor 
papers and provide technical reports
, especially in very-low-income countries, but our experience has also 
been that the time that people have in ministries of
 health or in governmenta
l agencies is incredibly 
limited to interact with us and to be trained. They
 have very limited capacity to train people and then use 
the data management system at all. So it has b
een a struggle for us to identify people and push 
governments to see if there are people available to be traine
d. There is also the issue of lack of interest in 
the data itself. We found that a lot of governments do not really seem to care too much or do not see the 
value yet. In summary, our challenge is the sustainab
ility of training people and making sure that after we 
leave, the country retains the databases and data sy
stems and modeling capacity, and it has also retained 
the interest of the people locally.  
 PARTICIPANT: My question is for Ms. Muñoz. You ga
ve us a very comprehensive description of the 
initiatives of the National Commission of Scientific 
and Technological Investigation (CONICYT) with 
regard to promoting open data-sha
ring policies, but I wonder whether you could expand on the efforts of 
CONICYT to promote a culture of data sharing with
 the international commun
ity for Chilean scientists. 
 
MS. MUÑOZ: I think that we can work with the 
whole community to promote open access to data and 
scientific information, but at this moment, we think 
that the most important initiative will be to develop 
and implement the policy for manage
ment of publicly funded research 
data and scientific information, because this is the missing gap. 

 
PARTICIPANT:  My question is about how you see the new paradigm coming out from the cloud-

computing utilities that, in a way, the scientific co
mmunity is going to adopt. We can see that this 
phenomenon is growing very fast in the United 
States. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration (NOAA), for example, is leading, with other agencies, this kind of phenomenon.  I am 

very interested in your perspective. The second ques
tion concerns how you see this new utility from the 
technological point of view, as a way to boost 
collaboration among developing countries. I am 
representing Italy, and am very interested to see how 
we can boost this transatlantic dialogue between the United States and Europe in order 
to support developing countries. 
 
DR. HAYES:  From a NOAA perspective or a National Weather Service perspective, I put on rose-

colored glasses and say, ﬁHow could we benefit society?ﬂ Then I take the glasses off and say, ﬁWhat 

constraints do I have to live with?ﬂ One of my ch
allenges here is to increase the value of weather 
information to the United States. I think that crea
ting a concept like an open National Weather ServiceŠwhich would include the public sector, the private 
sector, and the academic sectorŠwould ensure that. 
This allows research managers to talk with operati
ons managers and encourages 
data-sharing partnerships among a variety of missions. 

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Given the importance of water to our future, we have launched an integrated water resources science and 
services within NOAA. There are 21 federal agencies 
in the United States government that produce water 
information. I would think that we could partner 
across the U.S. federal government, share data and information, and increase its value and partnership to
 the United States. I would broaden that to the private sector as well. 

 
Another example is one that we have just started. It
 has to do with space weather. We are going to have a 
solar maximum in 2013. The infrastructure that we ha
ve created is more technologically advanced, but it 
is also more vulnerable to things that happen on the 
sun than it was even 20 years ago. I envision a future 
where we could create an international partnershi
p around the globe through an organization like the 
World Meteorological Organization (WMO) to bring together academic, operational, and private-sector 
resources to benefit society. 
 
PARTICIPANT: I would like to address a question to 
Dr. Hayes about what might be related issues and 
possibly also get some response or input from our 
colleagues from Africa. Is there any information 
available about trends in the participation of
 developing countries in the WMO GTS (Global 
Telecommunication System) weather system?  Do you see more data coming into the WMO from 

developing countries, particularly Africa?  Also, h
as the WMO become more active in recent years in 
providing services or products, above and beyond the basi
c weather forecasting, that would be of special 
benefit for developing countries? Again, I ask particularly with respect to Africa. 
 
DR. HAYES:  I will try to address it, and if I mi
ss something, you can come back to me. First, 
observations are not inexpensive. You can imagine a de
veloping country has similar challenges. We also 
have commercial interests that are threatening; 
for example, 4G mobile communication standards are 
invading the space that used to be reserved for me
teorological sensing and data transmission. Second, 
going beyond weather, there is a concept in WMO ca
lled the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center. 
It really, I think, stemmed out of Chernobyl, wher
e some countries had a nuclear-dispersion capacity and 
could share that with regions and make those produc
ts available. I certainly see that capability. As it 
applies to Africa, I think the Severe Weather Dem
onstration Program that WMO is using is trying to 
anchor within a sub-region of Africa in more than just the computing and distribution infrastructure, but 
in the ownership as well.   
PARTICIPANT: This is a question for panelists
 Muñoz, Mayala, and Kahn. In developing your 
respective national science data policies, did you find
 the greatest resistance coming from political forces, 
economic or business forces, the scientific community, or just plain inertia? In other words, we have not 

needed it before; why do we need it now? 
 DR. KAHN: Previously, I worked for our Human Scie
nces Research Council at a time when we were 
busy debating the meaning of the OECD 2007 guidelines,
 which are great and noble and agreed upon by 
all. The Human Sciences Research Council, where 
I worked, was a research performer, unlike the 
Economic and Social Research Council of the United Ki
ngdom, which is a grant maker. The parody at the 
time was that our universities wanted only two simple 
things from us: all of our research funds and all of 
our data. The parody was, you show us
 yours and we will show you ours. It is a very critical issue. We are 
moving toward an open-access data policy. Certainly th
e national Department of Science and Technology 
believes that this is a good thing, but at the same 
time you get what I will call a ﬁtechno-nationalismﬂ that 
creeps in. It is even present in what I heard this 
morning from Tanzania. We have been cheated in the 
past, and therefore we have to be on guard to en
sure it does not happen in the future. So you get these 
countervailing tendencies. On the one hand, there is so
mething we might even call data sovereignty. On 
the other hand, there is data openness. We all agree that data openness is the way to go, but in the 
evening, when we have a drink with our party colleagues, we say, ﬁNo, no, no. The nasty foreigners are 

going to take it all away from us, a
nd we have to be on our guard all the time.ﬂ It comes from two sides.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART TWO: STATUS OF ACCESS TO SCIENTIFIC DATA
                                                                   35 
  You asked where most of the resistance comes from.
 I think there is a political dimension. The business 
sector is another case, because in South Africa the gr
eatest volume of research 
and development is done by the business community. In that sen
se, we are more like an OECD core member state than an emerging 
economy. However, the business community does not pub
lish very much in the scientific literature, so 
that does not really come up. The complication arises 
when you have a research project, and this takes us 
to the Bayh-Dole Act in your countryŠa research proj
ect that is jointly funded by business and public 
funds.  How do you now decide which piece of data 
goes into the public domain and which remains 
behind the company walls? There is resistance.  It is
 political. It is nationalistic, techno-nationalism, as I 
said. There are also proprietary restrictions. 
 
MS. MUÑOZ: I think that the big problem for implem
enting this in Chile is our scientific community, 
because of the cultural aspect. In this context, the researchers do not have knowledge about what is 
important in these matters in the developmen
t of the country, and its public value.  
 MR. MAYALA: I want to give a little bit of experience from my country. First of all, I think it is known 
that you cannot put science and politics in the same pot. 
It is very difficult to act together. In my country, 
we want to come up with something that people 
will see. There are those groups who wait and see and 
then they react. We are in that kind of situation. I 
mentioned that we are trying to build a data repository. 
We hope that when it is out, we can ge
t an appropriate reaction from people. 
 
PARTICIPANT:  I have a question for Dr. Kahn. You 
mentioned that South Africa is now a member of 
the BRICS Group. I presume that means more coopera
tion and partnerships with
 the large developing 
countries that are members of that network. You also 
mentioned that there is the issue of South Africa in 
Africa. You did not talk about that as much. Could you 
describe some of the partnerships and networking that are going on in South Africa with other African countries?  
 DR. KAHN: First, on an economic standpoint, South A
frica accounts for something like 30 percent of the 
continent™s gross domestic product and around 70 percen
t of its scientific production. Those two walk 
together. South Africa, for the last 10 years, has b
een paying the bill to host the New Partnership for 
Africa™s Development and now the African Union™s Sc
ience and Technology Secretariat, which is hosted 
in our Council of Science and Industrial Research in Pr
etoria. In addition, I mentioned the role that we are 
playing in supporting higher-education development. 
I mentioned a figure of 50,000 students from across 
Africa studying in South Africa, out of a student popu
lation of around a half a million. It is close to 10 
percent.  Of these 50,000, fully 30,000 come from 
an economic grouping known as the Southern African 
Development Community of 15 southern African 
countries, including Madagascar. Those students are 
regarded as home students. They pay exactly the sam
e fees as I pay for my own children.  So, South 
Africa is donating 1 billion Rand (the equivalent to 122.1 million U.S. dollars) a year to support students 
from the Southern African Development 
Community. This is very important. 
 
Because of the economic dominance of the country, ther
e are many international agreements to which we 
are a party and where we play a central, coordinatin
g role, ranging from air traffic navigation to weather 
and climate mapping and the like.  

 
Southern Africa™s achievements lie in environmenta
l modeling and monitoring cross-borders, as well as 
in the harmonization of transport links. All of these invol
ve considerable research 
and data sharing. So we in South Africa are playing a role both in capacity de
velopment and in data sharing in numerous fields, 
across southern Africa in particular, but further afield 
as well.  A lot of this, of course, is driven by self-
interest, and our business activities to the north are well supported by this research investment over many 

years. 

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36                                     
       THE CASE FOR INTERNAT
IONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 PARTICIPANT: Some international organizations still have contributing members who are not following 
those data policies. How can we provide incentives 
rather than simply just examples as we move 
forward? Are there lessons to be learned from other communities that have had success? 
 DR. HAYES:  I will speak from a meteorological persp
ective. One of the challenges in our community is 
that ownership of the data is c
ountry dependent. The philosophy we use in the United States is not the 
same philosophy they use in Russia. It is more than 
data.  It is how the government is organized and how 
they fund the services. While we may not feel
 a threat in the United States, the Russian 
Hydrometeorological Service does. You have to almost 
deal with those one at a time, country by country, 
and be willing to sit down and try to find
 a way to reduce the perception of threat. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37    
   PART THREE: 
COMPELLING BENEFITS 
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  11. Developing the Rice Genome in China 
 Huanming Yang 
BGI (Beijing Genomics Institute), China 
 
In this presentation, I will share with you informa
tion about the development of the rice genome as well as other genomes in China, through in
ternational collaboration and interna
tional sharing of scientific data.   
The field of genomics was cultivated by the Human 
Genome Project (HGP). It was important to China 
that its scientists made a contribution, even a small one, to the HGP. 
  
China was a latecomer.  One of my colleagues wr
ote: ﬁThe work was already underway in other 
countries, and China was way behind the curve. Bu
t Huanming convinced me that China™s involvement 
would represent a major advance for his country and 
for the Beijing Genome Center.ﬂ  Our idea was that with just a simple contribution from us, together w
ith all other countries, we could benefit from this 
project as could all the people in the world. It was so expensive that China alone could not afford it. That 
was the reason for us to support international scientific collaboration. 

 
As a member of the International Bioethics Committee of UNESCO, I strongly proposed that the most 
important and urgent issue in bioethics at present is
 the immediate release and free sharing of the human 
genome data. In a period of 5 months, I submitted f
our proposals for free sharing of human genome data. 
Then on May 9, 2000, the director-general of UN
ESCO issued a statement on the free availability of 
human genome data. This led to the Group of 8 (G8) 
communiqué of the Okinawa meeting in July 2000, 
as well as the United Nations Millennium Declaratio
n on September 19, 2000, to ensure free access to 
information on the human genome sequence. 
 As a unique member state from the developing countries in the HGP consortium, China™s contribution is 

not only a technical accomplishment, but also a rec
ognized effort in the free sharing of human genome 
data. As Michael Morgan, who was responsible fo
r the Wellcome Trust projects on genomics, said, 
ﬁChina™s unswerving support of open
 data release was an important factor in ensuring that the human 
genome sequence is the property of the whole world.ﬂ 
John Sulston, the leader of the HGP of the United 
Kingdom, said, ﬁI especially salute the Chinese colle
agues, who have affirmed the Human Genome 
Project™s common ownership by all mankind.ﬂ 

 
The Human Genome Project has established a brilliant 
example for international collaboration and data 
sharing. With no participation in the HGP or no in
ternational data sharing, genomics in China today 
would not be so advanced.  
 
With regard to the rice genome data, we freely shar
ed and published the first draft sequence of the rice genome in April 2002. It was a big event in the history 
of natural science in China. That is the reason that 
the editorial department of 
Science magazine went to Beijing for the news release:  ﬁ
Science magazine 
honoring China™s sequencing of the rice genome.ﬂ I would like to quote from 
Science:  ﬁThis team 
deserves enormous credit for their outstanding worl
d-class accomplishment in a remarkably short time.ﬂ 
 
It is true that the whole job was done in 74 days. Th
en we released all the data.  Our database on the rice 
genome has been one of the most popular databases 
in global genomics. If regarding citations as one 
indicator of the impact of that paper, we are pr
oud to see that our paper has been cited about 2,000 times 
up to now, and the citations are still increasing. The numbe
r of specific publications in one field could be 
another indication of the impact of the work in that
 field. Since the release and the sharing of the rice 
genome data, the research on rice has dramatically in
creased and has outnumbered that of wheat, though 
they were more or less the same at the starting line.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  39 
 For our students, it would be difficult to imagine how
 research could be done on rice without referring to 
its genome sequences. This is also th
e case for all the researchers in the field of genomics. I will give you 
two examples showing how significant the impact of the free sharing of the rice genome sequence can be. 
 We are now collaborating with various institutes a
nd universities within and outside China to sequence 
10,000 rice accessions or strains. We believe that is 
an important stimulus for rice genome research and 
breeding. We also have analyzed the genomes of ot
her important crops, such as maize and potatoes.  A 
paper about this research will be published in a prestigi
ous journal very soon. We 
also have analyzed the 
cucumber, and sequenced the genes related to sex e
xpression, disease resistance, and so on. As soybean 
curd is an important food for the Chinese, we have also completed the genome analysis on soybeans.  
 
We have analyzed the genome for chickens. One of 
the most important scientific discoveries is that the 
genome diversity of chickens originat
ed before their domestication.  
 Together with other institutions, we have analy
zed the genome for silkworms. The most thorough genome 
sequence data so far for the silkworm was released by
 BGI and other Chinese researchers many years ago.  
Now the job is continued by analyzing about 50 genomes,
 with the aim to reveal
 the domestication events 
and genes for this important insect.  

 We have analyzed the panda genome. Te
chnically it is the first successful 
de novo assembly of a 
mammal, without the help from a genetic or physical 
map of this animal. We have also analyzed, in collaboration with our colleagues in the United States
, the genome of two ant species to reveal how they 
organize their social activities.  
 
We are also concerned about global climate change, 
so we have finished the sequencing part of some 
animals living in extreme environments, like the polar 
bear, penguin, the Tibetan antelope, and the camel.  
 
We have initiated, together with our colleagues a
ll around the world, the International 10K Genomes 
Project.  About 25 percent of all the vertebrates are lis
ted in this project. We have already begun studying 
the first batch of more than 100 species. 
 Now I would like to turn back to the human genom
e research. As I have already indicated, the Human 
Genome Project has shaped the field of human ge
nomics, which is characterized by international 
collaboration and internatio
nal data sharing. Our contribution to the HGP has been small, probably 1 
percent, but we made about a 10 percent contribu
tion with the International HapMap Project. We 
completed the first Asian human genome by means 
of the new-generation sequencers and published the results in Nature. The publication of the Asian genome rev
ealed that the methods or sequencing 
technology available now are extremely powe
rful, as stated in a review paper in Science.   
Perhaps you have seen that my institute is committed
 to sequencing more than 10,000 individuals before 
the end of this year. We are also an essential part of the Human Variome Project, as well as the 
International Cancer Genome Project. For the Interna
tional Cancer Genome Project, we are committed to 
gastric cancer now, and we will expand our contribution 
to other cancers related to digestive systems. We 
have initiated the 1,000 Monogenic Diseases Proj
ect, based on our own experiences working on the 
Mendelian disorders. One of the most important di
scoveries in 2009 was the ﬁhuman pan-genomeﬂ. We 
have identified that 0.6 ~ 1.5 percent of human genome sequences actually are population-specific.  
 We also analyzed people living in two different e
nvironments to reveal how their genomes have adapted 
to the environment. The population study of Tibetans and Han Chinese uncovered that regulation of the 
hypoxia response is central to high-altitude
 adaptation. That paper was published in 
Science.   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  We captured more than 80 percent of the human ge
nome sequence from the hairs of a sample which was 
at least 4,000 years old. Then, we published the firs
t catalogue of the human gut metagenomes, in which 
we identified at least 2,000 species of bacteria.  
Finally, we also have initiated a 10,000 Microbial Genome Project, as well as the Earth Microbiome Project, also through international collaboration. 
 
As scientists, we acknowledge that we have a responsibility to the world.  In 1994, I told my colleagues 
what we should bring back is not only the technology, but also the ethical principles. As co-chairman of 

the European Actions for Global Life Sciences, we de
veloped this slogan: ﬁTo raise the banner of science and humanity.ﬂ I am president of BGI (formerly know
n as Beijing Genomics Institute), and the institute™s 
slogan is:  ﬁTo raise the banner of innovation and ethics.ﬂ 
 
BGI™s mission is to share what we have with others
 to promote global genomics, to work together with 
those who are unable to access what they need, and to wo
rk together with others to do something bigger, 
faster, cheaper, and better.  It is, after all, so impor
tant to build the capacity in developing countries. 
 I think that international sharing of scientific data is
 not only an issue of science, nor merely an issue of 
economics, but also an issue of humanity and globa
l harmony. In genomics, we Chinese already have 
benefited so much from it. We are told by our ancestor
s that nobody can be a hero without three partners. 
Genomics cannot be done alone. 
 BGI™s strategy for sustainable development requires inte
rnational collaboration and da
ta sharing.  None of 
our achievements would have been gained without inte
rnational collaboration. We are confident of our 
passionate young staff, but of course, enthusiasm is
 not enough for science. Innovation is the key for 
scientific development.  Bioinformatics software is ou
r major innovation. That is how we have made rice 
genome assembly possible, as well as most, if not all, of the software that we are using for next-
generation sequencers.  
Nonetheless, humbleness is rooted in our Chinese 
culture. We began with nothing, though now my 
institute is poised to become the biggest DNA seque
ncing lab in the world. When we are called the 
sequencing factory for the world, we are happ
y to have this nickname.  According to 
Science, ﬁBGI-Shenzhen enhances its reputation as 
the world™s largest sequencing center, deciphering an ant, the Asian 
human genome, the human methylome, and a gene catal
og of the human gut microbes.ﬂ At the same time, 
we appreciate again all those who have helped us
. Just like the Chinese proverb says: ﬁWhen you drink 
sweet water from the well, do not forget who helped dig it.ﬂ 

 
 
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  41 
 12. Data Sharing in Astronomy 
 ”eljko Ivezi University of Washington, United States 
 
I am going to summarize a few experiences we collected in
 astronomy with data sharing. I will first list a 
few questions that we deal with in astronomy just to
 set the stage. Then I will review what we learned 
from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) and similar 
surveys in the context of data sharing. My main 
point is that we have to submit ourselves to cost-b
enefit analysis and see whether or not it pays back. 
 What we are trying to do in astronomy is fair
ly well summarized in these three big questions: 
1. How and when did the universe begin? 
2. How did the structure (planets, stars, galaxies) in the universe form and evolve? 
3. Is our planetary system unique (or, is there life anywhere else)? 
 You can rephrase this by asking if the physics we learned 
on earth is applicable to the rest of the universe, 
and if we can use the observations of the universe and 
of the heavens to learn more physics. These are, so 
to say, business questions, but we should never forget
 that, going from families visiting the Smithsonian 
Institution in Washington, D.C., to a small village in
 some corner of the world where grandparents tell 
their children the stories about stars, we are 
all fascinated by our place in the cosmos. 
 
Over the last decade or so, there 
has been an explosion in new tools and methods. Due to the fast 
development of computer and information technolog
ies, we now have new tools, methods, and cutting 
edge sky surveys that allow us to observe the whole sk
y in great detail. There are three frontiers in optical 
astronomy. 
 The first is to build ever-larger telescopes. These are,
 for example, the twin Keck telescopes in Hawaii. 
We build large telescopes not to get more detail, but to see fainter objects. The second frontier is to 
launch our telescopes in space, above the Earth™s at
mosphere, which blurs the images of ground-based 
telescopes and absorbs all the light except visible an
d radio. The beautiful images from the Hubble Space 
Telescope are so detailed not because Hubble is ex
ceptionally large, but because the images are not 
blurred by the atmosphere. 

 
Both the Keck telescopes and Hubble more or less study one object at a time, but they cannot see the 
whole sky. In fact, all of the area in the sky that Hubb
le imaged to date is less than one-thousandth of the 
whole sky. With new technology, we can begin to co
ver the entire sky and get diverse and precise data on 
hundreds of millions of objects. That progress brought in
 the third frontier in astronomy: gathering digital 
data for these large numbers of sources and then usin
g statistical analysis and data-mining methods to 
study them.  

 
One of the key developments related to this sym
posium is that about a decade ago astronomers started 
sharing all these giant databases freely with the public.
 What do these data contain?  First, they have 
images. Observers are interested in 
the position of the object in the sky,
 its brightness, the size and shape 
of its image. Objects are observed with different f
ilters to get information about the spectral energy 
distribution. Images are processed to measure objects,
 such as stars and galaxies, and to construct 
catalogues, which are the most useful data products th
at we put in the public domainŠof course, together 
with images. 
 Why are these catalogues important? We can use them to discover new objects, classify those new 

objects, study them statistically, and search for unus
ual objects.  The larger the sample is, the more 
unusual stars or galaxies will be found. Then we can 
study cosmology and try to answer these questions: 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  When did the universe begin?  How did it develop? 
 
When astronomy databases are open to the public, mo
re people can participate. One of the foremost 
examples of this new generation of surveys is the Sloa
n Digital Sky Survey (SDSS). It was the first time 
that we could get digital data, a color map of the sky, 
for a substantial fraction of the sky. There have been 
a number of projects in astronomy in the last decade that have built digital databases and made them 

available to the world™s public. 

 
SDSS used a camera that has 120 megapixels. It used to 
be the largest camera in the world. For more than 
half a decade we collected measurementsŠpositions, 
colors, shapes, and so onŠfor about 400 million 
objects. When the database containing these measureme
nts was released to the public, even before a 
substantial fraction of science analysis was completed by the project team, that was a revolution in 

astronomy. This approach is still not accepted in all 
the fields, but I would argue that there are clear 
benefits of doing so. 
 The SDSS public portal provides astronomical data
 to anyone, anywhere. Two years ago, I was 
vacationing in Croatia, my country of origin, and I 
met a friend from Serbia who is an astronomer who 
had a house on the same island. We got all the data 
for a paper in four days by accessing this database 
through our laptops while drinking beer in a beach coffee bar. 
 The portal also has a special section with many ex
ercises for teachers and supplemental material that 
shows KŒ12 teachers how to use these data in the cl
assroom. There are literally tens of thousands of 
examples where the data were incorporated in school curricula. I would like to remind you that astronomy 

is very effective in attracting students to science, 
technology, engineering, a
nd mathematics professions.  
 As a result of this public data release, again even before a substantial fraction of science was done by the 
project team itself, several thousand papers were 
published by scientists not associated with the SDSSŠ
more papers than by the people who were members 
of the SDSS collaboration.  The total data volume 
that was delivered through this portal was more than
 100 times the size of the full SDSS database.  There 
were more than 300 million Web hits over 6 years. 
 The number of unique users was about 1 million.  
Compare this to about 10,000 professional astronomers.
  It is a huge impact. As a result of SDSS and 
previous work, the intellectual father of SDSS, Pr
of. Jim Gunn from Princeton University, was awarded 
the National Medal of Science by President Obama. 

 
Over the last few years, even more portals have 
been developed. One was de
veloped by Microsoft and 
called WorldWide Telescope. You can use it to get 
not only SDSS data, but just about every large 
astronomical dataset. Google Sky did a similar thing. A colleague who developed Google Sky with 
people from Google told me that as soon as they put 
it online, there were several million downloads. 
Google thought that someone was giving them a deni
al-of-service attack. That shows many people were 
interested. 
 What did we learn from this exercise of releasing data even before the project team did its own science? 
First, it requires higher standards. When you put 
something out to the public, you have to have 
documentation. You cannot put out documentation that 
is not spell-checked, for example. It is a very 
serious job to put something in the public domain. Then
 there are costs to keep it public, such as servers, 
help desks, and so on. These are the two main issu
es: higher standards and the cost of curation, and 
because there are costs, we cannot just say, let™s do 
it. We have to subject this idea of publicly releasing 
data to a cost-benefit analysis.  
 
I will go through a list of the top 10 benefits that we think we extracted from our experience in 

astronomy. The caveat is, not all of them may apply to your field. Also, they may vary with time. For 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  43 
 example, 20 years ago in astronomy, not many astronomers would buy the arguments that I am going to 
present to you, but today most of them would. Things change with time. 

 The primary benefit, in the view of many, is that 
while you are taking data, and you have a finite lifetime 
for your project, if your dataset is complex, you need
 to subject it to rigorous analysis to be certain that 
everything is fine with your data-taking strategy, with
 your instrument, and so on. Some easy things, of 
course, you can see immediately. In astronomy, if you 
get a blank image, then you know that something 
is wrong. But there are effects at the 1 percent level.
 With these statistical surveys that have hundreds of 
millions of objects, we study such percent-level eff
ects. Often they can be hidden systematically in the 
data that you cannot see with the naked eye; you canno
t even see with simple analysis. You need to do 
complex analysis and cutting-edge research to disco
ver something special with your data.  If the data 
collecting is already finished, then it is too late. Th
at is the main reason why you should do it early, before 
the end of your project. 

 Then, especially in astronomy, sometim
es you want to take data with different facilities at the same time.  
In astronomy there are objects in the sky that do not exist forever. Supernova explosions last for a month 

or so; similarly, there are some asteroids that p
ass close to Earth, and then we do not see them for 
decades. There are events in the sk
y that last a short time and we want to deploy many facilities. To 
enable this, you have to release your data early. 
 If you release your data to the whole world, you will have many more users doing your science. With 

SDSS in particular, outsiders wrote more papers.  Ma
ny of these papers had great ideas that were not even 
listed in the project book that was given to funding ag
encies to justify this investment of close to $200 
million. More people mean more ideas. 

 If you release your data for everyone to work on, 
you ensure that all the scientific results will be 
reproducible. They can be verified and you will preserve
 your data for posterity. That is, again, very 
important in astronomy. Astronomers strongly believe that
 code should be released with the data, not just 
the final product. In particular, in astronomy, because of the atmospheric effects, we see from the ground 

only optical and radio wavelengths, but we learn a 
lot about the heavens by observing in X-ray and 
infrared bandwidths, among ot
hers, and using telescopes on satellites. To
 take this same argument further, cross-disciplinary science is enabled.   

 
There are some fantastic examples from the ast
ronomyŒstatisticsŒcomputer science boundary, where 
computer scientists use astronomical data to deve
lop new ideas, which are then used once again in 
astronomy to do better science than astronomers could ha
ve done on our own. One can extend this also to 
other fields, because most disciplines have these giant da
tasets today. Many of the problems are the same:  
How do you do data mining in highly multidimensiona
l space? How do you visualize massive datasets? 
How do you store and query 100 petabytes? These are all common problems.  It is not efficient to try to 

solve them N times when we could solve them together. 

 Sometimes collaborating and promising to release the 
data are the only way to secure scarce resources, 
especially in astronomy where tools are becoming very ex
pensive. Most of the easy things were done in 
the last centuryŠthings you could do in a basement, 
with one professor and three graduate students.  Today™s more difficult problems require major resourc
es. Also if you look at the gross domestic product 
(GDP) of a big country like the United States, in the 1950s, it was 50 percent of the world™s economy.  

Today, it is only one-quarter of the world GDP: therefore, it is now much more profitable for the United 
States to enter international partnerships than it w
as 50 years ago.  In astronomy, very often when you 
have a major undertaking, you have to get everyone on 
board.  That is why it is good to share your data. 
 
Going back to the team that produced the data, we 
are all concerned about our 
careers, especially when 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  we are young postdoctoral researchers (postdocs) with
 small children to feed. We want to protect these 
young people. We want them in su
ccessful positions. Indeed, we hear
d many counterarguments against 
early release of data from SDSS, claiming that all of us
 who were postdocs at that time would not get jobs 
because other people would do the science. What happe
ned in practice was that all of us who were 
postdocs had know-how about the dataset. We did all 
the early science, even though the data was public. 
There was a delay of a year to two for the world community to get on board.  Furthermore, our know-how 

became a marketable commodity, so all the young 
postdocs who worked on SDSSŠliterally, all of them, 
a few dozenŠare faculty today.   

 Then, especially in astronomy, but in other fields 
as well, education and public outreach are important 
aspects of our science endeavors. You may have heard about the Galaxy Zoo project, where members of 

the public visually classify galaxies from the SD
SS.  The project has already recruited 200,000 
volunteers, who went through images of a million gala
xies. Evidently, the general public is greatly 
fascinated by astronomy. 
 Finally, there are issues of ethics and broader imp
act. First, sharing is nice, as we all know from our 
kindergarten days. Furthermore, taxpayers paid for mo
st of our projects. They have the right to see the 
results at every level of understanding, looking at astronomical images through Google Sky and 

WorldWide Telescope, all the way to seeing scientific
 results and translating these to understand better how the universe began, and on the other big questions. 
 
A big aspect of sharing data worldwide is that we are enabling democratization of scientific research. In 
the context of developing countries, this public rel
ease of giant datasets allows small teams to do big 
science. That colleague of mine and I on the beach in 
Croatia were a pretty small team, just two of us, and 
we managed to do cutting-edge science becau
se SDSS data were made public worldwide. 
 These are the top benefits, but then there are some ot
her issues that we should consider when thinking 
about releasing data. For example, if you spend some 
resources to release the data, is anyone going to use 
them? How many customers do you expect? 

 Of course, there are different kinds of data. Sometim
es they are of great use, like astronomical data. We 
saw millions of hits to public data 
releases of people looking at images of
 the sky. Sometimes data are so 
specific that even if you release them, not many peop
le would use themŠfor example, giant datastreams 
from particle accelerators.  That is another extreme. 

 
Then there are security and proprietary issues. For example, a big astronomical project, Pan-STARRS, 
was done in collaboration with the Air Force. They ha
ve to mask some parts of images and not release 
them to the public. There are also issues of
 commercial gains and foreign competition. 
 
Jim Gray, who was a Principal Researcher of Microsoft Research Lab, developed parts of those tools that 

SDSS used to manage and release data. He liked to jo
ke that he loved to work with astronomical data 
because ﬁthey are worthless.ﬂ What he meant was that
 they do not have commercial value. With other 
databases, he had to be very careful about what was released.  

 
If you are doing a major data release that
 can cost tens of millions of dollars, you have to justify the cost. 
Once, I listed these top benefits on one page. Being a sci
entist, I immediately asked myself if there is any 
predictive value in that list. Can we go through other 
projects and see if they are consistent with this 
reasoning? Should they publicly release their data? 
I will share with you two examples, one from 
astronomy and one from physics. The first one, an 
astronomical example, will be a new telescope, a 
successor to SDSS called the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), for which I am the project 
scientist. Located in Chile, the collaboration includes more than 30 U.S. institutions and about a half 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  45 
 dozen European institutions. The shortest way to summa
rize the difference is that the SDSS gave us the first digital color map of its kind, a snapshot. With 
LSST, we will observe the sky in a similar fashion as 
SDSS, but with about 1,000 times greater resolution. Essentially, you can think of it as a digital movieŠ
the greatest movie ever made. If you watched that movi
e, it would take you a full year without sleep, just 
staring at the screen. This telescope will have an
 8-meter aperture, not a 2.5-meter one, like SDSS. 
Because its sensitivity will be great
er, LSST will detect many more objects. Instead of 400 million objects 
detected with SDSS, we will collect 20 billion objects w
ith this telescope. It will be the first time that 
astronomers will have cataloged more objects than liv
ing people on Earth. Everyone can get their own 
galaxy. 
 When you look at the data volume, SDSS was about 40 te
rabytes. This is roughly the data volume of the 
books in the U.S. Library of Congress. Now, when
 you want to compare LSST, about 100 petabytes, 
100,000 terabytes, it is about the same as the volume 
of all the words ever printed in the world since 
Gutenberg. Of course, so much data can be problematic
. We have 20 billion objects, and we have to track 
them in real time. 
 
On my list of 10 benefits, indeed, all 10 of them a
pply to the LSST dataset. It is not a great surprise, 
because it is so similar to SDSS. But because of this cl
ear win in the cost-benefit analysis, all of the data 
will be made public to the world. Phenomena that ch
ange in the sky will be released within 60 seconds. 
Then every year there will be a cumulative data 
release as well (about 10 petabytes of new data every 
year). 

 
Let me tell you just a few words about another bi
g project in physics, the Laser Interferometer 
Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO). There are two 
sites in Louisiana and Washington. The project is trying to detect gravitational waves. If it is successf
ul, that is a Nobel Prize-class discovery that would 
have a great impact on our understanding of the fu
ndamental physics. Should those data be released 
immediately, or not? It turns out that most of the t
op 10 benefits apply to LIGO, too, but it is a more 
difficult question.  

 
To summarize, the issue of public data sharing is a 
matter of cost-benefit analysis. Often when you do a 
detailed analysis, you are led to the conclusion that you 
just have to do it. Given all the parameters of the 
problem, all the benefits, and all other forces that 
act upon you, you simply have to share the data. 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  13. Sharing Engineering Data for 
Failure Analysis in Airplane Crashes: Creation of a Web-based 
Knowledge System  Daniel I. Cheney 
Federal Aviation Administration, United States 
 
What I would like to address today is an informati
on system that the Federal Aviation Administration has 
developed regarding transport airplane accidents. It 
is an initiative to gather information and lessons 
learned from these accidents, because they definitely ha
ve been repeated. The origin of this effort goes back to some problems that we wo
rked on in the late 1990s and th
e early 2000s. There were several 
accidents, some of them very large that were heav
ily covered in the media. When we looked at them 
carefully, they exposed deficiencies about the way th
e aircrafts were operated, shortcomings in the 
maintenance programs, and in the fundamentals of th
e design of the aircraft. The processes that linked 
them together were inconsistent. The closer we
 looked, the starker the inconsistencies were.  Four accidents drew particular attention. These were
 the TWA Flight 800, Swissair Flight 111, Alaska Airlines Flight 261, and the American Eagle Flight 4184. 

 
From an investigator™s standpoint, the TWA Flight 800 accident investigation was a very long, 
complicated, and technical one. It took years to ass
emble the wreckage, and much research was done to 
understand the science behind the cause. At the end,
 we certainly knew more about fuel system 
flammability than we did before th
is accident. Much has been done to
 reduce the risk of this kind of 
accident on airplanes today. The Swissair Flight 111 
accident was also a very complicated one. Much 
research was done on the subject of flammability of mate
rials, particularly the materials used in the cabin 
for thermal acoustic protection. Flawed assumptions were a dominant characteristic of this accident. The 
Alaska Airlines Flight 261 accident involved a stabilizer control system that malfunctioned due to poor 
lubrication. Again, there were inconsistencies in th
e methods by which the aircraft was being maintained. 
The fourth accident that caused us to initiate this
 accident library was the American Eagle Flight 4184 
accident in Indiana. There were flawed assumptions in
 the way that atmospheric icing would affect the 
airplane. The ice would actually accumulate on parts of 
the airfoil that had never been observed before. It was very unusual and, before this accident, it was a 
part of atmospheric icing that was not understood. 
The result was loss of flight control. 

 
All these accidents and investigations resulted in a great 
deal of scientific research, testing, retesting, and 
evaluation. That research was documented, but was la
rgely languishing in various archives and places not 
readily available to the general public.   
 Knowledge of these and other major accidents was ba
sically being lost with the passage of time. The 
more years that passed, the more people forgot th
e causes, and the more new folks coming into this 
industry had no knowledge of these de
ficiencies and shortcomings at all, and we were seeing repeated 
accidents, which is unacceptable. 
 Awareness of information about previous accidents be
came key to understanding 
more recent accidents. 
The challenge that we undertook was to craft an information system that could take what could be well 
over a decade of work in doing the research and fixi
ng things and make it freely and easily accessible to 
those who can benefit from it so we do not
 need to make these mistakes again. 
 More than a century ago, George Santayana 
of Harvard University wrote a paper titled, 
Life of Reason: 
Reason in Common Sense
, saying that ﬁthose that cannot remember 
the past are condemned to repeat it.ﬂ
1                      1 Available at http://iat.iupui.edu/Santayana 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  47 
 It really is true. We will continue to repeat things 
unless we are mindful about what we need to be careful. 
A large transport airplane accident is an enormous 
human tragedy, but a second tragedy would be not to 
learn from it and then cause similar accidents. 
 Let me now talk about the barriers. Some other prese
nters talked about barriers to science and barriers to 
information flow. Aviation, particularly accidents, 
is driven by these very real and powerful barriers: 
  Fear of negative publicity
. There is probably nothing more negative than a large 
transport airplane accident.  It 
is very sad for all involved. 
 Lengthy investigation.
 Some investigations take more th
an a decade in order to get all 
the science and research together, and ge
t a go-forward path that is solid.  Continual workforce turnover
. Many of the people that come into these accident 
investigations will be involved for a decade or so
 and then move on, and we replace them with 
new people and fail to build corporate memory of the problems.   
 The information technology (IT) tools
. If you go back 30 or 40 years, before the 
Internet and the computational systems, it 
was very hard to capture all these data.  
 We have developed a ﬁLessons Learned from Transport Airplane Accidentsﬂ library
2 that is organized, threat-based, and has search-and-sort capability. Its intent is to stop and reverse the loss of lessons so that 
others can benefit from what has taken 40 or 50 y
ears to accumulate. Many of the speakers at this 
meeting, including myself, that came from out of town
 flew here on one of these airplanes. We take air 
travel almost for granted. The biggest risk is the car
, not the airplane. We want to keep it that way and 
maintain a very safe aviation system. 
 Now let me talk about the portal itself. Right now there are 57 major accident modules on the site. We are 

working on more all the time. We have another five
 being crafted. It is relatively time-consuming to 
create this material and involves different stakehol
ders. Boeing, Airbus, General Electric, Pratt and 
Whitney, and the airline companies all 
have been very helpful. They r
ealize that their work can benefit from getting this right.  
 
The only information on the portal is information that 
is already publicly available. We are looking at 
maybe 10 to 15 years of hard work captured in a 15-minute read. Anybody who wants to know about 

accidents like these can get the big issues in about 15 minutes.  
 Regarding the organization of the library, when we fi
rst started this, it was very tempting to only look at 
issues from technical and scientific aspects, such as fire, 
structural issues, flight control issues, and things 
like that. Then we looked at several major accident
s and asked ourselves: Are we really getting the 
maximum value of the material?  If not, what are we missing? After looking at half a dozen big accidents 

that we had prototyped, we realized that we we
re missing the bigger issues beyond the technical and 
scientific ones; we were missing what may be an organizational problem or a human error aspect. 
 
After the iterative process of developing the library
, we agreed upon three perspectives of looking at 
accidents. First, we look at the accident from a perspectiv
e of what we call the airplane life cycle. This is 
the beginning, the operational, and the maintenance 
and repair perspective. Second, we examine the accident threat categories. In looking at accidents sinc
e the jet era began, it turns out that we can put them 
into 18 technical categories that are important. The th
ird perspective is what we call the common themes. 
Every accident has a strong link to one of five 
common themes: flawed assumptions, human error,  
                       2 Available at http://accidents-ll.faa.gov/
. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  organizational lapses, preexisting 
failures, and unintended effects. 
Every miscue that has happened in 
aviation can be strongly linked to at least one of these.
 In some accidents we have found strong links to all 
fiveŠnot often, but there are some.  
 We have the site arranged so that you can search any one of these categories or themes. You can say, ﬁI 

want to know about structural failures,ﬂ and you can 
pull out the accidents in that category. You can also 
look at specific examples of accidents from an organizational standpoint. These are important not because 

they provide the most lessons, but they are certainly 
the most deadly accidents that have ever happened. 
For each accident there is a quick 60-second read of 
the general accident summary. The overview section 
gives you the nuts and bolts of the accident, 
the science, and the research that was done.  
 
What we also feel is very important in this kind of
 material is the value of the Internet and IT toolsŠ
streaming video, animation, interv
iews, and things like that. Where animation has not been done by the 
companies involved, we have created animation with 
the help of staff at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. It has been a very good partnership. 
 
The portal has been in the public arena for two and a ha
lf years now. We are still building it. We add 5 to 
10 accidents per year, and we will do that for at least 2 more years. Then we will transition into a 

sustaining mode where, as accidents happen, we will add them, but we will be finished with doing the 
historical mining and catching up. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  49 
 14. Integrated Disaster Research: Issues Around Data 
 Jane E. Rovins Integrated Research on Disaster Risk Programme, China 
 
I am going to introduce a new program as well as talk
 about the data issues surrounding disasters, because 
this is a topic that the Integrated Research on Disast
er Risk (IRDR) Programme has taken to heart. It is 
one of our three main projects. It comes up on a 
regular basis, and I spend as much time addressing 
disaster data questions as I do with risk-reduction questions. 
 So that you understand where I am coming from, 
I am a practitioner who happens to have academic 
credentials. I am a certified emergency manager. I sp
ent about 10 years in the field getting mud on my 
boots before I came into research.  

 The main issues that are faced by the IRDR Programme
 in the disaster arena are globalization, population 
growth, widespread poverty, and climate change. Ur
ban areas face unique challenges in these issues, so 
we have initiated several city-at-risk projects. The Co
astal Cities at Risk project is a partnership between 
various countries and is funded by 
Canada. Another project is the Cities at Risk project, which is a partnership between IRDR, the Global Change System
 for Analysis, Research, and Training, and the 
East-West Center in Hawaii. These projects are geared 
toward the specialized needs of densely populated, 
rapidly developing cities.  

 
In response to these issues, the International Counc
il for Science (ICSU) decided to ask the following 
question: Why, despite the advances in science on 
hazards and disasters, do our losses continue to increase? They created the IRDR Science 
Plan to try to answer that question.
3   In addressing natural and human-induced environmental 
hazards, we are taking an integrated approach to research through an international, multidisciplinary (n
atural, health, engineering, and social sciences, 
including socioeconomic analysis), collaborative r
esearch program. This, however, gets challenging. As 
you know, trying to bring even two or three of the 
natural science disciplines under one program can be 
difficult. IRDR is bringing all those disci
plines in with the social sciences as well. 
 
What exactly is our scope at IRDR? This is fairly st
raightforward, for those of you that have looked at 
natural hazards or disasters: 

  Geophysical and hydrometeorological trigger events. 
 Earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes, floods, storms (hurricanes, cyclones, typhoons), heat 
waves, droughts, wildfires, landslides, coastal erosion, climate change. 
 Space weather and impact by near-Earth objects. 
 Effects of human activities on creating or enhancing disasters, including land-use 
practices. 
 
What we are not looking at are technological disasters and warfare. What do I mean by technological 

disasters? Take the Japanese earthquake and tsunami, for 
example.  There were two natural disasters that 
created a technological problem with nuclear fallout. We would look at that in relationship to the 
earthquake and the tsunami. Had it been just a nuclear
 release caused by a failure at the plant, we 
probably would not have looked at it, but because it w
as created by natural hazards, we are incorporating 
it into our studies of the event. 

                      3 The Science Plan can be accessed at
 http://www.irdrinternational.org/.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  The IRDR Science Plan, has three key objectives. All of these are very data intensive, as you will see. 
The first is the characterization of hazards, vulne
rability, and risk. This includes the following: 
  Identifying hazards and vulnera
bilities leading to risks.   Forecasting hazards and assessing risks. 
 Dynamic modeling of risk. 
 
This is mainly focused on identifying hazards and 
vulnerabilities, especially in developing countries. 
They do not necessarily have the means to identify a
nd understand what their risk levels are (e.g., the 
forecasting of these hazards and assessing risk). The second objective is effective decision making in the 

context of complex and changing risk. This includes the following: 
  Identifying relevant decision-making systems and their interactions. 
 Understanding decision making in the co
ntext of environmental hazards. 
 Improving the quality of decision-making practice. 
 
The third objective has to do with how we ulti
mately reduce the risk and curb the losses through 
knowledge-based actions. In the disaster arena, there is 
much anecdotal information. That is historically 
on what the disaster field has based its decisions. Scie
nce is not good at getting information down to the practitioners. The practitioners do not understand a lot of the science, because it is presented in highly 
complicated expositions, using very statistics-heavy methods
. It needs to be translated in such a way that 
they can actually understand it.  

 
In this process, some of the things that we are tr
ying to develop are long-term databases. Disasters have 
very short memories. Within a year or two of a major 
event, it is forgotten. Even in Florida, where they 
get hit all the time, they just forget. 
 
How are we going to actually do this?  The three cr
osscutting themes that we are implementing are as 
follows: 
  Capacity building. Research is great, but if 
you do not train people how to use it, it does 
not do any good. We are partnering with several
 capacity-building organizations, in the United 
States and globally, to develop this. 
 Looking at case studies and demonstration projects. People learn by seeing what has 
already happened. 
 Addressing assessment, data management, and monitoring. 
 
To illustrate the difficulties in achieving this kind of in
tegration, we can think of the parable of the blind 
men and an elephant, where six blind men touch different
 parts of an elephant in a collective attempt to 
discern its true nature. The one who touched the elephant™s ears decided that an elephant must be like a 
fan. The one who touched its trunk determined that an
 elephant is like a snake, and similar conclusions 
were reached by those who felt horns like spears, sk
in like a wall, legs like tree trunks, and a tail like a 
rope. Similarly, with so many scientists from diverse 
fields ﬁtouchingﬂ disasters, it is a monumental task 
to integrate their respective works into a comprehensiv
e, cohesive understanding of the nature of hazards 
and risk. The researchers will examine wind speed, wa
ve action, rainfall, ground motion, and the like. 
They all have their own unique data issues and their 
own unique data links to social science aspects, such 
as religion, ethnicity, age, and gender, for example. 

 
Ultimately, though, what we need to be doing is talkin
g about risk reduction in the collective sense, to get 
an accurate picture of what an elephant looks like. 
When you try to integrate census data from the social 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  51 
 science side, which is collected differently and measur
ed differently in every country around the world, 
with the natural sciences and how these issues are all 
measured, you come up with very different results. 
What IRDR is trying to do in the disaster arena is 
get researchers to look at all of the topics in a common 
platform and a common way. It is also very important that the private sector be brought into what we are 
doing.  

 
Then there are problems with the quality and quantit
y of data on the impacts of disasters. This comes 
from several factors. Natural hazard management, right 
or wrong philosophically, is tied very closely to 
homeland security. When you start looking at disaster 
data and public infrastructure (e.g., police stations, 
fire stations, hospitals, power grids, water systems)
, the homeland security experts do not want to talk 
about it, because they are afraid that it will show 
vulnerabilities in the system. They would say, ﬁWe 
cannot talk about the water system, because then 
somebody would know how to poison the water system 
in a major city.ﬂ I can understand that logic, but wh
en you look at a city like Beijing, with 22 million 
people, whether or not that water system continues 
to function in an earthquake is really important. 
 There is also the issue of the quantity of data. Ther
e are massive amounts of satellite data coming in from 
all over the world for a disaster, but if we look at 
information on disaster losses related to injury and 
death, there is actually very little information becau
se there is no common agreement within the medical field of what defines death by disaster. Disaster is not
 a cause of death on a death certificate. In the recent 
tsunami in Japan, for example, people were washed 
out to seaŠis that an immediate impact? Or what 
about people in Florida who died of carbon monoxide
 poisoning several days after the disaster because 
they ran generators in their garage? 
Is that still death by disaster, or is that just accidental? We have not 
figured that out yet, and this creates questions rela
ted to the quality of data and how they are being 
analyzed. 

 There are many other biases affecting data quality, such
 as those in the databases regarding various losses. 
Most data related to disasters look at post-disaster responses and the losses that have accumulated. We 
also have hazard biases, since hazards are defined differ
ently in different parts of the world. Further still, 
there are temporal biases. How are hazards compared over time?  Can we compare a disaster from the 

1960s and 1970s to a disaster that just occurred today?  Realistically, it is much more difficult, partially 
because of technology. The technology was not availa
ble then to measure things the way we do now. 
Other biases include the following: 

 
Threshold biases.
 This becomes a bigger issue, because many
 the databases will, for example, not count 
an event as a disaster unless a certain number of peop
le were affected.  For example, a tornado this 
morning ripped through Greenburg, PA. That communi
ty had less than 10,000 people, but the event was 
not any less significant. For the 11 families affected, 
it was as devastating as Hurricane Katrina was to the 
Gulf Coast.  This becomes a threshold bias, 
because every database has a different cutoff. 
 
Accounting biases. This is really straightforward. How are they measuring the economic effects? What 
losses are included and how is that done?  Even within
 the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency, 
they are not consistent. There is no consistency 
across the field or within individual countries. 
 
Geographic bias. This becomes really interesting when yo
u start talking about changing borders. An 
example that occurred recently was an earthquake 
on the China-Myanmar border. How China counts the 
damages and how Myanmar counts them can be very
 different. How do you look at the earthquake 
collectively when you only get half the information? 
 If you are interested in these issues, I encourage you 
to look at a recent article titled ﬁWhen do losses 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  count?  Six fallacies of natural hazard loss dataﬂ
4 that looks directly at natural hazard loss data.   
 
So what is needed? For one, users need to be edu
cated about data biases and issues of social loss data. 
This is especially important at the policy-makers™ leve
l. Within the social sciences sphere, this becomes 
an even bigger issue when you start looking at th
resholds for age, income levels, and so on. 
 
Making things comparable and accessible for human di
saster loss data to support research and policy is 
another requirement. For example, the floods in Pakist
an and China that occurred last year look very 
similar on many levels. The problem is, we cannot go in
 and scientifically compare them because the data 
were collected so differently for the two events.  
 
Furthermore, existing databases need to be identified. 
We know what is out there globally, but what about 
the national and regional datasets?  In Latin America,
 for example, they deal a lot on a regional level. 
What do the databases look like there versus here in th
e United States, in Canada, or in Europe? A lot of 
the data have global and regional trends.  How do we
 make the sub-national databases accessible so that 
policy makers can look at them?  We are working ve
ry closely with the United Nations International 
Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) to try to make
 a lot of this information readily available to the 
policy makers so they can apply it in their areas. 

 The following are brief introductions to two activities already underway.  
  The Risk Interpretation and Action project is looking at why people think they are at risk 
(or are not) and how they react. It is also taking into account the likelihood of the magnitude of 

events. Moreover, it is bringing together the phys
ical sciences with the social sciences to look at 
the resiliency of physical infrastructure. 
 Our job in the Forensic Investigations of
 Disasters (FORIN) project is to trace back 
through all the articles, data, a
nd other research to figure out 
what happened leading up to and 
ultimately causing the disaster. What was the underl
ying cause for the event?  It goes far beyond 
looking at why the communities are socially vulnera
ble. In Japan, for example, why was a nuclear 
reactor put in a tsunami zone? There must be an
 underlying reason somewhere back in history. 
This will be a series of case studies using a common template and methodology. The Japanese 
have already picked this up and will be looking 
at it in relationship to a previous earthquake, as 
well as the latest series of events. 
 
How did IRDR get to this point, and who are our pa
rtners? We are cosponsored by ICSU, the UNISDR, 
and the International Social Science Council. Our partners are important, because this is about 
implementation. They are the national and internati
onal science institutes, national and international development agencies, and funding bodies. We are wo
rking with organizations such as the Department 
for International Development, which is the Un
ited Kingdom™s overseas development agency, and the 
U.S. Agency for International Development, looki
ng at the majority of disasters that happen in 
developing countries. We have six national committees around the world. These take the IRDR principles 
and apply them in a national context. We also have 
the IRDR Centres of Excellence, the first being in 
Taipei. They will be doing research (national and in
ternational) as well as capacity-building programs, 
and they have funding for young scientists.   
 
One of the things that we are not doing is trying to 
duplicate existing initiatives. We are trying to identify 
the gaps, fill the gaps, and partner with agencies that 
are already out there doing it. We provide them with 
expertise and solid scientific research.  
                     4 M. Gall, K. A. Borden, S. L. Cutter, 2009. When do lo
sses count?  Six fallacies of
 natural hazard loss data.  
BAMS 90 (6): 799Œ
809. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  53 
 We strive to enhance the capacity of the world to 
address these issues and make informed decisions. We 
are trying to get stakeholders to shift their focus 
from response and recovery to mitigation and prevention. 
How remarkable would it be if there were a major ea
rthquake and we did not have to spend the next 10 
years rebuilding? What we are trying to do also is 
to learn from the dataŠnot only the mistakes and the 
lessons learned, but also the best
 practices and innovative approaches. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  15. Understanding Brazilian Biodiversity: E
xamples Where More Data Sharing Makes the 
Difference 
 Vanderlei Canhos 
Reference Center on Environmental Information (CRIA), Brazil 
 
Increasing consumption of natural resources is leading 
to a high rate of environmental degradation and biodiversity loss. In the last d
ecade, large forest areas of the Brazilian Amazon Basin have been 
destroyed, including national park areas classified as 
high-priority areas for biodiversity conservation. To 
halt this destruction, real-time monitoring systems 
to support law enforcement are needed. Prompt and 
easy access to scientific and socioenvironmental data
 are critical for the development of real-time 
monitoring systems, law enforcement measures, and 
informed decision making. To promote conservation 
and sustainable use of biological resources, we need to improve access to quality and fit-for-use data, 
from molecules to ecosystems, deploying new tools that
 allow the real-time integration of different types 
of information, including legal regulations, biologi
cal data, and socioeconomic 
and environmental data.  
 
Biological collections are repositories of reference ma
terials and, as data centers, they provide the 
information necessary to understand the biocomplex in
teractions of organisms in ecosystems. Biological 
collections worldwide house an estimated 2.5 to 3 bi
llion biodiversity objects. Of those, about 40 million 
samples are housed in Brazilian collections. Theref
ore, to improve knowledge 
of Brazilian biodiversity, 
we need to unlock and share the data associated with these Brazilian samples. The most efficient way to 
address this challenge is to develop a long-term, 
large-scale cooperative program focused on data sharing 
and data repatriation, with the deployment of state o
f-the-art information and communication technology.    
 
The interoperability of e-infrastructures needs to be
 improved to facilitate the easy, open, and free access 
to biological data, tools, and Web services. This is th
e key to innovation in the life sciences, and is a 
critical factor in the design of support systems fo
r informed decision making. Both the emergence of 
state-of-the-art computational tools and workflows 
to check and improve data
 quality and with the 
availability of Web services and tools that allow the vi
sualization of models and data on a spatial scale are 
opening new avenues to improve 
our knowledge on biodiversity.  
 The 10-year existence of the speciesLink network
5 demonstrated that the key success factors for network 
consolidation were the adoption of practical soluti
ons to address the lack of adequate institutional 
infrastructure and the change in culture of sharing 
data. The network was developed as an inclusive and 
collaborative bottom-up effort, based on low-cost equi
pment and free or shareware software. The project 
implementation started in November 2001, and the 
network was launched in October 2002, releasing 
5,000 records online. Three years after the network 
launch, approximately 700,000 records were available 
online.  
 
In the early days of the project, many organizations 
had serious concerns about releasing and sharing data, 
but this problem was overcome as the benefits of co
llaborative networking became clear. At the end of 
2010, the network reached 4 million records from near
ly 200 collections, double the 2 million records 
expected to be reached in the initial growth rate. 
 
The key factor in the consolidati
on of the speciesLink network was the adoption of an architecture (Figure 
15-1) that allows the harvesting of data from all 
types of collections, from small laboratories to large 
institutional repositories, including collections with 
substandard computing facilities and poor Internet 
connectivity. The development of mechanisms to mirr
or the data in regional cache nodes, associated with mechanisms to transfer and store the data in a centr
alized database, allows the deployment of tools and 
                     5 Available at http://splink.cria.org.br
. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  55 
 services to flag potential errors (such as misspelled names and other outliers) and the provision of tools to 
improve data quality to the data 
providers and ensuring full control of the data served.    
   FIGURE 15-1 speciesLink network architecture 
Source: From the speaker™s p
resentation at the symposium. 
 Speakers in this symposium from Tanzania and S
outh Africa emphasized that a major problem to be 
addressed is the lack of confidence of data providers
 to release and share data openly. This problem has 
been addressed by the speciesLink network through 
the development of mechanisms that allow the 
mapping and filtering of sensitive data, and facilitating the 
blocking of records that are not to be shared. 
When the user carries out the search, the system indi
cates that collection has the data, but data can be 
blocked. If needed, users can contact the database cura
tor to check the restrictions to get the data under 
special circumstances. 
 The system harvests the data from cache nodes and stores 
the data in the central depository. This dataset 
is used for the network management and the develo
pment of indicators of the network evolution. The 
daily data-cleaning reports are available online not only
 to data providers but also to the users. This 
provides an opportunity for the users to check if the 
data have the required quality and are fit for use. A 
set of tools and algorithms are available to develop ecological niche models within the openModeller 
framework.   

 
The 10-year development of the Reference Center 
on Environmental Information™s (CRIA) biodiversity 
e-infrastructure is the basis for the effort to inte
grate the Brazilian and European e-infrastructures through 
the implementation of the ﬁEU-Brazil Open Data and Cloud Computing e-Infrastructure
6ﬂ. This is a scoping project cofunded by the European Commission
 and the National Council for Scientific and 
Technological Development in Brazil.  

                      6 Available at http://
www.eubrazilopenbio.eu/. 
TAPIR Portal
Cache node
Cache node
Indicators
Network Manager
Query interface
Data cleaning
Web Site
mapcria
webservice
Data analysis
Reports
Maps
PostGIS
Central Repository
Data Harvester
Collections with
a DiGIR provider
Collections 
with
spLinker
DiGIR
SOAP
TAPIR
WMSspeciesLink architecture
TAPIR Provider
webservice
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  One important feature of the CRIA™s system is the de
ployment of a statistics package to monitor usage. 
Figure 15-2 shows the continuous increase throughout the years, in which the green bar indicates the 

consolidated usage of all systems available at 
CRIA. The record is 4.2 million visits in 2010. 
    FIGURE 15-2  Visits to CRIA™s online systems in 2010 
Source: From the speaker™s p
resentation at the symposium. 
 Considering that the bulk of information available 
at CRIA™s systems is primary data and taxonomic 
information, the figures are impressive, mainly becau
se more than 80 percent of users are from Brazil. 
This is the result of investments made by the 
Brazilian government in improving Internet access. The 
numbers show the increasing demand for access to sci
entific biodiversity data and information. 
 
A challenge that is currently being addressed by th
e CRIA team is the development of mechanisms to 
share biodiversity information with different user 
communities, meeting the needs of scientists, policy 
makers, and common citizens. The way that the da
ta from images, maps, species, and specimen is 
transparently integrated and shown to the users is 
key to meet their needs. New Web services are being 
developed to show high-resolution images integrated w
ith taxonomic information. This is the core of the 
implementation of the ongoing, long-term, large-scal
e repatriation program of data from international 
collections.   
In a cooperative effort involving the National Museu
m of Natural History (MNHN) in Paris and the São Paulo Botanical Garden, CRIA developed the ﬁA
ugust de Saint-Hilaire Virtual Herbarium-HVSH
7ﬂ. This site integrates bibliographic data with higher-reso
lution images of maps, field notebooks, and samples of 
herbarium specimens collected during Saint-Hilair
e™s travels in Brazil between 1816 and 1822. This 
material is stored at the MNHN in Paris and the Cl
ermont-Ferrand Herbarium in France. The information 
system is the prototype that will be adopted to in
tegrate high-resolution images 
of samples collected in 
Brazil. This is relevant, as the MNHN Herbarium is
 finalizing the processing of more than 6 million 
images of specimens collected worldwide. After proc
essing the label information and improving the data 
quality by adding coordinates and revi
sing the taxonomic information, the 
digital data will be integrated 
to the MNHN Sonnerat Information System. 
  
Another successful example is the revision of the Brazilia
n List of Plant Species. To meet the first target 
of the Global Strategy for Plant Conservation approved 
at the Conference of Parties of the Convention on 
Biological Diversity (CBD) in 2002, all CBD memb
er countries were supposed to produce an updated 
                     7 Available at http://hvsh.cria.org.br/. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  57 
 working list of plants by 2010. In 2008, after defini
ng the strategy to revise the Brazilian List of Plant 
Species, the Brazilian government contracted with CRIA 
to develop the information system to support the 
collaborative network of experts. The coordination t
ask was delegated to the Rio de Janeiro Botanical 
Garden. After merging more than 40 databases in different
 formats into a single one, the 400 specialists in 
the network revised the list. It included more than
 40,000 valid names of plant species and synonyms, was 
published in May 2010, and was presented at
 the CBD Nagoya meeting in October 2010
8. After the development of new functions, the system was 
reopened for the continuous review by experts.
9   
To conclude, we are living in a new information 
era where small nonprofit organizations like CRIA, in 
collaboration with local and internati
onal partners, can play an important role in the creation of virtual 
environments and e-infrastructures that integrate 
distributed data, information, and knowledge. These developments are opening new avenues for innovation 
in science and technology. In this respect the 
sharing of data, tools, and experiences is maki
ng the difference, and a big difference it is!    
   
                         8 Digital version available at h
ttp://floradobrasil.jbrj.gov.br/2010. 
9 The official 2011 updated list is availabl
e at http://floradobr
asil.jbrj.gov.br/2011/. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  16. Social Statistics as One of the Instruments of Strategic Management of Sustainable 
Development Processes: Compelling Examples 
 Victoria A. Bakhtina10 International Finance Corporation, United States 
 The focus of my presentation will be on social statis
tics as an instrument of strategic management for 
sustainable development processes. This topic is impo
rtant because of the stronger interlinkages between 
social, economic, and ecological domains coming to th
e forefront of sustainable development progress, 
and a need to assess the impact of this progress on society. 
 
The twenty-first century brings radical changes to determining the direction of economic progress, 

shifting the focus to solving the problems of innovative development, and transition to economies of 

knowledge based on intellectual resources, intellectual 
capital, science, and education. The ultimate goal 
is the improvement of people™s lives and the expans
ion of people™s choices and opportunities, together 
with sustainable, balanced, and harmonious development of society. 
 
The modern vision of gradual sustainable development unifies three main components: economic, 

ecological, and social. The quality of the economic co
mponent is increasingly linked in people™s minds 
with the concept of human development. Human or 
social development becomes the main purpose, and 
material means become a condition of this development. 

 
Enormous data capabilities in conjunction with scien
tific and technological progress allow for a systemic 
approach to management and a comprehensive review
 and vision of complex information, leading to a 
better understanding of the major challenges facing humanity. It is key, therefore, to create an 
information-analytic base for innovative development 
using pioneering models a
nd high-quality data. We can benchmark and look at the world as a whole, a
nd we can add to these descriptions of reality and 
infuse more precision to the understanding of real situations. 

 
Another approach is extracting data on risks, both 
general and specific, and drawing conclusions about 
management and prevention of risk situations. Statis
tical analysis is a necessary tool and condition for 
justifying the taking of strategic decisions. 

 
In the 1990s the Human Development Report (HDR) of
 the United Nations demonstrated how to change 
the approach to development, focusing on people, 
and opening an era of new opportunities for the policy 
and research agenda. History has shown that a sole
 focus on economic growth does not necessarily result 
in the highest achievement in human development, 
and countries with the highest economic growth can 
lag in health, education, and ot
her key areas. Having people as the source and the purpose of development 
makes progress equitable and creates an enabling envir
onment for each member of the community to be a 
participant in change. 

 Initially the Human Development Index (HDI) encompass
ed only longevity, adult literacy, and income. In 
2010, HDI was adjusted to reflect inequality and w
as complemented by the Multidimensional Poverty 
Index (MPI) and the Gender Inequality Index (GII), wh
ich illustrate countries™ trends over the years and 
highlight important lessons for the future. 

 
Assessments of ﬁwell-beingﬂ vary dramatically b
ased on many aspects not covered by HDI: lack of self-
respect and dignity, lack of access to assets and access to
 information, lack of time, insecurity, lack of 
                     10 The views expressed herein are those of 
the individual contributor and do not necessa
rily reflect the views of the IFC or its 
management. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  59 
 freedom of choice, helplessness, social exclusion, and 
isolation. This list is far from complete and can be 
expanded based on any specific context. These aspects
 are often interconnected and can lead to the 
disempowerment of people. Further research is 
needed to shed more light on these areas. 
 Social statistics complement and enrich economic a
nd environmental measures, and allow us to analyze 
the efficiency of policies. It is equally important
 on a macro level when conceptually assessing global 
phenomena, and on a micro level, for example,
 utilizing household surveys, when assessing the 
qualitative nature of information and tailori
ng the policies to a certain context.  
 The Human Development Index is important for develope
d and developing countries, allowing us to track 
cumulative progress year after year. Measurements s
hould be standardized as much as possible around the 
globe. Complemented by MPI and GII data, HDI adds
 various nuances to country performance relative to 
similar countries. The HDI shows that inequality adju
stment can drastically shift the perception of the 
countries. For example, you can see from Figure 16-1 
that there are significant losses in HDI due to 
inequality in various components. 
  FIGURE 16-1 HDI index adjustments due to inequality.  
Source: From the speaker™s p
resentation at the symposium. 
 Figure 16-2 shows six African countries: Ghana, Botswana, Gabon, Malawi, Rwanda, and Kenya. These 
countries are dispersed around the continent, differ in
 access to natural resources, and have different 
political situations. There is a strong desire in these countries for reforms. 

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
   FIGURE 16-2 Six African countries: Overall Satisfaction with Life 
Source: From the speaker™s p
resentation at the symposium. 
 
Rwanda has strong leadership, far-reaching reforms,
 and a roadmap outlining the transformation to a 
middle-income country by 2017. According to an In
ternational Monetary Fund report, reforms are on 
track and quantitative targets are being met. Malawi 
is a landlocked country and an agriculture-driven, 
smallholder-based economy. Ghana is one of the mo
st robust democracies in Sub-Saharan Africa. 
Botswana is one of the most successful countries in 
Sub-Saharan Africa. Gabon is rated highest in human 
development in Sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya is one of
 the largest economies in East and Central Africa. 
 Figure 16-3 displays four of the six countries that
 are in the low human development quartile, according 
to the HDR. The main reasons are poverty, poor infrastructure, and limited access to health services and 
education.  
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  61 
  FIGURE 16-3 Multidimensional Poverty Index of Six African Countries  Data Source: HDR 2010; Figure is from th
e speaker™s presentation at the symposium.  Gabon and Botswana have a medium level of human de
velopment, and they are almost identical, standing 
at 0.65 and 0.63 HDI, respectively. Kenya and Ghana ar
e close, with 0.47 HDI. Rwanda and Malawi both 
have 0.39 HDI.  

 Let us expand the picture inferred from the Huma
n Development Index further, and take into 
consideration inequalities in income, longevity, and e
ducation. According to Figure 16-3, Gabon moves 
to 0.5 HDI when we review inequality-adjusted HDI. 
After adjustment for inequality, Ghana comes first 
in the set of four countries from the low human de
velopment cluster. Malawi is a little higher than 
Rwanda.  
 Now, add an additional measureŠa Multidimensiona
l Poverty Index (see Figure 16-3). Based on this 
index, Ghana supersedes Gabon, appearing as the countr
y with the lowest MPI of the six countries. In 
gender inequality, Rwanda exhibits the most equality
, followed by Botswana and Gabon. Kenya has the 
same GII as Ghana, and Malawi shows the largest inequality. 

 An additional measure to be considered in the analysis
 is developmental, or the sustainability, risk index 
based on region-specific features. The sustainability ri
sk index shows how vulnerable the countries are to 
the targeted key risks. According to
 the latest research (Bakhtina, 2010
11), Botswana (rank 4) and Gabon (rank 5) falls into the cluster of least vulnerable c
ountries, followed by Ghana (rank 10). Malawi (rank 29) 
falls into the medium-risk cluster, followed by Ke
nya (rank 30). Rwanda (rank 13) is the country least 
vulnerable to regional risks in the medium-risk cluster. 
 Now let us see how happy the people feel in the si
x countries under consideration. Overall satisfaction 
with life is highest in Malawi, followed by Ghana an
d Botswana, and those least satisfied with life are 
Kenyans. Females appear to be less happy. Is it a 
result of inequality? This presumption is not clear, as 
                     11 V. A. Bakhtina, 2010, Sub-Saharan Africa
: Sustainability risk disc
ussion (presented at CODATA 22 International Conference, 
Cape Town, October 24Œ27).
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62             
 Malawi ha4).   Credit: H What conaddress onpoverty a
n When Ma6 versus 8is in Costahappier an  
Here, mo
rdomestic 

 
Accordingand creatidevelopmhuman d
e 
Let us turndecisions.amended 

face (Nat
ideprivatio                       
as the largest 
FIGHDR 2010. 
Onclusions can bn the global 
snd inequality
alawi is com
p8.  (The lowe
sa Rica at 8.5.nd inspired tore informationviolence. Whg to the HD
Rive lives, to adment equitablyevelopment a
sn now to so
m. In 2009 in 
Mbased on a mional Councilon in at least o                       
inequality a
mGURE 16-4  SSource: FromOverall Satisfabe made fromscale? As we s.  ared with N
ost life-satisfac)  We can also act towards n is needed: fhat factors in
cR, ﬁhuman devdvance other 
y and sustainas individuals 
ame compellin
gMexico, the Cmultidimensionl for Evaluati
oone of six dim             THE 
Cmong the six cSix African Com the speakeraction with L
ifwith life in m these data? 
see from the
sorway, the couction level is oo expand the 
change and lifor example, 
mcrease happinevelopment is tgoals they h
aably on a shar
and groups.ﬂ
g examples s
honstitution a
nnal poverty 
mon of Social 
Pmensions: ed
uCASE FOR IN
Tcountries, bu
tountriesŒOver™s presentat
iife is based ona Gallup Wo
rWould the d
ase statistics, l
iuntry with hi
gobserved in Tresearch agenife-quality i
mmeasures of 
eess of the po
pthe expansionave reason to ed planet. Peohowing how snd the Gener
ameasure reflecPolicy). The 
cucation, healthTERNATIONA
Lt the highest 
lerall Satisfaction at the sy
mn responses torld Poll  
ata help us id
eife satisfactio
nghest HDI, th
eTanzania at 2.nda: What pomprovement? 
empowermen
tpulation?  
n of people™s 
value, and to
ople are both social statistical Law of Soccting various dcountry is ma
ph care, social L SHARING O
Flife satisfactioion with Life.
mposium. o a question 
aentify and fl
an has no strone satisfaction4 and Togo 
aolicies would t, unpaid wo
mfreedoms to l engage acti
vthe beneficiacs were used 
tcial Developmdeprivations 
tpped based osecurity, ho
uF SCIENITIFC Don (see Figure  about satisfa
cag key issues 
tng relation to 
-with-life indat 2.6, the hig
hmake people 
men™s work, alive long, heavely in shapin
aries and driv
eto drive polic
yment were 
the househol
dn the level ofusing quality, 
DATA 
e 16-ction to dex is hest and lthy, 
g ers of y ds f basic The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  63 
 household utilities, and access to food. The Mexi
can government uses the data to monitor the 
effectiveness of national social assistance programs. 

 The World Bank utilizes the Participatory Poverty 
Assessment (PPA) approach. The PPA allows the 
World Bank to incorporate views of the poor into the 
analysis of poverty, combine the results with other 
types of data, and communicate the findings to the 
policy makers, thus allowing the poor to influence 
policy. In numerous cases, PPA results contributed
 to a shift in World Bank lending programs. For 
example, in Ghana, PPAs contributed to a shift in th
e focus of reforms to rural infrastructure, quality and 
accessibility of health care, and education. In the 19
90s, the World Bank focus in Nigeria was shifted to 
water and roads.   
At the same time, PPAs were used in Thailand as a pa
rt of the Social Investment Project to increase the 
understanding of shifting patterns of vulnerability as th
e impact of the Asian crisis deepened, and to 
inform policy makers, strengthening the capacity of
 the country by consolidating various types of 
information. The Asian Development Bank also c
onducted similar assessments in Laos and the 
Philippines. 

 
Social aspects are also key in disaster response and 
mitigation. Along with physical aspects, such as the 
probability of loss and risk, social aspects such as vul
nerability and resilience should be considered. Fear, 
depression, despair, and post-traumatic stress can 
cause long-term consequences for the nation after a 
natural disaster. Apart from the assessment of hazar
ds, probability, magnitude, and impact, a people-
centered perspective is required to evaluate the susceptibility of the community to natural hazards. 
Interaction between hazard conditions
 and vulnerability conditions should be tracked dynamically (e.g., 
climate change impacts and economy impacts on migra
tion of people to places susceptible to hazards like 
floods). 
 The World Health Organization points out that the con
cept of risk is associated with the perception of 
risk, and is a characteristic of society and culture. More
 effort is needed in community involvement in risk 
mapping and analysis, enhancing vulnerability assessme
nts, understanding of risk perception, and the 
capacity to adjust. 
  The example of Mozambique shows how to link early
 warning of disaster and early action. After the 
flood in early 2000 left devastating consequences for th
e country, the social aspects of disaster mitigation 
were assessed and used to train the community to un
derstand the risk and use warning information. The consequences of the 2007 and 2008 fl
oods were significantly less severe. 
 Social factors contributing to cyclones™ severity in 
Bangladesh are cultural.  Male heads of the household historically did not want to move to shelters ﬁuns
uitable for females,ﬂ with 
lack of privacy and poor 
sanitation. Families mostly adopted a wait-and-see 
strategy. Vulnerability was increased by late 
responses. Currently the issue is being addressed by educati
ng the population.  The examples above show us how social statistics 
can serve as an instrument and basis for decision 
making and research on sustainable development process
es. We are looking at the management process of 
decision making and utilizing this powerful instrument
. We are showing how this instrument works on 
the global scale in the computation of indexes, which 
help us to understand objective trends. The focus is 
on the level at which the statistics are used. We reviewed
 three levels of application of social statistics: 
global, national, and local decision making. Many cha
llenges remain, such as the sharing of data, the need 
for global statistical standards, data communication, 
intellectual property rights to the research results, 
and utilization of the data and research in policy decision making.  

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  The benefits of sharing social data are many, and on
ly a selection of them are given in this presentation. 
We should not forget that with benefits come re
sponsibilities: To whom do we distribute the data? How 
do we protect the information against misinterpreta
tion? How do we educate communities on how to use 
the data? How do we protect the data against terrori
sm? Who is accountable for quality, timeliness, and 
accessibility of data? 

 
Let me conclude by reinforcing what I said earlier. 
We have tremendous opportunities. With the help of 
powerful technologies and new innovative models, 
we can promote and reinforce sustainable 
development. We can illustrate socioeconomic and 
ecological aspects of the development and address key 
risks. To validate, calibrate, and use the models
, we need accurate and timely data and collective 
cooperation among statistical agencies and policy 
makers around the world. The assessment of the 
contribution of policies and financing mechanisms in
 the improvement of people™s lives and expansion of 
their freedoms, cannot possibly be done without ex
tensive shared informati
on on social statistics. 
 
References 
Human Development Report (UN), 2010. 
 
Robb, Caroline M., 
Can the Poor Influence Policy? Participat
ory Poverty Assessment in the Developing  
 World
,  2nd ed. (International Bank for Reconstr
uction and DevelopmentŒThe World Bank,  
 2002). 
 World Disasters Report 2009, Focus on
 Early Warning, Early Action
 (International Federation of Red   Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2009). 

 
Bakhtina, Victoria A., Sub-Saharan Africa: Sustainability Risk Discussion (paper presented at the   CODATA 22 International Conference,
 Cape Town, October 24Œ27, 2010).     
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  65 
 17. Remote Sensing and In Situ Measurements in 
the Global Earth Observation System of Systems 
 Curtis Woodcock 
Boston University, United States 
 
What I would like to present today are my experienc
es related to the Group on Earth Observations (GEO), 
specifically the Forest Carbon Tracking (FCT) task. 
There are examples that relate to what we are 
interested in here, so I would like to share those. 
 The whole point of the FCT task has been to try to stay ahead of the problem of determining if and how 
developing countries could start to report on rates of 
deforestation and degradation. This is important so 
they could be eligible for compensation for reduci
ng those rates, all in support of trying to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere to 
try to mitigate increasing carbon dioxide in the 
atmosphere. Then the main question is, can those 
countries report in a reasonable way? To do this 
accurately, there is a need for data. 
 
The two primary kinds of data that are needed for this
 task are satellite observations and in situ forest 
data. I am mostly going to talk about the satellite 
observations. On the one hand, that is because if you 
think about data policy and data sharing, in situ obs
ervations are typically collected by people in their 
own backyard. On the other hand, satellite data are ge
nerally collected by somebody else. Certainly we 
ought to make the first step, that if we are going to collect data in other people™s backyards, we ought to at 

least share the data with them, rather than necessarily
 force them to share the data they collect. If we 
could at least take that step, it would be a good step forward. 

   GEO has identified coordination among space agencies for image acquisitions as its first and top priority 
as it moves forward. Different satellite programs have 
collected data to be contributed to this task, 
including those in Table 17-1:  
Table 17-1 Image Acquisitions by Country 
  Why I call it a first priority is that there has actually
 been some coordination of image acquisitions across 
different countries™ space agencies. Those data were co
llected for this task and has been contributed to countries where we are trying to demonstrate these t
echnologies.  Nonetheless, there are still questions 
about data access, even though the data were collected 
specifically for this task. Free and open sharing of 
data remains very much an issue. 

 
Why is this so hard? It is hard because satellite miss
ions are expensive. They range from the hundreds of 
millions to billions of dollars. What makes it frustrati
ng is that the revenues that countries get from selling 
data that come from these missions rarely offset anyt
hing close to a significant fraction of the cost of 
those missions. Just logically, it does not match up very well. I am going to try to convince you that 

charging for the data significantly hinders the use of the data. 

  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66             
 The exammissions ifunctioninfrom 38 
yby 185 ki
llaunchingdataset. Weffectively The good 
distributesanyone intaxpayer, 
biggest yein from s
ebest, $10 were getti      After all tthat data p 
The other35 years. 

we could 
new categpolicy w
a 
Let me ra

has had inyears. Th
ethe interna                        
mple I am goi
nin the United ng still. The 
eyears of satellilometers of thg the satellite
sWe spent a lot 
y in the futur
enews is that 
s the Landsa
tn the world. 
Tthink about t
hear ever for saelling images
,million. Tha
ting back fromthese years, 
wpolicy can ha
vr thing that is 

All of a sudddo in the pas
tgories of acti
vas changed.  I ise one sensi
tnternational cere are about ational grou
n                       
ng to use is thStates. Thereeighth is sche
dite observatiohe surface of s, the data cosof money o
ne. starting in O
ct data, stoppedThe data usag
ehis. As show
nales of Lands
, on an annuat is one-tenth 
m selling the 
dFIGURE 
we are finally 
ve on the abilinteresting t
oden, we are fi
gt.  It not only 
vities that are think it is a t
rtive issue aboollaborators. 2.5 million i
mnd stations ar
o              THE 
Che Landsat mie have been seduled to be laons that is a lithe Earth. If yst somewhere
n generating t
hctober 2008, 
td charging fo
re has gone u
pn in Figure 17at data, they sal basis, was sof 1 percent 
odata.  17-1 Landsatgetting our 
mlity to do res
eo note here is 
tguring out ne
wallows us to starting to s
hransformativeout this data pThe governmmages archiv
eound the wor
lCASE FOR IN
Tission, which even satellitesaunched in Dettle more tha
nyou think ab
o between $5 bhis dataset, a
nthe U.S. Geo
lr the data andp by a factor 
o7-2, before t
hsold about 2
5somewhere b
eof the cost of t Web-enabledmoney™s worthearch and appthat I have bew and better wknow what hhow up, and i
te kind of exp
eolicy. Lands
ament sold licened in the Unitld. Although 
tTERNATIONA
Lis the oldest 
os in the Landsecember 201
2n 2.5 million 
out all the cosbillion and $
1nd we would logical Surve
yd provided accof 100 since i
the data becam5,000 images. etween about fthe dataset, od Monthly St
ah out of this 
dplications. een using La
nways to do a las happened it has been on
lerience for that is a U.S. sanses to receivted States andthose other c
oL SHARING O
Fof the land r
esat program. 
2. What we haimages. An i
mts associated 
10 billion. It 
ilike to see it gy (USGS), th
ecess on a no-
ct became fre
eme freely avai
lThe income 
$5 million a
non an annual batistics 
dataset. This indsat data for lot of things 
win the past, buly 2 years sin
he use of satelatellite, but th
eving stations td about 3 mil
lountries paid 
F SCIENITIFC Demote-sensin
gTwo are bar
eave is a datas
emage covers 
with buildingis an expensi
vget used e agency tha
tcost basis to 
ely available. 
Alable, in the that was co
mnd, at the verybasis, that thes the kind of 
my research 
we never thouut there are 
wce the distrib
ullite data. e United Stat
eto get data ov
elion images nfor the licen
sDATA 
g ely 
et 185 g and ve t As a ming y ey  effect over ught 
whole ution es er the now in ses to  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  67 
 collect the data, the United States now is giving the data
 away freely. At the same time, the history of the 
surface of the Earth is embedded in these datasets. We ca
nnot go back and recollect the data.  It is a really 
valuable dataset showing part of the history of the planet™s surface.  
 Here is where that effort stands. The USGS made an 
offer to the long list of countries that have data in their archives that if they would give us the data
, we would reprocess them to the highest standards and 
return the data to them, and we would freely make 
available the data, if they want them. The United 
States has made that offer to these countries, but I thi
nk you can appreciate the delicate nature of this sort 
of discussion, when, after having asked people to pay 
for the data all these years ago, you are now saying 
that you want the data returned at no cost. 
 
It really is an effort to bring into a standard state of 
affairs a very valuable dataset. A lot of this imagery is 
sitting around on media that is degrading. If we are goi
ng to do this right in the future, because we have 
not really done this correctly in the past, we n
eed to think about the dimensions of international 
coordination and collaboration on earth observations. 
We now have dozens of countries running satellite 
observation missions, but in a very coordinated manner. 

 
The first step is mission planning, so that there coul
d actually be some compatibility between the datasets 
produced by these different organizations and countries.
 Then you have acquisition strategies. Can we get 
some coordination of acquisition strategies? For the fi
rst time, countries are actually beginning to collect 
data in concert with each other. 
 
These satellite missions are expensive; there is no que
stion about that. A big question then is risk 
mitigation. If multiple countries are going to put up 
comparable satellite missions, which is what is 
happening now, can we at least share risk with each 
other, so that if somebody™s mission fails, the other 
will provide the data that would have otherwise been
 collected by the other satellite mission? This is 
starting to happen to some extent between the Euro
pean Space Agency and the 
U.S. Geological Survey, 
with the Sentinel satellites and the Landsat program. 

 
 If we are really going to take advantage of having
 multiple satellite systems collecting similar data in 
space, it is equally important to get the data processed a
nd distributed in consistent fashion, so that we can actually start to make use of them. It is difficult fo
r individual investigators to try to take data from 
multiple satellite systems and combine them if they 
do not have any coordination at the outset. This is 
something that, at an organizational level, would really help. 

 
My concluding thoughts are not too surprising. One 
is that we need satellite observations for many 
societal benefit areas, such as effective research and 
monitoring on climate and deforestation. We are in 
the infancy of trying to do any si
gnificant international coordination of these missions and collaboration, 
and there are many benefits to doing it that wa
y. Free and open access to Earth observation, in some 
ways, is most important for developing countries, b
ecause they can least afford to pay for the data.  
 I also work in an organization called the Global Ob
servation of Forest Cover and Global Observation of 
Land Dynamics. We have two sets of thematically 
oriented groupsŠthe forest group and a land cover 
group. I cochair the latter. We also support capacity building through a set of regional networks. These 
are groups of regional scientists with common interest
s in Earth observation as used for forest monitoring 
and other such research and applications. 

 We have been running da
ta-sharing workshops for the last coupl
e of years, sponsoring people from 
regional networks to come to the USGS Earth Resources Observation Systems Data Center in South 

Dakota, and letting them take away all the data they 
want. This removes many of the technology barriers.  
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENITIFC DATA
  They go home with hard disks full of satellite images th
at they can use and share 
in the region. It becomes a focused network.  

 We are going to continue to do this for at least the 
next 2 or 3 years. There was one workshop per year for 
each of the last 2 years, and we are going to do two 
more this year and in the next 2 years. If anybody 
wants to try to get people into one of these workshops
, or is interested in a particular region or getting 
access to the data that has already b
een taken back to some of these regions, I would be happy to help 
connect people and try to coordinate those activities.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPLELLING BENEFITS                                                                                               
                  69 
 18. DISCUSSION BY THE 
WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT: This question is to Dan Cheney. 
Have you and the Federal Aviation Administration 
taken the next step?  Now that you have all this 
wonderful scientific and technological experience data, 
have you started thinking about how you can exploit tho
se data to make the entire air system both safer 
and more efficient? 

 
MR. CHENEY: That really is the ultimate plan. The 
first step was to accumulate the knowledge. We are 
at the front end of taking the final step, and that is integrating the knowledge into our processes for 
maintaining and improving aviation safety. This initiativ
e is only two and a half years old, so we are still 
in the middle stages of catching up on the history of aviation. We are laying the groundwork now for what 

to do with it. We know we have some gaps in know
ledge in various aspects of aviation. So the question 
is, how do we use this to fill those gaps? We ar
e not there yet. There is more work to do.   
 PARTICIPANT: I am thinking particularly about th
e accidents that did not happen. There is a huge 
amount of learning there that goes on inside the airline industry all the time, when these things are 

adequately reported. Sometimes they are not. There are 
malpractices with loading, with crew behavior in 
the cockpit, and so on. There are seriously overwei
ght takeoffs and landings. 
We, as the general public, 
do not hear about those at all. There is an e
normous amount of learning embedded in that.   
 MR. CHENEY: The aviation industry has benefited from 
a level of safety margins that exist in every 
aspect of safety. We have achieved internationally an
 unthinkable safety record when you look back at 
where we were 40 years ago and 30 years ago, and 
even 20 years ago. But it is because of the safety 
margins that are there. When we do have the overweight takeoff, when we do have the pilot that forgets to 
deploy a system, or a fire occurs, there are margins upon 
margins that result in that airplane not having an 
accident. 
 
What we believe is the value in understanding the causes of yesterday™s accidents is to recognize that 
when you do load an airplane over gross or you do have
 a tired crew that forgets things, you effectively 
take away one of the five levels of margin or one of th
e three levels of margin for that flight. That in itself 
may not be catastrophic, but now you have put that plan
e in a level of vulnerability in which it would not 
otherwise have been in. The accident is nearly always
 because you have eaten up four or five levels, and 
you have nothing left. The close calls, the accidents th
at did not happenŠand they are certainly going on 
every dayŠare mirror images of what has happened in the 
last 50 years since the jet era.  Whether it is an 
A380 or a 787 of tomorrow, those margins are the margins. 

 I think our big return will be to have tomorro
w™s decision makers and 
operators understand the 
importance of checklists, the importance of getting 
it right from a maintenance perspective, because 
getting it wrong takes the margin away on one level.
  Now we have a two-legged stool.  One more 
mistake, and eventually we have an accident. The reason 
we are enjoying the safety we have is that it is a 
robust, margin-full industry. We are going to fight any threats of giving up any of the margins. 
 PARTICIPANT: One of the themes I got from several 
presentations is that a traditional problem for these 
kinds of data efforts is that data was locked up in 
disciplines, in silos. A lot of the presentations talked 
about how, especially for applied problems, you were 
able to overcome those traditional silos and put data 
together in new ways. The thing I am wondering about 
is, now that we have new problem-oriented silos, 
it seems there is always a danger of repeating hist
ory and having these new problem areas become silos 
on their own. I am just curious if you have thoughts on
 how to avoid that. To what extent in each of your 
areas are you really paying attention to other people™
s standards and looking at interoperability between 
biodiversity and disasters, which may not have an 
obvious connection now, but in fact, because of 
deforestation and forest cover loss, may have a connec
tion to land use and disaster loss? To what extent 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFC DATA 
 do you think people are thinking, especially in develo
ping countries, about not creating new barriers after 
having overcome the old barriers? 
 DR. CANHOS: I think that you raise a very critical point about standards and protocols for 
interoperability of databanks and data systems. When
 you look back at biological data, there were no 
standards and protocols for biodivers
ity data, although several organizati
ons have worked in this area in 
recent years, such as the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF) in close collaboration with a 

Committee on Data for Science and Technology 
(CODATA) committee for developments and 
improvements in this area.  
 We do have big issues with silos. You talk here a
bout different people working in different data areas 
such as biological data, species-oriented biological data
 and integration at a mol
ecular level, genome data, 
and then integration with the information derived fro
m satellite data, like land coverage. I think for local 
development, it is extremely important from the beginning to look at how the internationally agreed 
standards and protocols are developed. For the speci
esLink network, when we started 10 years ago, our 
first approach was to see what was happening in 
the taxonomic databases working group. Also, after 
looking at what they were doing regarding biodive
rsity information, we decided to work in close 
collaboration with the Taxonomic Data
 Working Group (TDWG) and GBIF.  
 
In conclusion, I think here we need the international organizations. We need CODATA and the 
International Council for Science (ICSU).  All those 
efforts, like TDWG, are voluntary efforts. It is 

extremely difficult to develop sta
ndards and protocols on a voluntary basis. I think the major development 
was the support of GBIF to TDWG. This happened 
with $1.5 million that came from the Gordon and 
Betty Moore Foundation. Again, we need more involve
ment of international organizations. I think ICSU 
has an important role to play in the definition and 
further development of the 
data-related standards and protocols. 

 
PARTICIPANT: Dr. Canhos, are you concerned about the 
sustainability of your biodiversity database?   
 
DR. CANHOS:  I am very concerned about the sustainability of those efforts. For me, it is difficult to get 
funds from the Brazilian government to maintain the speciesLink network. As to the content, from the 
beginning of the development of the network, we to
ld the collections, ﬁYou can come in or leave the 
network anytime you want.ﬂ It is just like pressing a 
button to take all the data from your database from 
the network, but that did not happen. Today we ha
ve more than 200 collections. The cost is well 
distributed and includes the cost of development of 
the software and the tools. This was a well-funded 
project for 4 years. Now the cost is to upgrade all t
hose tools and also to develop more tools. The more 
data use we get, the more new requests for new appli
cations we receive. I think that is a challenge, but 
now we are in an age of integrating distributed inte
lligence and distributed data. That lowers the cost.  That is public infrastructure. When you think about 
the industrialized countries, we are talking about huge 
legacy collections. Think about the Smithsonian Instit
ution. They have more than 130 million biodiversity 
objects in the Smithsonian collections. The cost to di
gitize all this legacy information is very high. 
Finally, I think we need support from international organizations. We need ICSU and CODATA to 

continue advocating the importance of not only sharing th
e data but also finding means to gather this data 
and to treat the data so that it can be easily 
accessible by the whole community all over the world. 
 DR. BAKHTINA:  Regarding involvement of internationa
l organizations, I want to add that the World Bank 
promotes democratization of development via open da
ta access. Last week, a new initiative, Mapping for 
Results, was launched. This initiative allows civil soci
eties, various organizations, and citizens to access large 
World Bank databases, to contribute to the database and to use the data. It also opens a direct dialogue with 
governments and citizens, in terms of transparency of government policy and delivery of public services. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART THREE: COMPELLING BENEFITS                                                                                                
                 71 
 Furthermore, it will promote transparency related to 
the development, and hopefully, create incentives for 
various types of organizations to improve data quality and increase data sharing. 
 PARTICIPANT: I am with the International Envi
ronmental Data Rescue Organization. We are a 
nonprofit organization whose mandate is to locate, rescue, and digitize every piece of historic 

environmental data we can find throughout the worl
d. We have projects in 15 developing countries, and 
we have rescued probably 2 million to 30 million hist
oric weather observations. One of the problems we 
have is that, for example, we have located about
 30 million weather observations on microfiche. They 
were taken in about 1,000 observation sites through
out Africa. We are negotiating with the African 
Center for Meteorological Applications for Development in Niger to at least get the microfiche before 
they deteriorate to nothing. I am wondering, do any of
 your organizations have data in a format where you 
cannot share them? Right now 95 percent of our data are 
either on microfiche or on paper, and that is a 
very huge problem for us. I am wondering if anybod
y knows of any other organizations, other than our 
own, that actually seek out data on perishable medi
a to rescue them before they are gone forever. 
 
DR. WOODCOCK: The U.S. Geological Survey is doing 
that for Landsat data. They do get data on all 
kinds of customized software and media, where they 
have to go back and rec
onstruct and reconcile them. 
It is hard. I do not do that myself, but I have been convinced that it is a pretty big obstacle in many 

countries.  PARTICIPANT: I am not sure if I am the only libraria
n in the audience, but libraries are definitely aware 
of this. They have been looking at this for straight text documents, and now they are starting to look at it 

for both born-digital, which is also being lost at 
an alarming rate, and print objects. So there are 
institutions working on these problems, and the Nati
onal Science Foundation is 
supporting some of that 
activity. 

 
PARTICIPANT: There is also a new CODATA task group
 called Data at Risk, which is working to at 

least identify a broader range of scientific data, not 
just environmental. Another group is the Minnesota 
Population Center. There is a lot of recovery of 
old census data, going back and migrating data on old 
media and similar activities. There are different gr
oups in different disciplines that are doing this. 
 
PARTICIPANT:  The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration also has a data-rescue activity. I 

imagine there are quite a few others. And the Unite
d Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 

Organization, I believe, has a digital heritage program. 

 PARTICIPANT: I have a question for Dan Cheney about
 the difficulty in getting access to the data that 
you have been talking about because 
of the sensitive nature of them. For the FAA data, it could be 
potentially sensitive for the companies 
that either built the planes or operate them, in legal exposure. I 
was wondering if that is mitigated by some kind of le
gislation that caps the exposure to lawsuits or if 
there is some kind of waiver of liability associated with the disclosure of the data. 
 MR. CHENEY:  I do not think I mentioned this during the 
talk. There are four criteria that have to be met 
before we even begin to look at an accident: the offi
cial accident report is issued; the corrective action and 
accident results are finished; there has not been anothe
r accident or incident that would call into question 
the official accident findings; and litigation is finished
. Only then, when all four of those are met, do we 
begin to work, and we only use publicly available information. Normally it is the information that was 
gathered during the course of the investigative process,
 and in the United States it is part of the public 
domain. We work with other countries™ accident-inves
tigating bodies to secure access to their information 
that was gathered in the course of the investigation. We do not do any additional investigation. It is only 
what is already lying around in archives in pieces that is
 being lost. The task is to put it together in one 
cohesive place, look at it, and put it in a structure th
at makes sense. As far as litigation, the opportunity to 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72                                                                        THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFC DATA 
 litigate has already come and gone. Could someone co
me back and say, ﬁWell, we did not think about 
that. Let us review it again.ﬂ They could. Our greater-
good concern, however, is that the information is so 
important that it cannot be lost, and 
we have to take this step and ma
ke sure that erosion is stopped. 
 PARTICIPANT: Do you also get data from other countries? 

 
MR. CHENEY: We do. Not all are equally sharing, 
but there is outreach. As we have done networking and have improved our networking process, the efficien
cy is increasing, with recognition that this is a 
product that will benefit world aviation, not just U.S. aviation. It is getting much better. 
 PARTICIPANT: Victoria Bakhtina, how difficult is it 
to get access to the data that support the statistics 
for the different countries? Are the data collected by
 the countries themselves and made available to the 
World Bank, or does the World Bank pay people to 
collect the data and work with the different ministries? It is not clear how the data are compile
d, and whether it is comparable kind of coverage. 
 DR. BAKHTINA: In terms of access, wi
th the launch of open data policy, 
it becomes very easy. Now the set 
of all development reports that include underlying data will be available. Just visit the World Bank website, 
and you can easily download and research the statistics from different countries. Moreover, you can visualize 
the data and map the country statistics to the World Bank projects information. I am also using the UN data 

which are also publicly available.  There are various methods and strategies of collecting the data and multiple 

approaches can be applied depending on what is measured. The World Bank Data Group partners with other 
organizations on data collection and statistical capacity-building. I would recommend that you consult the 
World Bank web site for details.  When using any publicly available data, it is important to understand what is 

behind the numbers, and depending on the end goal of your research, determine what coverage would be 

acceptable, and most importantly, always conduct the analysis within a specific context. 
    The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73      
 
 PART FOUR: 
THE LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 19. Data Sharing: Limits and Barriers and Init
iatives to Overcome Them Œ An Introduction 
 Roger Pfister ICSU Committee on Freedom and Responsibility 
in the conduct of Science, France, and 
Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences, Switzerland
  
Discussing the limits and barriers to data sharing with
 developing countries is also about their access to 
information. This paper suggests that the situati
on is improving, albeit slowly. We will look at the 
developments in this area from a historical perspec
tive. A review of the last few decades will allow seeing 
the current situation against that background. 
 Calls for a new information order 
To locate the idea of information sharing in a historic perspective, we go back to the 1960s. Mention 
needs to be made of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM
) in this regard. Established in 1961, the mission 
of this political organization was to pursue an independent policy based on coexistence between the two 
power blocks, East and West, dominating the Cold War era. NAM was basically the device of the 

developing world, because it comprised primarily coun
tries from Africa, Central and South America, and 
Asia.  
 Following political independence, especially on the Afri
can continent, during the first part of the 1960s, 
members of the Non-Aligned Movement strived fo
r economic and cultural liberation from the North, 
which could be seen as synonymous to the West in
 those days. For that purpose it propagated two 
initiatives during the first half of the 1970s, namely
 the New International Economic Order and the New 
International Information Order. To gain internati
onal attention and support for them, and by means of 
political lobbying, the latter was taken into the Unite
d Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO). The reason for this move w
as that the number of developing countries had 
increased so much in that UN body th
at developing world demands could 
be pushed through rather easily. 
As a result, the Non-Aligned Movement succeeded 
at the UNESCO 19th General Conference in Nairobi 
in 1976. A resolution was adopted that called for the fr
ee flow of information. This was facilitated by the 
fact that the UNESCO Directo
r-General at the time was Amadou-Mahtar M™Bow from Senegal. 
However, the two initiatives came to a standstill 
in the mid-1980s because political quarrels over the 
organization™s role in this field limited UNESCO™
s possibilities. A crucial 
loss was when the United States, by far the largest sponsor, left the organization in 1984 over that issue. 

 
Yet, the NAM™s demand for a New International Info
rmation Order had a sound basis. The notion of 
developing countries having been left out of the worl
dwide flow of information was based on realities that 
we would like to illustrate with some statistical data from the period before e-mail and Internet emerged 
as tools of communication and tools for exchanging in
formation. These were the days when newspapers, 
television, and radio were the principal means for spreading information. 
 Indicators of information sharing Figures on the number of daily newspape
rs available in the different world regions reveal that Africa had 
the fewest between 1980 and 1994, with no increase in
 the period under consideration, and that all 
developing areas fared much behind the devel
oped Europe and North America (Table 19-1). 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     75 
  TABLE 19-1 
Daily newspapers per 1,000 people  
 141614Africa
464464Oceania
989588S. America
116
106
87Asia
244
220
188
Europe
209
231
247
N. America
1994
1990
1980UN Statistical Yearbook; UNESCO Statistical Yearbook.
  Another statistical figure indicating the underprivileged access of developing countries to information is 
the low number of television receivers per one thousand 
habitants. At the same time, it is significant to 
note the sixfold increase in numbers in the devel
oping parts of the world between 1980 and 1997, as 
compared with only some 25 percent in the developed regions (Table 19-2). 
  TABLE 19-2 
TV receivers per 1,000 people 
 
  1980 1990 1997 Developing Countries 
27 124 157 
Developed Countries 
424 492 548 
                                                                                                                       UNESCO St
atistical Yearbook 
 Radios have been an even more important source of
 information in the developing countries, and an 
almost 400 percent increase can be noted from 1980 to
 1997, as compared with only 50 percent in the 
developed countries (Table 19-3). 
  TABLE 19-3
 Radio receivers per 1,000 people 
  1980 1990 1997 Developing Countries 
398 895 1,124 
Developed Countries 
986 1,181 1,308 
              UNESCO Statistical Yearbook
  All of the above figures indicate that the issue of information flow has been of great relevance to the 
developing countries, and that 
some development and progress can be discerned with them gaining 
increased access. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  This is to put into perspective the situation con
cerning the access of these countri
es to information, which 
has become increasingly and more easily available si
nce the advent of the Internet in the mid-1990s. 
Figures, once again, illustrate that developing count
ries are lagging behind. However, there has been a 
phenomenal increase in the number of people in those 
regions using the Internet in the years from 2000 to 
2010 (Table 19-4). There is still a long way to go to reach dimensions such as in North America or 

Europe, but there is progress. 

 TABLE 19-4
 Internet growth 2000Œ2010 
Internet users
112,357
Africa
351,033
S. America
22622Asia
58352Europe77146N. America
Penetration(% Population)
Growth (%;
2000-2010)http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm
  Initiatives of the Internationa
l Council for Science (ICSU) 
Against this background, the International Council for Science (ICSU) recognizes that access to 
information is crucial for both science and for a world 
where science is used for the benefit of society. A 
cornerstone of ICSU™s mission, therefore, is to 
promote the universal and equitable access to data and 
information. Several ICSU initiatives sustain this
 policy approach and are now mentioned in the 
chronological order of their establishment. 

 
The general objectives of the Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA; established in 
1966) are to improve the quality and accessibility of da
ta, to facilitate international cooperation among 
those collecting, organizing, and using data, as well as to promote an 
increased awareness in the scientific 
and technical community of the importance of th
ese activities. The International Network for the 
Availability of Scientific Publications (INASP) 
aims at improving access to scientific and scholarly 
information; fostering in-country, regional, and in
ternational cooperation and 
networking; and advising 
local organizations and funding agencies on ways 
to utilize information a
nd publishing to achieve development goals. Most recently, the World Da
ta System (WDS) was established in 2008 to 
inter alia, enable universal and equitable access to quality-assu
red scientific data, data services, products, and 
information. The WDS is being built on the foundation 
of two earlier international networks that were established in the context of the International Geoph
ysical Year in 1958Šthe World Data Centers and the 
Federation of Astronomical and Geoph
ysical Data Analysis Services. 
 Apart from these bodies with a specific remit for promo
ting data and information sharing, three regional 
officesŠin Africa, Asia and the Pacific, and Latin
 America and the CaribbeanŠensure that ICSU™s 
strategy and activities, among them its approach to 
data and information sharing, are responsive to the 
needs of developing countries.  
 Finally, the ICSU Committee on Freedom and Responsib
ility in the conduct of Science (CFRS) is also 
concerned with these issues as part of its mission to 
promote the Principle of Universality of Science. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     77 
 This principle is about developing a truly globa
l scientific community on the basis of equity and 
nondiscrimination, which also comprises equal and n
ondiscriminatory access to data and information. For 
this reason, the committee, and several of its me
mbers, cosponsored this international symposium 
organized by the U.S. National Academies, which fo
rms the basis for the presen
t publication. To further 
raise awareness among the global scientific community 
for these concerns, the CFRS issued an Advisory 
Note on the matter following this scientific meeting
1                      1 The CFRS Advisory Note is availa
ble in Appendix C and at
 http://www.icsu.org/pub
lications/cfrs-statements.   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 20. Consideration of Barriers to Data Sharing 
 Elaine Collier National Institutes of Health, United States 
 
I will give a brief overview of the things we should 
think about when considering the barriers to data 
sharing. I will focus on questions related to data, 
although scientific information is equally important. 
 
First, let us look at finding out about the existence 
of data. Many questions come to mind, such as the 
following:    How do you know whether the data that you want exist or not, and how do you find out?  
 Is the database discoverable by humans or machines,
 and human or machine readable and usable?  
 Do you have to know a friend of a friend of a frie
nd to get access to the data or information, or 
can you discover it on the Internet, or on other media?  
 Once you discover that the data exist, can you di
scover what the characteristics of the data are, 
and if the data are usable in ways that you want to use them?  
 Do you know what parameters there are among the data? 
 What are the requirements for access to the 
database, and can you discover what those 
requirements are? 
 
All of this should be easy. We should know whether th
e data exist or not, but whether we have access to 
them is a different question. Often their very existen
ce is difficult to determine, particularly in scientific 
areas. 

 Some of the other issues relate to the actual charact
eristics of data, including semantics or meaning of the 
data, for example: 

  What are the elements and what are the fields in the data, and what do they mean?  
 What formats are they in so th
at you can actually use them?  
 Are there readable words on a page or are the data in a data field in a relational database? 
 Are the data on the Web in semantic Web technology?  
 What kind of information and protocols are the data in?  
 Is the database complete? Are you getting the 
raw data, aggregate data, or derived data?  
 What is the history of the data? Who collected
 them? On what authority? Who curated the 
database, added to it, or annotated it?  
 Does it link to other data or other information that 
is out there? Is it public or private information? 
And again, how do you get access to that data and information? 
 
When we talk about semantics or data quality, we are 
referring to the actual meaning of the data. That has 
to do with the content. There are also
 some questions in this regard:  
  What is the content information in the data or 
information that you have? What is it about? What 
does it mean?  
 What is the context of that content? Is it seen
 from a perspective of a certain country or a 
profession?   
 What are the temporal aspects? Are you getting the early information or the latest information? 
 Do you have the whole picture of the time frame of the data?  
 What is the granularity of the database? Do you 
know the details about the data or only high-level 
information?  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     79 
  In what language are the data? This is a particul
arly interesting issue when it comes to sharing 
information across countries and the world.   
 What is the durability of the information? Will it 
be there tomorrow or is it ethereal and passing? 
 
Then there are the annotations of the data, and the pr
operties or other context information about the data. 
In what framework are the data? What are the comm
unity needs and requirements about the data, in the 
collection of the data, in your analysis, and in your us
e? Are there shared standards for this information, 
so that you can actually mix them with other data 
that are similar from other places and other countries 
and other areas? 

 Some of the technical aspects relate not only to ha
ving standards for all these data quality measures, but 
also to being able to share the format so you can 
actually share the information electronically. Or if you 
are going to share it on paper in human-readable form, 
it again depends on what language it is in. It also 
depends on whether it is on a piece of paper or in a file
 that you can download. What is its availability?  Is 
it persistent? If it is persistent, what version do you have of
 the data?  Is it updated?  Are there requirements for reusing the data or re
purposing them? When you do that, what are your 
requirements of the database? Do you have to clean it?
  Do you have to derive it into other formats and 
document what you are doing with it? Did other people 
who did that to the data before you document 
them so that you know what happened to the data? 

 Are the data coming from a repository, where the pe
ople you are getting them from are merely serving as 
the repository or are they actually the publishers of 
a database in the sense of publishing a dataset, not just 
publishing a paper? Again, is the data
 linked to other data, or is it able
 to be linked to other data? How do 
we preserve the data so that we actually have a hist
ory of what is going on, particularly as technology 
changes? 

 Some of the issues relate to policy and cultural issu
es. Some people who collect data are concerned about their misuse or their misinterpretation, and are reluct
ant to share them because they are afraid somebody 
will use them wrongly. 

 
There are confidentiality and privacy concerns. Some re
late to human data from clinical studies. Some of 
the concerns relate to health care data, while others
 are related to competitive advantage and proprietary 
information. There are also legal considerations acr
oss countries, which are very complex and relate to 
privacy issues.  

 
Intellectual property is another interesting issue. 
One person™s intellectual property and one country™s 
intellectual property is not necess
arily the same as another™s. 
 
What resources does it take to make your data availabl
e for sharing?  Even if a country wanted to make 
data available, how would they do it and would they
 have the resources to make the data accessible?  
What are the resources needed to access other people™s 
data? What kind of approval process do you need? 
What are the costs? The costs here are not only technical
 costs, but also the cost of policy agreements that 
may be required to use the data or to make them available. 
 Some of the competing interests arise as a result of di
fferent perspectives. One perspective is that of a 
researcher or a collector of the data.  That can be a country, a utility, or a scientific researcher. That 
individual has certain interests in the data, but the 
institution, the company, or the country government 
where they work may have interests that may be di
fferent from the collector™s. Second, there are national 
issues related to having competitive advantages. Thir
d, there are certain advantages for cooperating and sharing data. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Next, there are the public and private issues. What are public data and what are private data? Could 

certain information that you consider 
public be considered private in some areas? Some issues relate to 
privacy and security. What is the impact of sharing 
the information on the individual? Is it an individual™s 
information? Is it the individual who actually collected
 the data? What is the impact on the institution? 
Will the institution look bad if they share the data
? If you have hospital data a
nd infection rates and you 
share them, will that impact badly on
 one hospital because they have a higher infection rate than another, 
or is that related to the patients they see? Public hea
lth data are critical to share in order to prevent public 
health outbreaks, but such data also can affect the re
putation of countries and institutions. Some of this is 
cultural.  There are more open groups, people, and in
stitutions that are sharing and being willing to risk 
more. How much of a database should we share? Shoul
d we share the raw or aggregate data?  How do we make the data unidentifiable? Does that ma
ke them better or worse to share?   
 
Clinical care and clinical research are particular issu
es related to privacy and security, and the latter are 
clearly very different across different countries. 
First, you have questions about the audience. One 
audience includes both the people who are actually sharing their data and information; the other is the 

people who are using those data. Then we consider cost. 
Is it the cost of the institution or the cost to the 
person?  What is the cost versus the value of the in
formation? Is it more valuable to spend the money to 
get the data or not? We also need to consider the effect of cost on the usability and the availability of the 
data.  Free data may be very valuable or worthless. They
 could also be very expensive data to buy in cost 
or in effort and ultimately not be worth an
ything. How do we get these issues worked out? 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     81 
 21. Artificial Barriers to Data Sharing Œ Technical Aspects 
 Donald R. Riley University of Maryland, United States 
 When I talk about technical issues, I speak as a mechanical engineering professor who taught for 22 years 
at the University of Minnesota. I grew up with what ev
entually became the Internet. I also grew up in the 
university environment and have remained inside it th
roughout my career. My view of the world is that 
we teach and do research that has real impact on societ
y. To do that, we need certain kinds of tools and 
access to data, resources like cloud computing, and so on. 
 
I also have been a chief information officer, me
aning I had to provide and be responsible for 
infrastructure and tools and services in two major research universities. There was a need to develop advanced capabilities and create an infrastructure that had certain characteristics to serve those missions. 
This led to the creation of Internet2, which has become a global activity. I think it is fundamental and 
crucial. I am also now part-time chair of the Inte
rnet Educational Equal Access Foundation, which has a 
goal of trying to get universities and schools connected around the world. 

 
What the statistics about regional usage of the Internet 
do not show is whether or not people have to drive 
or walk or bike 2 miles to an Internet café to ge
t that access. Is the university connected, and at what 
speed? In Table 21-1 and Figure 21-2, you can look at some of the statistics, in aggregate, but numbers 

sometimes do not tell the whole story.  

 TABLE 21-1
 2010 Internet World Statistics 
  Credit: Copyright © 2000 - 2012, Miniwatts Marketing Group. All rights reserved.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  FIGURE 21-1 World Internet Penetration Rates by Geographical Region in 2010 
Credit: Copyright © 2000 - 2012, Miniwatts Marketing Group. All rights reserved
.   When we look at Africa, it seems like the situati
on is improving. People are really excited about cell 
phone penetration rates, because it generates some re
venue and it fosters connectivity, but each device™s 
speed and capability affects what you can actually 
do. Even these limited devices are expensive when your monthly income is less than $100 a month. We ha
ve to consider more deeply the quality, access, and 
affordability.   

 Is it about the Internet or is it about next-generation 
kinds of things that you can explore and develop and 
be part of the technology generation with new info
rmation and new tools? How do we collaborate beyond 
e-mail and tweets? From my perspective, I thin
k universities are the cornerstone of technology 
development implementation. The biggest problem we 
have in Africa is that there are not enough people 
who know how to manage routers and other such things
, and how to deal with bots and other malware.  
 The real message is that we need to look beyond 
just focusing on the Internet and whatever the 
telecommunications companies provide, and look at 
the future. The emphasis should be on performance: 
advanced capabilities instead of just more bandwidth. If we
 really want to have a society that is able to 
compete in the global information economy, then we
 have to focus on high performance and collaboration 
without barriers. We have to look beyond bandwid
th. We have to look at how we support advanced 
collaboration, teaching, and research. We need to focu
s on quality and recognize it is not just about saying 
there are things you can do from an educational standpoi
nt, but it is also fundamentally about creating that 
enabler for advanced economic development and sustainability. 
  
The model that is evolving on the intern
ational scale is similar to our Internet
2: the National Research and 
Education Network (NREN) that manages its own 
backbone and capabilities. In the United States, we 
have state-based regional optical networks that all tie into this big backbone, and with the Obama 
administration Broadband Technologies Opportunities Pr
ogram, we are now talking about reaching out 
and creating ﬁcommunity anchorﬂ networks in, for exam
ple, rural areas and inner cities and in other areas 
that need improved broadband accessŠthat then tie 
into this new universal community-access public-
purpose backbone.  
 My next message concerns NRENs. If you look at th
e map showing international collaborators in Figure 
21-2, the NRENs that are mostly in the northern 
hemisphere and the more
 economically developed 
countries. There also are some light gray areas, most
ly in the southern hemisphere, where there is no 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     83 
 equivalent NREN in place yet. Most of those gaps
 are in developing countries. Fortunately, however, 
there are already some networks from the developi
ng countries represented, so it is getting better. 
  FIGURE 21-2 The International Reach of the Internet2 Network 
 If you want to know more about NRENs, the Eu
ropean Networking Research Organization does an 
annual compendium of the NRENs around the world.  They also produce a study called 
The Case for NRENS2, which looks at where NRENs exist and what 
their impact has been. A significant conclusion 
that they drew is that cutting-edge advanced 
capability networks provide services and encourage and enable technology spillover into the commercial sect
or. They also concluded that where NRENs do not 
exist, it hampers development and can exclude count
ries from achieving advances that could help their 
economic development.   
 If we look at the Global Lambda Integrated Facility, wh
ich is a global research platform for advanced 
applications, they have multiple 10-gigabyte-per-seco
nd links, a level of connectivity that gives it the 
capability of shared and collaborative research, connecti
ng different parts of the world, with one such 
connection to Africa in South Africa. In African na
tions, and other developing
 countries, international 
connectivity is poor and expensive, because 
  Internet cost is very high (Figure 21-3); 
 Satellite access limits what can be undertak
en, because of latencies and asymmetrical 
characteristics (it assumes Africa is a user of, not a generator of, new information); and 
 There are significant barriers to access to information and resources, modern education, 
collaboration, research, and funding opportunities. 
                      2 Available at http://www.terena.org/
publications/files/20090127-case-for-nrens.pdf 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
   FIGURE 21-3 Sample bandwidth costs for African universities 
 
Much of it is based on satellite service, although they ar
e starting to build terrestrial fiber to interconnect 
to submarine cables. Submarine cables are not thought of frequently, but if we did not have submarine 

cables, it would be difficult to transmit data back a
nd forth. There are cables coming to Africa, but the gap 
is still widening. There are studies you can look at that relate to technical aspects and capabilities, but the 
human infrastructure is not being developed, b
ecause they do not have acc
ess to these capabilities.  
 
NRENs are developing in a lot of African countries, but they have a long way to go. Most of the new 

technologies are hard to deploy because of unr
eliable infrastructure, such as Skype calls, 
videoconferences, audio conferences, and the like. Ho
wever, new submarine cables are being deployed 
around Africa in different places, and now there are fiber-optic cables on the ground to connect land-
locked countries to the sea route and to the submar
ine cables. This connectivity is evolving slowly, 
however. 
 
The UbuntuNet Alliance covers southern and eastern 
Africa, and is an alliance of NRENs trying to 
determine what their common future needs to be
. They have lots of challenges, such as the 
telecommunication monopolies. Few of those countries have truly adopted competitive 

telecommunications practices. 

 
I will now turn to some technical and managerial ch
allenges. Working across all these countries, there are 
many issues to consider: technical aspects, the l
ack of human resources, and financial undersourcing, 
along with high cost, uneven development, and insu
fficient governmental support. Additionally, we are 
faced with the high costs of connectivity; network 
and equipment costs; inefficient use of established 
networks; an uneven development of
 technological infrastructure related to the different sectors; and 
insufficient governmental and administrative s
upport for the development of information and 
communication technology infrastructure. Furthermore, the collaboration among research institutions in 
the region is not at the required level. There is 
a lack of skilled human resources and knowledge for its 
implementation. 
 The reason I am here is because Paul Uhlir and I work
ed together in different meetings. I cochaired the InterAcademy Panel on International Issues Task Group 
on Knowledge Infrastructure. Some of the things 
we looked at were related to data sharing and open repositories, and what we need to really promote at the 
Academies. Wherever possible, we also focused 
on government support for promoting the high-speed, 
specialized networks to connect universities. We wa
nted to emphasize that the topic does not necessarily 
have to be scientific. It could be liberal arts. It could be shared performances that need infrastructure 
dedicated to information flows and collaborations. What
 is really needed are clear policies, consistent 
regulations, and plans and development of the unde
rlying factors. We included some recommendations 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     85 
 that were specifically targeted toward governments, in
cluding things that they ought to do, and things that 
those of us in research and educa
tional organizations can do as well. The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 22. Scientific Management and Cultural Aspects  David Carlson University of Colorado, United States
3  
Suppose that based on everything we have heard for th
e last day and a half, we took the best information 
and the most advanced and thoughtfu
l practices and we decided to c
onduct a big science program. Let us 
adhere strictly to free and open access, and do it in th
e age of cyberinfrastructure and global connections 
and aspire to set new standards for data access. What
 would happen? Well, the International Polar Year 
(IPY) did that. It was the largest program since Inte
rnational Geophysical Year in 1957Œ1958. Out of IPY 
came some interesting lessons.  

 
These lessons have nothing to do w
ith developing versus 
developed countries. Rather, they come out of 
the science culture itself. That is what I want to talk about today: data 
lessons from the International Polar 
Year. 
 
The two big organizations, the International Council 
for Science (ICSU) and the World Meteorological 
Organization (WMO), proclaimed the International 
Polar Year in 2007Œ2008. It spanned 2 years, because 
it takes a lot of time to actually do a year™s worth of 
work in the polar regions, and if you are going to do 
it in the North and the South, it takes 2 years. Th
ey convened a joint science committee to set the overall 
goals, and the committee immediately adopted the mo
st advanced free and open data access policy.  
 
Using the World Climate Research Program™s program
 as a model, they established an International 
Program Office to organize and manage the event,
 including managing the data aspects. I had the 
challenge and privilege to lead that office. Then
 we took the crucial step of inviting individual 
international proposals for IPY projects. This was done
 deliberately to bring the best ideas forward. We 
did not build IPY from national plans, and we did not wa
nt to write the central plan. We wanted to solicit as many ideas as possible. This led to enormous succ
ess in the diversity of science and international 
participation, but it left data 
management as a severe challenge. 
 Each of these projects was intended to bring forward ur
gent and significant research; something that was 
more than what you would do in your normal routine. Each of these projects was to stimulate 

international partnerships. The average project had 
about 15 international partners. Some had as many as 
40 partners. They were to build connections acr
oss disciplines between science and policy, across 
generations. They were to store and share data. 
Again, IPY set explicitly a free and open data access 
policy. This was not a passive requirement. Every pr
oject for endorsement had to check a box just like 
you check an agreement when you download software. 
We agreed to the IPY data policies; everyone 
opted in.  

 
They were to take on substantial 
education and outreach. Each project
 had to show how to expand the polar community, by which we meant not only reach
 out from polar science disciplines to other science 
disciplines but also from polar science countries to other countries.  It was a community building and 
outreach exercise. 

 
We attracted enormous interest, 
and ended up with 230 IPY-endorsed 
projects related to earth, land, people, ocean, ice, atmosphere, space, education, 
and outreach. For geography, we have the Arctic, the 
Antarctic, and projects and processes that occur in both
 the Arctic and the Antarctic. Of the 230 projects endorsed, 170 of them were funded, and most of these projects got most of what they requested. 
                      3 Retired.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     87 
 Another aspect I would like to highlight is the par
ticipation of indigenous partners, both as leaders of 
projects and as partners in the research team. We want
ed to build the capacity 
of leadership from this 
community.  
 We generated $1.2 billion in science funds. That num
ber is growing as countries start to reassess what they actually spent on IPY, and I think that number 
will easily surpass $1.5 billion. One of our goals was 
to stimulate new money for polar research, and we
 succeeded. There were 63 countries and easily 50,000 
participants. That number we think today is proba
bly more like 60,000. By the standard bandwidth 
metricsŠmoney, people, and countriesŠwe did extremely well in IPY. 
 What I want to do now is to take a more critical look at IPY. I want to assess whether we are going to 

meet the IPY goals and how; meaning, how are we doing today and in the future (let us say over a period 

of 10 years)? 
  Advance polar knowledge. There is no question now that we had a huge impact and 
there will be an avalanche of polar science coming forward.   
 Enhance facilities and infrastructure. Polar science involves huge infrastructure, such 
as ice breakers and bases in Antarctica. However, they
 are very expensive. They take a lot of fuel, 
and even though IPY enhanced them a lot, I think it is going to be a challenge for the polar 

community to keep going at the level we did in IPY. 
 Inspire the next generations.
 We absolutely did that. It is hard to see how we could 
have done better. We have an asso
ciation of 2,600 young scientists 
in 40 countries. They have a 
secretariat and a Web site. They are a recognized member of the Scientific Committee for Arctic 
Research and the International Arctic Scien
ce Committee. They are receiving grants from the 
ICSU, and we are very happy about that. They have 5 years of funding for their secretariat, but I 

am worried about their funding in the long term.   
 Attract public interest.
 Given the resources we had, we did extremely well. In the 
future, I think public interest will decrease, partly because people™s 
attention turns to other issues, 
but also partly because the networks that we put in place have already started to deteriorate. 
 Integrated and accessible data
. I am less optimistic here and I am scoring data low. It is 
that low score for data that causes me to worry a
bout our ability to keep doing polar science in the 
future. Let me explain the problem. I am going to give you a tour of IPY data. It includes: 
o GPS positions, vertical and horizontal, all around Greenland and Antarctica.  
o Everything about sea ice: temperature, salinit
y, porosity, rheology, roughness, and extent. 
It includes an extensive measurement of contam
inants, how they are transported, what the 
deposition processes are onto the ice, and all ki
nds of lake sediment cores, and from that, 
pollen records, volcanic records, and chemical records are developed. 
o For much of the work in the deep oceans, 
tracers, including isotopes to understand the 
deep ocean circulation systems.  
o Everything about ice cores: age, hardness, isot
opes, dust levels, and other kinds of data.  
o On-the-ground mineralogy of exposed rock in
 the Arctic and especially the Antarctic, and 
also the microbiology of these systems. 
o Information about the social cultures of the inhabitants in the Arctic region.  
o Satellite images of new pipelines and new roads that are barriers to migration.  
o All kinds of data around the herding and meat-producing industry of the North.  
o Arctic Ocean temperature, salinity, currents, 
warm water under the ice, and all the aspects 
of that complicated system.  
o The great fish migrations of the North and th
e health of the fish. In this case, if you 
measure their ear bones and measure the isotop
es, you can tell when they went from fresh 
water to sea water. Chemistry, physiology, and zoology are included.   
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 o For birds: long migrations, fitness, health
 of the birds, and population level.   
o Measurements of the sun. What are the solar properties through the dry polar 
atmosphere? Yesterday we talked about th
e atmospheric window. Antarctica is one of 
those atmospheric windows. 
 We also want to know about all the children around
 the world who did the IPY-wide experiments on polar 
days. We want to know all the students who were expo
sed to IPY at exhibits around the world. We want 
to know the number of cities and museums that ha
d IPY events. We want to know about students who 
went to summer schools and gave their first poster or 
gave their first presentation, and we want to know the number of young scientists who have joined
 this new association of polar scientists. 
 
This is just a glimpse of the IPY datasets, but you see 
the variety and complexity. It is literally true that, 
among the ICSU unions, no union could identify a science that was not included in IPY. This is its 

strength, but this is also its challenge from a da
ta management point of view. Think of our data 
management systems on two axes: one international 
and the other interdisciplinary. The WMO and the 
World Data Centers are examples of internationa
l data activities. The WMO has meteorological and 
hydrological data, but it is actually relatively narrow in
 an interdisciplinary perspective. The World Data 
Centers are even more so. Canada built a relatively good 
interdisciplinary data portal for IPY. It does not 
cover satellite data or public health
 data, but it covers much of the 
range of what we would call earth science data. Canada did a very good job with interdisciplinary access. 
 
IPY is thus both highly interdisciplinary and highly inte
rnational. IPY is leading in this regard and I think 
this is where science is going to be in the future. It 
is going to be widely interdisciplinary and widely 
international, but we also expose the gaps. There real
ly are no existing services and that is an institutional 
or international infrastructural gap.  We have projects that have good data plans and others 
that have adequate data plans. I define a good data 
plan as those projects that have a plan for both storing and sharing the data. Thirty-five of the projects 

have good data plans. Another 30 of 
them have adequate data plans. That means they know where they 
are going to store their data, but they do not know ho
w they are going to make it accessible. It might be 
stored regionally or locally. This means that of the 
170 projects, about 105 of them do not have adequate 
plans at all. 
 
I lead the project office. We set the overall goals, but 
we do not enforce the data plans. We defer to the national organization. If you were funded by the Na
tional Science Foundation, the National Research 
Council of Canada, or the National Environment Rese
arch Council of the United Kingdom, that is where 
the enforcement happens in good da
ta practices. If those countries have varying practices, that is, one 
allows a 2-year proprietary period, and one has a mo
re aggressive and enlightened practice, then you will get that variation propagated into the projects itself. 
 Institutional behavior inhibits the actual practice of 
good data stewardship. The enforcement of good da
ta policies actually comes down to a national funding 
agency issue. In the IPY, where we have all th
ese national funding agencies, the enforcement is very 
spotty.   
 
We have identified that there are national issues relate
d to enforcement of national policies, but there are 
also individual behavioral issues. The individual issues
 are related to incentives for data sharing. Elaine 
Collier identified very nicely a variety of reasons th
at people have for not sharing, but fundamentally 
there is no equivalent incentive for sharing. If you are competing, if you are trying to protect proprietary 
data, there is no incentive that actually pulls you the other way. 
 
I wrote an article in Nature in early 2011, where I talked about these lessons in data sharing. I suggested publishing the data, because by doing that you can get 
credit for it by way of a citation, and on your 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     89 
 promotion and tenure-record, it shows the dataset. It is
 very appropriate because many of these datasets 
involve a huge creative effort to pull together data in
to quality products. This can be the same effort that 
we put into writing a paper. 
 There is a new journal called Earth System Science Data
. The journal itself is open access, and all the 
datasets that are published are at an open-access repos
itory. We see that as a step forward on the data 
publication side. 

   
We still have the issue of how to encourage everyone
 to share their individual datasets. We started to 
build a Polar Information Commons (PIC). This is a 
joint effort with the Committee on Data for Science 
and Technology and IPY to set up a sharing system for datasets. What we are trying to do is to set up an 

exchange system and to overcome barriers related to 
people saying, ﬁI am afraid to share. Someone is 
going to steal my data. How will I know who used it?ﬂ 
and set up an exchange system. Below are the PIC 
guidelines for data users: 
 You agree to cite it through acknowledgment
 or even coauthorship, whatever the 
appropriate mechanism is.  
 You agree to acknowledge that you got it off of the PIC.   
 You notify others of the use and of any issues that you noticed with the dataset.   
 You recognize that you as the user are responsible for determining the quality and the 
appropriateness.    If you make any improvements, then you return
 that value-added dataset to the PIC. 
 
Notice that there is a parallel set of responsibilities for contributors. Contributors agree to make their data 
openly accessible. We use a Creative Commons license fo
r that. You also agree to use the PIC badge and provide adequate metadata. You agree under limits to
 respond to any inquiries about the dataset, and you 
agree to include into the PIC system a notification 
of any changes that you made. The key here is not 
these guidelines, because they are really just standard
 rules of proper behavior that we already use in 
science. The key here is that a user can be a cont
ributor and a contributor can be a user. As long as you 
are on both sides of this exchange, then there is 
incentive to cooperate with the guidelines and norms. 
 In conclusion, the strength of the IPY is that it has a 
whole collection of data, which is what it takes to do 
science in the polar region and, I would argue, in the 
tropical regions and the temperate regions today. It 
takes this kind of breadth to do modern science, but 
when we do this, we are going to have to bring the 
international, national, and 
individual data behaviors up to a new standard as well. 
 We like to say IPY polar science has had global impact
. There is no question that in the short term we 
have had global impact on the quality of science. We
 had a positive effect on the public, recruited young 
scientists, and produced a burst of data. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 23. Political and Economic Barriers to 
Data Sharing: The African Perspective 
 Tilahun Yilma University of California, Davis, United States 
 Development will bring food security only if it is people
-centered, if it is environmentally sound, if it is 
participatory, and if it builds local and national capacity fo
r self-reliance.  These are the basic 
characteristics of sustainable human development
. James Gustave Speth (UN Development Program, 
1994).  I think you have heard a lot about the problems we ar
e facing in Africa with data sharing. I would like to 
share with you information about the work of African
s who have come to the University of California 
(UC), Davis. They have generated very significant sci
entific data. So if African scientists can do this 
excellent work at UC Davis, why are they not capable of doing the same in Africa? 
 The answer may be because of political problems. For exam
ple, I was not able to go back to Ethiopia, so I 
established an International Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology (ILMB) at UC Davis in 1991. The goals of 
the ILMB are to (1) promote a culture of science in de
veloping countries; (2) conduct research in tropical viral diseases, including the development of recombinan
t vaccines and rapid diagnostic kits; (3) transfer 
technologies to developing countries; and (4) address the issue of barriers to the growth of science in 
developing countries. 
 Any type of aid program that does not lead eventually 
to self-sufficiency is actua
lly destructive, just like welfare, and that is what has happened with many ai
d programs in Africa. Much of what we have heard 
about Africa so far is negative. Yesterday, Dr. Yang brilliantly showed how China has advanced very far 
both technologically and economically in the past 30 
years.  My goal has b
een to promote similar 
development in Africa.  My idea was for African scientists
 to be trained at UC Davis and then to go back 
to train other Africans, thus allowing the successful
 transfer of technology and enhancement science. 
Unfortunately, there were many political problems and ba
rriers that interfered with this goal, and I would 
like to discuss these with you. 
 I am going to use rinderpest as an example. Rinderp
est is an important disease that played a very 
significant role in the development of the veterinary 
profession. It was the virus that was introduced into 
East Africa through collaborations between the British and the Italians in the 1800s.  It was used as germ 
warfare, and in fact, 32 to 60 percent of the population 
and more than 90 percent of all ruminant animals, 
including cattle, goats, and sheep, perished.  
 I was sent to the United States to become a veterinarian
 and then returned to Ethiopia to aid in the attempt 
to eradicate rinderpest using a tissue culture vaccine. 
In the 1970s we managed to vaccinate more than 
120 million cattle, and we then celebrated the eradicati
on of this disease.  Unfortunately, rinderpest was 
not eradicated in African wildlife; it did not take very 
long for the virus to spread
 back into livestock and 
once again become endemic in Africa.   
 
The major problems associated with the failure of th
e first attempt to eradicate rinderpest from Africa 
included the lack of heat-stability, the expensive cost of producing the vaccine, the difficulty in 
administering the vaccine, and a lack of continued 
surveillance for the disease.  I decided to develop a 
safe, heat stable, inexpensive, and effective vacci
ne by implementing the new technology that uses the 
smallpox vaccine (vaccinia virus) as a vector for reco
mbinant vaccines to express the protective proteins 
of the rinderpest virus.  Using vaccinia virus as a vector, we developed several vaccines for rinderpest; the 
first paper demonstrating the safety and efficacy
 of this vaccine was published in the journal 
Science
 in 1988. Further refinements of the vaccine led to field tria
ls in Africa and demonstrated that it can be given 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     91 
 intramuscularly or intradermally. We also devel
oped and transferred an inexpensive, companion 
diagnostic kit that can be used to distinguish vacci
nated from infected animals. This is what African 
scientists have done in collaboration with scientists 
from the United States and developing countries at the 
ILMB.   Other vaccines we have developed utilizing this techno
logy include a vaccine for a disease similar to foot-
and-mouth disease, vesicular stomatitis. Unlike the rind
erpest vaccine, the level of protection was very 
minimal.  Another vaccine we developed in our lab w
as for HIV; we were the first to show that vaccines 
for HIV do not protect but only reduce the virus load 
in the blood.  This was one of the three major 
contributions considered in the HIV field. These resu
lts indicate that many recombinant vaccines require 
enhancement of efficacy to be protective immunogens. Wh
at we needed then was to enhance the efficacy 
of these recombinant vaccines.  
 During his inaugural speech, David Baltimore, the Nobe
l Laureate and former president of the California 
Institute of Technology, stated, ﬁW
hen you grow up with a world like that, there is a central aspect of 
society that makes no sense: politics. For years, I simp
ly could not comprehend what that meant. When 
people said that in making decisions, you need to cons
ider both the rational elements of an issue and the 
political ones, I did not understand what they mean
tŠwhy was not rationality enough?  So my whole life 
since I left my parents™ nest has 
been an education in irrationality. I have had to learn that you cannot 
deny the passions of people, you must accommodate them; that you cannot deny history, you must 
accommodate it. I think this is a perspective that all 
scientists who are willing to work within the larger 
society have to learn, and it is what sometimes limi
ts the effectiveness of scientists when they do venture 
outside of their laboratories and institutions.ﬂ  

 
This is really what I have learned. Using science to
 make vaccines is simple, but dealing with the politics 
is very difficult.  
 
The Journal of Virology
 is the number one international specialty
 journal for virology. Details about the 
rinderpest vaccine that was tested in Kenya were published there by a group of scientists from the 
International Laboratory of Molecu
lar Biology for Tropical Disease Agents who originally came from 
Argentina, Brazil, Afghanistan, Pakistan, the United States, Ethiopia, and Kenya. You can see that these 
people who came together were able to devel
op what Dr. Gordon Ada described in the journal 
Nature (January 31, 1991)
4 as one of the two outstanding recombinant 
vaccinia virus vaccines in the world.  
These results help prove my point that people from deve
loping countries, if given the right opportunity, 
are quite capable of competing with 
scientists in developed countries.  
 Another contribution that people from developing coun
tries have made is to use cytokine genes for 
enhancing the safety of vaccines by more than 100-
million-fold. One brilliant Ph.D. student born in 
Afghanistan, published her dissertation research on the topic in the 
Journal of Virology 
and the 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. Another Ph.D. student, from Ethiopia, has advanced a 
concept to develop a safer, effective vaccine for sm
allpox. Extending this work, we have developed a 
recombinant vaccine for Rift Valley fever, a diseas
e that affects both humans and livestock, a project 
sponsored by the U.S. Department of Homeland Securi
ty. Rift Valley fever virus is considered a very 
dangerous agent that could be used as a bioterrorist 
weapon. We have also developed diagnostic tests for 
both Rift Valley fever 
and foot-and-mouth disease. 
 
The program that we started at UC Davis is to 
advance self-reliance. Based on that, we built labs in 
Egypt, Kenya, Ethiopia, and Senegal. An insect
 virus expression system was used to produce a 
recombinant rinderpest protein used in the development 
of a diagnostic kit at the ILMB. This reagent is                      4 Available at http://www.nature.com
/nature/journal/v349/n6308/pdf/349369a0.pdf 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 produced at high levels and does not come from a viru
s capable of infecting mammals. Thus, what would have cost $60,000 could be produced for 5 cents.  Afri
can scientists trained at the ILMB went back to 
Senegal, produced the diagnostic kits, and trained ot
her African scientists from 30 different laboratories to 
successfully transfer the technology.
5   The accomplishment of postdoctoral researchers and stude
nts in the lab is evident in publications such as Science, Nature, and other top scientific journals, including 
Nature Biotechnology
.  This is proof that these people are capable of making valuable contribut
ions in a supportive environment.  We have received the highest award in animal science, been
 elected to the National Academy of Sciences, and 
honored with the University of California Medal. A
ll this was done by people from developing countries. 
 
Then the question I ask again is, why not in Africa? 
If we can do this in Davis, California, why can we 
not do it in Africa?  I am not asking about South
east Asia, because progress there is obvious. One of these 
days, I hope we can say the same thing about Africa. 
 What are the barriers internally and externally that 
prevent the development of science in Africa? Natural 
resources are sucked dry by governments from deve
loped countries. Moreover, African countries pay 
billions for military goods and warfare
. When I worked in Senegal, I ask
ed a colleague, how is it that you 
have absolutely no natural resources, yet you have a ve
ry high per capita income in
 the African continent? 
Her response was, ﬁWe are blessed in Senegal in that 
we have no natural resources. Thus, we are left 
alone and spared from destruction.ﬂ
  One example I like to use is the 
war that was conducted between Eritrea and Ethiopia. People from both 
countries speak the Tigrinya language. Each country spent more than $2 billon purchasing military 

weapons and jets to fight a war for a piece of d
esert called Badme and sacrificing more than 200,000 
people. According to 
Africa Today, observers likened the conflict to ﬁtwo bald men fighting over a 
comb.ﬂ What economic or strategic benefit could be 
gained from control of 400 square-kilometers of a 
rocky triangle of land over which these two former alli
es were now locked in battle? ﬁEritrea already has 
enough rocks,ﬂ says one analyst, adding that ﬁif rocks were worth money, Eritrea would be the richest 

country in the world.ﬂ  
 In my opinion, the countries in Africa should follow the 
example of China, India, and Brazil if they want 
to achieve development and overcome their reliance 
on destructive foreign aid. Africans should work 
toward becoming more self-sufficient. 
                     5 Yilma, et al. (2003) Inexpens
ive vaccines and rapid di
agnostic kits tailor-made for the glob
al eradication of rinderpest. In 
Vaccines for OIE List A and Emerging Animal Diseas
es.  Developments in Biologicals. 114: 99-111. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     93 
 24. DISCUSSION BY THE WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT:  I am going to ask a question as a former president of the Committee on Data for 
Science and Technology (CODATA), which is an inte
rnational organization co
ncerned with advancing the use of data within science. We have heard a num
ber of talks about various barriers, and one of the 
questions that we have been grappling with for a 
long time is what we can effectively do to break down 
some of these barriers, given that in the United Stat
es you buy a personal computer and you basically are 
ready to be a data scientist. In many parts of the deve
loping world, that is not the case. They do not have 
the connectivity, software, or training to do that. 
What practical steps could an organization like 
CODATA take to actually help break down some of 
the barriers that we have heard discussed today? 
 
DR. RILEY: If your university was spending 30 percent of
 its budget on Internet connectivity, how would 
you feel as a faculty member? You would probably grumble. You would probably go to your faculty 

governance meetings and say, ﬁWe have to do something ab
out this.ﬂ One of the interesting things is that 
as these National Research and Education Networks evol
ve, and as this international connectivity comes 
into place, and networks are built and the prices start to
 fall, you start to free up money that can then be 
used on other things, like computers and software and 
content-related activities. It is just amazing when 
you look at how much money is being sucked out of the universities because of this connectivity problem. 

We have recognized that something needs to be done
. One of the reasons I mentioned the statements from 
the InterAcademy Panel is that we spent a long tim
e trying to craft messages asking, ﬁWhat can you as 
members of the Academies do? We would like you to re
fer your governments to these statements. Go into 
your societies, and ask for help in fixing this problem
 so we can get on to the things we really want to 
do.ﬂ  
 
DR. CARLSON: We cannot accept the status quo, an
d CODATA can be an agent to identify that 
interface. A good idea like an information commons
 rapidly runs into pushback from the research 
infrastructure: legal pushback, behavioral pushback
, and so on. CODATA can be the agent to keep 
pushing forward. 

 
DR. COLLIER: I will comment from the perspective of
 the National Institutes of Health (NIH). The National Center for Research Resources supports a lot 
of development in rural parts of America. There 
were and still are real connectivity problems in parts 
of this country. I am amazed by the creativity of 
some of the people at those institutions who solv
e problems by using lower-technology solutions that 
actually move data. I think that we need to 
push forward on getting the higher performance and 
bandwidth, but we also need to not squash creativity
 and actually allow things to happen with what is 
available. Just saying you cannot do it until you get more is not true in many cases. 
 DR. RILEY: I need to clarify what I was saying. I was 
not saying that nothing is happening. There is a lot 
of great activity going on, but what could happen if 
we could free scientists in less-developed countries from the low network connectivity they have? It is
 amazing how creative people everywhere have been 
trying to get access. However, try doing your research onsite in the middle of Botswana, for example, and 
you will understand what the limitations are. What could these great students and faculty do if they had 
the kind of connectivity I have at home, which I do not
 think is even as good as when I am sitting in my 
office, but it is wonderful compared to what they have. 

 
DR. KAHN: My question is directed to Professor Riley.
 On one extreme, he is talking about a poverty of 
technology, and he has just reemphasized that, whereas 
at the other extreme, Dr. Yilma is talking about 
the poverty of politics. Dr. Yilma said that in Africa there are not enough people to manage the routers 
and networks. Yet Africans have been more than capa
ble of putting in the routers and the networks and 
running mobile telephony and making fortunes. Here 
are some data. The 300th wealthiest person in the 
world is an Egyptian named Naguib Sawiris. He runs
 a network. Another example is the 630th in the 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 world, who is a former Sudanese and now lives in th
e United Kingdom. His name is Mohamed Ibrahim. It 
seems where there is a demand, the technology is not
 the barrier. I would like your comment in reply.  
 DR. RILEY: Cellular technology is generating a reve
nue stream that is now making it economically 
feasible to use submarine cables, and a small number
 of people are getting wealthy. They hire a few 
people to do those routers and switchers, and a lo
t of them are nonnative Africans. Many countries in 
Africa are using Chinese money, including loans to
 bring in Chinese engineers to build national 
backbones, and also highways and mines and petrol
eum centers using Chinese technology. When it is 
over they will be captive to owing the Chinese govern
ment money, and captive to the annual maintenance 
costs associated with the equipmen
t. They will not have had much development of the human side of 
being able to run the routers and switchers other than
 maybe what ties into those cell towers. The problem 
is very deep and very complex. I would stand behi
nd everything I said, because most of it comes from 
colleagues in Africa or people doing that infrastructure. There are new forms of colonialism going on, 
too.  
 PARTICIPANT: There were two messages that I thi
nk were not consistent in Dr. Yilma™s speech. One 
message was that Africa is better off being left
 alone. The other message was that places like the 
University of California, Davis, and Columbia Univer
sity have resources and training and capacity to help 
development constructively without leaving Africa alone
. An example is my center, where we do a lot of 
capacity-building training on how to manage data 
and use data for decision making in Millennium 
Villages and in the African context. I am just curious
 which message you really think is the one that is 
important. 

 
DR. YILMA:  I would be happy to address this. Afri
cans lived for a millennium in harmony with the 
environment. Since the colonial introduction, look at wh
at has happened to Africa. It is in total turmoil.  
 PARTICIPANT:  I was involved in the selection of
 the Millennium Villages from the ecological and 
sustainable development point of view. As far as 
I know, the villages do not have direct links to the 
people involved in the conflict. The approach of th
e whole network of Millennium Villages is to help 
build capacity and work with expertise in the develo
ped countries. We have a big project in Haiti, which 
is a postconflict country just like ones that are currently 
in conflict. The point is not to ignore the concerns 
of postconflict countries. Those are the countries that in
 fact need help and need positive reinforcement separate from these other political forces. You did not r
eally answer the question of whether you believe 
in groups at U.S. universities and other developed 
countries getting engaged with 
the developing world. Is 
that not a model that you also
 think is one that can work?  DR. YILMA: Absolutely. I support such activities, and 
I think there should be an exchange of data and 
exchange of scientists. This is a wonderful thing.  

 
PARTICIPANT: We have this improvement taking place 
in connectivity and hopefully it will also change 
the possibilities for Africa. Simultaneously, however, we 
have a growth of databases and we get very big amounts of data. It is really hard to work with 
these databases if you do not have access to very good 
broadband. My question is: Do you think that we should 
consider the problems for lack of connectivity in 
certain parts of the world when working on the desi
gn, structure, and accessibility of these databases so 
they can be easily accessible? Is that a problem? 

 
DR. RILEY: The answer is, of course. One of the 
problems has been that people who do collaborative 
projects with African colleagues often make a deci
sion to put their data on a server back home. The 
consequence of that is that their African colleagu
es then have a hard time getting the data. As this 
connectivity comes into place, this is going to create 
new opportunities where that does not have to be the 
case. For example, initially the submarine cables will 
land at places like Mombasa, Dar es Salaam, and, of 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FOUR: LIMITS AND BARRIERS TO DATA SHARING                                                                                 
     95 
 course, South Africa. The University of Dar es Salaam
 has been one of the first to get some of that 
bandwidth connectivity, and I think Kenyatta Univers
ity and several in the Nairobi area have as well. 
Those become interesting places to think about hosti
ng data centers as the infrastructure gets built up 
around the rest of the country.   
 
PARTICIPANT: We heard in some of the presentations yesterday and today that at least one of the 

barriers to sharing data are the lack of incentives and motivation from scientists. Professor Carlson, you 
articulated very nicely some suggestions for changing
 professional institutional structures to get scientists 
to share data, but in my field in global health and 
public health, the incentives are not enough. You cannot 
just have carrots. You have to have
 sticks. For example, the NIH, Ca
nada, a lot of public funders, and 
even private funders in my home country require subm
ission of data-sharing plans, but there is not that 
follow-up or at least a robust system of enforcement.
 I was wondering what the panel thinks about having 
something like sticks and what those sticks might lo
ok like. If incentives are not enough to motivate data 
sharing, what should the penalties look like? Is that a good idea? 
 DR. CARLSON: I completely agree. If you look at the regulatory environment of the funding agencies 

and talk to the directors of those funding agencies, most
 of them would say, ﬁYes, we have those sticks in 
place. If scientists want to come back to us for a rene
wal of their grant, it already says in the grant award 
they must have a data plan and provide their data
 to a center.ﬂ The problem is not the lack of the 
regulations. The problem is that at the program mana
ger level, there is no enforcement. I can say this 
honestly without listing any country. I have been into
 a research council where the director said, ﬁWe 
have in place procedures so that our investigators have
 to provide their data in order to get a renewal. However, the program managers have no idea if any of
 their principal investigators have provided that 
data. They are not set up to track it. They have no m
echanism, and there is no incentive to track it.ﬂ It is 
actually a culture within the agenci
es. The agencies already have the written regulations, but the agency 
culture has to change.   
DR. COLLIER: I think that you can do some things w
ith sticks, but if you did the enforcement, where 
would these people put their information? How would it 
be sustained? Do we have the infrastructure in 
any country to deal with that? Who do we hold accounta
ble? Is it the institution? Is it the investigator? 
What if the investigator dies? What if the institu
tion goes bankrupt? We do not have a real plan for how 
we are going to do this. I think that you can push, 
but it is going to take pushing in other places and 
providing some solutions as to how we are actually going 
to manage that information, where it is going to 
be, and how we are actually going to access it. 

 
PARTICIPANT: I am wondering if the panel would be
 willing to address two issues that are enormously 
hindering, not only to data sharing but also to ge
neral science development in emerging economies. One 
of them is taking again what Michael was saying about cellular telephony as well as broadband 

availability. He mentioned a number of individuals, a
nd we also know that the first or second richest man 
in the world is a Mexican who controls telecommuni
cations throughout the continent. What we have 
experienced is that telecommunications in all of Sout
h America are enormously more expensive than they 
are for comparable services in the United 
States. That is one of the issues.  
 
The other one is somewhat related, although it is strictly
 applied to the biological sciences, and that is the 
issue of intellectual property rights (IPR), either for th
erapeutic agents or for vaccine agents. There are a 
variety of agents that can be produced through r
ecombinant technologies at extraordinarily low cost 
compared to the price at which they are available 
commercially in Africa and Southeast Asia. There is 
quite a bit of controversy regarding the prudence or
 the rationale for proceeding with producing the necessary agents regardless of IPR. Two common issues link these two: one is enormous greed, and the 

second is corruption. Would the panel be willing to address that? 

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96                                                                 THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 DR. RILEY: How do you deal with greed and corruption?  I am not sure that we know how to do that.  
Look at what is going on around the world right now
 because of people getting fed up with greed and 
corruption in their countries, and now using these t
ools that seem to be unstoppable, although there 
certainly have been attempts to stop them by shu
tting down cell phones and shutting down the Internet. If 
we could get rid of the devil, we would solve the problem. 

 
 
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97    
   
 PART FIVE: 
HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98                                                           THE CASE FOR INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 25. Government Science Policy Makers™ and Rese
arch Funders™ Challenges to International Data Sharing: The Role of UNESCO
  Gretchen Kalonji 
UNESCO, France  
I am going to offer you a very brief overview of the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural 
Organization (UNESCO). I will give some examples of
 current activities that have to do with the 
challenges of data access and sharing, particularly in 
the developing world, and then proceed with some ideas about new opportunities and new directions that we might pursue in hopes of getting feedback from 
you and even perhaps forging new collaborations. 

 
UNESCO was founded in 1949, and has an extraordinar
ily broad mandate covering education, science, 
and culture; communications and information; and ethi
cs and philosophy. Such a broad mandate could be 
seen as a disadvantage, but within the context of the 
challenges that we are addressing at this meeting 
today, I hope to show you why this mandate may in fact be a very useful thing. 

 
The organization has some strong existing programs with
in the natural sciences sector, in particular, the 
well-known Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commissi
on and the International Hydrological Program. 
Both have been around for 50 or so years. We also
 have the ecological sciences with the Man and the 
Biosphere Program and the International Geoscience
s Program. What is perhaps less well known is our 
strong focus on indigenous knowledge and science policy.
 Science policy is one of our largest areas. 
 
We are headquartered in Paris, but have science 
offices in Jakarta, Nairobi, Montevideo, Venice, and 
Cairo. We have science officers in about 53 UNESCO offices around the world. It is a strong, 
geographically distributed network with peopl
e on the ground actually working on projects. 
 UNESCO has a number of affiliated institutions, includ
ing our Category One Centers. The best known to 
this community is probably the International Center fo
r Theoretical Physics in Trieste, but we also have 
an international hydrological education program in 
Delft, which is the world™s largest postgraduate 
freshwater program, with 80 percent of the students coming from the developing world. The Academy of 
Sciences for the Developing World, TW
AS, is also a UNESCO institution.  UNESCO also has what are called Category Two Ce
nters, which are affiliated research centers 
established by our member states within a particular
 country and funded by that country. The country 
agrees that they will take on an international r
esponsibility for a particular topic (e.g., water-based 
disasters, including one in Japan called ICHARM [Int
ernational Center for Water Hazard]). We have 
about 22 of those in the sciences. Most are in wate
r, and there are four new ones being established in 
Africa. Lastly, we have UNESCO Chairs around the worl
d, which are appointed in a competitive process, 
and they are another wonderful resource for UNESCO. 

 One of the things that we have that is particularly
 important for the challenges we are discussing today are 
the extraordinary and very well-known World Heritage
 sites. They are designated for either cultural value, natural value, or both.  In addition to the World Heritage sites,
 we have the biosphere reserves and 
the newly emerging geoparks, which are very popular 
in some countries, particularly China. Those are 
areas where a combination of research and educati
on and community economic development can take 
place in an integrated manner. 
 We also have a network of affiliated partners. CE
RN, the European Organization for Nuclear Research,
1                      1 See http://public.web.cern.ch/public/.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        99 
 was in fact created through UNESCO, and we continue
 to work very closely with them on issues such as 
digital access in Africa and physics education for t
eachers in Africa. The International Council for 
Science (ICSU) predates us but is a very close partne
r institution. The International Union of Pure and 
Applied Chemistry is another partne
r. We are working very closely with them on the International Year 
of Chemistry. One of the things that is perhap
s less well understood about UNESCO is the very close 
relationships we have with our member states. We
 are unique within the United Nations specialized 
agencies and programs in that we actually work 
in the same building in Paris as the permanent 
delegations from the member states, which enables a ve
ry close working relationship on concrete projects. 
We also have a structure that is unique within
 the UN system. The national commissions for UNESCO 
bring civil society together to help set directions fo
r the organization. These commissions are more or less 
active. Korea, for example, has 600 people working 
on education, science, and culture, and UNESCO has 
become a household word there. 

 
Lastly, we have perceived political neutrality. What th
at means is that we can convene discussions about 
topics that are quite thorny and have our 193 member
 states from around the world come together and 
discuss them in an amicable manner. 

 
On the other hand, we could have a more strategic focu
s.  We need to have a better working system of all 
of these various parts and partners; we need to work
 better with other UN agencies, the private sector, and 
other sectors of society; and we need to enhance our visibility. 
 
Given these strengths and weaknesses, UNESCO™s science 
agenda should prioritize three things. First, we 
should help tackle problems that intrinsically requi
re international cooperation and provide services for 
member states in that regard. Second, we shoul
d build on our original mandate. UNESCO was created 
with the slogan of building peace in the minds of me
n and women. We focus on those areas in which the 
science agenda interacts very closel
y with the issue of conflict preven
tion and conflict resolution.  The broader agenda of peace is very dear to our hearts. 
I cite a couple of examples here. One is our work on 
transboundary aquifers, which I am going to talk about 
later in terms of large-scale data challenges. The other one is a fascinating effort called SESAME (International Center for Synchrotron-light for 
Experimental Science and Applications in the Middle
 East), which brings together scientists throughout 
the Middle East. It is a very important project in that
 it is putting together a synchrotron in Jordan and 
bringing together a scientific community from throughout
 the disciplines that can use this light source. It 
is an extraordinary example of scientists from a re
gion with a huge amount of tension actually working 
together. Iranians, Israelis, Palestinians, Turkish,
 and so on are all working on the same large-scale 
science project. 

 Lastly, perhaps the bulk of our activity falls into serving the member states. We are international civil 
servants. We need to do the best job possible to help our member states reach their own goals for building 

scientific, technological, and innovation capacity in or
der to address poverty eradication and also provide 
the scientific basis for the solutions that are being pr
oposed.  Of course, we should continue to prioritize work in those areas where we have a 
lot of expertise, such as water. 
 At UNESCO, we have a unique view regarding the science and the development agendas. We have a very 
people-centered approachŠan approach that is based on empowerment, ethics, and respect for local 
knowledge, but also our conviction that the ability to 
contribute to global challenges and the opportunities 
to do so are in fact fundamental human rights. 

 Since I joined UNESCO, we have melded our activities 
into a new strategic plan to be approved by our 
executive board next month. We have clustered our ac
tivities into two main areas, which I will talk about 
to show how the data challenges map onto some of these activities.  

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 One area is strengthening science, technology, and 
innovation ecosystems. Societies have to have good 
policy, and we put an enormous amount of atten
tion into that effort, particularly in Africa. 
Some of the symposium speakers have stressed th
at universities are really the heart of healthy 
technological innovation ecosystems. We have a big 
focus on higher education in the developing world, 
and on mobilizing the popular understanding and support for science, such as science for 

parliamentarians, science journalism, and working with science museums, as well as programs that 

enhance participation of indi
genous people.  To summarize, this cluster focuses on 
  Promoting science, technolog
y, and innovation (STI) polic
ies and access to knowledge;  Building capacities in basic sciences and engineering, including through strengthening 
higher education systems; and 
 Mobilizing broad-based societal participation in STI. 
 
The second cluster is mobilizing science for sustainability.
 This is an activity wh
ere large-scale scientific communities come together to set a collective scientific agenda. 

 
I want to discuss a couple of examples for how these la
rge-scale data issues become the actual work of 
our UNESCO family.  In freshwater, UNESCO has the 
International Hydrological Program, which is an 
intergovernmental effort. Each nation has its own co
mmittee that works on setting a collective agenda in the area of freshwater. Then together they develop a 6-
year plan that they modify over time. This is just 
one of the examples in which a community of hydrol
ogists working together is trying to assemble the 
kind of data that we need. An example of the success of
 their work is in the transboundary aquifer in parts 
of the world, including Africa. 
 
In this kind of an effort, UNESCO plays a coordina
ting and somewhat catalytic role, but basically there 
are multiples of hundreds of hydrologists around the world working on a common agenda. This is very 

important for avoiding conflict.  Our connections w
ith the UN system means that
 the scientists can work 
with the legal people in the United Nations and the dipl
omatic representatives to help forge the law in the 
general assembly concerning the equitabl
e sharing of transboundary aquifers. 
 
In the current work plan for freshwater intergovern
mental science programs, there is a big emphasis on 
education, sustainability, basic scie
nces, and climate change. There are also cross-cutting programs, such 
as networks of hydrologists who work on a regional 
and global basis sharing data for hydrological 
research. For example, there is a Nile River basin gro
up that brings together the scientists who are dealing 
with the Nile River water issues. 

 
Another example of data sharing that is qualitatively 
different is the Man and the Biosphere Program. In 
this program, there are 564 sites in 109 countries. These sites are proposed by each country. There is an 
intergovernmental body that decides whether it can 
become a biosphere reserve. The interesting thing 
about the biosphere reserves is that, unlike the Worl
d Heritage sites, they involve a region that is 
protected because of biological diversity, but human
s also live there. There is also a buffer zone 
surrounding the core region, and an extended zone. What that means is that activities such as mining, 

tourism, and farming are not forbidden. It gives sci
entists the opportunity to have some very vibrant case 
studies of the international balance between biodi
versity conservation and economic development and 
livelihoods for local communities. 
 
Let me briefly touch upon some other areas. UNESCO™s science policy activities range from 

international, like the 
World Science Report
 and the World Engineering Report
, to regional and country-
based policy support. Twenty-two countries in Afri
ca are working with us right now on their science 
policies.  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        101 
 In the geological sciences, there are many examples
 in which the global change research community has 
been working together with a broader geological co
mmunity, particularly the International Union of 
Geological Sciences (IUGS), on getting access to and co
mbining and sharing geological information from 
a variety of sources, including paper-based sources. It is a very exciting time now for the biodiversity 
community, too, and an intergovernmental platform 
on biodiversity and ecosystem services has been 
discussed. The biodiversity analog of the Intergove
rnmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will 
undertake a very large-scale effort to promote acces
s to data in the area of biodiversity. This is 
particularly exciting because of the newly created 
Nagoya Protocol for Access and Benefit Sharing. 
 There are three qualitative areas to which I believe 
UNESCO contributes. First, it helps strengthen the 
capacity of member states to engage in data-inten
sive science. Second, it provides platforms for more 
effective community engagement. Lastly, UNESCO enhances awareness of the value of freely sharing 

scientific data.   

 UNESCO could, if it is of interest to other partners
 to work with us, potentially host a meeting in Paris 
with our member states about the same topic, 
because they are the direct
 representatives to the government. They are the ones who need to hear
 the speeches like the one from Professor Yang about 
how wonderful it was for China to make data freely accessible. 

 My second idea is to incorporate within our existing efforts on strengthening higher education a 
collaboration on developing capacity in data-intensive sci
ence in partner universities, especially in Africa.  
It should be very straightforward to integrate aw
areness-raising activities into some of our existing efforts, like our work with ICSU in preparati
on for the UN Conference on Sustainable Development 
(Rio+20), or programs on science for parliamentarians, or our work on policy. 

 Lastly, I am very excited about the Intergovernme
ntal Science Policy Platform on Biodiversity and 
Ecosystem Services (IPBES). It seems very likely 
that UNESCO, together with the UN Environment Programme and maybe another agency, will be taking
 the lead as the institutional cohost for IPBES. I 
would be interested in brainstorming with indivi
duals or organizations about this extraordinary 
opportunity. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 26. International Scientific Organizations: Views and Examples 
 Bengt Gustafsson Uppsala University, Sweden 
ICSU Committee on Freedom and Respons
ibility in the Conduct of Science 
 I will begin with some historical remarks. History pr
ovides an enormous data bank, which is also useful 
when we discuss the accessibility of data banks in 
contemporary research. By starting the discussion by 
referring to the development in Europe some four to 
five hundred years ago, we find scientists quite often 
keeping their truths between themselves, and ev
en sending cryptographic messages to each other to 
prevent others from reading or understanding. The in
teresting counter-examples in the early seventeenth 
century were the new artisans, the small factories, 
and the people developing technology for mining. They 
were open-minded, and symbolized modernity.  

 Openness was from the very beginning connected to th
e idea of progressŠprogress in arts and in building 
a new society. That was clear and strongly brought forward by Francis Bacon. Let me cite from an 

account of this by William Eamon in the 
Minerva article, 
From the Secrets of Nature to Public 
Knowledge: The Origins of the Concept of Openness in Science
: ﬁOne of the lasting effects of the 
influence of Bacon™s philosophy was the establishment 
of a new model of the scientific research worker 
as one dedicated to the pursuit of knowledge for the 
public good. No longer was science to exist merely 
for the pleasure and illumination of a few minds; it was 
to be used for the advancement of commonwealth in general. This new demand required that more
 knowledge be shared, both within the scientific 
community and with society at large.ﬂ
2  
However, this was not the beginning; traditions al
ong these lines existed before the Renaissance in 
Europe. But the ideas from Bacon™s time form the ideo
logical tradition in which we scientists still live 
and work. This was also the spirit in which the Roya
l Society was formed in 1660, in fact, directly 
inspired by Bacon and his writing, and that also pursued the idea of transmitting publicly the findings by 

its Philosophical Transactions. There were many 
academies formed on this model. One was my own 
academy, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, in 
the following century. The aim was to develop and 
spread knowledge in mathematics, natural sciences,
 economy, trade, useful arts, and manufacturing. 
There was also the idea of publishing descriptions 
of research achievements and creating a pregnant 
almanac containing advice for farmers and others, 
which was the second book printed in Swedish during 
more than 100 years. Only the Bible w
as read more than the Academy almanac. 
 
These ideas are important cornerstones in the fou
ndation of all academies still and also for the 
International Council for Science (ICSU), which 
has about 100 national members, most of them 
academies, as well as some international scientific uni
ons. Since the 1930s, ICSU 
has built its activity on 
the Principle of the Universality of Science (Univers
ality Principle). This principle is fundamental to 
scientific progress. According to the 5
th statute of ICSU, the principle involves freedom of movement, 
association, expression, and communication with scientists, as well as equitable access to data, 
information, and research materials. In pursuing 
its objectives for the rights and responsibilities of 
scientists, ICSU actively upholds this principle and,
 in so doing, opposes any discrimination on the basis 
of such factors as ethnic origin, religion, citizenship
, language, political stance, ge
nder, sexual orientation, or age. ICSU states that it shall not accept disruption of its own activities by statements or reactions that 
intentionally or otherwise prevent the application of this principle. 

 What can we do to uphold this principle in reality? 
 ICSU has taken a number of steps for this, such as 
                     2 Eamon, W (1985). From the Secrets of Nature to Public K
nowledge: The Origins of the Concept of Openness in Science. 
Minerva 23, pp. 321-347. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        103 
 establishing committees, including its current Committee on Freedom and Responsibility in the Conduct 
of Science (CFRS). It is clear from the name of this committee that it has wide objectives, reflecting the 

view that the freedom advocated in the Universa
lity Principle should also require that important 
responsibilities are taken by the scientific community rela
tive to the society. In addition to this committee, 
ICSU has also taken other initiatives, which are di
rected more particularly toward securing data 
distribution and data accessibility, such as initiati
ng a Strategic Coordinating Committee on Information 
and Data, looking at the interaction of the World 
Data System, the Committee on Data for Science and 
Technology (CODATA), and other ICSU data- and in
formation-related activities. ICSU has also 
cooperated with other organizations in
 forming an International Network for the Availability of Scientific 
Publications.     
 
The CFRS discusses and takes stands against breaches of the Universality Principle. This is often done in 
collaboration with several other organizations, in pa
rticular, the members of ICSU. Another important 
collaborator is the International Human Rights Netw
ork of Academies and Scholarly Societies. The 
CFRS advises ICSU and ICSU members on related ma
tters and helps arrange conferences and workshops 
on issues of responsibility and integrity of science. In 
doing so, it is important for the committee to also 
try to reach conclusions; after such workshops and 
conferences, conclusions are published as statements 
or advisory notes. Some recent examples, in a
ddition to this workshop, is a workshop on access and 
benefit sharing of genetic resources held in Berne 
in June 2011, as well as one on private sectorŒacademia 
interaction in November 2011 in Sigtuna, Swed
en. Other workshops are planned on science policy 
advice, science and antiscience, and science in cont
emporary wars. All these workshops must be truly 
international and will have a focus on the bala
nce of responsibility and freedom in science. 
 
Now, turning more particularly toward the question of 
access to scientific data, it must be stressed that the 
present situation, although improving, is far from satis
factory. As Paul Uhlir pointed out in a 2010 essay 
in the CODATA Data Science Journal, there are still ﬁinformation gulags,ﬂ that is, large numbers of data 
resources in dark repositories; ﬁintellectual straitjacket
s,ﬂ exclusive property prot
ection of data when not needed; as well as ﬁmemory holes,ﬂ meaning that data 
once collected are often later destroyed or not 
conserved properly
3. Existing data are most often not properly ar
chived. Even quite important data are not 
maintained. Early National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) and National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) data are examples of this. 
 
Let me now focus on my own field, astronomy, and provide several examples to show the progress in 

openness, with a more historical twist than that of the stimulating presentation by ”eljko Ivezi
. A famous 
example of secrecy in science is the behavior of
 Galileo Galilei when he summarized his pioneering 
telescopic studies of the planet Saturn in the early 
1610s. He did not interpret what he saw as a ring 
system, since there seemed to be two bodies on either 
side of the planet, or possibly ﬁearsﬂ on the planet. 
Yet, to claim his discovery in spite of the uncertain
 interpretation, he used an anagram (when deciphered 
indicating that the planet ﬁhad triple formﬂ) as 
a form of commitment scheme. Not until several decades 
later, Christian Huygens correctly identified 
the ring system and announced its existence.  
 Twice a century, Venus passes across the solar disk; 
the first detailed European observations of this 
phenomenon were made in 1639. James 
Gregory next proposed that a met
hod could be developed to find 
the distance to the sun by timing exactly when Venus en
ters the solar disk and when it leaves the disk. If  that is done from several places on Earth, the distan
ce to the sun could be determined accurately. Edmond 
Halley proposed that astronomers should observe the 
Venus transits systematically next time, which 
happened to be after his death in 1742. Astronomers trav
eled to various parts of the world to measure the 
transits of Venus accurately. The first passage was in
 1761. There were even measurements made from a 
                     3 Uhlir, P. (2010, October 7). Information Gula
gs, Intellectual Stra
ightjackets, and Memory Holes: 
Three Principles to Guide the
 Preservation of Scien
tific Data, CODATA. 
Data Science Journal, 9.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 naval frigate while fighting pirates in the Mediterrane
an. The data were then assembled, shared among a 
network of astronomers, and made common.  

 During the event 8 years later, astronomers were even
 better spread across the globe, including a British 
expedition on Tahiti where young James Cook was sent w
ith his vessel to carry out the observations. His 
observations turned out to be rather poor. The excuse given by Cook was that the quadrant was robbed by 

a local chief and dismantled, and then only provisionally mended. On his way back, however, he 

discovered some new regions of the earth and reported 
this back to the admiralty, and they forgave him 
explicitly for his bad observations
. The data were assembled and discussed among the astronomers, 
because they did not have the quality expectedŠthe di
stance calculated by Jérôme Lalande in Paris was 
153 million kilometers plus 1 million 
kilometers, which was not as good as they had hoped for. This very 
problem of coordinating all observations and minimi
zing the errors led to requirements for further 
openness. 
 Another great international project from the following century was the great star map, 
Carte du Ciel, where 22 observatories joined in constructing rather 
similar telescopes, which together exposed 22,000 
photographic glass plates with 4.6 million stars to be me
asured and printed. Many people, including non-
expert women, were engaged in these activities. Th
e whole result was published in 254 volumes. Again, 
the need to reach the goal required wide international collaboration, and to 
achieve optimal quality, 
openness was necessary. This experience that such vent
ures must be carried out in common, not only to 
make the heavy workload possible but also to achieve an
 optimal analysis of the data, demonstrated to the 
astronomy community the importance of sharing data. 

 
In contemporary astronomy we find this intimate collaboration taking place not only in discussing the 

data or sharing data but also in the very setting up 
of projects and determining how to analyze the data, 
how to release them, how to publicize them, and how 
to provide assistance so as to allow as many people 
as possible to contribute. At many of the largest inte
rnational telescope facilities, financed by consortia 
with universities or states as members, nonmember as
tronomers may take part, and in some cases even be 
principal investigators (PIs) on projects. At least in
 principle, only excellence of the project proposal matters. Finally, in most cases, all data are made fully public after about 1 year.  
 We can compare this situation with CERN, the Eur
opean high-energy physics laboratory at Geneva. 
Nonmember state PIs work there and are playing impor
tant roles. CERN also runs an open fellowship 
program, to which scientists from all over the world ar
e encouraged to come and team up with others. 
Some primary data are available from earlier expe
riments, but the recent ones, including the Large 
Hadron Collider experiments, will probably not be ava
ilable publicly, just because they are so extensive. 
It is very hard to interpret th
em without being a member of the experimental group. In this case the 
enormous database of primary data may still be closed. 

 
Astronomers produced a data manifesto 5 years ago,
 which was later adopted by the International 
Astronomical Union (IAU). It starts with this decl
aration: ﬁWe, the global community of astronomy, 
aspire to the following guidelines for managing astronomical data, believing that these guidelines would 
maximize the rate and cost effectiveness of science discovery.ﬂ
4 Relevant guidelines include: ﬁAll 
significant tables and images published in journals shoul
d appear in astronomical data centers. All data 
obtained with publicly funded observatories should afte
r proprietary periods be placed in public domain.  
In any new major astronomical construction project
, the data processing, storage, migration and 
management requirements should be built in at an early
 stage in the project and budgeted along with other 
parts of the project. Astronomers in all countries shou
ld have the same access to astronomical data and 
information. Legacy astronomical data can be valuab
le and high-priority legacy
 data should be preserved 
                     4 Available at http://www.at
nf.csiro.au/people/rnorri
s/papers/manifesto.pdf 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        105 
 and stored in digital form in the data centers. IAU sh
ould work with other international organizations to 
achieve our common goals and learn from our colleagues in
 other fields.ﬂ Legacy astronomical data refers 
to older data. For instance, the glass plates mentione
d above can be valuable and even high-priority 
legacy data, and they should theref
ore be preserved and stored in dig
ital form in the data centers.  
 
Implementing such a manifesto is, of course, a ma
jor undertaking. One important initiative along these 
lines is the International Virtual Observatory Allian
ce, which is a worldwide organization of national 
members, which tries to make all astronomical ob
servational data in various wavelength bands from 
various instruments available publicly. Several interna
tional astronomical data centers also play a great 
role in these endeavors.  
 
Such efforts to promote openness are not only for gene
rosity. There have been studies showing that the 
open data policy of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) 
has increased the number of publications based on 
HST data by a factor of 3, and that the earlier sate
llite telescope International Ultraviolet Explorer has increased the number of publications based on those data
 by a factor of 5. Another important issue on 
openness is open-access publications. Most astronomy papers can now be accessed freely via a preprint 
database or archive (Smithsonian/NASA Astrophysics Da
ta System), and most major journals accept this 
way of prepublication. 

 Let me also comment on the problem of overcoming 
the digital divide. There are several concrete 
examples of attempts within the scien
tific communities in particular fields to bridge the gap between the 
developed and the developing world in this respect. In 
astronomy, this bridging has partly been driven by 
the important fact that many of the best astronomical
 sites are situated in developing countries. The IAU 
has recently established an office for astronomy devel
opment in the developing countries at the South 
African Astronomical Observatory. The experience 
at the International Science Programs at Uppsala 
University, which has been actively bridging between
 university science departments in the developing 
world and in the Nordic countries for 50 years, show
s that much can be done to diminish the digital 
divide with patience and consistency.  

 
No doubt, astronomy is a simple example with a 
long tradition of interna
tional collaboration and openness. Astronomers have realized that internationa
l collaboration is necessary,
 because the universe is 
large and rich in a multitude of various phenomena.
 Astronomy has limited economic impact and interest 
and few security restrictions. And it is mainly motivated 
by the interest of the public, which after all have 
to pay for it, and is why openness is necessary. So
, astronomy is a simple case. Nevertheless, we may 
learn from it. There is a full chain of openness aspects 
in the scientific process to be considered. Can we be open in project planning, letting pe
ople team up whenever they want in the process? Can we be open in 
planning our big investments, building our telescopes,
 our accelerators, and our big projects? Can we be 
open in data analysis even before 
we have published the data, and open in
 data use too?  I think so. Our 
science will benefit from openness in all these respects. 

 
We can learn from history that much of science is pr
imarily not driven by scientists, but by society. 
However, almost all science is 
also science driven. There are good reasons, both from a scientific point of 
view and from a societal one, for promoting better science by being open. We also can learn from 

examples of several of the presentations during 
this symposium that individuals matter.  
 
By opening up internationally together, we actually 
can provide something even more important than pure 
science to the worldŠnamely, demonstrate that together
 we can do very difficult things. Previously, we 
have mostly demonstrated this by way of war operati
ons in big international co
llaborations, but here we 
can do it with more lasting value. Can we afford to co
ntinue losing more than half of all human capacity 
that would wish and be able to contribute important 
scientific achievements?  Of course not. That is the 
basic motivation for all these endeavors. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Let me end with a quote that very appropriately is 
presented as an inscription on the Keck Building, 500 
Fifth Street, N.W., where this meeting takes place: 
  
 
     
     The right to search for truth implies also a duty; one must not conceal what 
one recognized to be true.   
A. Einstein The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        107 
 27. Improving Data Access and Use for 
Sustainable Development in the South 
 Daniel Schaffer Academy of Sciences for the Developing World, Italy 
 
I am speaking on behalf of TWAS, the Academy of 
Sciences for the Developing World. I will explain 
what TWAS is, in brief, later in the presentation. At the outset, my talk will focus on both scientific 
information and scientific data. I will speak about ke
y issues raised during this 2-day symposium, but 
with a TWAS twist and a particular focus on broad-based problems faced by scientists in the developing 
world who are seeking to access scientific information and scientific data. 
 
A world-class technical library can be found on the cam
pus of the Abdus Salam International Center for 
Theoretical Physics (ICTP) in Trieste, where TWAS 
is also located. When ICTP was created in the 
1960s, the library was the centerpiece of the enterpri
se. Scientists from across the developing world 
would come to ICTP for the library, since it was unlikel
y they could get the information at institutions in 
their home countries. Of course, they would also come to participate in ICTP™s research and training 

activities.  
 
The library is still there, but scientists can now often access much of the library™s material from 
anywhere. The shift that has taken place at ICTP, I be
lieve, is symbolic of the 
broad changes that have occurred in scientific information and data access across the world. 
 
My presentation will be framed by the United Nations
™ Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which 
states that everyone has the right to share in scientif
ic advancement and its bene
fits. The members of the 
United Nations signed this declaration in 1947. To th
at end, there is a long-standing principled foundation 
to the quest for free and open access to information and data.  
 
As we all know, the number of scholarly and scientific
 publications are increasing at a rapid rate. It is 
estimated that there are 25,000 to 50,000 scholarly pu
blications worldwide. Some 2.5 million scholarly 
articles are published each year. It is estimated that 
the output is doubling every 15 years.  Scientific 
information is experiencing its greatest transformation since the advent of the printing press more than 
five centuries ago, and what is true of scientific info
rmation is equally true of scientific data. In 2010 it is estimated that the world generated 1,250 exabytes of 
data. If you placed that data inside a conventional 
compact disk (CD) and you stacked those CDs one atop another, the stack would rise 3.75 million 

kilometers, a distance equal to five times to the m
oon and back. We are genera
ting additional information 
at such a rapid pace, this year alone we will be pr
oducing 1,800 exabytes of data. That means there would 
be several more stacks of CDs rising to incredible heights. 
 
Some of the problems in communications exist despite the enormous flow of 
information and data, and 
some exist because of the endless flow of informa
tion and data. For example, there are still some 
fundamental obstacles that stand in the way of the u
se, interpretation, and exchange of information and 
data. Many of these challenges have 
been mentioned over the course of the past day and a half. Some are 
universal. The data deluge itself presents an enormous
 data management problem. Security issues exist at 
both national and international levels. There are also pr
ivacy issues, particularly related to data on public 
health and medical research. What has not been ment
ioned extensively here is the reluctance to share 
data. As we all know, the international scientific
 community is based on competition and individual 
accomplishment. That often leads to reluctan
ce on the part of scientists to share data. 
 Some of the challenges are particular to the developing
 world. As we heard in the first session today, in 
poor countries, there is often poor Internet acce
ss, limited access to computers themselves, and low 
bandwidth. It is much less of a problem than it was 10 or
 even 5 years ago, but it still persists in parts of 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 the developing world. There is also limited access to sc
ientific literature. Historically this has been due to 
the cost of subscriptions, but we have shifted the burden from institutions to individuals through open 
access, which has admittedly been an important engi
ne for the spread of scientific information and advances in scientific capacity in the developing
 world. Nevertheless, open access presents some 
problems for individual scientists, particularly young scientists. 

 
Last year, TWAS held a conference in Egypt in part
nership with the New Alexandria Library on scientific 
publications. Many of the young scientists who partic
ipated in the conference complained about open 
access because they simply did not have the resour
ces to participate. Charges of $1,000Œ$1,500 U.S. 
dollars in author fees to publish in an open-access 
journal are beyond their means. Indeed it exceeds their 
yearly salaries. As a result, they do have 
problems with contributing to and accessing open-access 
materials, despite all of the benefits that open access provides.  

 
Additionally, there is inadequate training for 
gathering and interpreting data, poorly equipped 
laboratories, excessive teaching responsibilities that
 distract researchers from their research, limited 
career opportunities that dampen enthusiasm for rese
arch, and a general lack of funding. TWAS did a 
survey about 2 years ago asking young scientists in the 
developing world, particularly poorer countries in 
the South, what their research environment was lik
e and what kinds of issues they confronted. We 
received an e-mail from one scientist in Nigeria, where she had a list of problems with which we are all 
familiar. I would like to point to the opening and closi
ng paragraphs of her e-mail to highlight the realities 
those scientists in her circumstances face. She wrote: ﬁFor the past 3 hours, I have been trying to reply to 
your email, but the power has been going off and on ev
ery minute.ﬂ And the last sentence reads: ﬁI cut my 
discussion short because I need to send this message now before the power goes off.ﬂ  That is the reality 
that many young scientists face 
in poor developing countries. 
 Despite these challenges, there are someŠin f
act, manyŠencouraging developments. Two reports 
published recently indicated that the trends are positive for capacity building and access to scientific 
publications and scientific data collection in the deve
loping world. These reports are the UN Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization™s (UNESCO) World Science Report
5, published in 2010, and the 
Royal Society™s 
Knowledge, Networks and Nations
6, published in March 2011.  
 
The UNESCO report indicated that over the past d
ecade, there has been a substantial increase (from 30 
percent in 2002 to 38 percent today) in the number of
 publications by scientists from the South published 
in peer-reviewed scientific journals. Yet much of th
is growth has been due to a very small number of 
countries. According to surveys done by TWAS, six countries (China, India, South Korea, Brazil, 

Taiwan, and Turkey) in the global South are responsible
 for 75 percent of the publications that are being 
produced in the developing world.  

 We should note that some of these countries are no longer considered developing (e.g., China is both a 
developing and a developed country, and South Korea 
is defined as a high-income developed country in 
most economic surveys and reports). China, in fact, is
 now playing a role in the South similar to that 
played by the United States in the wo
rld, in the sense that it is producing 25 percent to 30 percent of all the journal publications in the developing world. 
 According to the Royal Society™s 
Knowledge, Networks and Nations
7, China is on course to overtake the 
United States in scientific output, possibly as soon as
 2013, which is far earlier than expected. Leaving 
aside the question of impact and overall quality, for sh
eer quantity, within the ne
xt 2 or 3 years, Chinese 
                     5 Available at http://www.unesco.
org/new/en/natural-sciences/sc
ience-technology/prospective-st
udies/unesco-science-report/ 
6 Available at http://royalsociety.org/policy/
projects/knowledge-networks-nations/report/ 
7 Available at http://royalsociety.org/policy/
projects/knowledge-networks-nations/report/
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        109 
 scientists will likely outpace scientists in the United St
ates in the number of scientific publications they 
publish. 

 So, on one side of the spectrum, we have six ﬁdevel
opingﬂ countries that are responsible for three-quarters 
of scientific publications in the developing world. On 
the other side of the spectrum, we have a group of 
80 developing countries that produce very small quan
tities of scientific information. These countries are 
home to 1.6 billion people, 25 percent of the world™s 
population. They are responsible for less than 1 
percent of the world™s scientific publications. Many of these countries are in sub-Saharan Africa. 

 We have heard examples of superior science being done
 in the South, and this is undoubtedly true, but the 
aggregate figures indicate that there is also a growing gap in scientific publications between countries 
such as China and India, which are progressing rapidl
y, and others that are lagging farther and farther behind. From TWAS™s perspective, one of the key 
questions about scientific information and scientific 
data is, How do you deal with these two divergent tre
ndsŠa narrowing North-South divide that is being 
matched by a widening South-South divide? 
 
Let me spend a few minutes now talking about TW
AS, the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World. Abdus Salam, the Nobel laureate from Pakistan
, founded TWAS in 1983 in Trieste, Italy. The 
secretary general of the United Nations inaugurat
ed the Academy in 1985. It operates under the 
administrative umbrella of UNESCO. It began with 
40 members. It now has 995 members from nearly 
100 developing countries: 853 fellows 
in 74 countries in the South, 142 associate fellows in 17 countries 
in the North. Fifteen Nobel laureates are TWAS members. 

 
Some of the Academy members may be familiar to 
you. There is Atta-ur-Rahman, who spoke to the 
participants at this meeting yesterday from Pakistan
 via cyberspace. There is Mohamed Hassan, who just 
stepped down as the TWAS executive director, and the ne
w executive director who was previously on the 
council, Romain Murenzi. He more recently worked 
with the American Association for the Advancement 
of Science in Washington, D.C. 

 
The objectives of TWAS are to:   Promote excellence in scientific research in developing countries; 
 Strengthen South-South collaboration; 
 Encourage South-North cooperation between individuals and centers of excellence; 
 Respond to needs of young scientists work
ing under unfavorable conditions; and 
 Engage in the dissemination of scientific
 information and sharing of innovative 
experiences. 
 
Our activities include sponsoring a South-South pos
tgraduate and postdocto
ral training fellowship 
program that we conduct in partnership with such
 large and increasingly successful developing countries 
as Brazil, China, India, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico
, and Thailand. We award 175 fellowships per year. 
Developing countries provide the funding for local ex
penses and tuition. TWAS provides the funding for 
transportation to enable these young scientists from 
the poor developing countries to go to centers of 
excellence and universities in the host countries. We al
so have a research grants program for individual 
scientists, comprising relatively small grants of $15,
000, largely used for purchasing equipment and 
supplies. Despite their modest size, these grants have
 a great deal of credibility, and they are well known 
among scientists in the developing world. 
 
We also support institutions. We have
 a grants program for research grou
ps in poor developing countries. 
We provide the groups with $30,000 a year over 
a 3-year period (subject to an annual performance 
review). These groups have shown much fortitude
, ingenuity, and progress in doing research under very 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 difficult conditions, and this money can make a big 
difference in the quality of their research going 
forward. 
 Furthermore, in recognition of the growing capacity of
 scientific expertise and excellence in the South, 
we have established, over the course of the past deca
des, five regional offices. The goal is to develop these regional offices into mini TWAS™s that can a
ddress within their own regions many of the same 
issues that TWAS does across the South.  

 
Given what I have said about TWAS, and given th
e trend toward a widening South-South gap in 
scientific capacity, how can we manage the growth 
of data and information for the benefit of all 
developing countries? It is a key question for TWAS 
and a key question for most of the members of this 
audience. 
 
I am going to make a number of recommendations. Th
e good news is these are not radically new ideas. 
Many of the recommendations have been discussed here. 
In fact, the recommendations are largely in line 
with many of the activities, programs, and initiatives 
that you are involved in. The recommendations also 
represent a strategy, in the TWAS context, to make 
them more encompassing so that they do not focus 
solely on successful developing countries at the e
xpense of developing countries that are not fully 
participating in international science. I therefore support the following recommendations: 
 Access and strategies that provide reduced 
rates for journals for scientists from poor 
developing countries. There are a number of 
initiatives already in play, and they should be 
supported by institutions like TWAS and institutions
 that you belong to in 
order to expand their 
impact to include the 80 science-poor countries that TWAS has identified.  
 Efforts to expand bandwidth and info
rmation and communication technology 
infrastructure.   Greater participation of scientists in developi
ng countries in international projects. This is 
happening, but it needs to happen on a broader 
and more extensive scale across the developing 
world.   Strategies for improving the manage
ment of indigenous databases. 
 The quality and availability of journals and da
ta information produced in the South. The 
International Network for the Availability of Scie
ntific Publications (INASP) was mentioned in 
several of the talks. There is also SciDev.Net
, which provides extensive news coverage about 
science and development in the developing world.   
 South-South data collection and exchange. Again, there are a growing number of 
examples, such as the Chinese-Brazil Earth Resources Satellite Program.  
 Regional repositories and mirrors in the South. Examples include the National Science Information Center in Karachi and the New Alexandria Library in Egypt. 
 More expansive global discussions on data 
management and use, incorporating the 
South™s viewpoint not just on issues related to trai
ning for data acquisition and interpretation, but 
also on issues related to broader policy and ethical
 concerns. In fact, in doing reading for this presentation, I noticed that the larger policy and 
ethical issues are dominated by Northern voices. 
We need Southern voices to be part of these discussions. 
 Best practices in data management in th
e South. There is India™s open-source drug-
discovery program among others, and at the mini
sterial level there is the India-Brazil-South Africa forum. 
 
All of these modest recommendations, which are larg
ely based on existing activities, experiences, and 
initiatives that have been mentioned at this meeting, ca
n play a critical role in fulfilling the principles and 
goals articulated in the Universal Declaration of Hu
man Rights with its lofty assertion that everyone has 
the right to share in scientific 
advancement and its benefits.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        111 
  They could also play a critical role in fulfilling th
e grand vision of Abdus Salam, creator of ICTP and 
TWAS, who often said in his writings and his speeches,
 ﬁScientific thought is the common heritage of 
mankind.ﬂ   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 28. How to Improve Data Access and Use: An Industry Perspective 
 John Rumble 
Information International Associates, United States 
 
The focus of my talk is on how to improve data acces
s and use from an industrial perspective. I work for a 
private company now, but I worked for the National 
Institute of Science and Technology (NIST) for 
many years. During that time, one of my main re
sponsibilities was to run the Standard Reference Data 
Program at NIST™s scientific and technical laborator
ies. Many of those data programs are run in 
cooperation and partnership with, as well as with direct
 funding from, industry. A lot of my perspective 
arises from my experience in working with various 
types of industriesŠfrom the biotechnology industry 
hoping to capitalize on genomics, to the concrete indus
try hoping to be able to build and pave roads in 
subfreezing weather, to the aircraft industry hoping to
 take advantage of new composite materials instead 
of good old-fashioned aluminum. 
 There are a lot of common features in the way that in
dustry approaches, accesses, uses, and supports data 
that are useful to it. It is important then to unde
rstand how industry looks upon publicly funded data. Just 
to give you the point of this in advance, industr
y strongly applauds the open access to publicly funded 
data because industry is in the best position to take ad
vantage of data from an exploitation point of view, 
not for scientific credit, but for revenue credit. The mo
re data they have access to, the more comfortable a 
company is that it is doing thi
ngs in the best possible way. 
  
It is always useful to look at the life cycle of 
data. When we talk about access to data, we are really 
talking about one part of a multistep, continuous pr
ocess. It starts with measurements and works its way 
around to having data resources being available and th
en having people use them. Then, from the use of 
these data resources, new needs are developed that in 
turn generate new measurements. This is how the 
data life cycle process continues. 

 
I want us to think about this particular life cycle from the industrial perspective to see where the 

interactions of industry take place within this life cycle and to understand some of the places where 
industry can both help and take advantage of the acce
ssibility of data. Many people do not really realize 
that industry plays a major role today in a lot of larg
e scale data collection efforts, whether it be the large-
scale manufacturer of small instruments that are used
 over and over again, such as mass spectrometers, 
genome sequencers, and crystallographic structure m
achines or all the way up to the big new colliders 
that have been built with a lot of cooperation from in
dustry. Industry does play 
a large role in generating 
data, even publicly funded data, through this support 
of the scientific effort and through instrumentation. 
They are looking to make money, but 
I think it is important to realize that a lot of the sources of publicly 
funded data resources that have been built in recent years have come as a direct result of industry 

involvement in this part of the data cycle. 

  
There are situations where industry gets very inte
rested in the development of and access to data 
resources. Sometimes it comes in terms of direct 
financial support. Good examples are some of the 
genomic and proteomic databases that are being built where industrial firms are directly doing 

measurements and contributing them to larger scale da
ta resources. Strategic moral support in the protein 
data bank is a good example of where industry does not
 necessarily provide direct support, but they have 
strongly encouraged the U.S. government to c
ontinue long-term support of that resource. 
 The knowledge support services that some of the best da
ta scientists have developed in terms of designing 
data architecture, data resources, and web services cam
e from IBM, Microsoft, and now Google. In other 
situations, where there are not particularly large set
s of tools or methodologies to exploit data, industry 
does a lot of development in terms of data mining, vi
sualization, and what I call ﬁvalue addedﬂ. This is 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        113 
 where industry will take some publicly available data, add value to it, and then sell it. An example is the 
NIST mass spectral database, which contains sever
al hundred thousand mass spectra. NIST distributes 
this database with a nice interface, but some of th
e machine manufacturers have taken that product and 
added an analytical package on top of it, thus enhanci
ng the value of that publicly funded data resource by 
making it a more important scientific and technological tool. 

 
Finally, one other way that industry very importantly i
nvolves itself in the data life cycle is by articulating 
new needs. Those of you from university research pr
ograms are well aware that industry has started many 
academic-industry joint programs. These programs have 
been started because industry realizes it has need 
for new scientific knowledge and measurements that it cannot satisfy itself.  
 
Another important main point has to do with how 
industry accesses data and when it accesses them, why 
it accesses them, and the economic implications of its
 access. Almost any product and service that is 
available commercially starts as a concept. It might simply be one entrepreneur sitting at a restaurant 
sketching something, or the result of a long process 
by a complex design team. What is important to 
understand is when industry makes money. Industr
y does not make money from concepts or rough 
designs; it makes money from selling things.  

 
The main point I want to make here is that the indus
try™s willingness to pay for data
 is directly related to how close in time the use of data are to the sale of
 a product or service. Data used years before a product 
is released and sold is not ﬁvaluedﬂ as highly as are 
data whose use has immediate impact. An example of 
the latter is analytical chemistry data that are used
 to identify an unknown substance that has affected a 
manufacturing process. Because the impact is immediat
e, companies are willing to pay many thousands 
of dollars for data. In contrast, companies are less will
ing to pay for material property data used early in a 
multi-year design database. 
  The picture I am trying to paint here is that industr
y needs to have access to all kinds of different data to 
support product development and services so they can 
make money. Data comes in lots of different 
flavors and has lots of different uses. Data also h
as differing impacts on the abil
ity of industry to make 
money from data use depending on when that use o
ccurs. Industry is willing to pay for data when it 
perceives the value of those data in helping them make more money. 
 
What really incentivizes industry to participate more
 willingly in scientific data activities? How do we 
improve access to data? There are situations where indus
try™s participation in scientific data activities is 
extremely important to the progress of those scientific
 data activities. Obviously the first example that 
comes to mind is genomics, but genetically modi
fied foods are another case. Other examples are 
pharmaceutical development, a
nd aircraft manufacturing.  
The primary motivation is the potential for increased revenue. Rarely do companies act out of goodwill. If 

we want industry participation in more public scientif
ic data activities, it is perfectly acceptable to allow them to demand a business case and for you to provide 
that business case to them, because that is how 
industry makes decisions. There are subsidiary r
easons, such as intellectual property rights, which eventually translate into increased revenue or increased market share. A company will support a data 
project if it leads to development of a new product, 
for example, a specific new pharmaceutical, such as a 
new drug for diabetes, which in turn will lead to increased revenue. 

 
There are other less tangible ways that are also useful
 to think about. One is that there are many smart 
people in industry, and they know that new scien
ce is going to create new industry and new products. 
They are not sure how, and if they participate in th
e fundamental research that develops these scientific 
disciplines, they will have an opportunity to perh
aps get the insights that will lead to revenue. The 
professional societies in the United States have incentivized industry to cooperate together. A lot of the 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 large-scale data programs are funded by indus
try through professional society programs. 
 
I would like to end by saying that contrary to what most people think, industry really supports open 
access to publicly funded data. From their perspective, 
they are often in the best position to exploit them 
for whatever reasons they want to. If industry have da
ta that it generated, there are many mechanisms to 
keep that proprietary data to themselves. As I alr
eady indicated, however, ther
e are instances when they 
do generate data or do help the gene
ration of data, which contributes cons
iderably to publicly funded data 
resources. 
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        115 
 29. Production and Access to Scientific Data
 in Africa: A Framework for Improving the 
Contribution of Research Institutions 
 Hilary I. Inyang 
African Continental University System Initiative
8 University of North Carolin
a, Charlotte, United States  INTRODUCTION To begin, I would like to describe the role of universities during three eras in Africa. The first was the 
pre-independence era in Africa when universities were 
engaged very deeply in independence movements, 
protests, and so forth. In Mozambique, for example, 
university-based intellectuals were at the forefront of 
protests to gain independence from the Portuguese govern
ment. At that time, African universities were at 
the vanguard of diverse indigenous groups that ratio
nalized the need for the independence of African 
countries on the basis of the human rights to freedom and self-governance. They were not really deep 
contributors of data or other forms of informati
on to economic development initiatives and governance of 
their countries. That role was played by colonial go
vernments directed from Europe.  This circumstance 
was prevalent in Africa until the late 1950s.  

 
The 1960s, when the wind of change blew across 
Africa bringing with it independence, was another 
significant period with respect to the availability of
 data in Africa for national economic development 
programs of newly independent nations. The first 
set of post-independence leaders in Africa were 
statesmen, exemplified by Dr. Kwame Nkrumah of 
Ghana, Dr. Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia, Dr. Siaka 
Stevens of Sierra Leone, Dr. Leopold Sedhar Senghor of Senegal, Dr. Ju
lius Nyerere of Tanzania, and Dr. Nnamdi Azikiwe of Nigeria. Most of them were we
stern-educated and valued good education, as well as 
the need to develop and use data for their govern
ments™ economic planning and governance. The high 
educational standards of the era are highlighted by the 
fact that despite the existence of very few research 
institutes within the continent at that
 time, colleges were able to engage in intellectual enquiry to generate 
data and build human capacity on analytical aspects
 of economic program pla
nning and implementation. 
However, during that era, universities were strong in the liberal arts, but not so much in the sciences, 
because they had not yet developed the infrastructure 
that would have made them competitive with those 
in global science. 
 
Unfortunately, following their initial interest in 
democracy and the utility of knowledge systems, 
including data in the sustainable development of thei
r countries, most of the early leaders overstayed their 
welcome in leadership positions and sometimes, turn
ed to autocracy. The ultimate result was a wave of 
military 
coup d™états 
 across Africa in the 1970s and 1980s, that derailed most of the long-term 
educational and research initiatives that would have in
stitutionalized the generation of data for economic 
planning and project implementation in Africa. Most of
 the new military leaders installed autocracies that 
devalued knowledge systems and opera
ted through edicts without regard to scientific facts and data that 
were not in support of their decisions. Intellectuals 
were often prosecuted and many were driven into 
exile.    Since the 1990s, there has been a continuing diminuti
on of autocracy in Africa. The need for national 
planning is recognized. Most African countries have 
5-year national development programs, and they are 
beginning to realize that this is the time to extract th
e intellect of their people and invest such intellect in 
development efforts. This era has also witnessed 
the emergence of continental knowledge systems 
consortia, professional organizations and academic inst
itutions that target the generation of knowledge and information. Examples are: the four-campus Afri
can University of Science and Technology, the Pan 
African University System, and continental professional 
societies in virtually every major scientific field. 
                     8 Former president of the African Con
tinental University System Initiative. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Organizations such as International Council for 
Science Œ Regional Office for Africa (ICSU-ROA) and 
UNESCO have embarked on science support activities that
 will also generate data. An example is the 
ICSU-ROA Science Plans in many thematic areas that are critical to Africa™s sustainable development.  
Requirements for improvements of data generation, 
management, and utilization systems in Africa should 
be viewed within the context described above.   THE ROLE OF KNOWLEDGE GENERATION IN
STITUTIONS IN DATA PRODUCTION AND 
MANAGEMENT 
What are the typical roles of universities and other institutions that are engaged in research?  I see such roles to be the following: 
 Supplier of options for sustainable development; 
 Producer of data for decision support systems; 
 Developer of human resources and capacity; 
 Creator of innovative ideas and products; and 
 Guardian of rationality and human rights. 
 
The last one often puts universities in conflict with
 political authorities. Every dictator that shows up 
wants to imprison journalists and 
professors. Let me start by addressing some problems. There are some 
very large projects in Africa. Development banks 
such as the World Bank and the African Development 
Bank sponsor most of these projects. Very large comp
anies, more recently larg
e Chinese companies, also 
sponsor such big projects. A main problem with these
 initiatives (e.g., building a dam or developing a big 
mining facility) is that there are no clear requireme
nts regarding post-project use of the data and information that they generate for other sustainabl
e development programs of the host countries. Then, of 
course, there is the issue of sensitive information and how to deal with it. 
 Also, there is the need for coordination and collabor
ation. For example, most of the African countries 
have declared a set of activities to achieve the Mille
nnium Development Goals, which are very specific. 
All of these activities will require data and other type
s of information for planning and implementation of 
projects. This is why I see that there is a need for a systematic relationship between data access programs 
and these efforts. 
 CAPACITY LIMITATIONS OF AFRICAN COUNTRIES
  Furthermore, there is the issue of the resource and 
human capacity gaps among African countries. It is not 
that information is sparse in all parts of Africa 
on every issue. In some countries like South Africa, 
Tunisia and Algeria, there is a lot of information, 
but some countries in West Africa and Central Africa do 
not have adequate facilities and capabilities for research information generation on critical issues in many 
economic sectors. About 30 percent of the annua
l budget of some of these poor countries comes as 
foreign aid. They have other things that they 
consider more immediate and more expedient than 
developing research facilities and data management systems.  
 Additionally, we should always remember that Africa 
has a number of official languages. So, it is very 
difficult to do things on a region-wide basis. Even in West Africa, there are 5 Anglophone and 9 

Francophone countries. In Central Africa, French a
nd Portuguese are used, and in Equatorial Guinea, 
Spanish is used. Translation of documents and r
eal-time oral speeches can be very expensive. 
 The level of investment in data generation activities is
 very limited in African countries. In fact, the entire 
African investment in this area is less than that 
of Israel. Currently, there are about 500 science parks 
worldwide, but less than 2 percent of
 those parks are in Africa. If those parks are absent, how will data be 
transferred or managed as we do here in places like 
the Research Triangle Park in North Carolina or 
Silicon Valley in California? There should be a clear 
model for how universities can interrelate with other 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        117 
 organizations to promote economic activities and progress.
 This has to be promoted through, for example, 
the activities of organizations like the World Bank, the African Development Bank, UNESCO, ICSU, the 
United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, the A
frican Union, the Regional Economic Blocs, and 
international aid organizations, as well 
as the African governments themselves. 
 PROPOSED SOLUTIONS 
What are the solutions? We need to establish an A
frican Research Foundation. Most of the efforts and 
money that have been spent would be better spent 
on the development of this critical entity. Even in 
Europe, where there are very strong national sci
ence or research foundations, there is still the 
superposition of the European Science Foundation on 
a continental basis, on those national capabilities. I 
think it is very critical to do this in Africa as well,
 more so when the lack of effective national research 
agencies is pervasive in the continent, except of course, in South Africa. An endowment fund should be 
attached to such an endeavor, because if there is a research foundation, it would be ineffective, if it does 
not have the funds to deal with issues.   
 As in most countries, universities in Africa emphasize 
three broad research discip
lines: the social sciences and humanities; engineering, technology and computing sciences; and physical, biological, ecological, 

and other natural sciences. In parallel, governments 
employ a variety of policy tools: market incentives, 
risk communication, technology deployment, public educa
tion, and so forth. Unless there is an interplay 
between these academic approaches and government policies and initiatives, it is very difficult to 
maximize the value of data, information, science, and public policy. 

 
I would like to address some important developments 
in Africa in the information technology area. There 
are many optical cable systems that are being implemented now in Africa. These cable systems are 

improving internet access in Africa. For example, the W
est African Cable System is reducing the cost of 
Internet connectivity, including access and data transfer
, and mobile systems. As a complement to this 
development, there are about 10 satellite systems now
 covering various regions
, including sub-Saharan 
Africa and the Arab countries in the north of Africa. 
  CONCLUSIONS 
Let me conclude by stating that the formation a
nd operation of an African Research Foundation would 
greatly enhance the generation of 
data and other types of information for regional sustainable 
development. Such a Foundation should have the following mandate: 
 To support research for production of information, 
including data, for use in African sustainable 
development programs; 

  To provide an opportunity for engagement of A
frican and other experts and the development of 
African talent (in Africa and the diaspora) on science and technology  research on critical issues 
that affect Africa; and 
  To catalyze science and technology-based A
frican entrepreneurship and improve the 
infrastructure for access to data in locations within and outside Africa. 
 
If these recommendations are implemented, Africa will 
increase its contribution of knowledge, not only to 
the improvement of the quality of life in the continent, 
but to global sustainable development. It is a fact 
of history that the continent has a heritage of c
ontributions to human development and on intellectual 
matters throughout the centuries.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 30. The ICSU World Data System  Yasuhiro Murayama 
National Institute of Information 
and Communication Technology, Japan  
My talk will include both international activities rela
ted to ICSU™s World Data System, as well as some 
examples of scientific database and data sharing ac
tivities related to developing countries, especially in 
Asian countries. I hope that the specific examples I w
ill share with you can inspire you to promote more 
open access data for social benefits.  
 About 50 years ago, when the former ﬁWorld Data
 Centerﬂ (WDC) system was established, the main 
objective was data preservation primarily for printed da
ta sheets and films, before digital data become 
predominant with state-of-art technology of high-sp
eed Internet, and huge data storage in computer 
servers. Those were valuable efforts to keep scientific
 data indispensible. Today, we get more and more 
data in digital form, and the size of the holdings is 
increasing rapidly. In Japan, other Asian countries, the 
United States, and Europe, we are expanding our data st
rategies, and scientists are concerned with how to 
handle the data influx. Also with digital data, the 
future interoperability for 
world-wide data centers 
connecting to each other can be envisioned, which w
as not available for data stored on paper and film. 
 In this context, the International Council for Sc
ience (ICSU) established the World Data System (WDS) 
in 2008. ICSU envisioned a global data system that would:    
 Emphasize the critical importance of data in global science activities;    
 Further ICSU strategic scientific outcomes by addressing pressing societal needs (e.g., 
sustainable development and the digital divide); 
  Highlight the positive impact of universal a
nd equitable access to data and information;   Support services for long-term stewardship of data and information; and  
  Promote and support data 
publication and citation.
  
I should mention that CODATA has also participated in
 such international data sharing efforts, and we are hoping for more future collaboration with CODATA. Other collaborators come from the disaster 
research area. We also have collaborations with 
international scientific unions, a number of United 
Nations agencies, and additional Asian and Japanese unions.    

 
To fulfill this vision and to facilitate collabora
tion, I am now in process of establishing a new 
International Programme Office (IPO) for ICSU-WDS th
is year, as its acting director. The IPO is to be 
hosted by the National Institute of Information a
nd Communication Technology (NICT) in Japan (NB: the internationally selected Executive Director was 
appointed in March 2012, and the official opening 
ceremony was held in Tokyo, in May 2012).  

 
Next, I would like to address several scientific data 
activities carried out by myself and my institute. We 
have a monitoring network for solar and space scien
ce, and space weather observational data. These kind 
of data are important in social activities too; for exam
ple, the ionosphere is the biggest delay factor in 
radio navigation signals for the Global Positioning Sy
stem (GPS). This is very
 crucial in positioning 
aircraft and in future precise applications.  
 If we want to introduce GPS-guided aircraft navigatio
n, the networks should extend into the south Asian 
countries and be based upon sound science where data 
are shared together with those countries. Many cities also provide this kind of distributed system
 and use high-speed internet to link with several Japanese universities. 

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        119 
 Future directions include scientific data cloud servi
ces, or creating a digital Earth capability that combines 
observational data and simulation data with informat
ics technologies. Better management of the data can 
be enabled through high-speed research network ex
periments, such as the Asian-Pacific Advanced 
Network (APAN). This kind of infrastructure enabl
es Japanese researchers to access data from various 
countries in eastern and southern Asia and vice versa. 
 
A final example focuses on university groups in Japan. 
They are now designing a metadata system for 
space and atmospheric, and interdisciplinary science
s. An improved metadata system enables more 
information exchanges to promote data usage and more
 scientific research. Universities also have various data observing networks. Some are rada
rs in Arctic regions, while others
 are radars or magnetometers in 
Asian countries or in Antarctic stations. The starting point is a good metadata system for data in the 
archives. 

 
I would like to conclude by noting that in Septem
ber 2011 we will have the first World Data System 
conference in Kyoto, together with the WDS scientific committee meeting. 
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.120                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 31. Libraries and Improving Data Access and Use in Developing Regions 
 Stephen Griffin National Science Foundation, United States 
 
I am going to explore some of the potential roles fo
r libraries in improving access, use and sharing of 
large stores of data in support of e-Science and other data-intensive scholarly inquiry. The focus will be 
on their application in developing countries.   

 Contemporary research and scholarship is increasingly 
characterized by the u
se of large-scale datasets 
and computationally intensive tasks. Vast amounts of da
ta are used by scientists to better map the cosmos, 
build more accurate earth system models, examine in 
finer details the structures of living organisms, and 
gain insights into the behaviors of societies and 
individuals in a complex world increasingly dependent 
upon information technology. 
 Significantly, more humanists are rapidly integrati
ng newly digitized corpora, digital surrogates of 
cultural heritage artifacts, and historical, spatial, and 
temporal indexed data into their scholarly endeavors. 
The datasets are huge by any measure. Petabyte-scale datasets are not uncommon. More raw data are 

being produced today than can be physically stored, 
and this disparity will almost certainly increase very 
rapidly. 
 
Much has been accomplished by the libraries and 
information sciences commun
ities over the past decade to establish basic principles, standards, object representations, descriptive metadata, and reference models 
needed to achieve interoperability, scalability, access, and long-term preservation and archiving of digital 
content. 
 Already, libraries have undergone significant transfor
mation by converting collections and holdings to 
digital forms in prescribed formats with appropriate 
descriptive metadata.  In addition, they have dealt 
with a deluge of new ﬁborn digitalﬂ data from a vari
ety of sources. Libraries now play a central role in 
providing enhanced access to very large digital collec
tions across many topic domains for a wide variety 
of users, but the prospect of libraries taking responsibility for large-scale raw datasets and a multitude of 
derivative forms of data associated with e-Scien
ce and data-intensive scholarship was not seriously 
considered until more recently. As a result, there is 
lively debate and controversy over how libraries, and 
particularly research libraries, should participate in pr
oviding tools and infrastructure in support of data-
intensive research. 

 The challenges are daunting. In addition to tasks inherent in the life cycle of data and information, there 
are other tasks requiring new technologies and new expe
rtise and a broader spectrum of user services. 
This points to the question of how graduate schools 
of library and information science should prepare 
students for the realities that await them in a digital world of knowledge resources. 

 For developing countries, all of that applies, but ther
e are additional barriers that are not present in more-
developed regions of the world. At the same time
, perhaps there are unique opportunities that we can 
discover, as in some respect they are beginning at a 
different starting point in a long evolutionary process 
and may not be burdened by entrenched practices. 

 
There are several points in Figure 31-1 that depicts the rapid transition from storing information on analog 
media to digital media. It is impressive how quickly it happened, and perhaps a bit disconcerting, too. 
Also, it should be noted that scientific data only re
presents a very small proportion of the data being 
produced, and  all data of value require careful mana
gement to ensure reusability. Of equal importance is 
that the various media on which the data are stored deteriorates over time and will likely become 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        121 
 unreadable within a few decades. This implies that 
policies for physical migration be established and 
followed. 
   FIGURE 31-1 The World™s Capacity to Store Information 
Credit: Hilbert, M. & López, P. (February 11, 2011). The World™s Technological Capacity to Store, 
Communicate, and Compute Information
. Science Magazine, 332
(6025), 60-65. 
 Contemporary data-centered research and scholarship 
can be categorized based on the types of data 
associated with the research activity: 

 
e-Science: A natural evolution of computational science th
at involves massive simulations of phenomena 
of scientific interest too large or small, too fast or slow, or too complex to explore in a research 
laboratory.  
e-Science is computationally-intensive and frequently involves the use of distributed network 
environments and grid computing.   
 Data-Driven Science: A rapidly growing set of applications in which analysis of large amounts of 
experimental data drives the overall research. The 
sources of data are often high-throughput digital 
instruments and recording devices; for example, s
ophisticated astronomical instruments, particle 
accelerators, environmental sensors, medical diagnosti
c equipment, and many others. The petabytes of 
data that may result frequently require significant comput
ation to yield the basic data for analysis.  Data-
driven science is a more recent paradigm primarily
 dependent upon new forms of data analytics. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Data-Intensive Research and Scholarship:
 This includes efforts based in part on the exploration, 
manipulation, and analysis of diverse datasets in
cluding born-digital data, data resulting from the 
continuing digitization of large analog collections, digital representati
ons of physical artifacts and 
complex higher-order derived data 
constructs. Collaboration within a
nd across disciplines may take a key 
role.  Interoperable and highly contextualized datasets are often essential to success. 
 
Data-intensive research is being broadly pursued
 in many disciplinary domains.  Scholars in the 
humanities and social sciences are finding new problems of compelling interest that both have a strong 

technology component and are based on analysis of
 large and heterogeneous datasets. Collaborative 
efforts that involve technologists and domain resear
chers are leading to advances in knowledge and new 
understanding in many areas. 

 
In all of the categories of research described above, 
data visualization of research findings is common and 
frequently the most effective way to present results.   
 Early programs at NSF were instrumental in leading th
e way to some of the data-intensive research that 
we are seeing today. The Supercomputer Centers 
Program, which was begun in the mid-1980s, and the 
NSFNet program that was originally part of the Su
percomputer Centers Program in the 1980s, were very 
important. The NSFNet was originally envisioned to 
be a service-type of facility for the supercomputer 
centers. The idea was that if one built a network 
connecting large computing facilities around the United 
States, one could share datasets and aggregate comput
ational cycles.  The notion of a network as a means 
for federated search of data repositories had not yet been seriously discussed.   

 
As the network evolved, it began to connect data 
stores. New access methods were developed and the 
idea of digital libraries emerged.  I was given the r
esponsibility to be the Program Director for the multi-
agency and international Digital Libraries Initia
tives (DLI) that began in 1994 and continued as a programmatic entity well into the 2000s. This progra
m is well documented. The broader impact of the 
program included not only noteworthy achievements in 
advancing academic resear
ch and scholarship, but also created profitable commercial entities as well; Google, Inc. being a prime example. The legacy of the 
DLI Program continues as new interdisciplinary 
communities develop and use digital content and 
advanced information infrastructure and tools to pr
obe new problem domains. The culmination of support 
for large-scale computing and networking infrastructur
e was the NSF Cyberinfrastructure program, based 
on the findings outlined in a report written by a group led 
by Dan Atkins of the University of Michigan.    
 
I want to focus on some of the disadvantages of rese
archers in developing countries. While some of the 
maps we have seen show increased connectivity in 
developing countries, bandwidth is not sufficient or 
uniform enough to support the data-intensive scholarship 
that I have been describing. For a researcher in a 
less developed or developing 
country, one of the primary considerati
ons is a sense of isolation. Not only a 
sense of not being able to gain access to critical resources,
 but also of being left out of the mainstream of 
the scientific discourse that characterizes their partic
ular disciplines and their particular research areas. 
 What is likely to happen? I think that the roles w
ill be enhanced for certain libraries. Certainly the 
national libraries and the university and research librari
es will be expected to carry the load. This is 
because they are likely to be the best equipped to hand
le data. They have been doing some of it for many 
years and know what makes it work. It
 is also because the scientists in ge
neral have very little interest in handling their own data. They want to use them, get 
their experiment done, and publish their results, but 
that is it, in most cases. We now are becoming aware 
that the reuse of data is of critical importance in 
terms of saving resources.  
 Finally, there are special topic libraries. These may be
 libraries of a single individual, but they have an 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        123 
 extraordinary wealth of information. Often the 
special libraries focus on a particular media like 
photographic libraries, image libraries, film libra
ries, or audio libraries, and these will become 
increasingly important as research resources for numerous scholarly domains. 
 While there is no single designation that is genera
lly accepted to determine whether a country is 
developing or not, there are some general comme
nts that one can make. Making data useful and 
facilitating scholarly communication and data cura
tion services are among the most important and the 
most tractable activities for libraries in developing count
ries at present. What is more difficult is to assist 
directly in the establishment of close peer relationshi
ps with counterparts in other countries, provide high-
bandwidth access to remote and distributed informat
ion stores, build advanced content management 
schemes, create sophisticated applications tools, 
and provide the level of support and services that 
libraries in more developing countries are able to provide. 
 There are some things that these institutions could begi
n immediately to do that might in fact bring them 
into the mainstream without the physical infrastructure enjoyed by their counterparts in more 

economically developed countries:  
 Increase staff dialogue in all institutional and technical matters;  Strive to build a sense of local community 
and institutional pride (e.g., pursue excellence 
and recognition in specific areas, create new coll
ections and services, and create and ﬁpublishﬂ a new journal highlighting local research); 
 Enhance outreach to the larger regional a
nd global communities (e.g., support staff 
attendance and participation in relevant c
onferences and professional training events, and 
establish exchange programs); 
 Expand efforts to convert digital holdi
ngs to current standards and forms; 
 Build new tools and resources; and   Pursue internal and external support from public and private sources (i.e., UNESCO, 
USAID, the European Union, and various non-governmental organizations and private 
foundations). 
 The emergence of a culture of sharing has accompan
ied the growth of the Internet and new communities 
involved in the creation and management of digital 
content and resources. The digital libraries community 
has been particularly instrumental. At the same ti
me, there has been a general movement toward openness 
of internet based content and resources (whe
n appropriate and legal).  For example:   Open data  Open access journals 
 Open repositories and archives 
 Open source software 
 Open architectures 
 Open educational resources  Open and transparent governance 
 Open scholarly and practitioner communities 
 The Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) is one
 example. The DOAJ lists more than 8000 journals 
(as of October 2012), from more than 110 countries in 
more than 50 languages. Over 4000 journals are 
providing metadata on the article le
vel, which means that almost 900,
000 articles are searchable from 
DOAJ.
9 There are other global efforts that are the subject of this symposium.   
                     9 See www.doaj.org 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Geography is a primary considerati
on in building high-bandwidth netw
orks. In the case of Africa, many 
factors influence the cost and effort. The size of 
Africa alone presents formidable challenges. GÉANT
10, the pan-European data network, has done a great deal 
of work in connecting various regions of the world. 
Internet2 has large international partnerships, and beyond their partnershi
ps, they have other networks 
that are reachable. National Research and Education Ne
tworks (NRENs) are an important core element of 
a country™s networking capabilities, as they are most 
often funded as part of a nation's budget and provide 
a single, robust connection point to NRENs in the rest of the world. NSF has an international network 

connections program. 
 Libraries will continue to play an essential role in 
the internetwork society. Libraries have managed the 
collected knowledge of the human record for centuri
es and will continue to do so. The manner in which 
this is done for digital content implies substantial an
d rapid change in established practices. This is being 
done already and new communities of practice are emer
ging that will continue to develop the means for 
confronting the ever-expanding vol
umes of data being created. 
                         10 See http://www.gean
t.net/pages/home.aspx
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        125 
 32. Developing a Policy Framework to Open up 
the Rights to Access and Reuse Research Data for 
the Next Generation of Researchers 
  Haswira Nor Mohamad Hashim 
Law and Justice Research Centre 
Queensland University of Technology, Australia 
 The Next Generation of Researchers 
In order to identify who is the next generation of 
researchers, we need to distinguish them from the 
current generation of researchers. For the purpose of this paper, the current generation of researchers is identified not by their age or seniority, but by the r
esearch methodology that they adopt in their research 
projects and the medium of dissemination of their research data and information.  Seen from this 
perspective, the current generation of researchers is
 a generation that is already taking advantage of 
information and communication technology by empl
oying e-Science and e-Research methodologies and 
relying more on research collaborations that requi
re intensive data sharing at both national and international levels. The current generation of researchers disseminates research data through both print 
and electronic media. Besides print publications a
nd conference proceedings, research data were also 
published in open-access journals or self-archi
ved in open-access data and repositories.  
 As for the next generation of researchers, it could be an
ticipated that they will continue to take advantage 
of the advancement of informati
on and communication technology and be involved in interdisciplinary 
and multidisciplinary research collabor
ations, albeit at greater scale. Like the current generation of 
researchers, it is predicted that the next generation 
of researchers will continue to publish and self-archive 
their research data in open-access journals and ope
n-access repositories as alternatives to conventional 
methods of dissemination. At first glance, it seems that the next generation of researchers will share many 

similarities with the current generation of researcher
s whose roles they will take over in the future. 
  Despite these similarities, it can be observed that 
the current generation of researchers has become the 
victim of a serial crisis arising from a toll-access system widely practiced by journal publishers.
11 Apart from that, the rapid expansion of c
opyright protection and th
e introduction of sui generis database rights 
in the European Union and a few other countries, which took place during the era of the current 
generation of researchers, has resulted in almost all 
categories of research data becoming the property of 
either the researchers or the resear
ch institutions that employ the resear
chers, or the research agencies that 
fund the research.
12 Research data, which contains a wealth of information is no longer freely accessible.
13                      11 See Open Access to Research Outputs: Final Report to RCUK
, 2008, 21, available at 
<http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/cmsweb/dow
nloads/rcuk/news/oareport.pd
f> (accessed March 11, 2010);
 Science and Technology 
Committee, 2004, Science and Technology Œ Tenth Report, 
U.K. House of Commons, Science and Technology Committee.
 12 The United States has not adopted sui generis pr
otection for databases, in contrast to Europe. 
13 See The Royal Society (U.K.), 2003, Keeping Science Open: Th
e Effects of Intellectual Property Policy on the Conduct of 
Science, 21, available at <http://royalsociety.org/Report_WF.aspx?
pageid=9842&terms=Keeping+science+openper
cent3A+the+effects+
of+intellectual+p
roperty+policy+on+the+conduct+of+science> (accessed February 26,
 2010) v.; Paul A. David, 2004, Can ﬁopen scienceﬂ be 
protected from the evolving regime
 of IPR protections? 129(March) 
Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
 3; Pamela Samuelson, 2003, Mapping the digital pub
lic domain: Threats and opportunities, 66(1 & 2) 
Law and Contemporary Problems 170; James Boyle, 2003, Foreword: The opposite of property? 66(1 & 2) 
Law and Contemporary Problems 13; Jerome H. Reichman and Tracy Lewis, 2005, Using 
liability rules to s
timulate local innovati
on in developing countries: Application to 
traditional knowledge, in Keith Eugene Ma
skus and Jerome H.
 Reichman, eds., International Public Goods and Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized Intellectual Property Regime
 (Cambridge University Press) 
340; P. A. Andanda, 2006, Human-
tissue-related inventions: Ownership and intellectual property ri
ghts in international collaborative research in developing 
countries, 34 
J Med Ethics
 172; Samuel E. Trosow, 2003, Copyright Protec
tion for Federally Funded
 Research: Necessary 
Incentive or Double Subsidy? 18, availa
ble at <http://publish.uwo.ca/
-strosow/Sabo_Bill_Paper.pdf>
 (accessed September 12, 
2010); Charlotte Hess and Elinor Ostrom, 2003,
 Ideas, artifacts, and fa
cilities: Information as 
a common-pool resource, 66 
Law The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 The current generation of researchers™ access to and re
use of research data are subject to consent or 
license from the owners or custodians of research data. Further, the emphasis on commercialization of 

publicly funded research outputs had seen data acces
s and sharing practices replaced by the norms of 
secrecy, whereby data withholding (including by acad
emic researchers) is widely practiced, resulting in 
the tragedy of anticommons.
14  
While the current generation of researchers and th
e next generation of researchers may share many 
similarities, the current generation of researchers is s
een as a generation deprived of their rights to access 
and reuse research data and scholarly information. It is
 therefore deemed important to ensure that the next 
generation of researchers will not suffer th
e same disadvantages as their predecessors.   The Need to Open up the Rights to Access and Re
use Research Data for the Next Generation of 
Researchers 
It is predicted that the roles that the next genera
tion of researchers are going to play will be far more 
challenging in understanding global phenomena, solv
ing problems, and improving the human condition, 
which are the aims of basic and applied research. Gl
obal crises such as climate change, rapid population 
growth, scarcity in natural resources, and natural di
sasters will be inherited by the next generation of 
researchers from their predecessors with a greater sense of urgency, as the problems are expected to be 

more acute. In solving these problems, the next 
generation of researchers will depend on the latest scientific data in their field, especially in the fields
 of research where a global picture is necessary for the 
development of effective international programs to
 solve transboundary problems such as infectious 
disease control and monitoring, environmental conservation, and climate change.
15  Without the ability to 
access and reuse research data, their research 
projects become meaningless, if not impossible.
16   
It could also be anticipated that th
e scientific research that will be undertaken by the next generation of 
researchers is becoming data driven and data
 intensive at a scale previously unimagined.
17 It is predicted that data-intensive science will emerge as a new para
digm of scientific research. This data-intensive 
science was described by Jim Gray as the ﬁFourth Paradigm,ﬂ
18 which is a new addition to the previous 
three scientific paradigms: theory, experimentation, and computational science.
19 The emergence of data-
intensive research undertaken by scientists on a glob
al scale requires opening early-stage research data in 
order to encourage broader participation and accelerate discoveries.
20 In playing their roles as researchers 
                                                                  and Contemporary Problems
 112; Carol M. Rose, 2003, Romans, roads, and roma
ntic creators: Traditions of public property in 
the information age 66 
Law and Contemporary Problems
 90. 14 See Bhaven N. Sampat, 2006, Patenting and US academic research
 in the 20th century: The world before and after Bayh-Dole, 
35 Research Policy
 784; Dirk Czarnitzki, Wolfgang Glanzel, and Katrin Hussinger, 2009, Hete
rogeneity of patenting activity and 
its implications for scientific research, 38 
Research Policy
 33; Jerry G. Thursby, Richard Jensen, and Marie G. Thursby, 2001, 
Objectives, characteristics and outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major U.S. universities, 26 
Journal of Technology 
Transfer 59; Peter D. Blumberg, 1996, From ﬁpublish or perishﬂ  to
 ﬁprofit or perishﬂ : Revenu
es from university technology 
transfer and the s. 501(c)(3) tax exemption, 145(1) 
The University of Pennsylvania Law Review
 91; Andrew F. Christie et al., 
2003, Analysis of the Legal Framework for Patent Ownership in
 Publicly Funded Research In
stitutions (Commonwealth of 
Australia Department 
of Education, Science and Training) 48.
 15 Barbara Kirsop and Leslie Chan, 2005, Transforming access 
to research literature for 
developing countries, 31(4) 
Serials Review
 24.
 16 Marjut Salokannel, 2003, Global Public G
oods and Private Rights: Scientific Resear
ch and Intellectual Property Rights, 11, 
available at <http://www.iprinfo.com/tiedostot/
5icFWowu.pdf> (accessed October 12, 2010).
 17 Michael L. Nelson, 2009, Data-drive
n science: A new paradigm? 44(4) 
Educause 6. 18 See Tony Hey, Stewart Tansley,
 and Kristin Tolle, eds., 2009, 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-In
tensive Scientific Discovery
 (Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington).
 19 Michael L. Nelson, Data-driven science,
 6; Francine Berman and Henry E. Brad
y, 2005, Workshop on Cyberinfrastructure for 
the Social and Behavioral Sciences: Fina
l Report (National Science Foundation) 32.
 20Anne Fitzgerald and Kylie Pappalardo, 2007, 
Building the infrastructure for data access and reuse in collaborative research: An
 analysis of the legal context
, in Open Access to Knowledge (OAK) Law Projec
t: Legal Protocols for 
Copyright Ma
nagement: Facilitating Open Access to Research at the National and International Levels, 58, available at 
<http://www.oaklaw.qut.edu.au/fi
les/Data_Report_final_web.pdf
> (accessed January 11, 2010).
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        127 
 amidst data-driven and data-intensive science, access 
to and reuse of research data will be essential for the 
next generation of researchers.   

 Besides the emergence of data-intensive science to
 solve global problems, another reason the next 
generation of researchers needs to be given the rights to
 access and reuse research data is to facilitate their 
participation in international, interdisciplinary, 
and multidisciplinary research collaborations. As global 
society turns to science with more and more problems, it will require the collaboration of the next 

generation of researchers from various disciplines 
to think about solutions to the same problem.
21 In this regard, science can no longer be managed within the 
old silo research model, as it requires thousands of 
collaborators across distinct institutional boundaries.
22  Collaboration among researchers is said to be an 
interactive process, where two or more researchers, 
or research organizations, work together toward 
common objectives by sharing knowledge and research 
results using collaborative research networking 
tools.23 The collaborative research requires the ability to search, access, move, manipulate, and mine 
research data like never before.
24   As discussed above, global research collaboration re
quires the next generation of researchers all around 
the world to contribute and share their research da
ta and information online. The National Science 
Foundation report 
Revolutionizing Science and Engineering Through Cyberinfrastructure
 stated that 
wider and easier access to reports, raw data, and instru
ments are needed in order to change science and 
engineering research.
25 Fry et al. argued that e-Science and e-
Research collaborations are not only about 
access to secondary resources such as scientific article
s, or to primary resources such as databanks, but 
also to openness in tool development and the shari
ng of software code to 
extend and modify tools.
26 As most research data are protected under a copyright or 
database-right legal regime, opening up the rights to 
access and reuse research data will form a big part 
of the emerging infrastructure for globally organized 
collaborative research activities. 
 The need to open up the rights 
to access and reuse research data also arises from conventional research 
libraries and the traditional publishing system not being 
well suited to the need of the next generation of 
researchers, who will require not only access to the 
latest research data but also the ability to 
communicate their research results as quickly as possible.
 While access to and reuse of research data are 
highly in demand, research libraries and journal publishe
rs have not been typically responsible to archive 
research data, so the role of the library and 
publishers as data steward is largely absent.
27  In contrast, opening up access to and reuse of research data fac
ilitates the collaboration of various research efforts, 
which in a closed-access world are ci
rcumscribed by conventional definitions of topic, field, or discipline 
and are isolated from one another in discrete families of journals.
28 With proper infrastructure such as open-access repositories, researchers in different domains
 can collaborate on the same dataset, and use, 
reuse, and combine data, which increas
es productivity and reveals new insights.
29 Based on the above 
                     21 Francine Berman and Henry E. Brady, 2005, Workshop on Cyberi
nfrastructure for the Social and Behavioral Sciences: Final 
Report (National Science Foundation) 57; Co
mmittee on National Statistics,1985, Issu
es and recommendations, in Stephen E. 
Fienberg, Margaret E. Martin, and Miron L. Straf, eds., 
Sharing Research Data
 (National Academy Press, Washington, DC) 24, 
25. 22 Yochai Benkler, 2008, The university in the 
networked economy and soci
ety (November/December) 
Educause
 65.
 23 David Bicknell, 2009, Collaboration 
drives innovation (Apr 28ŒMay 4) 
Computer Weekly
 14. 24 Tony Hey and Anne E. Trefethen, 2005, 
Cyberinfrastructure for e-Science, 308 
Science Mag
 818.
 25 Daniel E. Atkins et al., 
2003, Revolutionizing Scie
nce and Engineering Through Cyberinfrastructure: Report of the National 
Science Foundation Blue-Ribbon Adviso
ry Panel on Cyberinfrastructure (N
ational Science Foundation) 17, 28.
 26 Jenny Fry, Ralph Schroeder, and Matthijs des Besten, 2009, 
Open science in e-Science: 
Contingency or policy? 65(1) 
Journal of Documentation
 7. 27 Neil Rambo, 2009, E-science 
and biomedical libraries, 97(3) 
J Med Libr Assoc
 160.
 28 Alma Swan, 2007, Open access and th
e progress of science, 95(May-June) 
American Scientist
 200. 29 Kostas Glinos, 2010, Report of the High 
Level Expert Group on Scien
tific Data: ﬁRiding the Wave: How Europe Can Gain 
From the Rising Tide of Scientific Data
 Œ A Vision for 2030ﬂ (European Commission.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 arguments, the need to open up the rights to access and 
reuse research data for the next generation of 
researchers is therefore justified.  

 
The Next Generation of Researchers™ Responsibilities as Providers and Users of Research Data 
As discussed in the previous section, current developmen
ts point toward the need to open up the rights to 
access and reuse research data. Given the rapid progress of the open-access movement for research data,
30 it could be expected that the next generation of resear
chers will be vested with greater rights to access and 
reuse research data compared to their predecessors
. Quite naturally, their rights to access and reuse 
research data, comes with responsibilities as providers 
and users of research data.  This section examines 
the responsibilities that must be observed by the next 
generation of researchers in playing their dual roles 
as providers and users of research data.   The Responsibilities of the Next Genera
tion of Researchers as Data Providers In permitting access to and reuse of research data, 
the data providers have the responsibility not to 
disclose research data that contains confidential 
information and not to share it with a third party.
31 From 
a legal perspective, nondisclosure of confidential resea
rch data implies a legal duty that further disclosure 
of research data to a third party will not be allowed 
to occur without permission or authorization from an 
individual or entity that discloses conf
idential information in the first place.32 A nondisclosure duty could 
arise from contractual agreements such as a trade 
secret agreement, confidential agreement, or 
nondisclosure agreement.
33 Besides a nondisclosure duty arising from contractual agreements, it is 
common for the researchers, during the data collection 
process, to offer their promise of confidentiality 
that they will treat any data or information disclosed
 to them as confidential information. The promise of 
confidentiality could be given verb
ally or written on the consent form
, interview script, survey form, 
recruitment letter, or brochure.
34                      30 See UNESCO, 2007, Kronberg Declaration on the Future of
 Knowledge Acquisition a
nd Sharing, available at 
<http://www.unesco.de/kronberg_declarat
ion.html?&L=0> (accessed 
February 26, 2007); Organization for Economic Co-
Operation and Development, 2004, Declaration on Access 
to Research Data From P
ublic Funding, available at 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/0,2340,en_2649_34487_25998799_1_1_1_1,00.html> (accessed Fe
bruary 25, 2010); Council of 
the European Union, 2007, Council Conclusions on Scientific 
Information in the Digital Ag
e: Access, Dissemination and 
Preservation, 1, available at <http://www.
consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/intm/97236.pdf> (accessed 
February 28, 2010); Treaty on Access to
 Knowledge, 2005, available 
at <http://www.cptech.org
/a2k/a2k_treaty_may9.pdf> 
(accessed March 10, 2010); International 
Seminar Open Access for Developing Count
ries, 2005, Salvador declaration on open 
access: The developing world perspective, available at 
<http://www.icml9.org/meetings/
openaccess/public/documents/d
eclaration.htm> (accessed Fe
bruary 26, 2010); Australian 
Research Information Infrastructure Committee, 2004, Open 
Access Statement, available at <www.caul.edu.au/caul-
doc/caul20051ariic.doc> (accessed 
February 28, 2010); Iryna Kuchma, 2006, Berlin 4 : International Conference On Open 
Access, 24, available at <http://berli
n4.aei.mpg.de/presentations/Kuchma_OA06.pdf> (accessed March 1, 2010); Ingegerd 
Rabow, 2008, Open access in Swed
en: Recent development, 1 Sciecom Info
, available at 
<http://www.sciecom.org/ojs/inde
x.php/sciecominfo/article/viewFile/245/94> (accessed March 1, 2010); Hawk Jia, 2006, China 
Unveils Plans to Boost Scientific Data
 Sharing, available at <http://www.scidev
.net/en/news/china-unveils-plans-to-boost-
scientific-data-shari.html> (acc
essed March 1, 2010); Peter Sube
r, 2007, Pakistani Journals to be Available for Worldwide 
Electronic Access through Online Portal, av
ailable at <http://www.earlham.edu/~peter
s/fos/2007/05/pakistan-plans-oa-portal-for-
all-its.html> (accessed March 1, 2010); Stevan Harnad, 2007, Braz
ilian Bill to Mandate
 OA, available at 
<http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/2007/06/br
azilian-bill-to-mandate-oa.html> (acce
ssed March 1, 2010); see Peter Suber, 
2007, Spain is Funding OA Repositories, available at <htt
p://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/
2007/05/spain-is-funding-oa-
repositories.html> (accessed March 1, 2010).
 31 Terry Elizabeth Hendrick, 1985, Ju
stifications for and obstacles to data sharing,
 in Stephen E. Fienberg, Margaret E. Martin, 
and Miron L. Straf, eds., 
Sharing Research Data
 (National Academy Press, Washington, 
DC) 135; Michele M. Easter, Arlene M. 
Davis, and Gail E. Henderson, 2004,
 Confidentiality: More than a linka
ge file and a locked drawer, 26(2) 
IRB: Ethics and Human 
Research 14.
 32 Howard Bauchner, 2002, Protecti
ng research participants, 110 
Pediatrics 402. See also Jean E. Wylie and Geraldine P. 
Mineau, 2003, Biomedical databases: Protec
ting privacy and promoting research, 21(3) 
TRENDS in Biotechnology
 113.
 33 See Ian Story, 2004, Intellectual Property and Computer 
Software: A Battle of Competing Use and Access Visions for 
Countries of the South, 12; Software, av
ailable at <htt://www.answers.
com/topic/computer-software> (accessed May 27, 2010).
 34 Easter, Davis, and Henderson, Confidentiality, 13.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        129 
 The next generation of researchers who act as data 
providers also have the responsibility to protect 
personal or sensitive data of human subjects, us
ually referred to as informational privacy. The 
informational privacy concerns the limits on access 
to personal information,
 whereby anonymity and 
secrecy are branches of it.
35 Although tremendous value can be unlocke
d through the use of data, the fact 
remains that the public is concerned about the use of highly personal information.
36 For various reasons, 
the data subjects may not want their personal data to be
 revealed to a third party. This may be to avoid 
discrimination, personal embarrassment, or damage
 to their personal or professional reputation.
37 Hence, the data providers must make an important distinc
tion between research data collected on human subjects 
and research data on other impersonal subjects. While 
research data that describes natural phenomena has 
a low degree of sensitivity, research data that descr
ibes humans, their activities, opinions, or behaviors 
may pose a high degree of sensitivity.
38   
The next generation of researchers as data providers al
so has the responsibility to 
ensure that the research 
data they provide to others will not 
prejudice national interest and security.
39 In the McKinsey report on 
big data, it was stated that data access can expo
se not only personal information and confidential 
corporate information but even national security and secrets.
40 Schaffer argued that advocates of open access are not proposing that institutions allow unfe
ttered access to sensitive data that could place the 
security of a nation or the world at risk.
41 Although the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948)  
and the International Covenant on Civil and Political
 Rights (ICCPR) guarantee individuals the right to 
seek, receive, and impart information and ideas thro
ugh any media of their choice, these rights are not 
without limitation.
42 In recognizing the right to impart information, the ICCPR states that the exercise of 
these rights carries with it special duties and responsibiliti
es, and they are subject to certain restrictions, 
including for the protection of national security 
or of public order, as shall be provided by law.
43 Therefore, where there is a conflict between access to and reuse of research data with national security 

considerations, the national interest and security shall prevail.
44  Finally, there is a responsibility for the next genera
tion of researchers as data providers to ensure the 
quality and accuracy of research data that becomes the subject matter of access and reuse. The 

Organization for Economic Co-opera
tion and Development principle on data quality states that data 
should be relevant to the purposes for which they ar
e to be used and, to the extent necessary for those 
purposes, should be accurate, complete, and kept up to date.
45  While data accuracy denotes the closeness 
of results of observations to the true values or values accepted as being true,
46 data quality refers to the 
accuracy and completeness of the data and ﬁfitness for u
seﬂ for a specific dataset. It could be anticipated 
that a particular dataset will be unfit for use if 
the data and information is uncertain, inaccurate, or 
                     35 Jeantine E. Lunshof et 
al., 2008, From genetic privacy to open consent, 9 
Nature Reviews Genetics
 407. 36 James Manyika et al., 2011, Big Data: 
The Next Frontier for Innovation, Compet
ition, and Productivity
 (McKinsey Global 
Institute) 119.
 37 See Privacy, 
Wikipedia
, available at <http://en.wikipedia.org/w
iki/Privacy> (accessed June 29, 2010).
 38 Christine L. Borgman, 2005, Disciplinary differences in e-Re
search: an information perspec
tive (paper presented at the 
International Conference on e-Soci
al Science 2005, Manchester, UK).
 39 Stephen Hilgartner and Sherry I. Brandt-Rauf, 1994, Data acce
ss, ownership, and control: Towa
rd empirical studies of access 
practices, 15 
Science Communication 356.
 40 James Manyika et al., 2011, Big Data: 
The Next Frontier for Innovation, Compet
ition, and Productivity
 (McKinsey Global 
Institute) 11.
 41 Daniel Schaffer, 2011, Free Data Has Great 
Value, But Challenges Remain, available at 
<http://www.scidev.net/en/featur
es/free-data-has-great-value-but-challenges-remain-.html> (acce
ssed June 28, 2011).
 42 See Universal Declaration of Human Rights 1948, Art. 19; International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, Art. 19.
 43 See International Covenant on Ci
vil and Political Rights, Art. 19.3
 44 Hilgartner and Brandt-Rauf, Data access, ownership, and control, 356.
 45 OECD Guidelines on the Protection 
of Privacy and Transborder Flows of
 Personal Data Œ Data Quality  
Principle.
 46 David J. Buckey, [year?] Data Accuracy and Quality,  
available at <http://planet.botany.uw
c.ac.za/nisl/GIS/GIS_prim
er/page_08.htm> (accessed February 15, 2011).
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 erroneous.47 Data providers have important roles to pl
ay to ensure the quality of research data.
48 The researcher who is both data creator and data provider 
is ultimately responsible for ensuring the quality of 
research data that are shared with others.
49 Being data providers, the next generation of researchers need 
to remind themselves that the users of research data 
may not know that the research data are incomplete, 
incompatible, or poorly documented.
50 Therefore, they need to be responsible for the quality and accuracy 
of research data provided by them. 

 The Responsibilities of the Next Gene
ration of Researchers as Data Users It is important for the next generation of researche
rs to understand that opening up the rights to access 
research data should not be constr
ued as data owners having relinquis
hed all their exclusive rights over research data. From the perspective of copyright 
law, opening up the rights to access and reuse research 
data will not in any way extinguish copyright in research data.
51 Opening up the rights to access research 
data does not amount to the data owner surrendering th
eir intellectual property rights in research data. The 
data owners can still retain exclusive control over derivative use and commercial exploitation of research 
data.52  Hence, open access to research data does not include free riding or opportunistic use, such as 
profit making or commercial exploitation of research 
data, unless specifically allowed by data owners. 
Since data owners still retain their rights to control 
use and reuse of research data, the next generation of 
researchers has the responsibility to ensure that they
 do not reuse the research data beyond the permitted 
rights given by data owners.
53 In the absence of explicit permission from data owners, the data users 
should access and reuse the research data 
within the scope of legitimate use provided under the fair use or 
fair dealing exceptions under copyright law, whic
h permit certain uses without the need to obtain 
permission from data owners.  

 
If data users need to access and reu
se research data outside the scope of legitimate use provided under the 
fair use or fair dealing exceptions, permission must
 be obtained by data users from data owners.
54 In this regard, permission to access and reuse research data ar
e subject to different licensing arrangements that 
require separate negotiations between data owners and data users.
 55
 These separate negotiations will 
result in different licensing rights between one licensing contract to another, which depends mostly on the 
                     47  See Jeffrey W. Seifert, 2007, CRS Report for Congre
ss: Data Mining and Homeland 
Security: An Overview  
(Congressional Research Service) CRS-22; Earl F. Ei
pstein, Gary J. Hunter, and Aggrey Agumya, 1998, 
Liability insurance and the use of
 geographical information, 12(3) 
Int. J. Geographical Information Science
 203; see also Aggrey 
Agumya and Gary J. Hunter, 1999, A ri
sk-based approach to assessing the ﬁfitness for useﬂ of spatial data, 11(1) 
URISA Journal
 33. 48 Committee on Ensuring the Utility and Inte
grity of Research Data in [the ???]Dig
ital Age, 2009, Ensuring the Integrity,  
Accessibility, and Stewardship of Research Data in the Digital Age (National Academy of Sciences,  
National Academy of Engineering, and In
stitute of Medicine
, Washington, DC), 4.
 49 Ibid., 40.
 50 Jennifer L. Philips, 1999, Information 
liability: The possible ch
illing effect of tort claims against producers  
of geographic information systems data, 26 
Fla. St. U. L. Rev.
 749.
 51 David Shulenburger, 2003, Scholarly 
communications is not toxic waste: 
Lessons learned (prepared for the  
Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities Confer
ence, Max Planck Society, Harnack Haus, Berlin, October ) 4, 
available at 
<http://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/dspace/bitstream/1808/58/1/Scholar
lypercent20Communicationspercent20ispercent20Notpercent2
0Toxicpercent203.pdf> (accessed October 9, 2010).
 52 See Michele Boldrin and David Levine, 2002, Th
e case against intellec
tual property, 92(2) 
The  American Economic Review
 209; Estelle A. Fishbein, 1991, Ownership of research data, 66(3) 
Academic  
Medicine 129.
 53 Anne Fitzgerald, Neale Hooper, and 
Brian Fitzgerald, 2010, Enabling open acc
ess to public sector information  
with Creative Commons licenses Œ The Australian experience, in 
Access to Public Sector Information : Law, Technology & 
Policy
 (Sydney University Press); Linda Wang, 1999, Use of imag
es for commercial purposes: Copyright issues under Malaysian 
laws, in Barbara Hoffman, ed.,  
Exploiting Images and Image Collections in the 
New Media: Gold Mine or Legal Minefield?
 (Kluwer Law International, London, UK) 86.
 54 Stephanie Woods, 2008, Creative comm
ons Œ A useful development in the New Zealand copyright sphere? 14 
Canterbury Law 
Review
 38.
 55 Wang, Use of images for commercial purposes, 86.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        131 
 attitude and bargaining strength of the negotiating parties.
56 Because there could be several layers of 
intellectual property protection in 
research data, negotiations to obtain the rights to access and reuse 
research data could also be very cumbersome, time consuming, and excessively difficult.
57     The next generation of researchers as data users also
 has the responsibility not to infringe on the moral 
rights of data creators.  The moral rights under copyright law are meant to protect the rights of the author 

who creates the work.
58 Two most widely recognized moral rights are (1) the right of attribution, ensuring 
the data creators are recognized as the originators of 
their own work; and (2) the right of integrity, which 
allows data creators to object to mistr
eatment, misuse, or abuse of their works.
59 In the presence of moral 
right of integrity, data users are required to obtai
n permission from data creators or their personal 
representatives before they can significantly alter, modi
fy, or distort the research data. In the absence of 
such permission, data users could be prohibite
d by data creators from making any alterations, 
modifications, or distortions to the research data, re
gardless of whether the alterations, modifications, or 
distortions would negatively affect or objectively improve their works.
60   
 
Balancing the Next Generation of Researchers™ 
Rights to Access and Reuse Research Data with 
Their Responsibilities as Providers and Users of Research Data
 The proponents of open access have long identified the n
eed for a clear policy if the rights to access and 
reuse of research data are to be successfully implemented.
61 It was argued that, from a legal perspective, it 
is not possible to establish any kind 
of open-access system simply by de
fault. Rather, development of an open-access system can only successfully occur through deliberate construction and active management, 

supported by policies and laws that facilitate
 the rights to access and reuse research data.
 62
 In a report by 
the American Council of Learned Societies Commissi
on on Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and 
Social Sciences have recommendations that public a
nd institutional policies be developed to foster 
openness and access not only in science and engineering research but also in humanities and social 
sciences research.
63                        56 Academic Senate of the California St
ate University, 2003, Intellectual Property, 
Fair Use, and the Unbundling of Ownership 
Rights (California State University) 18.
 57 Wang, Use of images for commercial purposes, 46.
 58 Cyrill P. Rigamonti, 2006, D
econstructing moral rights, 47(2) 
Harvard International Law Journal
 360. 59 See Mira T. Sundara Rajan, 2002, Moral rights and copyright ha
rmonization: Prospects for an in
ternational moral right? (paper 
presented at 17th BILETA Annual Conf
erence), available at http
://www.bileta.ac.uk/02papers/sundarajan.html; Chris 
Armbruster, 2008, Cyberscience and the knowledge-based economy
: Open access and trade publishing: From contradiction to 
compatibility with nonexclusive
 copyright licensing, (12) 
International Journal of 
Communications Law and Policy
 17; Chris 
Armstrong et al., 2010, ACA2K: Comparative Review of Research Findi
ngs (Shuttleworth Foundation and University of 
Witwatersrand).
 60 Cyrill P. Rigamonti, Decons
tructing moral rights, 49, 364.
 61 See Paul Uhlir and Peter Schroder, 2008, Open data
 for global science, in 
Brian Fitzgerald, ed.,  
Legal Framework for e-
Research (Sydney University Press, Sydney) 216Œ217; V. M. Mos
kovkin, 2008, Institutional policies for open access to the 
results of scientific research, 35(6) 
Scientific and Technical 
Information Processing
 269; Brian Fitzgerald, Anne Fitzgerald, 
Professor Mark Perry, Scott Kiel
-Chisholm, Erin Driscoll, Dilan Thampapillai, 
Jessica Coates, 2008, Creating a legal framework 
for copyright management of open access within the Australian
 academic and research sector, in Brian Fitzgerald, ed., 
Legal Framework for e-Research
 (Sydney University Press, Sydney) 283; Peter Arzb
erger et al., 2004, An international framework to 
promote access to data, 303 Science
 1777; Anne Fitzgerald, Brian Fitzgerald, and 
Kylie Pappalardo, 2009, The future of data 
policy, in Tony Hey, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle, eds., 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-In
tensive Scientific Discovery
 (Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington)
 201; John Unsworth et al., 2006, Our Cultural Commonwealth: The Report of the 
American Council of Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfra
structure for the Humanities and Social Sciences, 29, 30.
 62 See Brian Fitzgerald, Anne Fitzgerald, Professor Mark Perry, 
Scott Kiel-Chisholm, Erin Driscoll, Dilan Thampapillai, Jessica 
Coates, 2008, Creating a legal framework for 
copyright management of open access within
 the Australian acad
emic and research 
sector, in Brian Fitzgerald, ed., 
Legal Framework for e-Research
 (Sydney University Press, Sydne
y) 283; Fitzgerald, Fitzgerald, 
and Pappalardo, Creating a lega
l framework, 53, 201; Anne Fitzgerald, Kylie 
Papalardo, and Anthony Austin, 2008, Legal 
implications surrounding data 
access, sharing and reuse, in Brian Fitzgerald, ed., 
Legal Framework for e-Research
 (Sydney 
University Press, Sydney) 161.
 63 Unsworth et al., Our Cultural Commonwealth
, 29, 30.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 In the Committee on Data for Science and Tec
hnology (CODATA) Berlin Conference discussion paper 
on international guidelines for access to research data, 
it was further proposed that where copyright or 
database law applies, the parties responsible for agreements and contracts concerning access to research 
data should take the relevant implications of the 
existing legal framework into account to allow for open 
access.
64 Due to the above recommendations, the next question 
that needs to be answered in this paper is, 
how should the data access and reuse policy framework
 that is to be developed balance the next 
generation of researchers™ rights to access and reuse 
research data with thei
r responsibilities as data providers and data users?  
 Balancing the Rights and Responsibilities as Op
en-Access Data Providers: The Responsibility Not 
to Disclose Research Data that Co
ntains Confidential Information A data access and reuse policy should balance the 
next generation of researchers™ rights to access and 
reuse research data with their responsibilities as data
 providers by putting in place a proper mechanism to 
ensure the confidential data are protected while a
llowing access to and reuse of research data. The U.S. 
Panel on Data Access for Research 
Purposes has suggested that the confidentiality of research data be addressed by using a variety of modes for data acc
ess. The panel™s suggestion involves restricting access 
to confidential data as well as granting unrestricted
 access to appropriately altered public-use data.
65 The U.S. National Research Council™s Committee on Nationa
l Statistics has also proposed for the technical 
and statistical solutions to be adopted to enable
 access to and reuse of data without violating a 
nondisclosure obligation. The statistical solutions involv
ed data alteration, while the technical solutions involve restricted access to research data.
66 Data access and reuse policy may also require the adoption of 
special licensing agreements for access to confidential 
data in order to balance the need for data access 
with confidentiality protection.
67    The Responsibility to Protect the Informational Privacy of Data Subjects 
Data access and reuse policy should find a way to 
balance the rights to access and reuse research data 
with the protection of informational privacy.
68 As part of the balance between data access and data 
protection of informational privacy, the U.S. Privacy Protection Study Commission proposed that 

personal information not be disclosed to a third party in an individually identifiable form.
69  It was suggested in the report that in most cases, omitti
ng identifiers, such as name, address, telephone number, 
and subject identification number, is enough to 
protect the anonymity of research participants.
70 Similarly 
the U.S. National Committee on Ensuring the Utility and In
tegrity of Research Data in a Digital Age also 
submitted in its report that for some research data
, privacy protection can be addressed by removing 
identifiers before the sharing or public release of data.71 Hence, a data-access and reuse policy should 
require data providers to remove 
data identifiers before sharing or public release of research data. 
                     64 Peter Schroder, 2004, Towards International Guidelines for Ac
cess to Research Data from P
ublic Funding (Organization for 
Economic Co-Operation and Development) 22.
 65 Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes, 2005, Expanding
 Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks and Opportunities 
(National Research Council) 3.
 66 National Research Council Committee on National Statistics, 2000,
 Improving Access to and Confidentiality of Research Data: 
Report of a Workshop, 29, 32.
 67 Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes
, Expanding Access to Research Data, 56, 4.
 68 R. J. Bazillion, 1984, The effect of access and privacy le
gislation on the conduct of scholarly research in Canada, 4 
Social 
Science Information Studies
 7.
 69 Privacy Protection Study Commission (USA),
 1997, Personal Privacy in an Information Society: The Report of the Privacy 
Protection Study Commission.
 70 Ibid. 71 Committee on Ensuring the Utility and Integrity of Research Data
 in a Digital Age, 2009, Ensuri
ng the Integrity, Accessibility
, and Stewardship of Research Data in the Digital Age (Nationa
l Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and 
Institute of Medicine) 68.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        133 
 Researchers who archived their research data shoul
d be requested to erase or change all names in 
transcripts and other material and erase any personal 
information that points directly to an individual.
72   
 The policy should also require research data that cont
ains sensitive and personal in
formation to be coded, 
and procedures be put in place to control access.
73  Besides de-identification and coding techniques, a 
range of other techniques to protect informational priv
acy could be employed in relation to different types 
of research data, either qualitative or statistical. Th
e techniques are based on reducing data specificity, 
distorting data, decreasing sampling sizes, and pert
urbing, rounding, swapping, and adding noise to the 
research data before release.
74  All the above technical measures could be used to protect the 
informational privacy while opening up the rights to acces
s and reuse research data that contains personal 
information.  
 The Responsibility to Safeguard National Interests and Security 
Data access and reuse policy should safeguard classi
fied and secret data, where their disclosure could 
jeopardize national interests and security. Where national security and secrecy laws are in place to protect 
national interests and security, data access and reuse po
licy should ensure this le
gal duty is complied with 
by data providers. Therefore, there is a need to cr
eate a specific exemption in the policy, whereby the next 
generation of researchers is prohibite
d from sharing research data that is subject to national security or 
secrecy legislation. To balance the rights to access a
nd reuse research data with the responsibility to safeguard national interests and security, the policy that
 is to be developed needs to clarify and draw a 
line between classified and unclassified data.
75  According to the U.S. Na
tional Academies™ Committee on 
Ensuring the Utility and Integrity of Research Data 
in the Digital Age, research data pertaining to 
intelligence and military or terrorist activities should 
not be shared by researchers for security reasons.
76 Research related to nuclear, radiological, and biologi
cal threats; chemicals and explosives; human and 
agricultural health systems; and information technology
 infrastructure may also contain data that is the 
subject of national interests and security.
77    The Responsibility to Ensure Data Quality and Accuracy 
To ensure data quality and accuracy, data access a
nd reuse policy should require data providers to 
actively supply and complete information about the research data provided.
78 If nonreviewed or 
nonverified research data are allowed to be shared 
for access and reuse, the data access and reuse policy 
should require data providers to warn
 or to notify data users of the quality and accuracy of research data. 
In the United States, the Office of Management
 and Budget™s 2002 Guidelines for Ensuring and 
Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity, Utility, and 
Integrity of Information Disseminated by Federal 
Agencies (OMB Guidelines) require federal agencies, including the research institutions that are required by the government to disseminate publicly funded da
ta, to adopt specific standards of quality that are 
appropriate for various categories of data that they disseminate.
 79  To this end, the standards and quality 
                     72 Anne Sofia Fink, 2000, The role of the researcher in the qua
litative research process. A pot
ential barrier to archiving 
qualitative data, 1(3) 
Forum: Qualitative Social Research
, available at <h
ttp://www.qualitative-
research.net/index.php/fqs/article/viewArtic
le/1021/2201> (accessed July 2, 2011).
 73 Beatrice Godard et al., 2003, Data storage and DNA banking fo
r biomedical research: Inform
ed consent, confidentiality, 
quality issues, ownership, return of benef
its. A professional perspective, 11(Suppl 2) 
European Journal of Human Genetics
 S91. 74 Mark Elliot, Kingsley Purdam, and Duncan
 Smith, 2005, Confidential data access using grid computing: An outline of the 
issues and possible solutions (paper presented at the Internatio
nal Conference on e-Social Science 2005, Manchester Conference 
Center, June 22Œ24).
 75 Committee on Ensuring the Utility and Integrity of Research Data
 in a Digital Age, Ensuring th
e Integrity, Accessibility, and 
Stewardship of Research Data, 62.
 76 Ibid., 68.
 77 Ibid. 78 Earl F. Eipstein, Gary J. Hunter, and Aggrey Agumya, 1998, Li
ability insurance and the use of geographical information, 12(3) 
Int. J. Geographical Information Science
 210. 79 Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality, Objectivity
, Utility and Integrity of Info
rmation Disseminated by Federal 
Agencies 2002, Guidelines III, para.1.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 to ensure data quality provided under the OMB Guide
lines could be used by data access and reuse policy 
for the purpose of imposing a standard of care on da
ta providers to ensure 
data quality and accuracy. 
 Balancing the Rights and Responsibilities as Op
en-Access Data Users: Th
e Responsibility Not to 
Use or Reuse Open-Access Research Data Beyond The Permitted Rights  
In most countries, the fair use or fair dealing exceptio
ns that dispense the need to obtain the data owner™s 
permission is limited to access and reuse of research
 data for private and 
educational purposes only. 
While the next generation of researchers require the ri
ght to access and reuse research data to be opened, 
the restrictive scope of legitimate use under fair use 
or fair dealing exceptions under copyright law could 
prevent data users from exploiting the fu
ll value and potential of research data.
80  For the purpose of 
opening up the rights to access and reuse research data, it was argued by Graham Greenleaf that the rights 

to access and reuse the research data given by data 
owners should be more extensive and beyond fair use 
or fair dealing exceptions offered by the copyright law.
81  For Uhlir and Schroder, open access in the 
context of public research data should be interpre
ted as access on equal terms for the international research community, as well as industry, with the fewest restrictions on reuse.
82  This could well mean that the next generation of researchers should be 
given broad rights to access and reuse research data, 
including for profit, industrial, commercial, or nonacademic research purposes.  

 The Responsibility to Obtain Permission to Access and Reuse Research Data 
One of the critical aspects in opening up the rights to a
ccess and reuse research data are to ensure that the 
rights are not only given to the first user but that th
ey remain freely accessible and usable by downstream 
users.83 In granting the rights to access and reuse data, 
data owners can choose from a wide range of 
licensing conditions, from the widest possible 
license to the narrowest form of licensing.
84  If data users have to enter into licensing or assignment contracts with data owners each time they require access to and 
reuse of research data, the progress of research will be retarded and transaction cost for data access will be high.85  Even when the rights to access and reuse is gr
anted by data owners by way of licensing, the 
copyright licensing mechanism is said to be tim
e-consuming, and not well suited to the digital 
environment.
   
To balance the need to access and reuse research data with the responsibilities to obtain licensing rights, a 
data access and reuse policy should require data owne
rs to adopt the simplest form of licensing scheme 
that accelerates and produces the optimum ri
ghts to access and reuse research data. 
86 To this end, the policy should require data owners to give permissi
on in advance to data users to access and reuse the 
research data. This advance permission should be gi
ven in a ready-made template by using standard 
licensing schemes such as Creative Commons licen
ses, Science Commons licenses, or GNU General 
Public License.  In this regard, the better approach for promoting open access to data is to apply for a 
                     80 Nicole Ebber, 2008, Creative Commons li
censes: New ways of granting 
and utilizing access to inform
ation (paper presented at 
the 16th BOBCATSSS Symposium 2008 Œ Providing Access to Info
rmation for Everyone, Zada
r, Croatia, January 28Œ30).
 81 Graham Greenleaf, 2008, Unlocking IP to 
Stimulate Australian Innovation: An Issues
 Paper (University of New South Wales). 
See also P. Arzberger et al., 
2004, Promoting access to public research data fo
r scientific, economic, a
nd social development, 
3 Data Science Journal
 146; Kai Ekholm, Access 
to Our Digital Heritage
 82 Paul Uhlir and Peter Schroder, 
2008, Open data for global scien
ce, in Brian Fitzgerald, ed., 
Legal Framework for e-Research: 
Realising the Potential 
(Sydney University Press Sydney) 209.
 83 Karl-Nikolaus Peifer, 2008, Open ac
cess and (German) copyright, in 
Open Access: Opportunities and Challenges Œ A 
Handbook (UNESCO) 50.
 84 Woods, Creative commons, 45.
 85 Gideon Emcee Christian, 2009, Building a 
Sustainable Framework for Open Access to
 Research Data Through Information 
and Communication Technologies (International Deve
lopment Research Center (IDRC) Canada) 22.
 86 Ibid., 75.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        135 
 Creative Commons Attribution (CC-BY) license to the data
. This allows the data to be widely shared and 
used, but also preserves the creator™s right to attribution.
87   
The Responsibility Not to Infringe on Data Creators™ Moral Rights To open up the rights to access and reuse research data 
for the next generation of researchers, the moral 
right of integrity should be construed in such a way as 
to ensure that the personal interests of authors do 
not interfere with the legitimate self-expression of future authors.
88  Data access and reuse policy should 
provide guidelines about what sort of acts are consider
ed as infringing on data creators™ moral rights. To 
this end, there should be clear guidelines about the 
reasonable circumstances that allow alteration or 
modification of the research data without being cons
trued as an infringement of data creators™ moral 
rights of integrity. There should also be exceptions to
 data creators™ moral rights of integrity for certain 
categories of copyright works as found in the Australian Copyright Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000 

(Commonwealth of Australia),
89 the U.K. Copyright, Designs and Patents Act (CDPA) 1988,
90 and the U.S. Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990. 
91 Further, in the U.K. CDPA,92 the moral right to integrity does 
not exist for copyright work produced under work for hire, that is, arising from employment or 
commissioned work. Applying the U.K. approach, this
 paper argues that, where the research data are 
publicly funded or produced by data creators under wo
rk for hire, they should be required to waive their 
moral right to integrity, which enables the research 
data to be transformed into beneficial use by other 
researchers. 
 Conclusion This presentation argues that to avoid the next gene
ration of researchers suffering the same disadvantages 
as their predecessors, it is deemed necessary to open 
up the rights to access and reuse research data. 
Premised upon this argument, this paper further argu
es that a policy framework needs to be developed to 
balance the rights and responsibilities of the next generation of researchers as providers and users of 
research data. Therefore, apart from establishing th
e need to open up the rights to access and reuse 
research data for the next generation of research
ers, this paper has also put forward several 
recommendations for balancing the rights to access an
d reuse research data with the responsibilities 
outlined above. Most of these recommendations would 
be best carried out by the research funders and the 
research institutions of each country.
93    Despite focusing on the rights and responsibilities of the next generation of researchers, it is clear that 
these rights and responsibilities are applicable regard
less of the generation with which the researchers 
may identify. However, as it is predicted that data 
access and reuse will be opened at a far larger scale in 
the near future, awareness towards 
the responsibilities pertaining to access to and reuse of research data, 
both as providers and users, is highly expected from the 
next generation of researchers. It is believed that through a proper policy framework that balances the 
rights to access and reuse w
ith the responsibilities as                      87 Anne Fitzgerald, 2009, Sharing Environmen
tal Data: The Role of an Information 
Policy Framework and Copyright Licensing, 
available at <http://www.eresearch.edu.au/docs/2
009/era09_submission_122.pdf> (accessed June 20, 2011); 
 88 Nicolas Suzor, 2006, Transformative Use of Copyright Materi
al (Master™s thesis, Queensla
nd University of Technology).
 89 Under the Australian Copyright Act, the author™s right of in
tegrity does not apply to sound reco
rding, but is applicable to 
literary, dramatic, musical, artistic, and cinematography 
works. See Copyright Amendment (Moral Rights) Act 2000 
(Commonwealth of Australia), Sec. 195AJ, 195AK, 195AL Œ Di
vision 4ŠRight of integrity of authorship of a work.
 90 The moral right of integrity under the U.K.
 CDPA does not apply to computer programs
 or to any computer-generated works. 
See Copyright, Designs and Pate
nts Act 1988, c. 48 (Eng.), Sec. 81(2) Œ Exceptions to right.
 91 The author™s moral right of integrity in the United States does 
not apply to all authors, but is only applicable to certain au
thors 
of the specified group of works. See U.S. Code Title 17 Copyrigh
t Act of 1976, s. 106A Œ Rights of certain authors to attributi
on and integrity. See also Visual Artist
s Rights Act of 1990 (US), Sec. 101(1), 101(2) Œ Work of Visual Art Defined.
 92 Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, 
c. 48 (Eng.), Sec. 82(1)(a), (b) Œ Qu
alification of right in certain cases.
 93 Uhlir and Schroder Open data for global science, 188.
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 data providers and data users, th
e next-generation researcher will be able to enjoy greater, yet well-
governed, rights to access and reuse research data.  
  REFERENCES 
Academic Senate of the California State Univer
sity, Intellectual Property, Fair Use, and the 
Unbundling of Ownership Rights (California State University, 2003) 18. 

 
Agumya, Aggrey, and Gary J. Hunter, A risk-based 
approach to assessing the ﬁ'fitness for useﬂ of 
spatial data (1999) 11(1) 
URISA Journal 33. 
 
Andanda, P. A., Human-tissue-rela
ted inventions: Ownership and in
tellectual property rights in 
international collaborative research 
in developing countries (2006) 34 
J Med Ethics
 172. 
 Armbruster, Chris, Cyberscience and the 
knowledge-based economy: Open access and trade 
publishing: From contradiction to compatibility with
 nonexclusive copyright licensing (2008) (12) 
International Journal of Communications Law and Policy
 17.  
Armstrong, Chris, et al., ACA2K: Comparativ
e Review of Research Findings (Shuttleworth Foundation and University of Witwatersrand, 2010). 
 
Arzberger, P., et al., Promoting access to public 
research data for scientific, economic, and social 
development (2004) 3 
Data Science Journal
 146
. Kai Ekholm, 'Access to Our Digital Heritage' 
 
Arzberger, Peter, et al., An international fra
mework to promote access to data (2004) 303 
Science 1777. 
 
Atkins, Daniel E., et al., Revolutionizing Science and Engineering Through Cyberinfrastructure: 

Report of the National Science Foundation Blue-R
ibbon Advisory Panel on Cyberinfrastructure 
(National Science Foundation, 2003) 17, 28. 
Australian Research Information Infrastructure Comm
ittee, Open Access Statement (2004), available 
at <www.caul.edu.au/caul-doc/caul20051a
riic.doc> (accessed February 28, 2010). 
 
Bauchner, Howard, Protecting research participants (2002) 110 
Pediatrics 402. See also Jean E. Wylie 
and Geraldine P. Mineau, Biomedical databases:
 Protecting privacy and promoting research (2003) 
21(3) TRENDS in Biotechnology
 113. 
 Bazillion, R. J., The effect of access and privacy 
legislation on the conduct of scholarly research in 
Canada (1984) 4 
Social Science Information Studies
 7. 
 
Benkler, Yochai, The university in the networked economy and society (2008) (November/December) 
Educause 65. 
 
Berman, Francine, and Henry E. Brady, Works
hop on Cyberinfrastructure for the Social and 
Behavioral Sciences: Final Report (Na
tional Science Foundation, 2005) 32, 57. 
 
Bicknell, David, Collaboration drives innovation (2009) (Apr 28ŒMay 4) 
Computer Weekly
 14.  Blumberg, Peter D., From ﬁpublish or perishﬂ to
 ﬁprofit or perishﬂ: Revenues from university 
technology transfer and the s. 501(c)(3) tax exemption (1996) 145(1) 
The University of Pennsylvania Law Review 91. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        137 
  Boldrin, Michele, and David Levine, The cas
e against intellectual property (2002) 92(2) 
The American Economic Review 209.  Borgman, Christine L., Disciplinary Differences in e-Research: An Information Perspective (paper 
presented at the International Conference on e-Social Science 2005, Manchester, UK, 2005). 
 
Boyle, James, Foreword: The opposite of property? (2003) 66(1&2) 
Law & Contemporary Problems
 13. 
 Buckey, David J., Data Accuracy
 and Quality, available at 
<http://planet.botany.uwc.ac.za/nisl/GIS/GIS_primer
/page_08.htm> (accessed February 15, 2011). 
 
Christian, Gideon Emcee, Building a Sustainabl
e Framework for Open Access to Research Data 
Through Information and Communication Technologi
es (International Development Research Center [IDRC] Canada, 2009) 22. 

 
Christie, Andrew F., et al., Analysis of the Legal 
Framework for Patent Ownership in Publicly Funded 
Research Institutions (Commonwealth of Australia 
Department of Education, Science and Training, 
2003) 48. 
 
Committee on Ensuring the Utility and Integrity of 
Research Data in a Digital Age, Ensuring the 
Integrity, Accessibility, and Stewardship of Research 
Data in the Digital Age (National Academy of 
Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, an
d Institute of Medicine, 2009) 4, 40, 68. 
 Committee on National Statistics, Issues and recomme
ndations, in Stephen E. Fienberg, Margaret E. 
Martin, and Miron L. Straf (eds.), 
Sharing Research Data
 (National Academy Press, Washington DC, 
1985) 24, 25. 

 
Council of the European Union, Council Conclusions
 on Scientific Information in the Digital Age: 
Access, Dissemination and Preservation (2007) 1, available at 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data
/docs/pressData/en/intm/97236.pdf> (accessed 
February 28, 2010). 

 
Czarnitzki, Dirk, Wolfgang Glanzel, and Katrin Hussi
nger, Heterogeneity of patenting activity and its 
implications for scientific research (2009) 38 
Research Policy 33. 
 David, Paul A., Can ﬁopen scienceﬂ be protected from 
the evolving regime of IPR protections? (2004) 
129 (March) Journal of Institutional 
and Theoretical Economics 3.  
Easter, Michele M., Arlene M. Davis, and Gail E. He
nderson, Confidentiality: More than a linkage file 
and a locked drawer (2004) 26(2) 
IRB: Ethics and Human Research
 14. 
 
Ebber, Nicole, Creative Commons Licenses: Ne
w Ways of Granting and Utilizing Access to 
Information (paper presented at the 16th BO
BCATSSS Symposium 2008 Œ Providing Access to 
Information for Everyone, Zadar, Croatia, January 28Œ30). 

 Eipstein, Earl F., Gary J. Hunter, and Aggrey Ag
umya, Liability insurance and the use of geographical 
information (1998) 12(3) 
Int. J. Geographical Information Science
 203, 210. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Elliot, Mark, Kingsley Purdam, and Duncan Smith, 
Confidential Data Access Using Grid Computing: 
An Outline of the Issues and Possible Solutions (pap
er presented at the International Conference on e-Social Science 2005, Manchester Conference Center, June 22Œ24, 2005). 
 Fink, Anne Sofia, The role of the researcher in th
e qualitative research process. A potential barrier to archiving qualitative data (2000) 1(3) 
Forum: Qualitative Social Research, available at 
<http://www.qualitative-research.net/index.php/fqs/artic
le/viewArticle/1021/2201> (accessed July 2, 
2011). 

 Fishbein, Estelle A., Ownership 
of research data (1991) 66(3) 
Academic Medicine
 129. 
 
Fitzgerald, Anne, Sharing Environmental Data: The 
Role of an Information Policy Framework and 
Copyright Licensing (2009), available at 

<http://www.eresearch.edu.au/docs/2009/era09_submission_122.pdf> (accessed June 20, 2011). 
 Fitzgerald, Anne, Brian Fitzgerald, 
and Kylie Pappalardo, The future 
of data policy, in Tony Hey, 
Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle (eds.), 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discovery
 (Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, 2009) 201. 

 Fitzgerald, Anne, Neale Hooper, and Brian F
itzgerald, Enabling open access to public sector information with Creative Commons li
censes Œ The Australian experience, in 
Access to Public Sector 
Information : Law, Technology and Policy
 (Sydney University Press, 2010). 
 
Fitzgerald, Anne, and Kylie Pappa
lardo, Building the Infrastructure for Data Access and Reuse in 
Collaborative Research: An Analysis of the Legal Context (2007). 
 Fitzgerald, Anne, Kylie Papalar
do, and Anthony Austin, Legal im
plications surrounding data access, 
sharing and reuse, in Brian Fitzgerald (ed.), 
Legal Framework for e-Research
 (Sydney University 
Press, Sydney, 2008) 161. 

 Fitzgerald, Brian, Anne Fitzgerald, Professor Mark Perry, Scott Kiel-Chisholm, Erin Driscoll, Dilan 
Thampapillai, Jessica Coates, Creating a legal frame
work for copyright management of open access 
within the Australian academic and resear
ch sector, in Brian Fitzgerald (ed.), Legal Framework for e-Research (Sydney University Press, Sydney, 2008) 283. 
 
Fry, Jenny, Ralph Schroeder, and Matthijs des Best
en, Open science in e-Science: Contingency or 
policy? (2009) 65(1) 
Journal of Documentation
 7. 
 
Glinos, Kostas, Report of the High Level Expert 
Group on Scientific Data: Riding the Wave: How 
Europe Can Gain From the Rising Tide of Sc
ientific Data Œ A Vision for 2030 (European 
Commission, 2010). 
 Godard, Beatrice, et al., Data storage and DNA banki
ng for biomedical research: Informed consent, 
confidentiality, quality issues, ownership, return of benefits. A professional perspective, (2003) 
11(Suppl 2) 
European Journal of Human Genetics
 S91. 
 
Greenleaf, Graham, Unlocking IP to
 Stimulate Australian Innovation: An Issues Paper (University of 
New South Wales, 2008). 
 Guidelines for Ensuring and Maximizing the Quality,
 Objectivity, Utility and Integrity of Information 
Disseminated by Federal Agencies 2002, Guidelines III, para.1. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        139 
  Harnad, Stevan, Brazilian Bill to Mandate OA (2007), available at 

<http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/2007/06/brazilian-
bill-to-mandate-oa.html> (accessed March 1, 
2010). 
 
Hendrick, Terry Elizabeth, Justifications for and ob
stacles to data sharing, in Stephen E. Fienberg, 
Margaret E. Martin, and Miron L. Straf (eds.), 
Sharing Research Data
 (National Academy Press, 
Washington DC, 1985) 135. 

 Hess, Charlotte, and Elinor Ostrom, Ideas, artifacts, and facilities: Information as a common-pool 
resource (2003) 66 Law and Contemporary Problems
 112. 
 
Hey, Tony, and Anne E. Trefethen, Cyberinfrastructure for e-Science (2005) 308 
Science Mag
 818. 
 Hey, Tony, Stewart Tansley, and Kristin Tolle (eds.), 
The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific 
Discovery
 (Microsoft Research, Redmond, Washington, 2009). 
 
Hilgartner, Stephen, and Sherry I. Brandt-Rau
f, Data access, ownership, and control: Toward 
empirical studies of access practices' (1994) 15 
Science Communication 356. 
 International Seminar on Open Access for Devel
oping Countries, Salvador Declaration on Open 
Access: The Developing World Perspective (2005), available at 

<http://www.icml9.org/meetings/openaccess/public/doc
uments/declaration.htm> (accessed February 
26, 2010). 

 Jia, Hawk, China Unveils Plans to Boost Sc
ientific Data Sharing (2006), available at 
<http://www.scidev.net/en/news/china-unveils-plans-to-boost-scientific-data-shari.html> (accessed 
March 1, 2010). 

 
Kirsop, Barbara, and Leslie Chan, Transforming ac
cess to research literature for developing countries 
(2005) 31(4) 
Serials Review
 247. 
Kuchma, Iryna, Berlin 4: International Conference on Open Access (2006) 24, available at 

<http://berlin4.aei.mpg.de/presentations/Kuchm
a_OA06.pdf> (accessed March 1, 2010). Lunshof, Jeantine E., et al., From genetic privacy to open consent (2008) 9 
Nature Reviews Genetics
 407. 

 Manyika, James, et al., Big Data: The Next Fron
tier for Innovation, Comp
etition, and Productivity 
(McKinsey Global Institu
te, 2011) 11, 119. 
 
Moskovkin, V. M., Institutional policies for open access 
to the results of scientific research (2008) 
35(6) Scientific and Technical Information Processing
 269. 
 National Research Council Committee on National Sta
tistics, Improving Access to and Confidentiality 
of Research Data: Report of a Workshop (??Nati
onal Academies Press, Washington, DC, 2000) 29, 
32. 

 
Nelson, Michael L., Data-driven science: A new paradigm? (2009) 44(4) 
Educause
 6. OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy an
d Transborder Flows of Personal Data Œ Data 
Quality Principle. 

 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Open Access to Knowledge (OAK) Law Project: 
Legal Protocols for Copyright Management: 
Facilitating Open Access to Research at the Na
tional and International Levels, available at <http://www.oaklaw.qut.edu.au/files/Data_Report_final_web.pdf> (accessed January 11, 2010) 58. 
 Organization for Economic Co-Opera
tion and Development, Declaration on Access to Research Data 
From Public Funding (2004), available at 

<http://www.oecd.org/document/0,2340,en_264
9_34487_25998799_1_1_1_1,00.html> (accessed 
February 25, 2010). 

 Panel on Data Access for Research Purposes, Expanding Access to Research Data: Reconciling Risks 
and Opportunities (National Research Council, 2005) 3, 4. 
 
Peifer, Karl-Nikolaus, Open access and (German) copyright, in 
Open Access: Opportunities and 
Challenges Œ A Handbook
 (UNESCO, 2008) 50. 
 Philips, Jennifer L., Information liability: The possibl
e chilling effect of tort claims against producers of geographic information systems data (1999) 26 
Fla. St. U. L. Rev.
 749. 
 
Privacy Protection Study Commission (USA), Personal 
Privacy in an Information Society: The Report 
of the Privacy Protection Study Commission (1977). 
 
Privacy, 
Wikipedia
, available at <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Privacy> (accessed June 29, 2010). 
 
Rabow, Ingegerd, Open access in Sweden: Recent development (2008) (1) 
Sciecom Info, available at <http://www.sciecom.org/ojs/index.php/sciecominfo/
article/viewFile/245/94> (accessed March 1, 
2010). 
 
Rajan, Mira T. Sundara, Moral Rights and Copyrigh
t Harmonization: Prospects for an International 
Moral Right? (2002) (paper presented at the 17th BILETA Annual Conference), available at 

http://www.bileta.ac.uk/02papers/sundarajan.html
.  Rambo, Neil, E-science and biomedical libraries (2009) 97(3) 
J Med Libr Assoc
 160. 
 
Reichman, Jerome H., and Tracy Lewis, Using 
liability rules to stimulate local innovation in 
developing countries: Application to traditional k
nowledge, in Keith Eugene
 Maskus and Jerome H. 
Reichman (eds.), 
International Public Goods and Transfer of Technology Under a Globalized 
Intellectual Property Regime (Cambridge University Press, 2005) 340. 
 
Research Councils UK, Open Access 
to Research Outputs: Final Report to RCUK (2008) 21, available 
at <http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/cmsweb/downloads/rcuk/
news/oareport.pdf> (accessed March 11, 2010). 
 Rigamonti, Cyrill P., Deconstructing moral rights (2006) 47(2) 
Harvard International Law Journal
 360. 

 
Rose, Carol M., Romans, roads, and romantic cr
eators: Traditions of public property in the 
information age (2003) 66 
Law & Contemporary Problems
 90.  Royal Society (United Kingdom), Keeping Science 
Open: The Effects of Intellectual Property Policy 
on the Conduct of Science (2003) 21, available at 

<http://royalsociety.org/Report_WF.aspx?pageid
=9842&terms=Keeping+sci
ence+openpercent3A+the
+effects+of+intellectual+property+policy+on+the+conduc
t+of+science> (accessed February 26, 2010)  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        141 
  Salokannel, Marjut, Global Public Goods and Priv
ate Rights: Scientific Research and Intellectual 
Property Rights (2003) 11, available at <http
://www.iprinfo.com/tiedostot/5
icFWowu.pdf> (accessed October 12, 2010). 
 
Sampat, Bhaven N., Patenting and US academic rese
arch in the 20th century: The world before and 
after Bayh-Dole (2006) 35 
Research Policy 784. 
 
Samuelson, Pamela, Mapping the digital public doma
in: Threats and opportunities (2003) 66(1 and 2) 
Law & Contemporary Problems
 170. 
 Schaffer, Daniel, Free Data has Great Value, 
But Challenges Remain (2011), available at 
<http://www.scidev.net/en/features/free-data-has-grea
t-value-but-challenges-remain-.html> (accessed 
June 28, 2011). 
 Schroder, Peter, Towards International Guidelines 
for Access to Research Data From Public Funding 
(Organization for Economic Co-Ope
ration and Development, 2004). 
 
Science and Technology Committee, Science a
nd Technology Œ Tenth Report (U.K. House of 
Commons, Science and Tec
hnology Committee, 2004).  
Shulenburger, David, Scholarly co
mmunications is not toxic waste: Lessons learned (prepared for the 
Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Huma
nities Conference, Max Planck Society, Harnack 
Haus, Berlin, October 2003) 4, available at 

<http://kuscholarworks.ku.edu/dspace/bitstream/1808/58/1/Scholarl
ypercent20Communicationspercent20ispercent20Notpercent20Toxicpercent203.pdf> (accessed October 9, 2010).  
Schwartz, Charles A., Reassessing prospects for the open access movement (2005) (November) 

College & Research Libraries
 491. 
 Seifert, Jeffrey W., CRS Report for Congress: Data Mining and Homeland Security: An Overview 
(Congressional Research Service, 2007) CRS-22. 

 
Story, Ian, Intellectual property and computer so
ftware: A battle of competing use and access visions 
for countries of the south (2004) 12; 
Software
,  available at <htt://www.answers.com/topic/computer-
software> (accessed May 27, 2010). 
 Suber, Peter, Pakistani Journals to be Available for Worldwide Electronic Access through Online 
Portal (2007), available at <http://www.earlham.edu/
~peters/fos/2007/05/pakistan-plans-oa-portal-for-
all-its.html> (accessed March 1, 2010). 

 ŠŠ, Spain is Funding OA Repositories (2007), available at 
<http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/2007/05/spain-i
s-funding-oa-repositories.ht
ml> (accessed March 
1, 2010). 

 
Suzor, Nicolas, Transformative Use of Copyright Ma
terial (Master™s thesis, Queensland University of 
Technology, 2006). 
 Swan, Alma, Open access and the progress of science (2007) 95(May-June) 
American Scientist 200. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 Thursby, Jerry G., Richard Jensen, and Marie G. T
hursby, Objectives, characteristics and outcomes of 
university licensing: A survey of major U.S. universities (2001) 26 
Journal of Technology Transfer
 59.  Treaty on Access to Knowledge (2005), available at 
<http://www.cptech.org/a2k/a2k_treaty_ma
y9.pdf> (accessed March 10, 2010). 
 Trosow, Samuel E., Copyright Protection for Fe
derally Funded Research: Necessary Incentive or 
Double Subsidy? (2003) 18, available at <http
://publish.uwo.ca/-strosow/Sabo_Bill_Paper.pdf> 
(accessed September 12, 2010). 
 Uhlir, Paul, and Peter Schroder, Open data fo
r global science, in Brian Fitzgerald (ed.), 
Legal Framework for e-Research
 (Sydney University Press, Sy
dney, 2008) 188, 209, 216Œ217. 
 
UNESCO, Kronberg Declaration on the Future of
 Knowledge Acquisition and Sharing (2007), 
available at <http://www.unesco.de/kronberg_declaration.html?&L=0> (accessed February 26, 2007). 
 
Unsworth, John, et al., Our Cultural Commonwealth: 
The Report of the American Council of Learned 
Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for th
e Humanities and Social Sciences (2006) 29, 30. 
 Wang, Linda, Use of images for commercial purpo
ses: Copyright issues under Malaysian laws, in 
Barbara Hoffman (ed.), 
Exploiting Images and Image Collections 
in the New Media: Gold Mine or 
Legal Minefield?
 (Kluwer Law International, London, 1999) 86. 
 
Woods, Stephanie, Creative Commons Œ A useful de
velopment in the New Zealand copyright sphere? 
(2008) 14 
Canterbury Law Review 38.   
 
 
    
 
 
   
   The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        143 
 33. DISCUSSION BY THE 
WORKSHOP PARTICIPANTS 
 PARTICIPANT:  My question is addressed to Mr. Sc
haffer, but I invite everybody on the panel to 
comment and express their point of view. About a year ago, I read a publication of science metrics, which 
measures the level of scientific activity in the world,
 and there were comparisons of different countries. 
China and Turkey, which you mentioned, show a really 
high level of scientific activity, but what struck 
me more was Iran and the huge spike in scientific ac
tivities there, especially related to fundamental and 
natural sciences. Basically, I invite you to comment 
on this trend related to da
ta-sharing policies and the 
global nature of data-sharing polic
ies, open data to scientific and research information, and maybe 
facilitating a dialogue. I am not sure if there are any 
partnerships between your 
organizations and Islamic 
countries apart from Egypt, which was mentioned. I would appreciate your views. 

 
MR. SCHAFFER: I will speak on behalf of the Academ
y of Sciences for the Developing World (TWAS) 
and others can join. The roots of TWAS and its identity
 lie in its efforts to build scientific capacity. Much 
of the work of TWAS over the course of its existence has been devoted to investments and partnerships 
for capacity building. Most of that 
has been in training and research. As the capacity of various countries 
improved, we have moved increasingly 
toward South-South cooperation. In some areas, we see some lead 
countries, for example, China in Asia, South Africa in
 Africa, and Brazil in South America. Our hope is 
that we can develop South-South cooperation networks, 
not just in publication output but also in projects 
that have impact on the ground, and do that by allowing the advancing countries in the South to take the 
lead in South-South partnerships. One of the critical questions or issues that TWAS is examining is 

whether countries like China, Brazil, and India will find greater reason to ally with the United States and 

Europe than with other countries in the developing world.
 It is that kind of dynamic that is now in play for 
scientific projects.   

 DR. RUMBLE: I would like to add that if you look at
 the demographics of the northern African countries 
all the way into Pakistan, the percentage of people 
who are under 25 and even under 15 is really startling compared to societies such as ours. I think organiza
tions like TWAS and the United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) have 
a unique opportunity to affect the young generation 
through science. There is tremendous opportunity for 
this generation to get turned on to science and see 
what it can do for them individually, as well as for the 
institutions that they cherish and their countries. I 
certainly hope that catches on. 

 
MR. SCHAFFER: There are limits to what organiza
tions like TWAS and UNESCO can do. Some of the 
discussion this morning was about politics. There are political issues that go beyond science education 

and training. Still, we can argue that, in some wa
ys, the investments in science can set the stage. 
Education can set the stage for political change.  
DR. GRIFFIN: I sponsored three workshops on building a digital library in the Middle East region. One 

was in 2006 at the New Alexandria Library; one in 
Rabat, Morocco, in 2007; and another one here in 
Washington, D.C., on January 24 and 25, 2011. We need to keep in mind when we are talking about 
individual countries in different parts of the world th
at there are shared cultu
ral identities that go across national and political boundaries. The general appro
aches, feelings, and values regarding the way in 
which they receive the world and the way in which th
ey receive the world through the scientific method is 
somewhat different in each of these cultures. Theref
ore, more communication mechanisms need to be 
established as an intermediate step to what 
we might be trying to get in the long term. 
 PARTICIPANT: I wanted to get to that issue of incentiv
es that were raised in a couple of talks. It is an 
important issue, especially because many organizations
 have been talking about scientific publications 
and open-access publications. Some of you may remember that maybe a decade or so ago, people were 

encouraged to do interdisciplinary work, but many pe
ople who published in interdisciplinary journals did 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 not get tenure and they did not get promoted. People 
did not like it. I have not heard too much discussion 
about how to change the incentive 
structures so that we do not have these problems with young people. 
 DR. GUSTAFSSON: Traditionally we have had the habit of saying that when writing a paper or proposal, 
you should be able to put your work into a more gene
ral framework. It is still disciplinary and is still only 
related to science itself, but it has a context. I think we can say that any scientist who is worth supporting 

should be able to put his or her work into a more gene
ral framework related to the world today. It is hard 
to make it an absolute condition, but I think it co
uld be a standard approach. I think research-funding 
agencies could put more emphasis on these things. 
 PARTICIPANT: I would like to thank Bengt Gustafsson for his opening remarks emphasizing the 

importance of free travel, communication, and collabo
ration as an element of international science. The 
American Physical Society (APS) has been very ac
tive in this regard. The APS has an Office of International Affairs and runs the Forum on Internat
ional Physics, which follo
ws up on international 
issues. I would like to share with you one experien
ce I had as chair of the forum in 2007. You may 
remember that in 2007 the American Chemical Societ
y (ACS) decided on its own that it had to expel all 
Iranian members. They misinterpreted some of the san
ctions rules, which in fact specifically allow the 
exchange of open scientific literature among memb
ers around the world without being subject to 
sanctions, but nevertheless they expelled them. The A
PS, especially the Forum on International Physics, 
took major action and wrote many letters protesting this
. As a result, the ACS backed down and reinstated 
the Iranians.  
 
The interesting thing is that shortly after this ev
ent, the University and College Union of the United 
Kingdom decided to institute a boycott against Israe
li academics. We took action against that as well. I 
took the opportunity to inform many colleagues and fri
ends I had in Iran and elsewhere in the Middle East 
of what was going on. I said if you have any comments or thoughts about this, why not write to the 
University and College Union and tell them what you 
think. I will read to yo
u two messages that came 
from friends in the Middle East. The first one w
as from Egypt and said, ﬁI regard the collective 
punishment of Israeli scientists to be unfair. In spite
 of the collective punishment practice by the Israeli 
government against Palestinians, sci
entists should not be punished just
 because of their nationality.ﬂ The 
second note was even more dramatic, from a very prom
inent Iranian scientist, president of the Iranian Physical Society and deputy minister of science in Ira
n, who said, ﬁLet me express my sincere opposition 
to the boycott of Israeli academics that is being c
onsidered by the University and College Union. As a 
scientist living in the Middle East, I appreciate the 
move of your organization to express its unhappiness 
about the restrictions being made by Israeli for
ces on Palestinian students and academics. However, the 
decision made by your organization is violating the sa
me principles that you are trying to defend. It is 
hard to accept that the Israeli academics are proponents of such restrictions.ﬂ  These examples show that 
as we engage in collaborations and communications 
with our colleagues abroad, we become aware of 
incidents like this (human rights violations, academic 
freedom violations), and we can take action using 
our connections abroad to influence it.  

 DR. GUSTAFSSON: I certainly agree. I think you will al
so agree that this experience shows that this 
kind of activity is necessary, but persistence is also ne
eded. In other words, a continuous effort must be 
made here. There is another point I also want to 
stress. We can hear other people claiming that this 
defense of universality is just in the scientific self-int
erest. I think that is not right, because we all believe that the efforts made would give more reward back to society.  
 DR. KAHN: It is not just about data. Data are the pr
ogeny of scientific activity, and it is everything that 
goes into that. Something that strikes me as obvious th
at has hardly been spoken about is the continuing 
divide between the natural sciences and engineering 
and the social sciences, which is as important for 
data and progress of sciences. That is one observation.
 The other one, which has not really come up in the 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PART FIVE: HOW TO IMPROVE DATA ACCESS AND USE                                                                                  
        145 
 discussions very much, is that when we talk about sci
entific collaboration in the global context, it tends to 
be North-South rather than South-South. It is a continuing tragedy and very easy to establish. You simply 

go to a Web of Science
94 and do your analysis and you will see. The point I am making is that the South 
tends to collaborate first with the North rather than w
ith the South. Changing that is certainly one of the 
most important challenges we have ahead of us.  

 
DR. INYANG:  Yes. I think this is one of the toughest
 things to change in Africa. This is precisely why I 
mentioned it in my presentation. There will not be m
ovement away from that circumstance and there will 
not be South-South collaboration unless there is a continental-level institution to promote and facilitate 
South-South in Africa. For example, if we have so
licitations that say we would like a university from 
South Africa to collaborate with a university in Senegal,
 it is very difficult to get that to happen, because 
there are many constraints like language, university systems, and so on. Also, most of the universities do 

not have the structure that is common in the United St
ates. This is a big issue, and the proposed African 
science foundation would help in this area. Moreover, 
most international agencies do not have a formal 
research solicitation program that is specifically
 targeting African scientists. UNESCO is trying. 
Sometimes they have an African-wide research solicita
tion, but that pales in comparison to the enormity 
of issues and problems that Africa needs to confront. 
The aid given by the European Union and the U.S. 
Agency for International Development and others should 
at least have considered the creation of such an 
entity, because unless there is an entity like that, mo
st of the people who have Ph.D.™s in Africa do not 
really have a place to go. Some of them migrate in
to government agencies, where the requirements that 
they use their intellect to do things are secondary to political patronage. 
 
PARTICIPANT: We just heard a series of approach
es from different sectors of the scientific community. 
What I would like everybody to comment on is whether 
they feel that the funding and the commitment of 
the people who could provide funding is there, 
or whether these are wonderful programs, wonderful 
approaches, and wonderful ideas, but we are so lacking in funding that progress is going to be 
significantly hindered.   

 
MR. SCHAFFER: Actually, I did not mention in the 
presentation that TWAS has been very fortunate, 
because it has had base funding provided by the Italian 
government with very little oversight of direction. 
Italy basically has given TWAS core funding sin
ce its inception and has allowed it the freedom to do 
what it thought needed to be done to accomplish or 
advance its goals. Being freed from looking for core 
funding has enabled TWAS to take risks, explore different avenues and diffe
rent opportunities knowing 
that its core funding and its core staff would be 
financially protected.  I think that has made a huge 
difference, and it is an example in a sense of 
North-South cooperation at a reasonable level of 
effectiveness. A major part of the reason, I think, h
as been the funding, and then the freedom to move on 
the part of the organization that has received the funding.    
 
DR. GRIFFIN: I can only speak from the experience 
of the digital libraries initiatives. We found that 
some of the most valuable long-term outcomes were
 those associated with process rather than simply 
individual basic research grants. For example, we
 fund working groups that develop positions on issues 
relevant to information management. I think that the 
next development that is going to have a significant 
effect on the way in which we think about scientif
ic endeavor are new document-publication models. 
When the publication model changes from papers to 
actively formatted documents, when we have links to 
datasets and other publications, when
 other people can use the same dataset and see if they can replicate 
our experiments, we are going to have an alt
ogether different perspective on how we do science 
collectively. 
 DR. INYANG: I think one of the things that can be do
ne is to create continental support systems, because 
                     94 Available at http://thomsonreuters.com/products_s
ervices/science/science_products/a-z/web_of_science/ 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146                                            
               THE CASE FOR 
INTERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
 while South Africa, Tunisia, Algeria, Egypt, and perhaps Nigeria can have the support systems to help 
themselves, there are many other countries that are 
just too poor to support themselves. They do not 
necessarily see investment in science as something important.  
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.147      APPENDIXES The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148                                           
             THE CASE FOR IN
TERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Appendix A  Meeting Agenda 
Board on International Scientific Organizations 
and the U.S. Committee on Data for Science and Technology  
Board on Research Data and Information  
National Academy of Sciences  
in consultation with the  Committee on Freedom and Responsibility in the Conduct of Science  
International Council for Science  Room 100  
National Academy of Sciences  
500 Fifth Street NW  
Washington, DC
  April 18Œ19, 2011
 Day One:  Session One: Setting the Stage  
Session Chair: Farouk El-Baz, Boston University
  8:45 
Welcoming remarks
   Charles Vest,  
      President, National Academy of Engineering 
9:00 Background and purpose of the  Farouk El-Baz, 
 symposium: A historical perspective Symposium co-chair 

9:20 Keynote presentation: Why is   Atta-ur-Rahman, 

 international scientific data sharing UNESCO Science Laureate 

 important? 
 10:00 
Coffee break 
  Session Two: Status of Access to Scientific Data  
Session Chair: Roberta Balstad
, Columbia University 
 10:30 Overview of scientific data policies Roberta Balstad, 
      Columbia University, United States 

 Examples of scientific data-sharing 

 policies in developing countries 

10:45 Implementing a research data access Michael Kahn, 
 policy in South Africa   CREST, University of Stellenbosch, South Africa 
11:05 Access to Research Data a
nd Scientific Patricia Muñoz,  
Information Generated with Public  CONICYT, Chile 

Funding in Chile 
     
11:25 The Management of Health a
nd   Leonard E. G. Mboera and 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A                                                                                                                     
                                  149 
 Biomedical Data in Tanzania: The  Benjamin Mayala, 
Need for a National Scientific Policy Nationa
l Institute for Medical
 Research, Tanzania 11:45 The data-sharing policy of the World Jack Hayes, 
 Meteorological Organization: The case World Meteorological Organization and NOAA,  
 for international sharing of scientific United States 

 data
 12:05 Moderated Panel Discussion  
(all morning speakers)
       Moderator: Farouk El-Baz, 

      Boston University 
12:30 
Lunch  Session Three: Compelling Benefits  
Session Chair: Barbara Andrews
, University of Chile 
 13:45 Examples of past successes 
  
 Developing the rice genome in China Huanming Yang, 

      Beijing Genomics Institute, China 

 Data-sharing in astronomy  ”eljko Ivezi
,       University of Washington 
 Sharing engineering data for failure Dan Cheney, 

 analysis in airplane crashes: Creation Federal Aviation Administration 

 of a Web-based knowledge system 

14:45 
Break  15:15 Examples where more data sharing  
 could make a big difference 

  
 Integrated disaster research: Issues Jane Rovins, 

 Around data    ICSU Integrated Research on Disaster Risk, China 
 Understanding Brazilian biodi
versity: Vanderlei Canhos, 
 Examples where more data-sharing Reference 
Center on Environmental Information, Brazil 
could make the difference      
 Social statistics as one of the  Victoria Bakhtina, 

 instruments of strategic management
 International Finance Corporation 
 of sustainable development processes:  
 Compelling examples 
 Remote sensing and In Situ  Curtis Woodcock, 

 measurements in the Global Earth Boston University 

 Observation System of Systems 

16:45 Moderated Panel Discussion  
(all 8 speakers)  17:30 
Adjourn  Day Two: Session Four: The Limits and Barriers to Data Sharing  
Session Chair: Roger Pfister
, Swiss Academy of Sciences and ICSU/CFRS 
 8:45 Introduction 

9:00 Consideration of barrier
s to data  Elaine Collier, 
 sharing      National Center for Research Resources, 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150                                           
             THE CASE FOR IN
TERNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
       National Institutes of Health 
9:20 Artificial barriers to da
ta sharing Œ  Donald Riley, 
 Technical aspects   University of Maryland, United States 
9:40 Scientific management 
and cultural David Carlson, 
 aspects      University of Colorado
1, United States 
10:00  Political and economical barriers to  Tilahun Yilma, 
data-sharing: The African perspective Univer
sity of California, Davis, United States 
10:20 Moderated Panel Discussion   
(all 4 speakers)      Moderator: Roger Pfister, 
Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences and ICSU/CFRS, 
Switzerland 
11:00 
Break  Session Five: How to Improve Data Access and Use  
Session Chair: John Rumble, Information International Associates 
  11:20 Government science policy 
makers™ Gretchen Kalonji, 
 and research funders™ challenges to  UNESCO,France 

 international data-sharing: The role of 
 UNESCO 
11:40 International scientific organizations: Bengt Gustafsson, 

 Views and examples   ICSU/CFRS, Sweden 

12:00 Improving data access and use for  Daniel Schaffer, 

 Sustainable development in the south TWAS, Italy 

12:20 Lunch 
 13:30 How to improve data access   John Rumble, 

 and use: An industry perspective IIA, United States 

13:50 Production and access to scientific Hilary Inyang
2,  Data in Africa: A framework for  African 
Continental University System Initiative,  
improving the contribution of research United States 
institutions 
14:10 The ICSU world data system  Yasuhiro Murayama,     

      World Data System/NICT, Japan 

14:30 Libraries and improving data access   Stephen Griffin, 

 and use in developing regions
  National Science Foundation 
14:50 Developing a policy framework to  Haswira Nor Mohamad Hashim, 
 open up the rights to access and re-use 
Queensland University of Technology, 
      Australia 

15:10 Moderated Panel Discussion  

15:55 
Concluding observations  Bengt Gustafsson, 
      ICSU/CFRS, Sweden 
16:00 
Adjourn                      1 Retired.
 2 Currently the Duke Energy Distinguished Professor of Envir
onmental Engineering and Science,
 at the University of North 
Carolina, Charlotte. Dr. Inyang is past president of 
the African Continental University System Initiative. 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 151   Appendix B  Biographies of Symposium Chairs and Presenters 
 Charles M. Vest
 is President of the National Academy of Engineering and President Emeritus of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Vest earn
ed a B.S. in mechanical engineering from West 
Virginia University in 1963, and M.S.E. and PhD de
grees in mechanical engineering from the University 
of Michigan in 1964 and 1967 respectively. He joined
 the faculty of the University of Michigan as an 
assistant professor in 1968 where he taught in the ar
eas of heat transfer, thermodynamics, and fluid 
mechanic, and conducted research in heat transfer 
and engineering applications of laser optics and 
holography. He and his graduate st
udents developed techniques for ma
king quantitative measurements of 
various properties and motions from holographic interf
erograms, especially the measurement of three-
dimensional temperature and density fields using computer tomography. He became an associate 
professor in 1972 and a full professor in 1977. 
In 1981 Dr. Vest turned much of his attention to acad
emic administration at the University of Michigan, 
serving as associate dean of engineering from 1981-86
, dean of engineering from 1986-1989, when he 
became provost and vice president for academic a
ffairs. In 1990 he became president of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and ser
ved in that position until December 2004. He then 
became professor and president emeritus. As president of MIT, he was active in science, technology, and 
innovation policy; building partners
hips among academia, government and 
industry; and championing the 
importance of open, global scientific communication, tr
avel, and sharing of intellectual resources. During his tenure, MIT launched its OpenCourseWare (OCW
) initiative; co-founded the Alliance for Global 
Sustainability; enhanced the racial, gender, and cultu
ral diversity of its students and faculty; established 
major new institutes in neuroscience and genomic 
medicine; and redeveloped much of its campus. 
He was a director of DuPont for 14 years and of IBM for 13 years; was vice chair of the U.S. Council on 
Competitiveness for eight years; and served on vari
ous federal committees and commissions, including 
the President™s Committee of Advisors on Science 
and Technology (PCAST) during the Clinton and Bush 
administrations, the Commission on the Intelligence Ca
pabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons 
of Mass Destruction, the Secretary of Education™s 
Commission on the Future of Higher Education, the 
Secretary of State™s Advisory Committee on Transf
ormational Diplomacy and the Rice-Chertoff Secure 
Borders and Open Doors Advisory Committee. He
 serves on the boards of several non-profit 
organizations and foundations devoted 
to education, science, and technology. In July 2007 he was elected 
to serve as president of the U.S. National Academy of Engineering (NAE) for six years. He has authored 
a book on holographic interferometry, and two books
 on higher education. He has received honorary 
doctoral degrees from fourteen universities, and was 
awarded the 2006 National Medal of Technology by 
President Bush. Barbara Andrews is Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology at the 
University of Chile in Santiago and a member of the Millennium Institute for Cell Dynamics and 

Biotechnology (ICDB). She has a BSc in Biochemistry
 and a PhD (Biochemical Engineering) from the 
University of London. Before joining the Departme
nt in Santiago 14 years ago, Barbara worked at 
Columbia University in New York and the University 
of Reading in the UK. Her main research interests 
include metabolic engineering, prot
ein separations and purification, cold-adapted enzymes. She is a 
member of the ICSU Strategic Coordinating Committee on Data and Information (SCCID). 
Victoria Bakhtina has over 10 years of experience devising portfolio and risk solutions and managing 
projects requiring collaboration across sectors, regions, and disciplines. She manages a corporate 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.152                                                      THE CASE FOR INTE
RNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Portfolio Screening initiative, addr
essing integrity of information for 
key portfolio areas, and leads an innovative Portfolio Management e-learning developmen
t. In addition, Dr. Bakhtina has worked in the 
areas of portfolio performance analysis (including applications to a corporate incentive program), credit 
research and rating performance, and loan recovery anal
ysis. She has also built models for client financial 
reporting and compliance analysis. During the last five y
ears, her scientific interests have been related to 
Risk Management, Sustainable Development, Knowledge Management, Innovation, and Leadership.  
Dr. Bakhtina holds the equivalent of a Bachelors 
and Masters in Applied Mathematics and Composite 
Materials Mechanics from Lomonosov Moscow State University, a Ph.D. in Applied Mathematical 
Education from Moscow State Pedagogical Univ
ersity, a MBA in Business and Finance from 
Waynesburg University, and a certificate in Cred
it Risk Modeling from Stanford University. Ms. 
Bakhtina is an active member of CODATA Germany,
 and has a series of publications in the area of 
Sustainability and Developmental Risks. 
 
Roberta Balstad is Co-chair of the Board on Research Data
 and Information of the National Research 
Council. She is also chair of the US National Committee on Scientific Data and Information (CODATA), 

a Trustee of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), and a member of the 
Governing Board of the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Simulation. She is Editor-in-Chief of 
Weather, Climate, and Society, a journal of the Amer
ican Meteorological Society, and a Special Research 
Scientist at Columbia University™s Center for R
esearch on Environmental Decisions. She has also served 
as Director of CIESIN (Center for International Earth Science Information Network), Columbia 
University, and as President/CEO of the or
ganization before it moved to Columbia.  
Dr. Balstad chaired the international committee that pr
epared a strategic plan on data and information for 
the International Council of Science (ICSU) and serves on that organization™s Committee on Science and 
Policy Research (CSPR). Her publications focus on the ro
le of the social sciences in understanding global 

environmental change, data policy and scientific r
esearch, information technol
ogy in science, and the 
social applications of remote sensing data. She was 
awarded the Ph.D. from the University of Minnesota 
in 1974. Dr. Balstad was previously the Director of
 the Division of Social and Economic Sciences at the 
National Science Foundation and the founding Executive 
Director of the Consortium of Social Science 

Associations (COSSA). Vanderlei Canhos
 is the president director of the Refe
rence Center on Environmental Information 
(CRIA) a non-governmental not-for-profit organization 
devoted to making biodiversity data freely and 

openly available via the Internet. Dr. Canhos has a B.S and a M.s. from the State University of Campinas 

(UNICAMP) and a Ph.D. degree from Oregon State Univer
sity (OSU). His early scientific research was 
focused on microbial systematics at the State Univer
sity of Campinas (UNICAMP
). In the 1990´s his 
work was focused on microbial collection management at the Tropical Culture Collection(CCT), and 

biodiversity databases at the Tropical Database(BDT).  
 During the last 10 years his work on the development 
of strategies and policies for the consolidation of 
biological collections and biodiversity databases in Brazil and Latin America. He contributed to the 

design and implementation of the In
ter-American Biodiversity Informa
tion Network (IABIN), the Virtual Institute of Biodiversity (Biota-Fapesp Program), a
nd in the implementation of
 the Brazilian Network of Biological Resource Centers. As a consultant to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development (OECD) he contributed to the deve
lopment of the Best Practices Guidelines for the 
Operation and Management of Biological Resource
s Centers. He was the project leader of the 

speciesLink network (http://splink.cria.org.br/) and openModeler (http:// openmodeller.sourceforge.net/) a 

computational environment for ecological niche mode
ling. speciesLink currently integrates more than 4 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  B                                                                                                                    
                                       153 
  million records from biological collections (botanical a
nd zoological specimens and microbial strain data 
of samples collected in Brazil).  
His current work includes the assessment of initiatives worldwide to
 improve data release and analysis. 
He is a member of the Board of Directors of Species2000 (Catalogue of Life), the Board of Directors of 
ETI Bioinformatics (University of Amsterdam) and 
of the Advisory Board of Global Research Data 
Infrastructures (GRDI 2020). David Carlson has served as Director of the Atmospheric Technology Division of the US National 
Centre for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Colorado fo
r nine years between 1994-2003. Prior to that he 
was for three years the Director of the office c
oordinating the 'Tropical Ocean Global Atmosphere 
Coupled Ocean - Atmosphere Response Experiment
' (TOGA COARE) leading oceanic and atmospheric 
scientists from twelve nations in a large ICSU/WMO 
climate research programme. He was appointed to 
the post of Director of the International Polar Y
ear 2007-2008 International Programme Office (IPO) in 
June 2006. David is originally from the mid west 
of the United States and holds a PhD in Oceanography 
from the University of Maine. 
Daniel I. Cheney is Manager of Safety Programs for th
e U.S. Federal Aviation Administration™s 
Transport Airplane Directorate. Mr. Cheney has b
een involved in nearly all aspects of certification 
activities of Boeing commercial airplanes from the B
707, through current activities of the B787 program. 
He has also been involved in supporting numerous 
accident and incident investigations, and their 
resolution. It has been through his involvement in accid
ent investigation, and the realization that costly 
lessons from major accidents were being lost through 
the passage of time, that led Mr. Cheney to initiate 
FAA™s development of the web-based ﬁLessons Lear
ned from Transport Airpla
ne Accidentsﬂ knowledge information system. This accident library, now cont
aining 57 accident modules, is available to the public 
on the FAA™s main web site at 
http://accidents-ll.faa.gov/. Farouk El-Baz is Research Professor and Director of the Center for Remote Sensing at Boston 
University. He participated in NASA™s Apollo progr
am (1967-72) as secretary of the lunar landing site 
selection committee, and chairman of astronaut traini
ng in visual observations and photography. In 1973-
82 he established and directed the Center for Eart
h and Planetary Studies at the National Air and Space 
Museum of the Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC 
and served as Principal Investigator of the Earth 
Observations and Photography Experiment on the Apollo-Soyuz mission of 1975. 
He became Vice President for Science and Technology 
at Itek Optical Systems in 1982, before joining 
Boston University in 1986. He pioneered the appli
cations of space photography to desert studies, with 
emphasis on groundwater concentration. He served in 
1978-1981 as science adviser to Anwar Sadat, the 
late President of Egypt. His honors include NASA™s A
pollo Achievement Award, the Nevada Medal, and 
the Egyptian Order of Merit - First Class. He serve
d for six years as chair of the U.S National Committee 
for the International Union of Geological Sciences of the National Academies, and is a member of the 
U.S. National Academy of Engineering. 
Stephen M. Griffin is a Program Director in the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems at the 
National Science Foundation (NSF). For the period 1994-
2004, Mr. Griffin managed the Special Projects 
Program that included the Interagency Digital Librar
ies Initiatives and the International Digital Libraries 
Collaborative Research and Applications Testbeds 
program. He has been active in working groups for 
Federal high performance computing and communicati
ons programs, and serves on numerous domestic 
and international advisory committees related to digi
tal libraries and advanced computing and networking 
infrastructure.  In 2004-2005 he was on special assignmen
t to the Library of Congress, Office of Strategic 
Initiatives, to assist with the National Digital Informat
ion and Infrastructure Preservation Program. He is 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154                                          
            THE CASE FOR INTE
RNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  currently again on assignment to the Library of Congress as a Visiting Scientist and advisor to the 
Associate Librarian for Strategic Initiatives and 
Senior Staff. His research interests include interdisciplinary scholarly communication, cultural he
ritage informatics and data-intensive scholarship. 
Bengt Gustafsson
 is a Swedish astronomer and professor in theoretical astrophysics with stellar physics 
as is main are of research at Uppsala University. He
 is known for his work in uniting cosmic science with 
culture and theology, and questioning space science from
 a humanistic point of view. In 2002, Bengt was 
awarded the grand prize of the Royal Institute of T
echnology, and has also been awarded the grand prize 
of Längmanska kulturfonden. At one point during his career, he was a counselor working for the 

government of Sweden. He is a member of the Ro
yal Swedish Academy of Sciences and the Norwegian 
Academy of Science and Letters. 
 
Haswira Nor Mohamad Hashim
 is a PhD Candidate at the Queensland University of Technology 
(QUT) Faculty of Law, Brisbane, Australia. He holds a Bachelor and a Masters of Law degrees and is a 

legal academic at MARA University of Technology, 
Shah Alam, in his native country, Malaysia. Since 
2010, Haswira has worked on his doctoral research 
project under the supervision of Professors Anne 
Fitzgerald and Brian Fitzgerald at QUT. His doc
toral research is examining the policy framework 
supporting open access to and reuse of publicly funded research data and 
information in Malaysian public 
universities. 
 John L. "Jack" Hayes
 is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Assistant 
Administrator for Weather Services and National Weat
her Service (NWS) Director. In this role, Dr. 
Hayes is responsible for an integrated weather ser
vices program, supporting the delivery of a variety of 
weather, water, and climate services to government
, industry, and the general public, including the 
preparation and delivery of weather 
warnings and predictions, and the 
exchange of data products and 
forecasts with international organizations. 
  Dr. Hayes returned to the NWS in 2007 after ser
ving as the director of the World Weather Watch 
Department at the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), a specialized agency of the United 

Nations located in Geneva, Switzerland. In that position, he was responsible for global weather observing, 
weather data exchange telecommunications, and w
eather data processing and forecasting systems.  
 Before joining the WMO, Dr. Hayes served in sev
eral senior executive positions at NOAA. As the 
Deputy Assistant Administrator for NOAA Research, he 
was responsible for the management of research 
programs. As Deputy Assistant Administrator of the National Ocean Service (NOS), he was the chief 

operating officer dealing with a multitude of ocean a
nd coastal challenges, including the NOS response to 
the Hurricane Katrina disaster in August 2005. As Dir
ector of the Office of Science and Technology for 
the NWS, Dr. Hayes had oversight of the infusion 
of new science and technology essential to weather 
service operations.  

 
Dr. Hayes was also an executive in
 the private sector and the military. He was general manager of the 
Automated Weather Interactive Processing System (AWIPS) program at Litton-PRC from 1998 through 
2000. AWIPS is the backbone computer and tel
ecommunications system used by weather service 
forecasters at over 150 locations across the U.S. From
 1970 through 1998, Dr. Hayes spent a career in the 
United States Air Force. He held a variety of positions, culminating his career as the Commander of the 
Air Force Weather Agency in the rank of Colonel.  

 
Dr. Hayes received both his Ph.D. and Master of 
Science degrees in meteorology from the Naval Post 
Graduate School in Monterey, California. A Fellow 
in the American Meteorological Society, he also 
graduated from Bowling Green State University, 
with a bachelor's degree in mathematics. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  B                                                                                                                    
                                       155 
  Hilary Inyang is currently the Duke Energy Distinguished Professor of Environmental Engineering and 
Science, and Professor of Earth Science at the Univ
ersity of North Carolina, Charlotte, USA, while 
serving also as the Pro-term Chancellor and Board Ch
air of African Continental University Systems 
(ACUS) Initiative, Abuja, Nigeria. He is a former President of the African University of Science and 
Technology, Abuja, and Founding 
Director (2002Œ2009) of the Global Institute for Energy and 
Environmental Systems (GIEES) at the University 
of North Carolina-Charlotte. He is currently the President of the International Society for Enviro
nmental Geotechnology (ISEG) and the Global Alliance 
for Disaster Reduction (GADR). In 2008, he was selected as a Technical Judge of the US Nuclear 

Regulatory Commission. From 1997 to 2001, he was the Chair of the Environmental Engineering 
Committee of the United States Environmental Protecti
on Agency™s Science Advisory Board, and also 
served on the Effluent Guidelines Committee of the United States National Council for Environmental 

Policy and Technology. From 1995 to 2000, he 
was the DuPont Young Professor/University 
Distinguished Professor at the University of Massachusetts, where he helped establish the university 
System™s Graduate School of Marine Science and 
Technology, while serving as the Founding Director of 
the Lowell-based Center for Environmental Engineer
ing, Science and Technology. He has been an 
Honorary Professor/Concurrent Professor (China University of Mining and Technology, and Nanjing 
University) since 2004 and 1999, respectively. 

  
He has authored/co-authored more than 220 research 
articles, book chapters, and federal design manuals 
and the textbook, Geoenvironmental Engineering: pr
inciples and applications, published by Marcel 
Dekker (ISBN: 0-8247-0045-7). He is the Editor-in-Chief 
of the Journal of Energy Engineering of the 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), and ha
s been associate editor/editorial board member of 27 
refereed international journals and contributing 
editor of three books, including the United Nations 
Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems (Environmen
tal Monitoring Section). Professor Inyang has served 
on more than 100 technical and policy panels of gove
rnments and professional societies, and has given more than 120 invited speeches and presentations on 
a variety of technical and policy issues at many 
institutions and agencies in several countries, Prof
essor Inyang holds a Ph.D. with a double major in 
Geotechnical Engineering and Materials, and a minor
 in Mineral Resources from Iowa State University, 
Ames, Iowa, USA. Prof. Inyang was the first A
frican-American to be endowed as a distinguished 
professor in environmental engineering in any univer
sity in the United States, and the first African immigrant to chair a U.S Congress-chattered permanen
t science committee of any U.S federal agency He 
has received many professional prizes and awards. 

 
”eljko Ivezi
 is a professor in the Astronomy Department at
 the University of Washington. He holds a 
PhD in physics from the University of Kentucky
, and B.Sc. degrees in physics and mechanical 
engineering from the University of Zagreb, Croatia. Hi
s research interests are in detection, analysis, and 
interpretation of electromagnetic radiation from astro
nomical objects, with emphasis on massive data sets 
and statistical analysis. He has co-authored over 25
0 refereed publications, with a cumulative citation 
count of over 40,000. He is one of the builders of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (
www.sdss.org), and serves as the Project Scientist for th
e Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (
www.lsst.org
).   Michael Kahn has contributed to science, education and innovation policy for over thirty years  in 
strategy, policy, measurement, monitoring and evaluati
on of these fields. He has worked as advisor to the 
Ministers of Education, and Science and Technology, as Chief Director in the Gauteng Provincial 

Government, as education professor in Botswana and 
South Africa, as Executive Director in the Human 
Sciences Research Council, and as a consultant to many multilateral organizations. He presently serves as 
Research Fellow with the National Research Founda
tion, Honorary Research Fellow in the Centre for 
Research on Science and Technology of the University of Stellenbosch, and is Professor Extraordinaire of the Institute for Economic Research on Innovation of
 Tshwane University of Technology. Over 2010/11 
he served as a member of the Ministerial Committee t
asked to review South Africa's innovation system. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.156                                          
            THE CASE FOR INTE
RNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  Gretchen Kalonji
 is the Assistant Director-General fo
r Natural Sciences at the United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.  
Throughout her career, she has developed strong interna
tional links in science, in particular in China, 
India and the Pacific Region. She is strongly committ
ed to promoting science in Africa and has worked 
with several African universities. Her work in edu
cational transformation has taken her to university 
positions in France, Japan and China. In 2006, she 
was appointed a distinguished honorary professor at 
Sichuan University, Chengdu, and a visiti
ng professor at Beijing's Qinghua University.  
Prior to 2005, she was the first women to hold an 
endowed chair Œ the Kyocera Professor of Materials 
Science and Engineering at the University of W
ashington (UW) Seattle, where she developed creative 
approaches to internationalization and to the transf
ormation of science and engineering education. At UW, she led a campus-wide effort to integrate co
llaborative international research activities into the 
academic curriculum, across disciplines and from freshme
n to doctoral level. This initiative, entitled UW Worldwide has been honored with multiple grants a
nd awards, both in the United States and in partner 
regions.  Prior to 1990, when she joined the University of Washington, she served as Assistant and Associate 
Professor in the Department of Material Science 
and Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT).  
Her work, both in materials science and in educationa
l transformation, has been recognized by numerous 
awards and honors, including: the Presidential Young 
Investigator Award; the George E. Westinghouse 
Award from the American Society for Engineeri
ng Education; the Leadership Award from the 
International Network for Engineering Education 
and Research; and the National Science Foundation™s 
Director™s Award for Distinguished Teaching Scholar
s, the highest honor offered by the NSF. She has 
held visiting faculty appointments at numerous unive
rsities and institutes around the world, including the 
Max Planck Institute (Germany), the University of
 Paris (France), Tohoku University (Japan), and 
Sichuan University and Tsinghua University (China
). She serves on numerous national and international 
advisory boards and committees, particularly for proj
ects and organizations focusing on innovations in 
education, equity and access in higher education, and 
international science and engineering. She has been 
called upon to give more than 115 invited 
lectures in institutions around the world. 
 Benjamin K. Mayala 
attended the University of Dar es Sa
laam, Tanzania until 2002, obtaining a 
Bachelor of Science in Geomatics. He was employ
ed by the National Institu
te for Medical Research (NIMR) in 2003 as a research scientist with expertise 
in health Geographic Information System (GIS). 
From 2005 to 2007, he pursued a Master of Science in
 GeoInformatics at the International Institute for 
GeoInformation Science and Earth Observation (ITC), Netherland.  
 
Mr. Mayala has applied his GIS expertise by mapping 
the geographical locations of health facilities in Tanzania. He has worked on various health mapping a
nd infectious diseases surve
illance. He has worked 
with NGOs, government institutions and international 
organizations on various projects and research that 
utilise GIS. For the past 3 years, he was a mentor a
nd lecturer on approaches in applying GIS in health 
research for Masters Studies in Field Epidemiology 
and Laboratory Technician at Muhimbili University 
of Health and Allied Science in Tanzania.   He is currently pursuing his Ph.D. at the University
 of Notre Dame in the Department of Biological 
Sciences. His project is focusing on the impact of 
climate on Change on Malaria in Tanzania, whereby he 
is going to use various algorithms to model the distribu
tion of malaria in relation to climate variable. He 
is expecting to develop models th
at could be used as an early warning system for diseases prediction. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  B                                                                                                                    
                                       157 
  Leonard Mboera works with the National Institute for Medical Research in Tanzania Chief Research 
Scientist and Director of Information Technology 
and Communication. He was born in November 21, 
1957. He holds a Bachelor of Veterinary Medicine of
 the Sokoine University of Agriculture (1985), MSc 
of Applied Entomology (Veterinary/Medical Entomology) of the University of London in UK and a 
Diploma of Imperial College, London, UK (1991). He obtained his PhD (Chemical Ecology) from the 

Wageningen University and Research Ce
ntre in the Netherlands in 1999.  
 
He has worked as a Veterinary Surgeon at the Mini
stry of Agriculture, Zonal Research and Training 
Centre (1985-1992) before joining the National Ins
titute for Medical Research in October 1992. In October 2002 he was appointed Director of 
Information Technology and Communication.  
 
His scientific contributions include: development a
nd improvement of mosquito sampling techniques for 
host seeking and oviposition s
ite selections; mosquito human attr
actants and oviposition attractants; 
research on malaria epidemics and development of mala
ria early warning systems; ecohealth and linkages 
between agriculture and malaria; research on know
ledge systems; and infectious disease surveillance 
systems.  

 
Dr. Mboera is the Editor of Tanzania Journal of Hea
lth Research (2002- to-date); Associate Editor, East 
African Journal of Public Health (2004-to date);
 Member, Steering Committee, Global Outbreak Alert 
and Response Network (2003-2009); Coordinator, East African Integrated Disease Surveillance (2002-
2004); and Secretary General, East African Public Health
 Association (2003- to-date). He is an author of 
one book, two book chapters, 72 peer reviewed Jour
nal publications and 26 scientific technical reports. 
 Patricia Muñoz has a Bachelor of Information Sciences, and a Master™s Degree in Digital 
Documentation at the Universidad Pompeu Fabra, Spain.
 She is the Director of the Scientific Information 
Programme at the National Commission of Scientific
 and Technological Research (CONICYT). She has 
specialized in Scientific and Technological Info
rmation Management, acting as the representative of 
Chile in various international experts committees, participating in projects of national and international 
scope focused on strengthening and guaranteeing accessibility and visibility of scientific and 
technological knowledge. She has been the representativ
e of Chile in ASFA (Aquatics Science Fisheries 
Abstracts) BOARD), a database management by FAO.
 Since 2004, she has been a member of the Group 
of Experts in Marine Information Management
 (GEMIN), of UNESCO™s International Oceans 
Commission. 

 
She is currently the Director of the Scientific Information Programme at CONICYT, where she develops 
and leads projects related to the accessibility and visibility of projects and results of funding instruments 
managed by CONICYT™s Programmes through the im
plementation of digital repositories with the 
purpose of guaranteeing accessibility and preservation of
 digital documents, and also implementing a 
portal with indicators of scientific productivity. 
 Yasuhiro Murayama
 is a director of Integrated Science Da
ta System Research Laboratory of National 
Institute of Information and Communications Technology (NICT), Japan. He is in charge of WDS-IPO 
business in NICT and plays a role of liaison with
 ICSU and WDS-science committee. From 1999-2006 he 
had been a leader of Japan group of US-Japan 
joint program of Arctic middle-upper atmosphere 
observations in Alaska, and then he was appointed as 
a group leader of NICT's whole atmospheric remote 
sensing group in 2008-2011. He was awarded by Japan's 
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science 
and Technology in 2007, for Internet use of high-quality Auroral image observation and live image 
distribution. Dr. Murayama received his Ph.D. from 
Kyoto University studying atmospheric dynamics 
using remote-sensing and sounding rocket techniques. 
 Roger Pfister 
is Head of International Cooperation at the 
Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences, the 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158                                          
            THE CASE FOR INTE
RNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  umbrella organization of the four Swiss academies. With an office at the Swiss Academy of Sciences 
(SCNAT), a member of this umbrella organization and 
the International Council for Science (ICSU), he is 
also the Executive Secretary for the ICSU Committee on Freedom and Responsibility in the conduct of 
Science (CFRS). By formation, he is a political scientist and Internatio
nal Relations scholar. He did his graduate studies in 
contemporary history, with a focus on Africa, at the Un
iversity of Berne, Switzerland, and at the Centre 
of West African Studies (CWAS), University of Birm
ingham, UK. He began his PhD at the Centre for 
International Studies (CIS) in Zurich, Switzerland, obtaining his degree from Rhodes University in 

Grahamstown, South Africa. In his doctoral thesis,
 he researched South Africa™s apartheid foreign 
relations with sub-Saharan African states.  
Following his studies, he was engaged in a network at the ETH Zurich that promoted the transfer of 

know-how to developing countries. Subsequently, in 
Fribourg, Switzerland, he directed the university™s 
Research Promotion Service. In that capacity, he w
as also involved in setting up social sciences research 
programs in the Western Balkans and in the South Caucasus. 
 
He has widely published on South Africa™s post-Aparth
eid foreign policy, the diplomacy in exile of the 
African National Congress (ANC), Africa™s intern
ational relations, and on the relevance of new 
information technologies for Africa. 
 Atta-ur-Rahman
 is the first scientist from the Muslim world to have won the prestigious UNESCO 
Science Prize (1999) in the 35 year old history of the Prize. He was elected as Fellow of Royal Society 

(London) in July 2006 thereby becoming the one of the 4 scientists from the Muslim world to have ever 

won this honor conferred by the prestigious 360 year old scientific Society
. He has been conferred honorary doctorate degrees by many universities including the degree of Doctor of Science (Sc.D.) by the 
Cambridge University (UK) (1987) and an honorary 
degree of Doctor of Education by Coventry 
University UK in November 2007, an honorary D.Sc. degree by Bradford University in 2010, and an 

honorary Ph.D. by Asian Institute of Technology in 2
010. He was elected Honorary Life Fellow of Kings 
College, Cambridge University, UK in 2007. He was 
conferred the TWAS Prize for Institution Building 
in Durban, South Africa in October 2009 in recognition of his contributions for bringing about 
revolutionary changes in the higher education sector in Pakistan.  
 
He is President of Network of Academies of Sc
iences of Islamic Countries (NASIC) and the Vice-
President (Central & South Asia) of the Academy of Sciences for the Developing World (TWAS) 

Council, and Foreign Fellow of Korean Academy of 
Sciences. He was the President of the Pakistan 
Academy of Sciences (2003-2006), and again elected 
the President of the Academy from 1st January 
2011. He was the Federal Minister for Science and 
Technology (2000 to 2002), Federal Minister of 
Education (2002), and Chairman of the Higher Edu
cation Commission with the status of a Federal 
Minister from 2002-2008. Successive Governments of 
Pakistan have conferred four civil awards, including Tamgha-i-Imtiaz (1983), Sitara-i-Imtiaz (
1991), Hilal-i-Imtiaz (1998), and the highest national 
civil award Nis-han-i-Imtiaz (2002), on him. The Aust
rian government also honored him with its high 
civil award (Grosse Goldene Ehrenzeischen am 
Bande" (2007) in recognition of his eminent 
contributions.  

 He is presently the Coordinator General of COM
STECH, an OIC Ministerial Committee comprising the 
57 Ministers of Science & Technology from 57 OIC member countries. He is also the Patron of 
International Centre of Chemical and Biological 
Sciences (which comprises a number of institutes, 
including the Husein Ebrahim Jamal 
Research Institute of Chemistry 
and the Dr. Panjwani Center of 
Molecular Medicine and Drug Development) at Karachi University. 
 The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  B                                                                                                                    
                                       159 
  He obtained his Ph.D. in organic chemistry fro
m Cambridge University (1968). He has over 843 
publications in several fields of organic chemistr
y including 663 research publications, 18 patents, 103 
books and 59 chapters in books published by major 
U.S. and European presses. Seventy four students 
have completed their Ph.D. degrees under his supervision.  
Donald R. Riley is Professor of Information Systems, Robert
 H. Smith School of Business, and Affiliate 
Professor of Mechanical Engineering, at the Univers
ity of Maryland, College Park. He also serves as IT 
Fellow at the Southeastern Universities Research Association (SURA) in Washington, D.C. He is 
founding chair of the Board of Directors of the In
ternet Educational Equal 
Access Foundation (IEEAF Œ 
http://www.ieeaf.org/), and serves on the board of National LambdaRail (NLR), Inc. Dr. Riley is co-
founder and co-chair of the annual Chinese Americ
an Network Symposium and was recognized in 2000 
by the Chinese Academy of Sciences as ﬁSenior T
echnical Advisor to China Science and Technology 
Network.ﬂ 
 
Dr. Riley was one of the founding members of the na
tional Internet2 initiative; founded the Mid-Atlantic 
Crossroads (MAX) regional networking consortium, one of the la
rgest Internet2 regional gigapops, 
hosting the NGIX-DC (Next Generation Internet Exch
ange) for the federal agency NGI R&D networks. 
He served as inaugural chair of the EDUCAUSE Board 
of Trustees and was one of the founders of the 
EDUCAUSE National Learning Infrastructure Initiative.  

 From 1998 to 2003, Dr. Riley served as Vice President and CIO at the University of Maryland; from 1992 
to 1998, he served in a similar capacity, Associate Vice President and CIO, at the University of 

Minnesota, where he also was a Professor of Mechanical Engineering from 1976 to 1998. Dr. Riley 

graduated from the Purdue University School of Mechanical Engineering with a B.S in 1969, an M.S. in 

1970, and a Ph.D. in 1976. 

 Jane E. Rovins
 is an Executive Director for the Integrated Research on Disaster Risk Programme and 
International Programme Office. She has worked as 
a consultant promoting risk reduction, mitigation 
planning and providing emergency 
management training throughout Asia, USA, Latin America and 
Africa; was a Professor for American Military Univer
sity in the Emergency and Disaster Management 
Department; and a Disaster Assistance Employee with 
the U.S. Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) for numerous disasters. Her specialties ar
e disaster risk reduction, programme management, 
planning, organizational deve
lopment, and education. 
  
She is a Certified Emergency Manager (CEM) a
nd Florida Professional Emergency Manager (FPEM). 
Dr. Rovins is Scholarship Commission Chairman
 and Oceania/Asia CEM Commission Chair for the 
International Association of Emer
gency Managers (IAEM) and she is 
a Past-President of the Natural 
Hazard Mitigation Association and a member of 
the Board of Directors. She holds a Ph.D. in 
International Development from Tulane
 University Law School and is a graduate of Tulane University 
School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine w
ith a Master's degree in International Health and 
Complex Emergencies. 

 John Rumble has over 30 years of experience managing scien
tific data organizations. He had nearly a 
quarter of a century of service with the National In
stitute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST) and its Standard Reference Data Program. From 2004 to
 2001, He was senior ex
ecutive for Information 
International Associates (Oak Ridge TN) and in 201
1 founded R&R Data Services
 (Gaithersburg MD).  Rumble™s expertise in scientific data management and scientific informatics, as well as his broad 

scientific background, has expanded both company's 
breadth of experience and knowledge in managing 
scientific and technical information.   
At NIST, Rumble led development of scientific a
nd technical databases. Under his leadership, NIST 
produced and sold more than 70 PC databases of scientif
ic information, generatin
g millions of dollars of 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160                                          
            THE CASE FOR INTE
RNATIONAL SHARING OF SCIENTIFIC DATA 
  annual revenue. Dr. Rumble led NIST into the Intern
et and Web eras with the release of over 25 online data systems in virtually every area of science and e
ngineering. When he left NIST, Rumble had oversight 
of direct customer service throughout the world 
as Chief of the NIST Measurement Services Division. The Division provides fee-based services to make inst
ruments and measurements directly traceable to the 
fundamental units. It also provides critically evaluated databases in many areas of science and technology.  

During his time at NIST, he also worked closely 
with industry on datab
ase standards, including an 
international standard for industria
l data exchange (ISO 10303). In 1998, he was elected President of the 
CODATA, the ICSU Committee on Data for Science and 
Technology), which is the leading international 
group for scientific and technical data.  
 In addition to his service to CODATA, Dr. Rumble is
 a Fellow of the ASTM International, a Fellow of ASM International, a foreign member of the Russian
 Federation Academy of Metrology, a Fellow of the 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistr
y, a Fellow of the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science, and recipient of the U.S.
 Department of Commerce Silver Medal. In 1993Œ94, 
Rumble was a Department of Commerce Fellow worki
ng in the Office of Science and Technology Policy 
in the Executive Office of the President. In 2006, Dr. Rumble was awarded the CODATA Prize for his 
accomplishments. He has written and lectured extensively on scientific data management. Dr. Rumble 

holds a Ph.D. in chemical physics from Indiana University. 

 Daniel Schaffer is a senior communications specialist 
with TWAS, the academy of sciences for the 
developing world, in Trieste, Italy, a UNESCO-a
ffiliated organization dedicated to building scientific 
capacity in the developing world. He has written on 
science and technology issues both in the developed 
and developing world for more than 20 years. Ea
rlier in his career, he served as director of 
communications at the University of Tennessee's 
Energy, Environment and Resources Center and an 
editor and speechwriter for the Tennessee Valley 
Authority (TVA) in the United States.  
 He has published books with Harvard University Press, Johns Hopkins University Press and World Scientific, and has produced educational progra
mmes for WCBS-TV in New York City and award-
winning documentaries aired on public television sta
tions in the United States. He was the founding 
editor and editor-in-chief of Forum, a science policy journal publishe
d by the University of Tennessee, 
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and Oak Ridge Nati
onal Laboratory (ORNL). He holds a Ph.D. from 
Rutgers University, USA, where he studied 
issues related to urban and suburban growth. 
 
Curtis E. Woodcock
 is a Professor in the Department of
 Geography and Environment at Boston 
University. His research specializations include remo
te sensing, particularly of land cover and land use 
change. He currently serves as the Team Leader of
 the USGS/NASA Landsat Science Team; Co-chairs 
the Land Cover Characteristics Implementation Team for GOFC-GOLD (Global Observations of Forests 
and Land Cover Dynamics); is a member of NASA™
s Land Cover and Land Use Change Science Team.  
Huanming Yang co-founded BGI (formerly Beijing Genomics In
stitute) in 1999 and is currently its 
President and Professor. He and his collaborators have made a significant contribution to the Human 
Genome Project, the HapMap Project, and the 10
00 Genomes Project, as well as to sequencing and 
analyzing genomes of the first Asian individual, ri
ce, chicken, silkworm, giant panda, ant, cucumber, 
maize, soybean, and many microorganisms. Dr. Yang
 has received many awards and honors, including 
Research Leader of the Year by Scientific American in 2002 and Award in Biology by the Third World 

Academy of Sciences (TWAS) in 2006. He was el
ected as a Foreign Member of EMBO in 2006, an 
Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in
 2007, a Fellow of TWAS in 2008, and a Foreign 
Fellow of Indian National Science Academy in 2009. 
 
Tilahun Yilma is the Director and Distinguished Professor of Virology at the International Laboratory of 
Molecular Biology (ILMB) at UC Davis. He received all his undergraduate, 
veterinary school, and 
The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX  B                                                                                                                    
                                       161 
  graduate degrees at UC Davis. Dr. Yilma has made ma
jor contributions in developing safe and efficacious viral vaccines for both animals and humans. He is noted
 for developing what the journal Nature described as one of the two outstanding vaccinia virus reco
mbinant vaccines (rinderpest) in the world.  
 Dr. Yilma has received many honors including the Ci
ba-Geigy award (highest international award in 
animal science), the UC Davis Faculty Research 
Award (highest research award), and UC Davis 
Distinguished Public Service Award (highest service 
award). Dr. Yilma is a member of the US National 
Academy of Sciences and a Fellow of the American Academy of Microbiology. Dr. Yilma has served on 

the Council of the NIH-NCRR, NSF Advisory Committ
ee for the Office of International Science and Engineering, and currently is a Member of the Scie
ntific Advisory Board for Center for Bio-Security 
Science, Los Alamos National Lab. Dr. Yilma has work
ed with a number of International Organizations 
including the WHO, FAO, OIE, AU, and IAEA. He is
 a member of the Board of Trustees, Science for 
Peace, Fondazione Umberto Veronesi, Milan, Italy. 

  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162   Appendix C CFRS Advisory Note
1  International Symposium ﬁThe Case for Intern
ational Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus 
on Developing Countries"  Researchers in developing countries, in particul
ar, lack the norms and traditions of more open 
data sharing for collaborative research and for the development of common research resources 
for the benefit of the entire research communit
y. This international symposium was designed to 
help address these and related issues, and to improve the access to a
nd use of publicly funded scientific data.  
 Synopsis Scientific research and problem solving are 
increasingly dependent for successful outcomes on 
access to diverse sources of data generated by 
the public and academic research community. 
Global issues, such as disaster mitigation 
and response, international environmental 
management, epidemiology of infectious diseases
, and various types of sustainable development 
concerns, require access to reliable data from many, if not all, 
countries. Digital networks now 
provide a near-universal infrastructure for sharing much of this factual information on a timely, 
comprehensive, and low-cost basis. There also 
are many compelling examples
 of data sharing in different areas that have yielded great benefits to the world community, although many more 
could be similarly facilitated.  
Moreover, many OECD countries and some em
erging economies already have implemented 
national policies and programs for public data 
management and access, while others are in the 
process of developing them. Neve
rtheless, a large number of deve
loping countries do not have formal mechanisms in place. 
 
At the same time, there are various specific barrier
s to the access and sharing of scientific data collected by governments or by researchers us
ing public funding. Such obstacles include scientific and technical; institutional and management; econom
ic and financial; legal and policy; 
and normative and socio-cultural aspects. Some of
 these barriers are possible to diminish or 
remove, whereas others seek to balance competing values that impose legitimate limitations on 

openness. Despite such challenges, however, there could be much greater value and benefits to research and society, particularly for economic a
nd social development, from the broader use and 
sharing of existing factual data sources. 
 
Researchers in developing countries, in particul
ar, lack the norms and traditions of more open 
data sharing for collaborative research and for the development of common research resources 
for the benefit of the entire research community. Moreover, th
e governments in many developing 
countries treat publicly-generated or publicly-funded research data either as secret or commercial commodities. Even if the governments do not actively 
protect such data, they lack policies that 
                     1 See http://www.icsu.org/events/ICSUpercen
t20Events/international-symposium-the-cas
e-for-international-sharing-of-scientific-date-a-focus-on-developing-countries
.  The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C                                                                                                                     
                                         163 
 provide guidance or identify responsibilities for the researchers they fund as to under what conditions the researchers should make their resear
ch data available for others to use. Finally, developing countries frequently do not have data centers or digital repositories in place that researchers can submit their data for use by othe
rs. In those cases where such repositories do exist, they tend to be managed as black archives. 
 This international symposium helped addressing 
these and related issues, and to improve the 
access to and use of publicly
-funded scientific data. 
 Organizers and hosts
 The symposium was organized by the Board on Inte
rnational Scientific Organizations (BISO), 
and the U.S. Committee on Data for Scien
ce and Technology (US CODATA) under the Board on Research Data and Information (BRDI), 
in consultation with 
the ICSU Committee on 
Freedom and Responsibility in 
the Conduct of Science (CFRS).      The Case for International Sharing of Scientific Data: A Focus on Developing Countries: Proceedings of a SymposiumCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. 