DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/1816Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating EnablingTechnologies into Neuroscience Research180 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-04497-4 | DOI 10.17226/1816Constance M. Pechura and Joseph B. Martin, Editors; Committee on a NationalNeural Circuitry Database, Division of Health Sciences Policy, Division ofBiobehavioral Sciences and Mental DisordersMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.MappingMappingMapping
Mapping 
  
 thethethe
the 
  
 BrainBrainBrain
Brain 
  
 andandand
anditsitsits
its 
  
 FunctionsFunctionsFunctions
FunctionsIntegrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience
ResearchConstance M. Pechura and Joseph B. Martin, Editors
Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database
Division of Health Sciences Policy
Division of Biobehavioral Sciences and Mental Disorders
Institute of Medicine
National Academy Press
Washington, D.C.1991iMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, DC 20418

NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board of the

National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy

of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of

the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with regard

for appropriate balance.
This report has been reviewed by a group other than the authors according to procedures
approved by a Report Review Committee consisting of members of the National Academy of Sci-

ences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine.
The Institute of Medicine was chartered in 1970 by the National Academy of Sciences to enlist
distinguished members of the appropriate professions in the examination of policy matters pertain-

ing to the health of the public. In this, the Institute acts under both the Academy's 1863 congres-

sional charter responsibility to be an advisor to the federal government and its own initiative in

identifying issues of medical care, research, and education.
The work on which this publication is based was performed pursuant to Contract No.
278-89-003 with the National Institute of Mental Health, Public Health Service, Department of

Health and Human Services. Funds for this contract were provided by the National Institute of Men-

tal Health, the National Institute of Drug Abuse, and the National Science Foundation (under NSF

Agreement No. BNS-8913554).Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database.
Mapping the brain and its functions: integrating enabling technologies into neuroscience

research / Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, Division of Health Sci-

ences Policy, Division of Biobehavioral Sciences and Mental Health, Institute of

Medicine; Constance M. Pechura and Joseph D. Martin, editors.

p. cm. Š (Publication ; no. IOM-91-08)

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-309-04497-9

1. BrainŠResearchŠData processingŠCongresses. 2. Brain mappingŠCongresses. I.

Pechura, Constance M. II. Martin, Joseph B., 1938- . III. Title. IV. Series: IOM publica-

tion ; 91Œ08.

[DNLM: 1. BrainŠphysiology. 2. Brain Mapping. 3. Medical Informatics. 4. Neuro-

sciences. 5. Research. WL 335 I59m]

QP376.I516 1991
612.8'2Šdc20
DNLM/DLC
for Library of Congress 91-4832
CIPCopyright © 1991 by the National Academy of Sciences
No part of this book may be reproduced by any mechanical, photographic, or electronic pro-
cess, or in the form of a phonographic recording, nor may it be stored in a retrieval system, transmit-

ted, or otherwise copied for public or private use, without written permission from the publisher,

except for the purpose of official use by the United States Government.

Printed in the United States of America
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost all cultures
and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The image adopted as a logotype by the Insti-

tute of Medicine is based on a relief carving from ancient Greece, now held by the Staatlichemuseen

in Berlin.iiMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database
JOSEPH B. MARTIN (
Chair),* Dean, School of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco
KAREN J. BERKLEY, McKenzie Professor, Department of Psychology,
Florida State University, Tallahassee
VINTON CERF, Vice President, Corporation for National Research Initiatives,
Reston, Virginia
W. MAXWELL COWAN,
ƒ Vice President and Chief Scientific Officer, 
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Bethesda, Maryland
JEROME R. COX,
* Welge Professor and Chairman, Department of Computer
Science, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri
JOSEPH T. COYLE,
* Distinguished Service Professor of Child Psychiatry,
Director, Division of Child Psychiatry, Professor of Psychiatry,

Neuroscience, Pharmacology, and Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University

School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland
RHETAUGH G. DUMAS,
* Dean and Professor, University of Michigan
School of Nursing, Ann Arbor
JON H. KAAS, Centennial Professor of Psychology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, Tennessee
JAMES KAJIYA, Associate Professor of Computer Science, Department of
Computer Science, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
RICHARD LUCIER, Director, Laboratory for Applied Research in Academic
Information, Welch Medical Library, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,

MarylandMARCUS E. RAICHLE, Professor of Neurology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri
GORDON M. SHEPHERD, Professor of Neuroanatomy, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
DIANE C.P. SMITH, Chief Scientist, Xerox Advanced Information
Technology, Xerox Corporation, Cambridge, Massachusetts
LARRY W. SWANSON, Professor of Biological Sciences and Psychology, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles
DAVID VAN ESSEN, Professor of Neurobiology, Division of Biology,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena
DONALD J. WOODWARD, Professor of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, 
University of Texas Health Science Center at Dallas
iiiMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Institute of Medicine Staff
Ruth Ellen Bulger, Director, Division of Health Sciences Policy
Constance M. Pechura, Study Director

Charles E. Vela, Staff Officer
⁄Elizabeth E. Meyer, Research Associate

Shelley A. Myers, Project Assistant

April E. Powers, Project Assistant
* Member, Institute of Medicine.
ƒ Member, Institute of Medicine and National Academy of Sciences.
⁄ From September 1989 to May 1990.
ivMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PrefaceThe Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database was convened in
October 1989 to formulate a position concerning the feasibility and utility of
incorporating computer technology into the basic and clinical neurosciences in
order to enhance research progress. The committee was comprised of experts

from the fields of neuroscience and computer and information sciences. Each

group was, in general, unaccustomed to the other area of endeavor, and

considerable effort was required in the beginning to identify the problems

confronting neuroscience and to learn more about the electronic and digital

applications that might be relevant. To carry the analysis forward, the

committee commissioned four task forces to examine the issues in more detail,

organized three symposia and open hearings, and sought advice and counsel

from leaders of the neuroscience community and from those with experience in

database development and computer systems design. This report summarizes

the committee's findings and offers advice regarding the opportunity to facilitate

neuroscience research and to maximize the benefits of that research.
It was not altogether clear at the outset of the study how the
recommendations would unfold. Several members of the committee were
skeptical that the time was ripe to apply new technologies to the gathering and
dissemination of neuroscience data. The enthusiasm that emerges in the report

for new approaches to these issues arose from much deliberation, numerous

discussions, and careful assessment of the technological opportunities that

currently exist and which are expected to expand rapidly in the future.

Throughout the study
PREFACEvMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the committee confronted some of the same challenges that will eventually be
faced by those who may be charged with implementing its recommendations.

One challenge was to find effective means of communication across the diverse

disciplines of neuroscience (basic and clinical) and computer science and

informatics (encompassing digital graphics, database technology, and electronic

networks). Beyond the expected difficulties of language (i.e., certain words
mean one thing to neuroscientists and something entirely different to computer
scientists), there were often fundamental differences in the perceptual

frameworks used by the two groups. In educating each other the members of the

committee came to the end of the study with a much greater understanding of

how each discipline approaches its work and how these approaches can and

should be melded in a common effort.
A second challenge was to balance creativity with practicality in order to
forge a reasonable plan for application of electronic and digital technologies to

the neurosciences. Such a balance had to be achieved largely in the absence of

immediately applicable models from other areas of biomedical science. The

committee evaluated the existing biomedical databases and found substantial

disparity in their development, funding, and structures. This disparity was
particularly characteristic of the genome and protein sequence databases. The
committee also discovered that the federal infrastructure for support of

biomedical science has not yet developed a clear, integrated set of guidelines

and policies to facilitate the incorporation of technological advances.

Nevertheless, technology has made major inroads in most of the physical and

biological sciences.
A third challenge the committee faced was the recognition that its
deliberations were being held during a time of serious biomedical research

funding constraints. Indeed, the question of funding was at the core of the most

vigorous objections to the proposed brain mapping initiative: some

neuroscientists feared the initiative would produce large-scale efforts that would

undermine the traditional investigator-initiated research enterprise. The
committee took these concerns seriously and the prospect of allocating already
scarce resources to possible new initiatives led the committee to attempt to

assess the probable costs and benefits of its recommendations. In addressing

this issue there emerged a recurring theme of the advantages of investment now,

as a protection against costly corrections later. The recommendations offered in

the report reflect the committee's attention to the possible dangers, as well as the

possible benefits that neuroscience can derive from computer and information

technology.Not withstanding the difficulties presented by these challenges, great
PREFACEviMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.enthusiasm emerged from the committee's deliberations. The committee
believes that the more than 150 neuroscientists who served on the committee,

participated in task force groups, attended open hearings, or responded to

written solicitations of opinions were representative of the diverse neuroscience

community. Some were already in favor of the proposals being discussed and

expressed strong views that the proposals should proceed. This group tended to
be comprised of the most experienced in the use of computer and information
technology. Some participants had strong reservations about the proposals. Of

the remaining participants, many held no clear position in the beginning. In the

end, however, some of the greatest excitement could be found among this group

as they considered the capabilities of the various technologies shown in

demonstrations and presentations and how these capabilities could be applied to

data collection and analysis, as well as to rapid communication of research

results.The recommendations that resulted from the committee's deliberations and
activities address certain key issues. The first is that a proper base of hands-on

experience must be built before any large-scale effort can begin. Thus, the

committee has proposed a two-phase initiative. Phase 1 would consist of pilot

projects that would allow neuroscientists and computer scientists to work

together to construct usable resource prototypes and address a variety of

technological and sociological challenges as described in the report. To realize
the greatest benefit from these pilot projects, however, a strong central
coordinating body must be in place. Thus, the committee has recommended that

an advisory panel be charged with certain responsibilities, including the

facilitation of information exchange among the projects, the establishment of

editorial and training functions, the development of policies to protect

confidentiality and intellectual property, and the definition of the overall

direction of the program. The committee's recommendations further outline the

possible funding structures that might be used and the need for additional

appropriations to support the proposed projects.
Despite the need for program stability and central authority, the committee
did not assign responsibility for the proposed initiative to any single agency or

institute but instead outlined two possible structures. In one, a lead agency

would have authority over the implementation of the initiative and

responsibility for its funding. Alternatively, multiple agencies could share

funding responsibility, but central authority would be maintained by formal
agreements between two or more agencies or institutes. Because neuroscience
research is funded through a wide variety of sources, the committee felt that

strict definition of a structure might limit resources available to the proposed
PREFACEviiMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.initiatives. Similarly, a detailed plan for the second phase of the initiative is not
offered in the committee's recommendations. The more global second phase of

development and integration of electronic and digital resources must proceed

from the experience gained in the pilot projects, a requirement which limited

the committee's ability to define a precise structure for the future.
The increasing use of many of the technologies discussed in this report is
beginning to change the way research is conducted and an integral role for such

technologies in biomedical science in general, and neuroscience in particular, is

inevitable. In the absence of clear priorities and policies to support these

technologies, the process of change will occur in a scattered, disparate, and

costly manner. It is the committee's hope that this report will underscore the

importance of a new focus on the role of computer and information technology
in the conduct of neuroscience research. Such a focus would help bring
neuroscience to an unprecedented level of discovery and, in a broader sense,

provide a model for technological integration that would benefit all of

biomedical science.
In that spirit, this report is aimed primarily toward policymakers in the
Congress, the Public Health Service, and other federal agencies who are

responsible for the support and direction of the biomedical research enterprise.

The report will also be of interest to basic and clinical neuroscientists, computer

scientists, systems developers, and information scientists. Beyond these groups,

other individuals interested in the broad issues of technological change may

find certain aspects of the report useful. Therefore, the committee attempted to

respond to the needs of a wide audience in constructing this report. Chapters 
1and 2 emphasize certain key aspects of neuroscience research, including already
achieved and potential benefits; the chapters further describe how computer and

information technology might enhance the acquisition of more information

about the brain than is available today. 
Chapter 3
 is an overview of some of the
methods and concepts of neuroscience. This chapter is specifically intended to

give those readers not familiar with neuroscience a greater appreciation of the

field's complexity, a factor that makes the integration of computer and

information technology especially challenging. 
Chapter 4
 provides a fictional
scenario of how a laboratory of the future might use electronic and digital

resources, followed by descriptions and specific examples of how computer and

information technologies are now in greater use in biomedical science. A

summary of the input received by the committee through its various activities is
contained in 
Chapter 5
. This chapter covers a broad range of topics that were
discussed at task force meetings and open hearings and that
PREFACEviiiMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.provided a strong base of knowledge for crafting specific recommendations.
Finally, Chapter 6
 contains the committee's formal recommendations.
In completing this study, the committee was aided in many valuable ways.
Of particular benefit were the efforts of the task force participants (see

Appendix A
). These neuroscientists, computer scientists, and information
scientists gave generously of their time and expertise to provide the committee

with creative and in many cases indispensable suggestions. Another important

source of input was those individuals in the neuroscience community who

responded to the committee's requests for opinions. These responses kept the
committee in touch with the variety of viewpoints existing in the field. The
committee also appreciated the help given by the speakers and demonstrators at

each of the three symposia and open hearings (see 
Appendix C
), as well as the
insightful, honest input provided by all the participants of these meetings.

Finally, the committee wishes to thank the Fidia Pharmaceutical Corporation

and the Fidia Research Foundation for their support of the symposia and

hearings, and Barry Peterson and Sandra Hicks from the Department of

Physiology at Northwestern University for their help in arranging the hearing

held in Chicago.
During the course of the study, other individuals provided helpful
information and necessary background materials. These included Stephen

Koslow and Ronald Schoenfeld, the study's project officers from the National

Institute of Mental Health; Lana Skirboll from the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and

Mental Health Administration; Lawrence Sellin from the National Science

Foundation; Daniel Masys from the National Library of Medicine; Eugene
Streicher from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke; and
Bruce Waxman from the Defense Mapping Agency. The committee is also

grateful for the work of the seven individuals who reviewed the report and

provided many thoughtful, carefully crafted suggestions and commentaries,

which greatly strengthened the final product.
The committee's charge could not have been met without the dedication
and expertise of the staff of the Institute of Medicine. Special thanks are owed

to staff editor Leah Mazade for her careful work in polishing the report. The

committee also wishes to thank the director of the Division of Health Sciences

Policy, Ruth Bulger, for her consistent interest and excellent suggestions.

Shelley Myers, the project assistant, made the many meetings in and out of

Washington as comfortable for the participants as possible and provided
excellent secretarial support. April Powers became the project assistant toward
the end of the study, when a thousand details, in ever-changing report drafts,

require attention. She dealt with these pressures with singular commitment
PREFACEixMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and a calming sense of humor. The numerous contributions made by Elizabeth
Meyer, the study's research associate, would be difficult to list here. To each

task she was assigned, from planning figures and illustrations to writing

summaries of the many meetings and designing the fliers for open hearings,

Elizabeth brought a quiet competence and an unfailing willingness to help.

Before leaving the study to accept a position in industry, Charles Vela, staff
officer and assistant study director, provided valuable assistance as a liaison to
the computer and information scientists of the committee and key information

regarding the funding and organization of other scientific databases. Lastly, and

most importantly, I wish to acknowledge the extraordinary efforts of Constance

Pechura, the study director, in shepherding the committee through its difficult

task.Joseph B. Martin, 
ChairmanCommittee on National Neural Circuitry Database
PREFACExMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Contents  List of Boxes, Color Plates, Figures, and Tables
 xiii  SUMMARY 1  Advancing Neuroscience in the Decade of the Brain,
 2  Examples of the Value of Integrating Knowledge to
Solve Problems, 4  The Growth of Neuroscience,
 7  Computer and Information Technology in Biomedical
and Neuroscience Research,
 8  Building Consensus, Identifying Needs,
 10  The Brain Mapping Initiative: Committee Recommenda-
tions, 13  Conclusion, 191 INTRODUCTION 212 ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF
THE BRAIN 25  Complexity and the Need for Information Management,
 26  Examples of the Value of Integrating Knowledge to
Solve Problems, 31  The Growth of Neuroscience,
 41  References, 46CONTENTSxiMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3 OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A
CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL HIERARCHY
 48  References and Bibliography, 654 COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN
BIOMEDICAL AND NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
 66  Critical Breakthroughs, Important Opportunities,
 69  Conclusion, 88  References, 895 BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS
 91  Building a Useful Resource Complex,
 93  The Challenges Ahead,
 99  Strategies for Building a Base of Experience,
 107  References, 1116 THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
 113  The Long-Range Goal,
 113Phase 1:
 Implementation, 116Phase 2:
 Long-Term Integration and Its Potential Benefits,
 125  Summary of Recommendations,
 127  References, 129  APPENDIXES  A Task Force Topics and Rosters
 133B Samples of Requests for Opinions
 136C Lists of Speakers and Demonstrators in Symposia and
Open Hearings
 139  INDEX 143CONTENTSxiiMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.List of Boxes, Color Plates, Figures, and
TablesBoxes2-1 The Gene for Neurofibromatosis 1,
 302-2 Sometimes the Brain Learns to Ignore Visual Input,
 323-1 Not All Neuroscience Research Is Concerned with Neurons,
 563-2 The Genetics of Color Vision,
 644-1 Relational Databases Versus Object-Oriented Databases,
 77Color PlatesFigures2-1 Magnetic resonance images of identical twins, one with
schizophrenia and the other without, 393-1 The neural hierarchy,
 493-2 An action potential tracing,
 593-3 The synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate,
 613-4 The acetylcholine receptor,
 634-1 The decreasing cost of computer memory,
 714-2 Computer-assisted neuronal reconstruction,
 754-3 Growth of on-line searches of word-oriented databases,
 784-4 Brain Browser,
 83Tables2-1 Prevalence of Selected Neurological Disorders, Mental Ill-
nesses, and Alcohol and Drug Abuse,
 422-2a Investment in Neuroscience Research by the National Institutes
of Health,
 452-2b Investment in Neuroscience Research by the Alcohol, Drug
abuse, and Mental Health Administration,
 452-3 U.S. Investment in Neuroscience and Mental Health Research:
Sponsoring Agencies and Foundations,
 464-1 Text Versus Image Data: Byte Requirements,
 724-2 Selected Genome and Scientific Databases,
 80LIST OF BOXES, COLOR PLATES, FIGURES, AND TABLESxiii
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACExivMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Mapping the Brain and Its Functions
xvMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xviMapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SummaryThe human brain is a fascinating, complex system whose mysteries are
becoming increasingly accessible to the tools of modern science.
Neuroscientists have amassed a sizable body of knowledge about the structure
of the brain and its specific functions, which has improved our ability to treat a

variety of mental and neurological diseases. Many other diseases are less

tractable, however, and effective treatments will require major advances in both

basic and clinical neuroscience. Underlying these advances will be an explosion

of experimental data, whose magnitude poses serious problems for information

management and communication.
Effective access to existing neuroscience information is critical to the
enterprise of discovery: such information forms the basis of new hypotheses,
drives the search for improved methodologies, and, ultimately, leads to insights
applicable to human disease. New strategies must be developed to enhance

integration of this information and to facilitate new discoveries about the brain.

Within the range of potentially beneficial strategies, the greater use of computer

and information technology in neuroscience research holds particular promise.
This report synthesizes the deliberations of the Institute of Medicine's
Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, which was formed at the
request of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), the National

Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), and the National Science Foundation (NSF).

The committee's task was to consider the desirability, feasibility, and possible

ways of implementing a family of resources, both electronic (e.g., computer

networks) and digital (e.g., databases),
SUMMARY1Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for the enhancement of neuroscience research. The incorporation of computer
and information technology into diverse scientific fields is often accomplished

in the absence of coordinated policy through trial and error by individual

scientists capitalizing on rapidly developing technological innovation. These

efforts have often led to far-reaching changes in the style of scientific research

that call for new governmental policies regarding the conduct of research in this
country and abroad. Within this context, and with an overall purpose of
increasing the resources available to the neuroscience community, this

committee has sought to
   formulate a position on the requirements for and appropriateness of
establishing a family of electronic and digital resources for basic and

clinical neuroscience that would allow optimal data communication

and sharing among investigators;
   consider the scope and elements of data that would constitute these
resources and determine strategies for representing the diverse data

types generated by neuroscientists;
   consider data storage, retrieval, and sharing schemes of existing
national databases to identify successful strategies and potential pitfalls

for the possible establishment of computerized resources for

neuroscience;   describe the optimal organization of a family of computerized
resources so that it can be efficiently established and coordinated for

research use by the neuroscience research community, clinical
investigators, clinicians, students, and educators; and
   provide recommendations to NIMH, NIDA, and NSF on future
directions in program development with respect to establishing such
electronic and digital resources.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE
BRAINThe major advances in neuroscience in the past two decades have
generated the opportunity that now exists to achieve an integrated

understanding of the brain's structure and functions. These advances, which are

producing new data on brain activity, include
   the identification of complex anatomical connections;
   capabilities for understanding the biochemical, molecular, and genetic
mechanisms that control brain structure and functions;
   the ability to measure and visualize human brain functioning during
mental activity; and
   the ability to monitor neural activity simultaneously in complicated
networks of neurons.
SUMMARY2Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.These and other advances have occurred primarily through the efforts of
individual investigators working in small groups on highly specific projects.

Despite the piecemeal quality of these efforts, the information derived from

them is so extensive that it is extremely difficult to coordinate it all and produce

a meaningful picture of how the brain functions. This traditional method of

neuroscience research
Šindividual investigators, highly specific projects
Šissimilar to a group of surveyors, each of whom has been assigned to chart a
different geographical region. To chart an entire continent, however, the work

of each surveyor must somehow be coordinated with the work of all other

surveyors. Based on input obtained through a variety of means, as well as on its

own deliberations, the committee considers it necessary to establish a formal

Brain Mapping Initiative to coordinate the valuable efforts of individual

neuroscientists in such a way that new discoveries occur with greater speed and

efficiency. The Brain Mapping Initiative is meant to subsume all the proposed

aspects of a National Neural Circuitry Database. In addition, it expresses

explicitly the overarching goals of the proposed effort and reflects more

adequately the complex of electronic and digital resources that will be required.
Complexity Drives the Need for Information Management
The brain is more complicated than any other part of the human body. To
understand the brain, scientists must measure and analyze the rapid changes in

neuronal activity that occur throughout the brain's many intricate neural

networks and pathways. The scope of such an endeavor is daunting.

Neuroscience research proceeds along a multilevel hierarchy, from behavior

and emotion to molecular interactions and genetic expression. At each level,

researchers use numerous techniques that are specifically designed to collect
information appropriate to that level. But information from one level may, and
most often does, have important implications for research and knowledge at

other levels. Therefore, new methods for assembling and integrating the pieces

of the ''brain puzzle" can be as important as the individual discoveries

themselves.The goal of information management, which is distinct from simply
acquiring data, is to realize the greatest possible benefit from the data that

already exist. The field of neuroscience research has two major information

management needs: (1) databases, which relate diverse data types

systematically and efficiently, and (2) visualization of structures in three

dimensions to capture the discoverable architecture of the brain and relate this

architecture to brain functioning.
SUMMARY3Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF THE VALUE OF INTEGRATING
KNOWLEDGE TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
It is useful to examine how the diverse neural hierarchy relates to real
biological processes and human disease. The examples in this section provide a

glimpse of the breadth of neuroscience research and suggest how that research,

coupled with better information management, can have positive effects on

human health.Vision: How We See Affects How We Think
Interpretation, complex perception, and even the appreciation of beauty
often begins with visual information. The neural basis of vision involves

billions of neurons and more than 300 separate but interrelated pathways in the

cerebral cortex alone. As in all neural systems, visual functioning relies on the

coordinated activity of neurons that communicate with each other, employing

hundreds of different molecules for the generation of specific electrical and

chemical signals. Many of these molecules are arranged in distinctive patterns

and located in specific brain regions. The combination of complex

physiological processes, anatomical pathways, and molecular and chemical
interactions creates a system that functions extremely well but that is
exceedingly difficult to decipher. Notwithstanding all of the information

currently available, the fundamental nature of visual perception remains a

mystery. To understand it, we need more experimental data and new ways of

assembling the diverse kinds of related data into an integrated whole.
Among the resources necessary to understand the basis of pattern
recognition and to gain insight into existing control and regulatory mechanisms

are methods for overlaying anatomical maps with chemical and physiological

maps. Computer simulations would also be of great value for understanding the

signal processing of neural sets and networks. (Such simulations could also be

used outside of neuroscience to construct new kinds of sensors and signal

processors for robots and other automated devices.) Enhancing research into

vision with these electronic tools promises to help ameliorate visual deficits

caused by injury and to increase the range of treatments available for a number

of diseases, including glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and inherited retinal
degeneration, as well as blindness from other causes.
Substance Abuse: The Search for the Biology of Self-
destructionA large fraction of the U.S. population uses substances that are injurious to
health. These substances include legally approved drugs,
SUMMARY4Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.such as nicotine and alcohol, and illegal drugs, such as cocaine and heroin, that
are accompanied by the societal burdens of violent crime and increased infant

mortality, among others. The key to substance abuse lies in the brain. One of

the clear successes of neuroscience has been the discovery that certain

molecules on the surface of neurons, called receptors, specifically bind many

drugs, including nicotine, heroin and other opiates, and even benzodiazepines,
such as Valium 
®. This finding has led to the search for synthetic compounds
that can block the actions of an injurious drug, yet still satisfy a person's craving

for that drug. Neuroscientists have also begun to pay close attention to those

areas of the brain that mediate not only the normal pleasurable experiences of

eating and socialization but the motivating, often pleasurable, drug effects that

can lead to psychological addiction. The complexity of these brain areas,

however, greatly complicates the investigations.
Unlike the visual and motor systems of the brain, the so-called reward
system of brain nuclei and cortical areas has not been clearly defined. Two

kinds of computerized databases could help researchers construct a framework

for this system. One would depict the distribution patterns of important

receptors and compare these patterns to the known anatomical and
neurochemical circuitry of the brain. The other would contain information
specific to those areas of the brain known to be involved in addictive processes.

These resources would allow investigators faced with integrating data on

anatomy, neurochemistry, pharmacology, and behavior to benefit from the

research of other subspecialties in the field.
Pain: Sometimes a Warning, Sometimes a Curse
Pain is a ubiquitous reality of life, and we need it to a certain degree to
recognize sprained ankles, overstressed back muscles, kidney stones, infections,

and many other problems. Yet for tens of thousands of people who suffer from

abnormal or pathological pain, any benefit from pain is hard to identify. For
these individuals, pain is an intractable barrier to a happy, productive life. The
neural basis of pain involves almost every region of the brain, spinal cord, and

peripheral nerves. Often, pain affects other body systems, such as the immune

and endocrine systems. The complexity of pain perception helps to explain the

variety in the pain people experience and the treatments that have been

developed. Much has been learned in recent years about the basic neural

mechanisms of pain, but substantial gaps in knowledge remain. For example,

we still do not understand pathological pain
Šthe severe pain often experienced
in an amputated
SUMMARY5Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.body part (despite its absence, so-called phantom limb pain) or the terrible pain
that can occur following seemingly minor injuries or after surgical procedures.
There is a pressing need to transfer the information gained through basic
research about pain to clinical practice. At present, widely divergent strategies

are used to treat pain and to use it diagnostically. A broad range of professionals

are often involved; thus, the responsibility for pain management may shift as a

patient is moved from the operating room, to recovery, to a postsurgery ward. A

database that related clinical observations to an integrated picture of relevant

basic scientific data would be of great value in pain management, especially if it
were combined with a repository of treatment and diagnostic strategies and their
documented outcomes. Indeed, better ways to integrate data from basic pain

research could contribute significantly to the alleviation of a major cause of

human suffering.Schizophrenia: Broken Minds, Shattered Dreams
The symptoms of schizophrenia often emerge in adolescence or early
adulthood, just as young people are beginning to plan their futures. In this

country the lives of more than 2 million people have been devastated by

schizophrenia and its various manifestations, which include hallucinations,

delusions, blunted emotions, cognitive deficits, and an inability to maintain

meaningful relationships. Neuroscience has focused on three major research

areas in its search for understanding: neurochemical abnormalities, structural

and functional brain abnormalities, and potential genetic and environmental
causes.It has long been thought that the effects of the neurotransmitter dopamine
are greater than normal in the brains of those with schizophrenia. Not all of the

symptoms of schizophrenia are alleviated by depression of dopamine activity,

however, and evidence is mounting that other neurotransmitters are involved.

The structural abnormalities identified thus far in some individuals are enlarged

cerebral ventricles and a thinning of the cerebral cortex in certain areas.

Although there seems to be a concomitant decrease in functioning in the frontal

cortex, neuroscientists do not know how these structural and functional
abnormalities contribute to the causes or symptoms of schizophrenia.
Advances such as gene mapping and positron emission tomography (PET)
scanning may lead to increased understanding of the neurobiology of

schizophrenia, but greater integration of the available information is needed.

The kinds of digital resources that would be of most use are maps of the

distribution of dopamine, dopamine receptors,
SUMMARY6Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and other neuroregulators in the brain, databases of the existing brain imaging
data with detailed descriptions of each patient's history and specific

constellation of symptoms, and databases containing information about the

genes that are most likely to confer susceptibility to schizophrenia. For those

whose ravaged lives testify to the burden of this disease, and for their families,

needed answers are long overdue.
THE GROWTH OF NEUROSCIENCE
Neuroscience Research Has Grown in Response to Critical
ProblemsThe preceding examples reflect only a small portion of the overall cost of
mental and neurological diseases. These diseases, combined with drug abuse,

constitute an immense financial burden to our population every year in direct

care expenses and lost wages. Nearly 23 million Americans suffer from head

and spinal cord injuries, hearing and speech disorders, or infectious diseases of

the nervous system. More than 3.5 million people suffer from Alzheimer's,

Huntington's, or Parkinson's disease, or from other degenerative disorders,
including multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. More than 60
million people suffer from mental illnesses, including schizophrenia and

depression, and more than 20 million abuse alcohol or drugs. Each of these

problems clamors for resolution.
In response, neuroscience has made steady progress in a number of areas.
Researchers have applied many new technologies, from the first oscilloscope to

modern computer graphics, to the study of the brain. These technologies,

combined with insightful, painstaking research, have led to the important

breakthroughs witnessed in the past two or three decades and have enlarged

considerably our understanding of the biological basis of disease. In addition,

many talented young scientists have entered the field of neuroscience: the

membership of the Society for Neuroscience has risen from 500 in 1969 to
more than 17,500 in 1990. Because we now possess vast amounts of data and
thousands of bright, dedicated scientists, the opportunities for successfully

addressing the remaining questions about the brain have never been more

promising.Neuroscience is a National Priority
Another source of the existing opportunities in neuroscience is the high
priority the United States places on research aimed at alleviating mental and

neurological disorders. Research support has come from various government

bodies, including the National Institutes of
SUMMARY7Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Health (NIH), the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration
(ADAMHA), the Department of Veterans Affairs, the National Science

Foundation, and other government agencies; private agencies and foundations,

including the Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the MacArthur Foundation,

and the Pew Charitable Trusts, have also provided funds. It is estimated that

these groups invest more than $1.5 billion annually in neuroscience research,
the majority of which comes from NIH and ADAMHA. Yet however
impressive the total, this investment represents a very small fraction of the

overall societal costs of neurological and mental diseases. In times of competing

needs and fiscal constraints, it is important to find ways to derive the most value

from the investments that are made. The committee believes that a Brain

Mapping Initiative, by enhancing the process of discovery and the

communication of new insights in neuroscience, can help to maximize the

benefits gained from the present investment of national resources.
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN
BIOMEDICAL AND NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
In the committee's opinion, a complex of electronic resources that will
enhance neuroscience research is an attainable goal. Current trends in computer

and information sciences clearly point to an unprecedented opportunity to

incorporate technologies that will enable neuroscientists to expand their use of

valuable, hard-won data and to communicate these data more effectively to

other scientists. In addition, the sheer mass of neuroscience information

accumulated to date, and the accelerating rate at which new results are being

obtained and reported, are becoming major driving forces for the kind of

organization, structure, and accessibility that electronic and digital resources
can provide. Increasing sophistication in computer technology, coupled with
decreasing costs, holds out the promise of enhanced research capabilities for

many fields of scientific endeavor
Šbut in particular, for neuroscience, owing to
its inherently visual, hierarchical nature.
Three areas of computer science are especially important for biomedical
research: computer graphics, database technology, and electronic networking.

The use of computer graphics, so pervasive in such fields as earth mapping and

space sciences, has only recently emerged as a resource in biomedical research,

a direct result of the rapidly decreasing costs of computer memory capacities.

One of the most successful applications of computer graphics has been the

modeling of molecular structures using data derived from x-ray crystallography.

No longer are scientists confined to trying to visualize a dynamic
SUMMARY8Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.molecule from a ball-and-stick depiction; computer models can be rotated and
manipulated to simulate the molecule's actual functioning. These models will

soon help to predict which drugs stop certain viruses, how genes are turned on

and off, and how two molecules may interact with one another. In neuroscience,

the use of computer graphics has led to visualization of the activity of the

human brain through PET scanning and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Such graphic depictions have proved to be so useful that greater and greater
attention is being paid to the concept of visualization computing in biomedical

sciences. One example of this increased attention is the greater priority given to

biomedical computing by leading universities and government laboratories.
Databases, the second computer science area that is important to
biomedical research, allow digitized data to be stored and organized in a way

that makes the data easily accessible. Databases can be word, number, image, or

sound oriented, and can be either public or private. The use of databases,

including databases of biomedical information, has increased substantially over
the past 15 years. The leader in the development of biomedical databases has
been the National Library of Medicine (NLM), which currently maintains a

number of on-line systems, including bibliographic databases of scientific

literature, registries of chemicals and their toxic effects, and medical

information related to cancer and other diseases. Other prominent scientific

databases are the protein sequence and genome databases developed by a

variety of institutions and individuals, which are being used in the efforts to

map the human genome. The need for databases for neuroscience information is

great, and the systems are beginning to emerge. Neuroscience database

developers can learn much from the experiences of the NLM and protein and

genome database originators.
The purpose of computer networks is to help create a communication
environment that is as free of barriers as possible. In science the communication

of data and ideas is as important to the growth of knowledge as the data

themselves; consequently, the use of computer networks holds great promise for
neuroscience. Since 1969, networks connecting research laboratories and
universities have grown so rapidly that today more than 5,000 interconnected

networks in 35 countries connect more than 300,000 computers. Further efforts,

such as the National Research and Education Network (NREN), are under way

to upgrade the transmission rates of U.S. scientific and educational computer

networks, including the National Science Foundation's NSFNET, to permit

them to handle more data and data of greater complexity (e.g., image data,

which currently cannot be efficiently transmitted
SUMMARY9Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.through computer networks). If computer networks are to be a viable method
for communication of neuroscience data, the planned increase in transmission

rates is a necessity. Also needed are strategies for standard data formats to

facilitate communication of digitized information among investigators.
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS
The committee sponsored a number of consultative activities to seek out
the opinions and advice of the neuroscience community at large. These

activities included written requests for opinions (published in various journals

and solicited directly from the leadership of the Society for Neuroscience);

formation of four task forces; and sponsorship of three symposia and open
hearings, which were held in Washington, D.C., Chicago, and San Francisco. In
addition, the committee commissioned two background papers: one traced the

development and current uses of genome and related scientific databases, and

the other investigated the Defense Mapping Agency's experience in converting

cartographic data to digital formats. Participants in these activities reflected a

wide range of backgrounds and expertise including library management,

scientific database administration and design, computer science, and

neuroscience research. Additionally, participants came from academic

departments, government laboratories, and private industry.
The complexity of neuroscience dictates that the scope of data included in
any group of electronic and digital resources must eventually be quite broad.

The majority of the individuals providing input to the committee's deliberations

envisioned the proposed complex of resources as necessarily containing more

kinds of information than are already or can be contained in library reference

materials and published journals. Participants also endorsed using the
neuroanatomy of the brain as the principal organizing arrangement for the
resources. Information on neuroanatomy could function as the skeleton or

frame-work on which data from multiple levels of the brain's hierarchy,

including information on functions, could be displayed. The information would

include neural pathways, cell types, neurochemistry and identification of

neurotransmitters, protein and gene sequences and gene mapping, receptor

types, electrophysiological responses, and data regarding behavioral

relationships, such as memory.
To realize such a database, the computerized resources must include a
range of capabilities. Some of the features participants deemed necessary were

the ability to
   transform data into three-dimensional images,
SUMMARY10Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   browse through various kinds of data,
   extract arbitrarily defined subsets of data, and
   compare different brain images with each other by precise overlaying
or co-registration of the images.
There was overwhelming consensus among all participants that a single
National Neural Circuitry Database was not a workable plan. Rather, a complex

of electronic and digital resources should be developed to include separate

databases with varied levels of accessibility. This complex should be composed
of reference databases, data banks, informal databases, national and
international registries, research collaboration databases, and specialty databases.
To implement this complex of resources, however, significant advances
will be required. The committee identified three areas deserving of attention:

databases, networks, and imaging technologies. Only imaging is sufficiently

advanced to be immediately applied to neuroscience research. Database
management technology presents one of the most difficult barriers to
implementation. Currently available database technology cannot handle images

easily, although improved capabilities are under development. Database

developers should consider incorporating these advances as soon as they

become available. In addition, present mechanisms to interlink different

databases will need to be improved substantially for application to

neuroscience. Human-computer interfaces also require improvement so that

they are uncomplicated for users yet powerful enough to enable the user to

extract needed information. Underlying both database and user interface design

issues is the challenge of developing software that allows the data to be

accessible and usable. Finally, as noted earlier, computer network upgrading

will be necessary for the transmission of complex image data.
The final technical topic covered by the task forces was the development
of standards for the exchange of data. Four areas of technical concern were

addressed:   Data representation and standard data formats are needed for textual
and numerical data and for the generation of images and graphics.
   Mechanisms are needed for conveying new algorithms for a variety of
applications.   Standard human-computer interface packages should be explored to
reduce barriers to the actual use of electronic resources.
   Standard communication protocols are needed to accommodate the
dynamic range of data accessibility required for research-oriented

databases.SUMMARY11Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.In addition to the technological changes that will be required to implement
the proposed resources, the task forces identified sociological patterns and

issues specific to the scientific community that must also be addressed. The

development of standard data formats presents important sociological questions.

Participants expressed strong views that standards should evolve out of the

needs and perspectives of users and not be imposed from outside. A careful
balance must be sought between the need for technical standards to facilitate
communication and the barriers that can result from overly strict standard

formats.Data sharing is another major sociological issue. In some neuroscience
specialties, sharing of unpublished and "raw" data is commonplace, whereas in

other specialties such openness is rare. Although the committee places no value

judgment on either end of the data-sharing continuum
Šrestrictive to open
Šitrecognizes the existence of a continuum and concludes that potential data-

sharing mechanisms must be carefully considered as part of any initiative. For
example, priority should be given to formulating methods to ensure that proper
credit is assigned for those contributing data and that the privacy of human

subjects is protected. In addition, the level of certification (peer-reviewed,

verified, unverified, etc.) of all data must be clearly stated, although preliminary

data probably would be included in special databases. Clear identification of

different levels of certainty, including unambiguous labeling of preliminary

data, will also need to be incorporated into the various kinds of databases; for

major resources, editorial boards may be a good mechanism to aid in this

process. As in all sciences, replication of experimental results will continue to

be important. The task forces also supported the concept that university tenure

committees should consider certain types of data sharing, particularly of peer-

reviewed data, as evidence of professional competence, comparable to journal
publication and teaching evaluations. The committee was further encouraged to
examine the policies developed recently by some journals devoted to gene

mapping and gene and protein sequencing for deposit of data into established

databases. Other areas of sociological concern were how to ensure that

electronic resources would be accessible to more than a few well-funded

laboratories and how to overcome resistance to the integration of technology

into the way people work. An additional concern of many participants was the

changing work force that would result from greater use of technology and the

need for computer specialists with expertise in neurobiology as well as

neurobiologists with expertise in computer science.
To overcome these technological and sociological impediments, the
SUMMARY12Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.task forces in particular strongly recommended that the committee call for the
establishment of pilot projects. The primary goal of these projects would be to

provide a desperately needed base of experience from which to establish a

family of usable computerized resources. The task forces suggested a two-phase

effort, with the pilot projects as a necessary first step, followed by a more global

incorporation of computerized resources into the neuroscience research
enterprise.A key area of consensus was that pilot projects would require coordination
and that oversight and evaluation mechanisms were crucial to the eventual

implementation of the resource complex. Structures suggested for coordination

of the pilot projects included advisory boards, host institutions, and formal

meetings.A final area of discussion was funding. Despite general support for the
proposed effort, many participants expressed concern about how and where

funds might be secured. There was considerable dialogue about current

constraints on biomedical research support, and virtually all participants

expressed the opinion that funds for this project should be obtained only

through additional appropriations.
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE
RECOMMENDATIONSAfter considering the opinions expressed and the input received through its
activities and during its own deliberations, the committee concluded that an

environment of opportunity now exists to enhance neuroscience research by a

more global incorporation of computer and information technologies.

Considering past experiences in other scientific disciplines, however, it is also

apparent that to ensure the greatest benefit from these technologies, they should

be incorporated with care and with a clear vision of the intended goal.

Neuroscience is diverse in its methodology and levels of inquiry. To achieve
true understanding, all of the available information must be coordinated into an
integrated, meaningful picture. At present, the detailed information being

generated at every level of neural organization is difficult to grasp and integrate.

Even searches for information regarding relatively specific neural levels or

processes are hindered because the information is widely scattered through

scores of different journals, review papers, symposia summaries, and books.

Added to these difficulties are the unique visual requirements of neuroscience.

The mass of information is steadily expanding because researchers can now

generate two- and three-dimensional graphic images relatively quickly and

easily. The increasing use of computers to collect the various kinds of

neuroscience data needed by researchers and the development currently under

way of the technology to link these
SUMMARY13Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.computerized research environments makes this an opportune time to begin a
Brain Mapping Initiative. Therefore,
the committee recommends that the Brain Mapping Initiative be established
with the long-term objective of developing three-dimensional computerized
maps and models of the structure, functions, connectivity, pharmacology, and
molecular biology of human, rat, and monkey
1 brains across developmental
stages and reflecting both normal and disease states.The Brain Mapping Initiative is meant to include features that were
originally proposed for a national Neural Circuitry Database, although the new

initiative, unlike the earlier project, would not be a single-entity database.

Rather, the Brain Mapping Initiative would lead to the establishment of a

complex of interrelated, integrated databases accessible from individual

laboratories. The committee is aware of the broad scale of such an undertaking

and that the successful implementation of this program will require
transformation of the way information is acquired, communicated, and analyzed
by neuroscientists. Therefore, the committee envisions the initiative as a long-

term endeavor to be accomplished in two phases. Phase 1 would comprise an

organized initiation of seed or pilot projects with the overall goals of gaining

experience in the incorporation of the required technologies and applying that

experience to long-range planning for phase 2. Phase 2 would involve

construction of the maps and models necessary to provide a complex of digital

and electronic resources to enhance neuroscience research. To begin phase 1,
the committee recommends the establishment of pilot projects or consortia.
These projects should be peer-reviewed by neuroscientists and computer
scientists; they should also be investigator initiated, involve geographically
dispersed laboratories, and include neuroscientists with varied levels of
computer experience. The projects should develop common formats for the

exchange of data and focus on different types of computer data representations
(geometric, structural, image, and free text). Selection of projects should be on
the basis of research quality and value to the evolution of a complex of
electronic resources for mapping the brain.
The pilot projects the committee recommends should be a coordinated
program of separate efforts but with certain common goals. In the committee's

vision, the pilot program would consist of several
SUMMARY14Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.groups of investigators, each working on specific neuroscience topics, with the
primary goals of mapping the brain's anatomy, chemistry, and functions, and

forging pathways for the integration of computer and information technology

into the overall neuroscience research effort. Consortia could be organized

among geographically distinct institutions or as centers housed within a single

institution. (If the centers approach is chosen, special attention should be given
to involving investigators from geographically distant institutions as users of the
technologies developed.) Research topics for the phase 1 projects should reflect

the vertical hierarchy of the brain from behavior and emotion to molecular

biological and genetic mechanisms, as well as the horizontal range of inquiry

including the anatomy, physiology, neurochemistry, and molecular and

developmental biology of specific brain systems.
In terms of technical developments, the overall goals of the pilot project
program would be the following:
   Develop electronic data collection and storage methods for data types
at each level of the neural hierarchy.
   Identify the kinds of data, level of resolution, and experimental
information necessary to facilitate new insights and stimulate research.
   Examine and evaluate the wide range of available capabilities that can
increase use of the resources and enhance access to meaningful

information.   Develop a variety of databases from formal, consensus databases to
informal databases for research collaboration.
   Develop and experiment with different software for translation across
different computing environments, for user interfaces, for network

transmission of images, for data searching, and for image generation

and comparison.   Begin to develop standard data formats, nomenclature, and data
collection schemes, and to evaluate the evolution of these standards.
   Gain experience in data sharing and communication through electronic
means, including networks and transportable media.
   Communicate with others in the program to share and evaluate
experiences and technological developments.
To ensure the greatest benefits possible from the phase 1 projects, the
committee agreed to emphasize certain areas by formulating the

recommendations below.
The committee recognizes that neuroscience efforts proceed internationally
and recommends that an international registry of neuroscience databases and
contacts be established so that appropriate linkages can be created in the future.
SUMMARY15Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Such a registry, which should be available to users through computer
networks, would help to identify currently available resources and provide a

mechanism to coordinate the efforts of phase 1 investigators and investigators

in other countries.The committee recommends the establishment of an archive of public domain
software, accessible through computer networks.
The committee expects that phase 1 projects will have special needs for
novel software. Public domain software is available at little or no cost to anyone

who wants to use it, and these programs should be explored. In addition, such

an archive would encourage the formation of neuroscience ''news groups," or

groups of users with similar interests, who could communicate by computer

bulletin boards or electronic mail.
The committee recommends that an administrative structure be established to
coordinate phase 1 activities. This Brain Map Advisory Panel (BMAP) should
be composed of neuroscientists and computer and information scientists, with

additional input from funding agency administrators. The panel would be
responsible for the overall direction, evaluation, and coordination of consortia
and for the development of necessary policies relating to establishment of a
brain mapping effort. The committee also recommends that the Advisory Panel
be responsible for consideration and development of editorial functions and
policies relating to the ethical and sociological issues that will arise, including,
but not limited to, correctness of information and quality control, intellectual

property rights, rights to privacy, and freedom of information.
To develop the proper basis for a coordinated brain mapping effort, there
must be communication among the consortia and some type of central

oversight. The committee considered several mechanisms for providing such

oversight and chose an advisory panel structure. The BMAP could also act as a

clearinghouse for information and perform certain other functions:
   examine the needs of the entire neuroscience community;
   evaluate various aspects of database development including resource
use, standards development, and effectiveness of incentives for data

sharing;SUMMARY16Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   gather information from the consortia on emerging trends in the
computer industry; and
   facilitate acceptance of the database among neuroscientists.
The BMAP should exercise oversight not in a top-down manner but as the
result of communication between members of the consortia and the panel. This

communication could occur through a variety of mechanisms including

consortia representation on the panel and the sponsorship of regular meetings

for consortia investigators. The panel should also coordinate establishment of
the international registry of neuroscience databases and contacts and the archive
of public domain software recommended by the committee. Finally, the panel

should coordinate the Brain Mapping Initiative's interaction with funding

agencies and with other, related scientific initiatives, and undertake the long-

range planning of phase 2.
If electronic resources are to be accepted and utilized, scientists must be
able to trust the accuracy of the information contained in the resource. One of

the tasks of phase 1 investigators should be to begin to define mechanisms that

ensure the appropriate use and labeling of different levels of data (from
preliminary to peer-reviewed) and that allow for the deletion of information that
becomes obsolete. In the committee's opinion, one of the best ways to achieve

such goals is to develop edited archives and databases.
The committee recommends that the phase 1 and 2 projects of the Brain
Mapping Initiative maintain a close relationship with the gene mapping and
sequencing community and the Human Genome Project, and with other
scientific computing efforts, including network initiatives such as NSFNET
and the proposed National Research and Education Network. As part of these
efforts, the committee further recommends that linkages be established with

protein sequence and genome databases to enhance access to information about
brain-specific genes.The committee believes that the importance of gene mapping and
sequencing to neuroscience should not be underestimated. In addition, much

can be learned from existing database initiatives in this area, including the array
of public and private databases that support the Human Genome Project and
other established scientific networking efforts. Interaction with the ongoing

scientific computing efforts in the global change research, astrophysics, and

earth mapping communities would also be desirable.
SUMMARY17Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The committee recommends that federal funding agencies develop requests for
applications and/or cooperative agreements to support the formation of
consortia and the activities of the Brain Map Advisory Panel. Limited use of
contract mechanisms should also be considered when appropriate to the overall
goals of the initiative.
The federal government uses several mechanisms to provide federal funds
for research. One is contracts in which the government funds projects that its

agencies propose, to be completed by an outside investigator according to a

contract written by the government. Another mechanism, typical of NIH,

ADAMHA, and NSF is grants to investigators or groups of investigators for

research projects that are proposed, accomplished, and supervised by the

investigators themselves. A third method, the cooperative agreement used by

NSF, combines aspects of both grants and contracts. In the committee's opinion,
the proposed Brain Mapping Initiative favors the use of grants because the
development of usable resources should be intricately combined with the

research itself. This kind of development is best carried out by scientists

actively involved in neuroscience research.
The committee recommends that phases 1 and 2 of the Brain Mapping
Initiative be international in scope and that they be funded by multiple sources
in a coordinated fashion. The structure for administering the funding should
ensure program stability and effectiveness. Possible funding structures include
the identification of a lead agency or institute, or the establishment of formal

administrative structures among two or more agencies.
The sources of neuroscience funding include the three institutes of
ADAMHA and almost every institute of the NIH, as well as many other

governmental agencies. The proposed organization of the Brain Mapping

Initiative, especially the inclusion of an advisory panel and computer scientists,
will not fit well into the usual funding structures administered by the NIH
Division of Research Grants. To be successful, the proposed phase 1 projects

require the involvement of multiple components of the federal biomedical

research complex, as well as communication and cooperation among

appropriate agencies of the Public Health Service, the Departments of Defense

and Energy, and private foundations that fund biomedical science.
The committee concludes that the expected benefits of the proposed Brain
Mapping Initiative justify the investment of necessary resources and
recommends the appropriation
SUMMARY18Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of additional funding to support the establishment of phase 1 projects.
The committee is sensitive to the current fiscal constraints now being felt
by the entire U.S. biomedical research effort and recognizes the view held by

many scientists that large-scale projects pose a threat to the basic research

enterprise. The committee believes, however, that the Brain Mapping Initiative

is an important project that should be undertaken and that it could begin with an

additional allocation of approximately $10 million annually, with an overall

evaluation to occur at the end of five years. This investment represents only a

small part (less than 1 percent) of the entire U.S. neuroscience research effort,

which is estimated to be more than $1.5 billion annually. It is the committee's

considered opinion that the success and probable benefits of the initiative

proposed here depend on and justify the appropriation of this additional support.
CONCLUSIONIt is clear that neuroscience stands at the threshold of a tremendous
opportunity to unlock the mysteries of the brain and its functions. Securing the
benefits inherent in this opportunity requires a concerted, interdisciplinary effort

on the part of the many basic and clinical neuroscientists engaged in research

worldwide. It is equally clear that this scientific enterprise is increasingly reliant

on the use of sophisticated methodologies and computer technologies. The

Brain Mapping Initiative proposed in this report will allow investigators

studying the brain to view data in new ways, to communicate data to each other

more efficiently, and to access data from any of the neuroscience subspecialties.

So enabled, neuroscientists will be able to map the brain and its functions, thus

realizing the full potential of the electronic resources now available to the

scientific enterprise and ensuring that society will receive the greatest possible

benefits from neuroscience research.
NOTE1. These species are intended as starting points. The committee also recognizes the need to
include data from other, vertebrate and invertebrate, species.
SUMMARY19Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SUMMARY20Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1IntroductionThe computer, the instrument of the sciences of complexity, will reveal a
new cosmos never before perceived. Because of its ability to manage and
process enormous quantities of information in a reliable, mechanical way, the
computer, as a scientific research tool, has already revealed a new universe.

This universe was previously inaccessible, not because it was so small or so far

away, but because it was so complex that no human mind could disentangle it.
HEINZ PAGELS, 
Dreams of Reason
Scientists studying the brain have generated a wealth of experimental data,
and this explosion of information has unlocked many of the secrets of brain
functioning. Moreover, this progress already has helped to alleviate some of the

human suffering that results from brain injury and disease. Ironically, however,

the field is threatened by its own success in that the sheer mass of information

available to basic and clinical neuroscientists is becoming unmanageable.

Effective access to existing neuroscience information is critical to the enterprise

of discovery: such information forms the basis for new hypotheses, drives the

search for improved methodology, and, ultimately, leads to the advances

necessary for fundamental improvements in human health.
One way to improve access and speed the meaningful dissemination of
scientific discoveries is through the application of sophisticated computer and

information-sharing technologies. These enabling
INTRODUCTION21
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.technologies currently assist space exploration, earth mapping, global
communication, and dissection of the atom, among other functions. In certain

types of scientific investigation, computer and information technologies have

led directly to new ways of observing, simulating, and manipulating biological

and physical processes. The neuroscience community has seen an escalation in

the use of computer technologies to collect and analyze data, organize the data
of individual investigators, and share experimental results with other
researchers. As computer-based tools for three-dimensional representations,

simulation and modeling, and storage of large data sets improve, their

usefulness to the study of the brain becomes more apparent. During the past

decade, many neuroscientists have become interested in the expanded

application of computer and information technologies in their research, with the

goal of forging new pathways for communication among investigators and

managing diverse collections of scientific information.
This report results from the deliberations of the Institute of Medicine's
Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, whose objective was to

consider the desirability, feasibility, and possible ways of implementing a

family of electronic (e.g., networks) and digital (e.g., computer databases)

resources for the enhancement of neuroscience research. The committee was

formed in response to a request from Lewis Judd, director of the National

Institute of Mental Health (NIMH); it was funded by NIMH in cooperation with
the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the National Science
Foundation (NSF). The impetus for the study came in large part from the need

expressed by neuroscientists for new ways of collecting and integrating the

large amount of data they generate. An additional motivation was the increased

attention of the general scientific community and of policymakers regarding the

challenges presented by these emerging technologies and their potential to

support and improve research. Initiatives such as the National Research and

Education Network, proposed by Senator Albert Gore and supported by the

President's Science Advisor, and the long-range plans of the National Library of

Medicine to construct digital libraries are examples of this increased attention.
The incorporation of computer and information technology into a scientific
field often begins through trial and error, driven by individual scientists who

respond to opportunities as they emerge. The initial use of these technologies is

often highly individual, and it generally proceeds in the absence of any

coordination within specific scientific disciplines. As usage expands, however,

the need for coordination and standardization increases, raising important

questions about the development of appropriate governmental policies, which
INTRODUCTION22
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ultimately affect the conduct of research both nationally and internationally.
Within this broad context, the charge to this committee was to
   formulate a position on the requirements for and appropriateness of
establishing a family of digital resources for basic and clinical

neuroscience that would allow optimal data communication and
sharing among investigators;
   consider the scope and elements of data that should constitute these
resources and determine strategies for representing the diverse data
types generated by neuroscientists;
   examine existing national databases to identify successful data storage,
retrieval, and sharing strategies as well as potential pitfalls for the
establishment of computerized resources for neuroscience;
   describe an effective structure for a family of computerized resources
to allow its efficient establishment and optimal coordination for use by
the neuroscience research community, clinical investigators, clinicians,
students, and educators; and
   provide recommendations on future directions in program development
for NIMH, NIDA, and NSF with respect to such computerized
resources.To fulfill its charge, the committee drew on many sources of expertise,
beginning with the experience and knowledge of its members. A diverse set of

activities supplemented the committee's deliberations and provided key data for
the study. Between October 1989 and October 1990, the committee convened
four task forces, in total, comprising 43 neuroscientists and computer and

information science experts, that considered various resource options in terms

of varied levels of neuroscience inquiry (see 
Appendix A
). The committee also
solicited input from the neuroscience community through published requests for

opinions, letters to the present officers and past presidents of the Society for

Neuroscience, and a series of three symposia and open hearings (these activities

are summarized in Appendixes 
B and 
C).Based on these activities and deliberations, this report focuses on the
benefits that could be realized by the successful application of electronic and

digital resources to the conduct of research into brain functions. The report's

recommendations provide a structural framework for initiating a program to
apply these resources; they also identify certain key elements that should be
considered by those who may be charged with implementing such a program.

Thus, the report should be useful for policymakers and directors of institutions

who will be involved in the endeavor. It is hoped that the committee's
INTRODUCTION23
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.findings will underscore for this audience the importance of increasing the
integration of information technology and computer science with neuroscience

in particular and with the biomedical research enterprise in general. In addition,

the report is aimed toward working scientists to foster an understanding of the

benefits to be gained by using these resources in their own research and by

sharing their results. As we enter the Decade of the Brain, the committee
believes that an exciting opportunity exists to harness computer and information
technology for the enhancement of neuroscience research. The advantages to be

derived from seizing this opportunity include accelerated progress in

understanding and treating neurological and mental illness, brain and spinal

cord injury, and developmental deficits.
INTRODUCTION24
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Advancing Neuroscience in the Decade of
the BrainNot very long ago, the feasibility of mapping the distinguishable regions of
the human brain in relation to their functional roles seemed remote. With the
tremendous advances in neuroscience in the past two decades, however, the
opportunity now exists to approach the integrated understanding of brain

structure and functioning necessary to clarify the neurobiological basis of

human thought and emotion and to discern the mechanisms that underlie

sensory perception and locomotor functions. Many of the intricate anatomical

connections of the brain are being defined in great detail. New capabilities have

emerged to identify and describe the biochemical, molecular, and genetic

mechanisms that determine brain structure and functions. The activity of the

human brain during mental activity can be measured and visualized. It is even

becoming possible to monitor simultaneously the activity of many neurons

within complex neural networks during discrete behaviors. The challenge now

is to establish a comprehensive initiative that will increase the ability of

neuroscientists to make discoveries about the brain and to apply this knowledge
to the many mental and neurological disorders that affect humankind.
The progress made in this area has occurred primarily through the
concerted efforts of increasing numbers of individual investigators, working
mostly in small groups on highly specific projects. The body of information

gained through such efforts has grown in a piecemeal fashion; it has now

reached a point of limitation, in terms of its usefulness, because the mass of

information is so great and its dissemination so poorly coordinated that critical

data are often difficult to recover and
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN25
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.define. Indeed, this approach to neuroscience research, which was so successful
in the past, may soon limit advances in the same way that a single surveyor who

charts a field cannot hope to map a continent without a coordinated plan

involving other mappers. A Brain Mapping Initiative could identify those

aspects of information exchange infrastructure that are critical to addressing a

broader goal, one that will include the advantages of single-investigator projects
and yet also yield the benefits of a larger, coordinated program. The Brain
Mapping Initiative is intended to subsume all the proposed aspects of a National

Neural Circuitry Database outlined in the charge to this committee. It is also

designed to express explicitly the goals of the proposed effort and reflect more

adequately the complex of electronic and digital resources that will be required.
A consensus is emerging that the initial steps can now be taken toward the
global task of understanding brain structure and functioning. The impact of

digital computer technology began in the physical sciences three or four

decades ago and led to such current large-scale efforts as the supercollider,

space telescope, and interplanetary probes. In neuroscience, the increasing

availability of new enabling technologies is likely to have similar, far-reaching

impacts. The development of high-density memory chips and the latest
generation of microprocessors provides a key stimulus to accelerated
development of image analysis graphics and image manipulation
Ša set of
capabilities known as visualization computing (McCormick et al., 1987). The

emergence of parallel processing, scientific visualization workstations, and high-

capacity digital communications may provide the technical support needed to

conduct coordinated projects in neuroscience.
A comprehensive, coordinated effort to understand basic organizational
patterns of brain connections needs to be undertaken. This effort should include

a definition of the chemical identity of neuronal populations and a description

of neuronal structure and neuronal circuit organization in each region in

sufficient detail to clarify the computational processes involved. The pace of

future advances in neuroscience will depend on critical choices, which need to
be made now, regarding the handling of information to be gathered in the
future. At issue is whether neuroscientists will embark on a large-scale effort to

develop and integrate new forms of technology for acquiring and managing

information.COMPLEXITY AND THE NEED FOR INFORMATION
MANAGEMENTThe brain exhibits by far the greatest complexity of any of the organs of
the human body. Indeed, there is reason to believe that a substantial
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN26
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.percentage of the human genome plays a role in creating neural structure,
connectional patterns, and neurochemistry. The brain's responsibilities are

numerous and include initiation of movement, mediation of sensation, and

regulation of other body organs. Its functioning provides the basis of perception

and cognition and underlies emotion and creative expression. Although

described as a master computer, the brain is fundamentally more complex and
its processes far more subtle than those of any current computer design. With
the advantage of parallel operation of neuronal populations, the brain manages

and controls a wide variety of tasks simultaneously, reliably, and with rapid

precision. Indeed, much of the brain's work proceeds even in the absence of an

individual's conscious awareness.
All brain activity results from electrical and chemical communication
among neurons (the primary signaling cells of the brain), each of which can

communicate with other neurons using signals at rates of up to 1,000 events

(impulses) per second. To understand the brain, neuroscientists must measure

and analyze the rapid changes in neuronal signaling activity that occur over the

vast networks of cells and connections. The scope of this endeavor is immense.

It is estimated that the human brain contains more than 100 billion neurons, and
each neuron maintains an average of about 1,000 connections, called synapses,
with other neurons. Some neurons have as many as 200,000 synapses. During

each moment of daily life, neural signals may be transmitted across any of

approximately 100 trillion synapses.
Improvements in human health require greater integration and synthesis of
knowledge than can be gained simply by describing the intricate, extensive

circuitry that characterizes a normal or average brain. To treat schizophrenia,

Alzheimer's disease, brain injury, degenerative diseases, developmental deficits,

and chemical dependency, it will be necessary to understand the biochemical

reactions and specialized neurochemistry expressed by different types of

neurons. In addition, neuroscience must take into account the differences among

individuals that arise from environmental as well as hereditary factors. Such
differences range from subtle genetic variations in small populations of neurons
to differing developmental states and wide-ranging perturbations of major brain

systems.In many ways, because of the brain's organization, neuroscience research is
obliged to proceed along a multilevel hierarchy, from behavior to molecular

interactions (see 
Chapter 3
). Each level of research uses numerous techniques
that are specifically designed to collect information appropriate to that level.

But information from one level often has important implications for knowledge

at other levels. Effective synthesis of the data depends on the traditional

academic skills of
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN27
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the scholar; it is becoming increasingly difficult, however, for neuroscientists to
identify, manage, and process all the information needed for the efficient design

and conduct of their research. Even with well-developed traditional academic

skills, the neuroscientist clearly needs new information organization and access

technologies. Electronic information management provides assistance at a high

level of synthesis
Šin much the same way that hand calculators and word
processors facilitate tasks like balancing a budget or creating a document.
To draw an analogy, neuroscientists are like puzzle builders who must
integrate and fit together numerous small pieces of information derived from

the hundreds of available techniques. Metaphorically, the challenge is to

assemble a multimillion-piece, three-dimensional puzzle, starting with an

incomplete set of pieces (many key facts about the brain remain unknown) and
incomplete knowledge of how different pieces relate to one another (seemingly
disparate facts are often closely related). In addition, the puzzle that represents

the brain must depict more than simply a structure. It must integrate structure

with function, function with chemistry, and chemistry with genetic mechanisms.

Generating the data that represent the individual pieces of the puzzle is difficult

in and of itself: the techniques available to neuroscientists all have inherent

limitations and usually produce only incremental bits of information, although

every year more bits are added and new puzzle pieces identified. The next

decade is expected to provide enough new pieces to allow for the discovery of

exciting new ways to understand, protect, and restore brain functioning. But

innovative methods of information assembly and integration will be as

important as the discovery of the individual pieces.
In science, the conventional way to gain access to relevant information
generated outside one's own laboratory is through the study of scientific

literature and by formal and informal communication with other scientists. As

the number of publications and literature sources grows, the use of such

resources becomes more and more expensive, inefficient, and incomplete. It

now takes an inordinate amount of time to sift through the various conventional
publications. The process usually requires a narrowly focused search strategy,
which yields less information than is actually available. Eventually, the process

is self limiting. To pursue the puzzle analogy, it is like trying to assemble the

three-dimensional puzzle by using two-dimensional sketches of the pieces,

rather than being able to hold the original three-dimensional pieces.

Furthermore, because the pieces are scattered in various locations, most of one's

time is spent in looking for the individual pieces and not in trying to understand

how they are interrelated.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN28
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.For many years, a number of neuroscientists have envisioned alternative
strategies for coping with the problem of information management, which is

distinct from that of acquiring more data. Information management is aimed

toward realizing the greatest benefit from the data that already exist. Two major

kinds of information management are the most critical for neuroscience: (1)

databases, which allow at least partial automation of the task of relating diverse
data types in a systematic, efficient manner, and (2) the capacity for
visualization of structures in three dimensions. Visualization computing,

whether by machine or by the scholar's brain, captures the discoverable

architecture of the brain and relates this architecture to brain functioning.
Scientists mapping the human genome or sequencing biologically
important proteins have been using databases for years (Smith, 1990; Vela,

1990). These databases contain precise information, obtained directly from

experimental investigation, regarding the sequence of base pairs of specific

genes, their locations on specific chromosomes, and the amino acid sequences
of known and newly discovered proteins. Investigators consider these databases
invaluable for a host of reasons. Most commonly, researchers check a newly

charted protein sequence against thousands of other known sequences to see if

their new sequence is related to other known proteins. Similarly, the base pair

sequences of genes of one species are routinely checked against sequences from

other species to determine the level of homology of specific genes across

species. Beyond simple comparison, knowledge of base pairs and protein

sequences can provide key information regarding biological functions. Thus,

protein and gene mapping databases are more than simply references; they are

quickly becoming essential components of the scientific process of discovery

(see Box 2-1; DeLisi, 1988; Colwell, 1989).
The experience of the protein and gene mapping community is an
instructive example of the benefits to be gained from incorporating database

and information technology into biomedical research efforts. There are major

differences, however, that must be taken into account when considering how to
extend this approach to the field of neuroscience. Chief among these differences
is that of complexity. Although proteins exhibit tremendous diversity, much of

this diversity is represented by the linear sequence of amino acids that make up

each protein. Such linear arrays are easy to store in traditional databases and

also represent the key information for genes. All proteins also have a three-

dimensional structure, however. Computerized molecular modeling has been

very successful in displaying molecular structures in three dimensions (Howard

Hughes Medical Institute, 1990), but it is not yet possible to incorporate these

three-dimensional models into
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN29
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.traditional databases. In contrast to molecular biology, understanding the
diversity inherent in brain structure and functioning requires the three-

dimensional display of many types of experimental information. Because the

fundamental complexity of neuroscience data exceeds that of molecular biology

data, the development of information management technologies to enhance

neuroscience research will present great challenges. Yet such challenges are
approachable, and the potential benefits to greater understanding of the human
brain are compelling reasons for confronting them.
BOX 2-1THE GENE FOR NEUROFIBROMATOSIS 1
First described in the late nineteenth century, neurofibromatosis 1
(NF1) is an inherited condition affecting 1 in every 3,500 people. The two
most common symptoms of NF1 are areas of dark pigmentation on the
skin, and benign but often disfiguring tumors, called neurofibromas,
beneath the skin. A wide range of other, less common symptoms appear
in connection with NF1, and these include learning disabilities, mental
retardation, malignancies of the nervous system, scoliosis, and other bone

abnormalities.
In 1987, James Gusella and his colleagues at Massachusetts
General Hospital (Seizinger et al., 1987) and Ray White and his research
team at the University of Utah (Barker et al., 1987), localized the gene
responsible for causing NF1 to chromosome 17. The abnormal gene was

subsequently isolated and sequenced by White's team and by Francis
Collins and his coworkers at the University of Michigan (Lewis, 1990). The
next step was to translate the genetic code into an amino acid sequence,
which was then fed into a computer and matched against databases of
other known sequences. Similarities were found between the protein

sequence of NF1 and those of two other genes, one being a gene that
codes for a group of proteins called GAP proteins, which are thought to
suppress tumor growth, and the other being a tumor-suppressing gene in
yeast. The homologies seem logicalŠaltered GAP protein function could
certainly have manifestations similar to those observed in NF1. Although
many important details remain to be filled in, what scientists already know
about GAP proteins and yeast genes will provide a springboard for

researchers striving to understand neurofibromatosis.
The knowledge base established by White, Collins, Gusella, and their
colleagues is likely to attract researchers from many disciplines that have
not traditionally studied neurofibromatosisŠcancer researchers in
particular, because NF1 now joins the growing list of potential tumor-
suppressor genes. A complete solution to the NF1 puzzle is unlikely in the
very near future, but discovery of the NF1 gene and its protein product
promises to speed development of prenatal diagnosis of and possibly
treatment for NF1.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN30
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXAMPLES OF THE VALUE OF INTEGRATING
KNOWLEDGE TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
Achieving advances in neuroscience is a difficult task, particularly those
advances that yield improvements in the treatment and understanding of

neurological, developmental, and mental diseases. Integration of knowledge

across the areas of investigation at each level of the neural hierarchy is required.

The importance of applying these diverse methodologies to discern how the

brain functions can be illustrated by the following explicit examples of the

hierarchical organization within neuroscience (see also 
Chapter 3
).Vision: How We See Affects How We Think
The visual system, one of the most intensively studied systems of the
brain, reveals remarkable complexity in organization and functioning. Because

it occurs so effortlessly, vision is something we often take for granted and

consider to be a fairly simple matter. In fact, however, the brain conducts

extensive processing of all visual information to allow for pattern recognition,

interpretation, and appreciation of such concepts as beauty. The neural

underpinnings of these abilities are contained within a rich, intricate network of
pathways that involve billions of individual neurons. The system also includes
muscles and motor regions of the brain to point the eyes toward areas of interest

and to track objects in motion (see 
Box 2-2).Investigations of the visual system have used a wide range of techniques
that have contributed substantial knowledge regarding the anatomy,

biochemistry, and physiology of the system. The information that reaches the

eyes is first processed by a thin layer of cells that make up the retina at the back

of the eye. Through exquisitely sensitive signal transduction mechanisms,

retinal cells respond to a range of inputs, including color. Coordination among
the cells in the retina also provides the first filtering of incoming information by
the balancing of excitatory and inhibitory processes. From the retina,

information is transmitted to a pair of nuclei on each side of the brain, called the

lateral geniculate nuclei, in a highly ordered pattern so that each half of the

visual field is precisely mapped onto the lateral geniculate on the opposite side

of the brain. So well understood is this map that differing kinds of visual

deficits can indicate the exact location of damage (a frequent occurrence

following stroke or as a result of the pressure of a growing tumor) along the

pathways of the visual system. The lateral geniculate nuclei relay visual

information to the primary visual cortex. Again, the information is mapped in a

highly ordered pattern with segregation of the inputs from each eye.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN31
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 2-2SOMETIMES THE BRAIN LEARNS TO IGNORE
VISUAL INPUT
To focus on objects in the visual field, the muscles of both eyes are
normally coordinated so that both eyes move in unison. But abnormal eye

muscle development in one eye can cause misalignment of the two eyes,
often resulting in a condition known as 
strabismus. A child born with this
condition will favor one eye to avoid double vision, and, over time, visual
acuity in the less favored eye deteriorates. Left uncorrected, the child
becomes blind in that eye. Before the neural basis of binocular vision was
understood, procedures to correct strabismus were typically done at age 8
or 9, long after permanent deterioration had occurred. Today, the

condition is corrected very early to protect such children's normal vision.
Measurement of how neurons in the visual cortex respond to different
stimuli has revealed much about the microprocessing of information. Most

important, many visual neurons are selective for specific features in the visual

world. For example, Nobel laureates David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel

discovered that many neurons are selective for the orientation of a bar, which

allows them to signal the presence of particular edges and contours (Hubel and

Wiesel, 1979). Since their discovery, other researchers have described types of
neurons that are sensitive to color, directional movements, and, at higher levels,
even complex shapes like faces.
From the primary visual cortex, information is transmitted to many other
cortical areas involved in higher aspects of visual processing. This dispersion of

information is necessary for all the activities associated with vision, including

reading, writing, and recognition of objects in the environment. The monkey

has 32 regions of the cortex that are known to be involved in some type of

visual processing (
Plate 2-1
). Each of these regions subserves a specific
function; yet they are interlinked by more than 300 separate pathways. Much
visual information ultimately reaches neural centers involved in cognitive
functions and emotions. Understanding these parallel, distributed pathways has

important implications for understanding the deficits from brain injury,

including stroke. They also help explain some of the most puzzling aspects of

these problems. (For example, some stroke patients can recognize words and

objects such as tables and chairs, but cannot recognize a loved one's face

[Sacks, 1970]. Because each of these different stimuli present distinct features,

damage to one area of the cortex may affect the perception of one constellation

of features but not others.)
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN32
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Cognition and recognition are not the only results of visual sensation. The
retina also projects visual information to nuclei that are involved not in feature

analysis but in controlling the eye muscles. These pathways mediate the turning

of the eyes in the direction of a stimulus; the coordinated, simultaneous

movement of both eyes; and the ability to track moving objects in the visual

field. Again, certain kinds of damage affect these pathways and may result in
debilitating deficits.
As in all neural systems, the functioning of the visual system relies on the
coordinated activity of neurons that communicate with each other using

electrical and chemical signals generated by hundreds of different molecules,

including neurotransmitters, second messengers, and signal transduction

molecules. Many of these molecules have been found in distinctive patterns in
specific areas of the visual system. The combination of complex physiological
responses, complex anatomical pathways, and hundreds of neurochemical

interactions creates a system that is extremely difficult to disentangle. Despite

all the information we possess, we still do not understand the fundamental

nature of visual perception, nor do we understand the specific computations

carried out in the vast networks at each stage of information processing.
Finding answers to these challenging questions will require not only
additional experimental data but new strategies for assembling the available

information to facilitate integration of the diverse data types. To accomplish this

integration, the use of three-dimensional graphics, sophisticated database

technology, and greater levels of electronic communication among investigators

will be critical. For example, maps of the anatomical pathways must be overlaid
with neurochemical maps to understand how the wide repertoire of chemical
modulatory influences may be related to different aspects of visual perception

and visual-motor coordination. Computer simulations and realistic

computational models, based on physiological and anatomical data, are needed

to understand the specific signal-processing strategies used in various regions of

the visual system. Such computational studies are also of interest to engineers

and computer scientists in the construction of new types of sensors and signal

detectors for nonbiological uses.
It is clear that the full potential of visual system research has yet to be
realized. Progress in this field will contribute to the ability to treat or

compensate for visual deficits caused by brain injury. In addition, this work can

contribute to the amelioration of blindness and diseases of the visual system,

including glaucoma, diabetic retinopathy, and inherited retinal degenerations.

The mapping and physiological characterization of the multiple visual system

pathwaysADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN33
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.also have direct relevance for understanding other portions of the brain,
especially other portions of the cerebral cortex.
Substance Abuse: The search for the Biology of Self-
destructionA large fraction of the U.S. population uses substances that are injurious to
personal health. These substances range from legally approved drugs (e.g.,

nicotine and alcohol) to illegal drugs (e.g., cocaine and heroin) that are

accompanied by grave societal costs such as violent crime and infant mortality.

The key to understanding and dealing with substance abuse lies in the brain.

One path of research has already led to the critically important discovery that

there are cell-surface receptors not only for neurotransmitters but also for many

drugs, including nicotine, marijuana, heroin and other opiate drugs, and

benzodiazepines, such as the tranquilizer Valium
® (Plate 2-2
). Often, certain
drugs bind to the same receptor to which a particular neurotransmitter binds.
For example, the two kinds of acetylcholine receptors were first distinguished

by the fact that one bound nicotine and the other did not. Such receptors have

been mapped to specific nuclei of the brain. Thus, the notion that certain drugs

have specific actions in discrete brain regions offers a possible route for

disrupting the effects of those drugs.
But the problem goes much deeper. For example, alcohol does not act at
specific receptor sites; its effects are much more general throughout the brain.

Furthermore, all psychoactive substances produce experiences that provide

some type of motivation or pleasure that can lead to addiction. Therefore,

addiction to medically harmful substances is directly related to the involvement

of brain systems that mediate the normal pleasurable experiences associated

with many day-to-day activities such as eating, drinking, and socialization.

Neuroscientists do not completely understand the location, organization, and

chemistry of the system in the brain that underlies positive emotions and
pleasure and, with that, the pleasurable, motivating effects of drugs and alcohol.
Certain fascinating clues, however, have been found. For example, animals will

self-administer cocaine so avidly that they totally ignore food; yet this behavior

can be completely reversed if the neurotransmitter dopamine is removed from

an area of the brain known as the nucleus accumbens. No conceptual

framework similar to those that guide our understanding of the visual and motor

systems has emerged to explain this phenomenon. Many scientists hypothesize

that a number of brain regions in the limbic system and hypothalamus are

involved, but the connections between these regions are extremely complex and

not well understood.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN34
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Two types of databases could greatly enhance research into the biology of
substance abuse. Databases that allow for the easy comparison of brain

distribution patterns of receptors for the many substances that are abused would

be invaluable. Their usefulness would be particularly great if distribution

patterns could be compared with the known circuitry of the brain, with the

associated distribution patterns of known neurotransmitters, receptors, and ion
channels, and with the results of behavioral studies related to the neural
mechanisms of addiction. No conventional library system currently allows for

this level of analysis of visual material. A second, related kind of database

would contain information about the known neural pathways implicated in

addiction. Such a resource could aid the development of a viable picture of the

brain system involved in mediating the reinforcing aspects of drug use and in

the formulation of efficient strategies for research into areas where more

information is needed. Substance abuse offers a compelling example of how the

availability of comprehensive databases that incorporate and integrate

information from many fields, including chemical neuroanatomy,

pharmacology, and biopsychology, would almost certainly speed the

development of effective treatments for a widespread, serious threat to human
health.Pain: Sometimes a Warning, Sometimes a Curse
Pain is a ubiquitous reality of life. We need pain to recognize sprained
ankles, overstressed back muscles, kidney stones, infections, and a host of other

ills. This useful warning system can go awry, however, and become an

intractable barrier to a happy, productive life (
Plate 2-3
). The neural
underpinnings of pain involve almost every region of the brain, spinal cord, and
peripheral nervous system. Moreover, these neural mechanisms interact with
other systems of the body, including the immune system and certain endocrine

glands, and are even affected by changes in the metabolic status of the

individual (e.g., as in diabetes). Pain is thus a remarkably complex process

about which much remains to be learned.
In its simplest form, pain results from the activation of peripheral nerves
by certain types of stimuli impinging on the skin and internal organs. This

neural information is transmitted to and processed by specific parts of the spinal

cord. From the spinal cord, information about injury is transmitted to numerous
brain regions, including specific relay nuclei that, in turn, transmit it to the
sensory part of the cerebral cortex and to nonspecific nuclei that disperse the

information through their abundant connections to other brain regions.

InformationADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN35
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.regarding a painful stimulus reaches brain regions that are involved in emotion,
sensory perception, body movement, and hormonal release. In addition, the

information reaches brain regions that connect back to the spinal cord and that

are capable of modulating the activity of spinal neurons. These complex

connections form the anatomical basis for systems that can activate or inhibit

pain. The pain system also utilizes scores of different neurotransmitters and an
interesting group of peptides that include endorphin and enkephalin, which are
similar to morphine.
The intricacy of these connections explains in part some of the most
fascinating and worrisome aspects of pain perception. For example, it is

common for wounded people to walk considerable distances to reach help

without conscious awareness of their pain and for people with malignant

cancerous growths to be free of pain in the cancer's early stages (possibly

because of the activation of pain-inhibiting systems). On the other hand, people

who have had amputations, including mastectomy, often feel pain in the
amputated body part, despite its absence (possibly because of pain-activating
systems). The intricacy of the pain system also accounts for the wide variety of

kinds of pain people experience, of kinds of treatments that are effective, and of

scientific and clinical disciplines that deal with pain.
The need for enhanced communication in neuroscientific disciplines is
well illustrated by the example of pain research and treatment. In the clinical

arena, neurosurgeons have had a long-standing interest in finding ways to

disrupt appropriate brain areas to alleviate intractable pain. The electrical

stimulation or selective destruction of such areas has met with limited success,

sometimes utter failure; in the worst-case scenario, the pain returns and is

greater than before the surgery. Further advances in these and other techniques

depend on expansion of knowledge from anatomical, electrophysiological, and
neurochemical studies in animals.
The experience and knowledge of other disciplines are also important. For
example, anesthesiologists deal with pain on an everyday basis, but the

responsibility for pain management typically changes from the anesthesiologist

to other health care providers as a patient is moved from the recovery or

delivery room to a regular medical/surgical ward. As a result, widely divergent

strategies are used. Increased communication among these various care

providers could lead to more effective pain management and the ability to use

pain (and the lack of it) as a diagnostic tool. As it becomes clearer that pain
management has a substantial impact on recovery following surgery,
communication between health care providers and basic researchers should be

increased to promote better information transfer.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN36
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Basic pain research has generated an impressive amount of knowledge
about the brain and the way it deals with pain. Recent work has begun to

characterize the connectivity patterns of spinal and brainstem pathways that

mediate pain, as well as their biochemical and physiological qualities. It is

becoming increasingly evident that the neural mechanisms underlying

musculoskeletal, cutaneous (skin), and visceral (internal organs) pain are
different, and these differences are under active investigation. Differences in
chronic and acute pain also are being intensely studied. Investigators are

defining as well the actions of various immune system products at the site of

injury and their contribution to pain. A very recent development has been the

use of animal models for pain caused by arthritis and peripheral nerve injury.

This work has brought the first hints that damage to the nerves can result in

permanent changes in the spinal cord, and possibly in other brain regions, that

may well be responsible for intractable pain syndromes. Prevention of these

changes by early intervention may help to alleviate a sizable proportion of the

human suffering that results from this kind of pain.
Given the prevalence of pain and the societal burdens it imposes, there is a
pressing need to find better ways to transfer into clinical practice what is being

learned from basic research and to apply clinical observations to the design of

basic research experiments. A family of computerized resources could promote

these information transfers by making anatomical, biochemical, and
physiological data available in a manner that integrates the information
graphically, cross-references data from other disciplines, and provides relevant

clinical observations. A repository for various pain diagnostic and treatment

strategies and observed outcomes would also be useful. Finding answers to the

many unresolved questions about pain and its varied pathologies will depend, in

part, on several communication-related factors including the most efficient use

of the information that exists now and the widest dissemination of the

information that will be generated in the future.
Schizophrenia: Broken Minds, Shattered Dreams
For the 2 million Americans who suffer from schizophrenia, the world is
often terrifying, confusing, and bitterly lonely. This devastating disease of the

brain most often strikes people in adolescence and young adulthood and is

expressed in a variety of forms, depending on the specific constellation of
symptoms that occur. These forms range from those with predominantly
''negative" (loss of function) symptoms to those with mainly "positive"

symptoms (exaggeratedADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN37
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.or distorted brain functions). Thus, a person with schizophrenia will exhibit
some combination of the following: hallucinations and delusions, blunted or

inappropriate emotional expression, inability to derive pleasure from normal

experiences, cognitive difficulties, and abnormal socialization. Major efforts are

under way in neuroscience to discover the causes of schizophrenia, to

understand the mechanisms of the disease, and to find better treatments for
those whose lives are burdened by this illness.
Researchers are pursuing three major areas of investigation: neurochemical
abnormalities, structural and functional brain abnormalities, and possible

genetic and environmental causes of the disease. The discovery that certain

drugs can alleviate the hallucinations and delusions of schizophrenics provided

strong evidence that a neurochemical imbalance was important in the disease.
Because all effective drugs were found to decrease the effects of the
neurotransmitter dopamine, research is now focusing on the mechanisms of

dopamine action in the brain and on mapping the areas of the brain that use

dopamine in neural transmission. Unlike Parkinson's disease, a condition in

which a specific group of dopamine-containing neurons die, people with

schizophrenia have no single, well-defined area of the brain that is damaged;

rather, anatomical studies suggest that many dopamine-containing brain areas

are affected. In addition, unlike Parkinson's disease, which exhibits a loss of

dopamine owing to neuronal death, schizophrenia displays an apparent excess

of dopamine activity. This excess activity may be due to an abnormally high

number of a specific type of cell-surface receptor for dopamine, the D
2 receptor.
(Receptor subtypes are themselves a subject of intense interest because each
subtype behaves differently; thus, their existence adds ever deeper levels of
complexity to the questions regarding the precise role of dopamine in

schizophrenia.)Further research is necessary to understand how abnormalities in the
dopamine system of the brain contribute to the symptoms of schizophrenia.

Evidence is mounting that other neurotransmitters are also involved. For

example, it is well known that dopamine blocking drugs are effective only

against the positive symptoms of schizophrenia, which suggests that the

blunting of affect and other negative symptoms do not result from dopamine
abnormalities. Recent studies have shown that these negative symptoms can be
lessened by drugs that act on another neurotransmitter, gamma aminobutyric

acid. Given the variable symptomatology of schizophrenia and the complexity

of the brain systems involved, it is not surprising that continued progress is

accompanied by new questions regarding the role of dopamine in this disease.

Nevertheless, investigations into the neurochemical
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN38
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.perturbations of schizophrenia have far-reaching implications for improved
treatment of the disease. Digital maps of neurochemical systems, including the

locations of different receptor subtypes, and the known functions of those

systems in normal and disease states would be of particular value in the study of

schizophrenia.FIGURE 2-1
 Magnetic resonance images of the brains of two 44-year-old
male identical twins, one with schizophrenia (right) and the other without
(left). Arrows point to the cerebral ventricles, which are enlarged in the
affected twin. Images provided by the National Institute of Mental Health.
The ability to "image" the structure and functioning of the brain is a
fundamental advance that is being vigorously applied to the study of

schizophrenia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has revealed some subtle

and intriguing structural abnormalities. These include in some individuals

abnormally large cerebral ventricles, specific spaces in the brain containing
cerebrospinal fluid, and an apparent thinning of certain areas of the cortex that
are involved in emotional expression (
Figure 2-1
). Nevertheless, the functional
implications of these structural abnormalities have yet to be determined. Brain

imaging techniques, such as positron emission tomography (PET scanning) and

its variations, can be used to measure such functions as energy metabolism,

blood flow, and receptor binding; localized electrical activity can be recorded

using electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography. These imaging

studies can be done while subjects are actively involved in specific tasks or at

rest. Such studies can also shed light on brain functioning during periods of

severe dysfunction or relative
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN39
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.remission, and during treatment with antischizophrenic medications. Studies of
regional cerebral blood flow suggest decreased activation of the frontal cortex

in response to certain tasks in some people with schizophrenia. PET studies of

cerebral metabolism have confirmed this dampened activity of the frontal cortex

and have further suggested increased activation of other brain regions. PET

studies of dopamine receptor binding in schizophrenic patients are just
beginning to yield interesting, although sometimes conflicting, information.
The potential of functional imaging studies to increase our knowledge of
schizophrenia is great, but these studies are complicated by several factors. For

example, the variable clusters of symptoms exhibited by different patients and

their differing treatment histories must be carefully correlated with the specific

findings from imaging experiments. In pharmacological studies, such as those
that examine dopamine receptor binding, the differing properties of the drugs
that are used must be well understood to interpret the results of each

experiment. Databases of imaging data combined with careful annotations

regarding patient history, pharmacological properties, and other variables could

greatly facilitate more rapid and more meaningful conclusions from these types

of studies.
Genetic studies, involving both population and molecular genetics, are
integral to research on schizophrenia. Studies of families and particularly of

twins clearly suggest genetic factors in the disease. Yet attempts to locate the

"schizophrenia gene" have not been successful. Candidates include genes

coding for the dopamine (D
2) receptor or for certain enzymes involved in
dopamine synthesis or degradation. The lack of success in finding a likely
single gene, combined with the complicated manifestations of the disease and
the different responses to treatment, suggests that schizophrenia might actually

be a group of related diseases. Indeed, strong evidence supports the notion that

there is probably more than one gene related to schizophrenia and that instead

of being a direct cause, it confers increased susceptibility for the disease.
This increased susceptibility raises the issue of environmental factors that
might precipitate expression of such a genetic predisposition. Proposed factors

range from viruses, or other infectious agents, to nutritional deficits to traumatic

early childhood experiences. Information about these environmental factors and

the varied clinical manifestations of the disease is exceedingly difficult to

correlate. Therefore, another use for sophisticated information management

tools is to begin to build a knowledge base about all that is known regarding the
environmental history of each patient, in context with information about the
pattern and prevalence of schizophrenia in
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN40
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.their families. In addition, once candidate genes for increased susceptibility are
identified, they can be compared with the genetic maps in existing databases

(see Chapter 4).Schizophrenia stands as yet another example of the brain's complexity.
Better answers about the causes of and effective treatments for schizophrenia

are anxiously awaited by those who suffer from the disease and by their

families. Although more data are needed to provide these answers, there is also

a pressing need to correlate and combine more adequately the data that already

exist.THE GROWTH OF NEUROSCIENCE
Neuroscience Research Has Grown in Response to Critical
ProblemsThe costs of caring for those who suffer from neurological disorders, drug
abuse, and mental illness, combined with the cost of lost wages and other

indirect losses from these conditions, are extremely difficult to estimate because

reporting mechanisms cannot account for those who have more than one

disorder (e.g., hearing loss and Parkinson's disease) and the severity of these

disorders vary widely. Yet even without such estimates we know that these

disorders constitute a sizable liability to the health and well-being of U.S.
society (
Table 2-1
). Nearly 23 million Americans suffer from neurological and
communicative disorders resulting from head and spinal cord injury, hearing

and speech impairments, and infectious diseases of the nervous system,

including acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). More than 3.5 million

people suffer the effects of debilitating disorders such as Alzheimer's,

Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases, and demyelinating and atrophic

disorders such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (National

Advisory Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke Council,

1989; National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 1989).

Impairment arising from alcohol abuse, drug abuse, and mental illness also

takes a significant toll. It is estimated that more than 60 million Americans

suffer from such mental illnesses as schizophrenia, affective disorders, anxiety
disorders, various types of dementia, eating disorders, childhood and adolescent
disorders, and sleep disorders, and more than 20 million Americans suffer from

alcohol or drug abuse (Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health

Administration, 1990; Gerstein and Harwood, 1990; Rice et al., 1990).
Researchers have estimated the lifetime prevalence for any alcohol, drug,
or mental health (ADM) disorder to be 32.7 percent (Regier et al., 1990).

Moreover, there is significant comorbidity among ADM
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN41
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.disorders. For example, the Regier study also showed that 37 percent of those
with an alcohol disorder had a comorbid mental disorder; of patients with a

drug disorder (other than alcohol), more than half (53 percent) had a mental

disorder as well. The frontline efforts now occurring to understand and treat this

diverse array of diseases are headed by basic and clinical neuroscientists.
TABLE 2-1 Prevalence of Selected Neurological Disorders, Mental Illnesses, and
Alcohol and Drug Abuse
ConditionEstimated Cases (in millions)
aAlzheimer's disease and related dementias3.0
Brain tumors0.062

Epilepsy2.0
Multiple sclerosis0.131
Neuro-AIDS0.02
bStroke1.9

Trauma (head and spinal cord injury)1.0

Mental illnessesAffective disorders27.7
Antisocial personality8.8

Anxiety disorders25.3

Schizophrenic disorders2.6
Alcohol and drug abuse
Alcohol17.7
Drug4.6
Total94.8a Some persons have more than one disorder concurrently (e.g., epilepsy and affective disorder),
and these figures may reflect that comorbidity.
b Incidence (number of new cases reported each year).
SOURCE: For neurological disorders, NINDS, November 1989 and NANCDSC, January 1989; for
mental illnesses, Rice et al., 1990; for alcohol and drug abuse, ADAMHA, 1990 and Gerstein and

Harwood, 1990.
Neuroscience Has Grown in Response to New Technologies
and an Expanded Understanding of Biology
Much of the recent growth in neuroscience has been spurred by the
development of important enabling technologies, which have opened entirely

new areas of research. For example, the development of the
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN42
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.oscilloscope permitted the first accurate visualization of the electrical activity of
neurons. The development of the electron microscope allowed investigators to

study components of neurons too small to be seen with conventional

microscopes. The development of antibody techniques to tag specific molecules

permitted the visualization and localization of specific neurochemicals. In

addition, the combination of tissue culture techniques with antibody labeling
and molecular biological techniques has provided critical new knowledge
regarding the mechanisms of neural functioning. Finally, the development of

computer technologies has played a fundamental role over the past two decades

in enabling data collection and analysis of single-neuron physiological data.

More recently, the development of graphic visualization techniques has

permitted researchers to view the active functioning of a human brain.
Many other factors in addition to technology have contributed to the
growth of neuroscience
Šfor example, increased appreciation of the importance
of the fundamental biological processes that underlie brain disorders, especially

mental illness. In the past decade, the groundwork has been laid for tackling

some of the most intractable neurological problems, including spinal cord

injury, epilepsy, stroke, and neurodegenerative diseases. These and other
achievements have led to a feast of exciting research opportunities that have
attracted great numbers of new investigators to neuroscience in the past 10

years. The Society for Neuroscience membership roster currently stands at more

than 17,500, a remarkable figure, given that there were only 500 charter

members in 1969 and 6,350 members in 1979. (At the society's annual meeting

in 1990, almost 8,000 abstracts of individual research projects were presented.)

Beyond U.S. borders, growth in international organizations is also apparent: the

International Brain Research Organization boasts more than 20,000 members

from 73 countries. An increase in scientific journals has accompanied this

growth, with more than 200 scientific journals now exclusively devoted to

neuroscience disciplines in the areas of basic science or clinical investigation.
Although growth in the field of neuroscience has contributed greatly to an
understanding of the brain, it is not without its problems. The volume of

knowledge and information generated from this work has been growing linearly

with public and private investments in resources and with individual

commitment. This expanding knowledge offers extraordinary opportunities for

neuroscience to make rapid progress in the treatment and prevention of mental

and neurological illnesses during the next decade. Without innovative strategies
for information management, communication, and processing, however, the
amountADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN43
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and complexity of the data present daunting impediments to future advances.
Neuroscience Research is a National Priority
A comprehensive resource for managing information on brain structure
and functioning is necessary to protect an already substantial public investment.

One measure of the current national investment in neuroscience research is

federal and nonfederal expenditures. Tables 
2-2a and 
2-2b summarize the
neuroscience-related expenditures of two agencies, the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) and the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration
(ADAMHA). Many other agencies in the federal biomedical research complex

also support basic, as well as clinical, neuroscience research. The National

Science Foundation has a long history of funding basic neuroscience research,

and other federal research support derives from such agencies as the

Department of Energy, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and the Office of

Naval Research (
Table 2-3
). Outside the federal government, a number of
private agencies and foundations, such as the Howard Hughes Medical Institute

and the MacArthur Foundation, provide support for neuroscience research

(Table 2-3
). Although it is impossible to determine the precise amount spent on
neuroscience research (because of the diversity of funding sources and the

inclusion of neuroscience-targeted funds in budgets that reflect support in more
than one field of biomedical research), it is estimated that the total national
investment is approximately $1.5 billion per year (
Table 2-3
).When considered within the context of the massive disease burden from
mental and neurological diseases, even greater investment in neuroscience

research could be justified. Strategies such as the Brain Mapping Initiative are

designed in part to protect current investments by maximizing the integration of
information gained from neuroscience research. The long-term benefits of this
research are numerous and will substantially reduce the national and

international burden
Šboth in terms of costs and human suffering
Šimposed by
neurological and mental disorders. To hasten this progress, strategies must be

developed to integrate new discoveries with the extensive body of accumulated

knowledge. Such integration is needed now because the advances made by

neuroscientists, especially in the past decade, have brought this research

enterprise to the threshold of major breakthroughs in a number of areas,

including neurogenetics, biobehavioral sciences, and neural injury.

Neuroscience research is a complex field that comprises many subdisciplines,

most of which share a common need for a comprehensive map of the brain in

digitalADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN44
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TABLE 2-2a Investment in Neuroscience Research (in thousands of dollars) by the
National Institutes of Health
Institute1988 (Actual)1989 (Actual)
1990 (Estimated)
Division of ResearchResources30,30134,36528,728
National Cancer Institute34,06841,37842,753
National Eye Institute79,18881,24481,753
National Heart, Lung, andBlood Institute52,97056,28057,700
National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases
24,57140,19741,805
National Institute of
Arthritis andMusculoskeletal and Skin
Diseases6281,1371,255
National Institute of Child
Health and Human
Development78,17391,03295,000
National Institute of Dental
Research9,3378,5118,755
National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive andKidney Diseases
25,50026,90028,100
National Institute of
Environmental Health
Sciences15,58819,12019,866
National Institute of General
Medical Sciences
11,40011,50011,750
National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and
Stroke458,792471,632490,409
National Institute on Aging63,22178,57384,380
Total883,707961,869992,254SOURCE: Division of Financial Management, National Institutes of Health, September 1990.
TABLE 2-2b Investment in Neuroscience Research (in thousands of dollars) by the
Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration a
Agency198819891990National Institute of Mental Health118,803153,881180,161
National Institute on Drug Abuse38,00054,00066,000

National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism18,60923,90429,313
Total175,412231,785275,474a All numbers are actual.
SOURCE: Financial management and planning offices of the three agencies, December 1990.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN45
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.form. The incorporation, through a Brain Mapping Initiative, of enabling
technologies in the field of neuroscience research is an appropriate strategy to

future breakthroughs.TABLE 2-3 U.S. Investment (in thousands of dollars) in Neuroscience and Mental

Health Research: Sponsoring Agencies and FoundationsaUnitAmountbNational Institutes of Health992,254

Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration275,474

Department of Veterans Affairs115,369
cNational Science Foundation39,000

Office of Naval Research22,200

Department of Energy20,000

Office of Scientific Research U.S. Air Force15,600

Environmental Protection Agency3,900
dDepartment of Agriculture3,501

Centers for Disease Control1,204
eFoundations
Howard Hughes Medical Institute35,000

The John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation14,000

Pew Charitable Trusts6,500
cWhitehall Foundation, Inc.2,000

Total1,546,002a Includes basic and clinical, extramural and intramural research only (services excluded).
b Figures are for fiscal year 1990 except where otherwise indicated and were obtained through
personal communications and, in some cases, annual reports.
c Fiscal year 1989 figures.
d Figure is for the Neurotoxicology Division of the Health Effects Research Laboratory.
e Extramural grants for head injury research.
REFERENCESAlcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration. 1990. Alcohol and Health (Seventh
Special Report to the U.S. Congress). ADAMHA Pub. No. 90-1656. Washington, D.C.:

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service.
Barker, D., E. Wright, K. Nguyen, L. Cannon, P. Fain, D. Goldgar, D. T. Bishop, J. Carey, B. Baty,
J. Kivlin, H. Willard, J.S. Waye, G. Greig, L. Leinwand, Y. Nakamura. P. O'Connell, M.

Leppert, J.-M. Lalouel, R. White, and M. Skolnick. 1987. Gene for
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN46
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis is in the pericentromeric region of chromosome 17.
Science236:1100Œ1102.Colwell, R. R., ed. 1989. Biomolecular Data: A Resource in Transition. New York: Oxford
University Press.
DeLisi, C.1988. Computers in molecular biology: Current applications and emerging trends.
Science240:47Œ52.Gerstein, D. R., and H. J. Harwood, eds. 1990. Treating Drug Problems, vol. 1. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 1990. Finding the Critical Shapes. Bethesda, Md.: Howard
Hughes Medical Institute Office of Communications.
Hubel, D. H., and T. N. Wiesel. 1979. Brain mechanisms of vision. Scientific American241(3):150
Œ162.Lewis, R.1990. A glimpse of neurofibromatosis 1 protein function. Journal of NIH Research2
(Oct.):60Œ64.McCormick, B. H., T. A. DeFanti, and M. D. Brown, eds. 1987. Visualization in scientific
computing. SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics Newsletter21(6):1
Œ13.National Advisory Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke Council. 1989. Decade
of the Brain: Answers Through Scientific Research. NIH Pub. No. 88-2957. Bethesda,

Md.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health.
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. 1989. Profile. Bethesda, Md.: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health.
Regier, D. A., M. E. Farmer, D. S. Rae, B. Z. Locke, S. J. Keith, L. L. Judd, and F. K. Goodwin.
1990. Comorbidity of mental disorders with alcohol and other substance abuse. Journal of

the American Medical Association264(19):2511
Œ2518.Rice, D. P., S. Kelman, L. S. Miller, and S. Dunmeyer, eds. 1990. The Economic Costs of Alcohol
and Drug Abuse and Mental Illness. ADAMHA Pub. No. 90-1694. Washington, D.C.:

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health

Administration.Rowbotham, M. C., and H. L. Fields. 1989. Post-herpetic neuralgia: The relation of pain complaint,
sensory disturbance, and skin temperature. Pain39:129
Œ144.Sacks, O.1970. The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat. New York: Harper and Row.

Seizinger, B. R., G. A. Rouleau, L. J. Ozelius, A. H. Lane, A. G. Faryniarz, M. V. Chao, S. Huson,
B. R. Korf, D. M. Parry, M. A. Pericak-Vance, and J. Gusella. 1987. Genetic linkage of

von Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis to the nerve growth factor receptor gene. Cell49

(5):589Œ594.Smith, T. F.1990. The history of the genetic sequence databases. Genomics6:701
Œ707.Vela, C.1990. Overview of U.S. Genome and Selected Scientific Databases. Background paper
prepared for the Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, Institute of Medicine.
ADVANCING NEUROSCIENCE IN THE DECADE OF THE BRAIN47
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Overview of Neuroscience Research: A
Closer Look at the Neural Hierarchy
This chapter is intended as a primer or simplified overview of some
aspects of neuroscience for those readers not familiar with the field. As such,
the chapter describes some of the experiments that are done at each level of a
vertical hierarchy of neural functioning, from behavior to genetic mechanisms

(Figure 3-1
). Researchers have developed hundreds of techniques and
formulated elaborate repertoires of experimental strategies to answer

fundamental questions about brain functions. When combined, these techniques

provide information at all levels of the vertical hierarchy. Although apparently

distinct, these levels cannot be separated because information that exists at one

horizontal plane must be considered in concert with information from all other

planes to generate a coherent picture of brain functioning. In addition, at each

vertical level, the results of many different experimental approaches need to be

integrated.Behavior and Emotion are Manifestations of Brain Activity
Behavior encompasses many degrees of complexity, from the most
rudimentary knee-jerk reflex to the subtlety and sophistication of movement
exhibited by a ballet dancer or chess grand master. The study of behavior can be

subdivided into several broad facets: sensory processing (vision, hearing, touch,

and smell leading to conscious perception), motor processing (reflexes and

coordinated movements), and cognitive processing (learning, thinking, and

planning). Behavior also includes psychological processes, such as personality

and mood.OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY48Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 3-1
 The neural hierarchy. Adapted from Shepherd, 1988.
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY49Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Animals as simple as fruit flies and snails exhibit behaviors that are
neurally driven. As organisms become more complex, their behaviors become

correspondingly more intricate. Human behavior represents the ultimate in rich

and elaborate repertoires that are affected by a range of factors from ''hard-

wired" genetic codes to minute-by-minute environmental perturbations.

Behavior and its neural under-pinnings must also be understood across different
developmental stages and different abnormal or pathological conditions. The
challenge in neuroscience is to understand the contributions of different factors

to specific behavioral and emotional functions. Because important factors exist

at all levels of the hierarchy, from organized brain systems to individual cells

and even genes, this formidable challenge can be met only by invoking a

diverse and powerful arsenal of experimental tools.
Many behavioral studies in animals employ conditioning techniques first
developed by Pavlov in the late 1920s. By pairing a bell with the presentation of

food to a dog, Pavlov was able to "condition" the dog to respond

physiologically with increased gastric secretion when only the bell was sounded

and no food was present. (In other words, a bell/food association was

established, and this mental association produced a physiological response in
the animal's body.) Later research efforts developed the concept of operant
conditioning: animals can be taught, using associations of food and sensory

stimuli such as sound or light, to press bars, enter doors, or perform some other

activity. Moreover, once an animal is trained to perform a specific activity, new

associations can be taught; how well these activities are learned, as well as the

disruption of well-learned activities, can then be assessed using a variety of

experimental manipulations. For example, many psychotropic drugs, including

morphine and nicotine, have been tested by operant conditioning in studies

aimed at finding replacement drugs that are perceived by the user to be similar

to the real drug but that have no addictive properties. Finally, because operant

conditioning models involve learning, behavioral experiments with rats born of

alcohol-ingesting mothers or rats exposed to lead poisoning have contributed to
an understanding of some of the learning deficits that result from prenatal or
environmental exposure to toxic substances.
Other behavioral research has involved the selective destruction or
electrical stimulation of discrete brain regions and the subsequent observation

of behavioral changes. Such experiments helped to associate a particular part of

the hypothalamus with the regulation of eating behavior, certain limbic system

nuclei with aggressive behavior, specific nuclei of the diencephalon with a

variety of movement disorders,
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY50Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and the hippocampus with memory deficits. As more is learned about the
presence, function, and location of brain neurotransmitters and

neuromodulators, these kinds of investigations are expanding to measure the

effects of loss and replacement of specific neurochemicals.
Learning and memory can also be measured in nonhuman animals. Simple
organisms, such as the fruit fly, can be classically conditioned, and, amazingly,

certain specific genetic mutations in the fruit fly are known to compromise

severely this type of learning (Dudai, 1985). Because there are important

similarities, or homologies, between the genes of fruit flies and those of higher
animals, identification of the protein encoded by the defective gene may
provide a clue to the genetic basis of learning in higher animals.
Animals such as monkeys are capable of complex learning tasks
Šforexample, long chains of discrete movements, association of symbols with

specific movements, association between different objects, or manipulation of

spatial relationships between objects. These tasks can be designed in such a way
as to distinguish short-term memory from long-term memory and to allow
precise measurement of learning acquisition. Behaviors such as these can then

be used as benchmarks for a range of manipulations of brain structure and

chemistry. Electrical recordings of brain activity made during specific tasks can

help localize the part of the brain that mediates the information processing and

control of movements necessary for the task. These tasks are also useful for

assessing the deficits caused by experimental brain injury or stroke.
The aim of behavioral research in animals is to discover neural processes
that can be correlated with human brain functions. Yet the techniques applied to

human behavior have also sought to go beyond such correlations and acquire a

window into cognitive and emotional function. For a long time, behavioral

research in humans was severely limited by the paucity of techniques
appropriate for human experimentation. Now, a number of new techniques
permit the study of human brain function. One important step was the advent of

noninvasive recording methods such as electroencephalographic (EEG)

recordings, which made it possible to associate certain behavioral states with

changes in the electrical activity of the cerebral cortex. (The recordings exhibit

different patterns during different states of consciousness, including quiet

wakefulness, alert wakefulness, and sleep.) Following its development, the EEG

technique was immediately applied to the study of many human neurological

and mental illnesses.More recently, it has become possible to discriminate between different
kinds of brain electrical activity by amplifying particular components
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY51Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of the EEG recordings during stimulation of specific visual, auditory, or sensory
systems. These so-called event-related potential (ERP) recordings, which are

essentially more finely tuned EEGs, contain specific waveforms that can be

mapped, albeit with limited resolution, to specific structures of the brain. ERPs

have been used to diagnose brain injury locations, describe abnormalities in

schizophrenic patients, and trace the pathways underlying certain types of
information processing. In the past five years, techniques have begun to be
developed to record the magnetic rather than electrical fields that are generated

by cortical activity. Magnetoencephalography, or neuromagnetic imaging, has

been applied to the study of epileptic seizure activity and may in the future add

greater resolution to the study of human brain activity.
Another exciting development is the ability to measure simultaneously the
activity of most of the discrete brain regions in humans, during a variety of

situations, with positron emission tomography. In PET scanning, short-lived

radioactive markers are attached to specific molecules and injected into the

bloodstream. These tagged molecules can then be visualized by detectors

outside the brain and the resulting images stored in a computer (
Plate 3-1
). In
some cases, the tagged molecules trace the blood flow to or the uptake of
glucose by the brain. Tracing these patterns in the nervous system helps to
identify brain regions with higher activity levels
Šthey generally exhibit
increased blood flow and increased uptake of glucose. Likewise, decreased

blood flow and glucose uptake are associated with those brain regions that are

not as active or that are being inhibited. Researchers have also used PET to

visualize the binding of various drugs and neurotransmitter substances to

receptors in the brain during discrete behavioral tasks and in certain emotional

states.Because PET studies can be repeated several times, they can be used to
evaluate clinical treatments for behavioral and emotional disorders, in addition

to their use in diagnosis or basic research. PET screening permits the

reassessment of individual subjects after the administration of therapeutic

agents or therapies and thus may show a return to or approximation of normal

brain activity following successful therapies. Clearly, the use of PET in normal

subjects also has great potential for increasing basic understanding of the brain
and its processes in addition to providing a baseline from which to judge
experimental therapies. So far, PET has provided the best and most complete

information on humans with which to correlate the mass of data from studies of

nonhuman animals, and its use will facilitate a more rapid transfer of basic

science research to human beings.
Magnetic resonance imaging is another technology that has proved
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY52Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to be useful in visualizing brain functions. MRI uses external magnetic fields to
visualize the three-dimensional structure of the brain at a resolution much better

than that provided by x-rays or computer-assisted tomography (CT). Even

though MR and CT images are essentially views of static structures and do not

reflect dynamic changes, their improved resolution has had an immediate

impact on the localization of brain damage from stroke, Alzheimer's disease,
epilepsy, and brain cancer. Furthermore, numerous efforts are under way to
achieve the precise overlay, or registration, of MR images with PET images so

that the anatomical localization of PET data can be improved. The future should

see the improvement of MRI techniques to allow visualization of particular

molecules, such as phosphorus, to reveal dynamic changes in neurochemical

activity over time.The Systems of the Brain are Connected by Elaborate
Pathways and Serve Many Functions
Although behavioral research has associated many functions with specific
parts of the brain, resolution of precisely how neural computation occurs

depends on knowledge of how various brain regions are connected to each other

and how activity in one region affects other regions. This level of the hierarchy

is concerned with organized groups of neurons
Š"areas" of the cerebral cortex
and "nuclei" of subcortical regions. Groups of nuclei and areas make up the

major systems of the brain, and vast networks of connections link these

components. At the turn of the century, the development and use of
histochemical stains revealed the rich variety of neuronal types and allowed
researchers to map and identify many of the interconnections among major

systems of the brain.
For many years this early information guided initial studies of factors
crucial to the development of certain brain regions. For example, research

showed that the neurons in the visual part of the cerebral cortex in kittens, who

were prevented from seeing by birth defects or experimental closing of the

eyelids at birth, did not develop properly. This finding provided the important

knowledge that proper development depended on the ability of the system to

function (also see 
Box 2-2
).More recent developments include neuroanatomical tract tracing
techniques to analyze the circuitry of the brain. These techniques take

advantage of the fact that neurons absorb certain substances, which

subsequently move from the axonal endings to the cell body or from the cell

body to the axonal endings. These tracer substances can be made visible in a

number of ways, and their presence or absence
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY53Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in specific regions of the brain indicates whether a region has connections to
some other region. In other words, the substances allow investigators to

demonstrate a connection between the region of the brain in which the

substance was placed and the region to which it was transported. Sometimes it

is possible to visualize the tracers, through high magnification with an electron

microscope, in axonal endings that contact one specific neuron. Such high-
resolution studies have determined that these connections are often to a specific
part of a neuron and occur in a highly predictable pattern. In addition, by using

more than one of these tracing substances at a time, it is possible to map

multiple pathways of connections among neurons and neuron groups.

Complementing the anatomical research have been electrophysiological studies

of brain pathways and systems. Such efforts not only establish circuitry

information but often shed light on the functional relationships between certain

regions (because physiological responses to stimulation, such as excitation and

inhibition, can also be measured).
Much of the present understanding of the networks of the brain has come
from anatomical and physiological studies such as those described above. This

work has generated conceptual frameworks that have greatly advanced our

thinking about the brain and that have been borrowed by computer scientists

who are attempting to build "thinking" computers. A key framework from these

studies is the concept of parallel distributed processing of information. Rarely is
there just one brain pathway for a certain type of information; instead, many
pathways, involving tens of millions of neurons, run parallel to each other.

Nevertheless, information is selectively distributed to specific regions of the

brain by functionally distinct processing streams. This organization underlies

the brain's ability to store, process, and mediate hundreds of kinds of

information simultaneously and reliably.
Overlying the anatomically defined neural systems are the chemical
systems of the brain. It is common for particular neurotransmitter substances to

predominate in specific brain nuclei, and thus knowledge about the actions of

these neurotransmitter substances must be added to knowledge of the known

anatomical connections of a particular brain region. The functional importance

of the interaction of anatomical and chemical systems is particularly well
illustrated in a region of the brain known as the substantia nigra. This region
contains many neurons that contain the neurotransmitter dopamine, and the loss

of these neurons is responsible for most of the effects noted in Parkinson's

disease (Plate 3-2
).Techniques for defining these chemical systems began to be developed in
biochemical studies, which isolated bioactive neurochemicals
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY54Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.from specific brain regions. As these neurochemicals were characterized, their
effects in discrete nuclei were assessed by a variety of techniques
Šforexample, injecting tiny amounts of the neurochemical into the brain and

recording the physiological response, or injecting the substance and measuring

changes in an animal's behavior. A major breakthrough in the study of

neurochemical systems was the development of antibody labeling techniques, or
immunocytochemistry, in which antibodies are obtained that recognize and bind
to a specific neurochemical. The antibodies can be tagged in various ways and

used to visualize the neurochemical's specific locations in the brain. Very soon

after this discovery, researchers had developed specific antibodies that

recognized a number of neurochemicals (or their synthetic enzymes), and

detailed maps of the locations of these neurotransmitters in the brain began to

emerge. Throughout the past 10 years, detailed maps of the locations of scores

of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators have been generated. Furthermore,

techniques have been developed that combine tract tracing methods with

immunocytochemistry and thus reveal simultaneously the connections and

neurochemistry of discrete brain regions. Finally, the changes in these maps

during development and following injury have been and continue to be actively
examined.Neurons Come in Many Shapes and Sizes, and Contain
Different ChemicalsNeurons are the signaling cells or basic functional units of the brain
(Box 3-1
). Each neuron has three major parts: cell body, dendrites, and axon.
The cell body is the neuron's powerhouse and contains the biosynthetic

machinery for making proteins and other molecules needed by the cell.

Extensions of the cell body (processes), called dendrites, normally form a

multitude of branching patterns, accounting in part for the many different

shapes neurons exhibit. Most of the surface area of neurons is in the dendrites,
which are the primary receiving areas for signals from other neurons. Neurons
have only one axon extending from their cell bodies; the axon transmits neural

signals from the cell body to other cells. All neurons are electrically charged

(like a battery) as a result of different ion concentrations inside and outside the

cell. When a neuron is excited, ions flow through the cell's membrane, and the

voltage difference between inside and outside is briefly reversed. This voltage

reversal, called an action potential, is propagated down the axon to its endings,

where it causes the release of the neurotransmitters stored within these endings.
Many different kinds of neurochemicals are transported back and
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY55Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.forth to the cell body in axons, sometimes along specialized protein structures
(microtubules) that are like railroads along which little packets (e.g., vesicles

containing neurotransmitters) of material can travel. (These same packets are

sometimes responsible for transporting the pathway-tracing substances

mentioned in the previous section.) Axons are important in development

because directed growth of the axon from the developing neuron to its intended
targets is critical to proper development of a whole brain. Although such growth
is affected by a host of chemical cues and mechanisms, the transport of certain

"trophic" factors by the axon is a key aspect of the growth process.
BOX 3-1NOT ALL NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH IS
CONCERNED WITH NEURONS
Glia are the supporting cells of the brain and are not involved in
synaptic transmission. More numerous than neurons, glial cells perform a

variety of functions. For example, they constitute the insulating myelin
sheaths that cover many axons. Microglia ingest debris from brain injury
or normal cell death. Another type of glial cell guides the migration of
developing neurons. Following brain injuries, glia proliferate and form
scars. As researchers develop new methods to encourage injured axons

to regrow, such scars could present a serious barrier.
The 
blood-brain barrier
 is a physical barrier between the blood and
brain tissue, formed by special junctions between the cells lining the
cerebral blood vessels. The brain is exquisitely sensitive to changes in
acidity, extracellular protein content, and other factors. The blood-brain

barrier protects the brain from these changes by preventing many
chemicals from entering the brain's extracellular spaces. However, the
barrier also prevents many therapeutic agents, including anticancer and
antibiotic drugs, from reaching the site of tumors or infections. Research
has revealed some mechanisms for bypassing the blood-brain barrier and
has identified conditions under which the barrier is disrupted.
In addition to the more than 100 major neuronal types defined by size and
shape, neurons differ in the kind of neurotransmitters and neuromodulators they

produce. More than a hundred of these neurochemicals have been identified,

and the list continues to grow. Some act to excite or to inhibit other neurons,

and some act in subtle ways to enhance or depress these effects. Investigation of

the regional location of specific neurotransmitters has indicated a role for the

neurotransmitter acetylcholine in Alzheimer's disease. Analysis with

immunocytochemistry in many regions has further revealed that
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY56Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.many neurons contain and release more than one neurochemical at a time.
Moreover, the balance of functionally important neurochemicals may change

during development. Sometimes one cell type can be the locus for significant

neurological dysfunctions
Šas mentioned earlier, the specific population of
cells that are damaged in Parkinson's disease. All of these factors must be

studied to map the structural and functional organization of each region of the
brain and spinal cord.Researchers also employ electrophysiological techniques at the cellular
level of analysis, which often involves the penetration of individual cells with

microscopically small electrodes to study the activity of a single cell. A recently

developed physiological technique that shows great promise is the use of

voltage- and ion-sensitive dyes (
Plate 3-3
). These dyes are fluorescent
substances that are taken up by neurons and that change colors depending on
the voltage state of the cell or the ion content of the cytoplasm inside the

neuron. Special microscopes can record these color changes (in response to a

variety of experimental manipulations) and provide images of the changes over

time and in discrete regions of the neuron. Researchers have applied this

technique to the study of regional activation of specific neuronal types, activity

of specific neurotransmitters, and activity of developing neurons.
Another recently developed technique, in situ hybridization, employs
specially synthesized pieces of nucleic acids that have a sequence

complementary to the RNA that codes for specific proteins within neurons.

These complementary pieces, which can be tagged with radioactive labels, bind

to the RNA of interest; exposing brain tissue to these probes, the presence and
quantity of RNA coding for specific proteins can be visualized and measured
(Plate 3-4
). This technique is particularly valuable because it can measure,
through the changes in RNA synthesis, the effect of many variables, including

neural activity, on genetic regulation of protein synthesis.
Considerable overlap occurs between investigations at the cellular level,
such as those described here, and investigations at the systems, synaptic, and

molecular levels. In many respects, the individual cells are the nodal points

where the various molecular and genetic processes combine to give rise to the

structural and gross functional organization of the nervous system. Thus,
investigators at many levels of the neural hierarchy must consider the
information their efforts generate within the context of the neuronal types to

which their data may apply.
Synapses and Microcircuits Filter Vast Numbers of Messages
Synapses are highly specialized regions of neurons at which
communication between cells takes place. Structurally, most synapses
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY57Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.are polarized, in that the sending part of one neuron (an axonal ending) makes
contact with the receiving part of another neuron (usually a cell body or

dendrite). Between these two components is a small space, called the synaptic

cleft. When an action potential occurs in the sending, or 
presynaptic, neuron, it
causes the release of neurotransmitter substances into the synaptic cleft. These

substances diffuse across the space and bind to specific receptor molecules on
the receiving, or 
postsynaptic, neuron. Because each neuron is studded with
literally thousands of synapses, any one synapse contributes only a tiny amount

to excitation or inhibition of a cell. An action potential is produced if the

excitatory inputs to the cell outweigh the inhibitory inputs (
Figure 3-2
).Underlying this process are complex biophysical mechanisms related to the

properties of the neuronal membrane and to the precise location and distribution

of different kinds of inputs.
The structural aspects of synapses and synapse formation are most often
studied using an electron microscope. Such investigations have delineated many

of the cellular specializations that occur at the synapse and have described the

function of these specializations. One of the most interesting phenomena

documented by electron microscopic studies is the retraction of presynaptic
axonal endings, which results from various types of damage to the presynaptic
cell. Such retraction can be transient or permanent and, depending on the

number of lost synaptic inputs, can fundamentally change the balance of inputs

to the postsynaptic cell. The loss of synapses may also cause structural changes

in the postsynaptic cells, which are often visible in regular microscopic

analysis. For example, in many large neurons of the cerebral cortex, dendrites

have tiny projections called dendritic spines. The density of these spines, which

provide even more surface area for synapses, has been shown to decrease with

advanced age, an effect that can also occur in certain neurological disease states

(Plate 3-5
).The physiology of synaptic transmission has been investigated using a
variety of electrophysiological techniques in a wide range of animal species.

These experiments, combined with chemical analysis, provide a rich picture of

the many events that occur in the synaptic endings and in the postsynaptic

neurons: ionic changes, the release of precise amounts of neurotransmitters, and
actions, in the synaptic cleft, of enzymes that sometimes degrade
neurotransmitters and thus end their effects. For example, researchers know that

the amount of transmitter released depends on changes in the intracellular

concentration of calcium in the axonal ending. This characteristic provides a

mechanism by which synaptic transmission can be modified or regulated
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY58Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.(varying the amount of transmitter that is released changes the likelihood of
action potential generation in the postsynaptic cell). This ability to change is

called plasticity and is another hallmark of neural information processing that

computer scientists would like to reproduce in "thinking" computers.
FIGURE 3-2
 An action potential tracing. The action potential, the basis of
neuronal signaling, is an electrical impulse generated by a change in the
permeability of the cell membrane to sodium, calcium, potassium, and other
ions. Adapted from Kandel and Schwartz, 1985.
Regulation of synaptic transmission has a number of interesting effects. It
has been known for a long time that when a neuron is repeatedly stimulated, it

often stops firing, despite continued stimulation. This process is known as

habituation and is an adaptive response that helps filter out stimuli. Researchers

have shown that repeated stimulation of a presynaptic ending results eventually
in a decrease in the calcium entering the ending. The synapse then "loses its
strength," so that presynaptic action potentials result in decreased release of

neurotransmitter. A reverse mechanism, called sensitization, helps strengthen

particular inputs.
By balancing inputs and filtering out unnecessary information, these
mechanisms are probably critical to the microcircuitry involved in learning and

memory. Many different brain regions are likely to be involved in various

aspects of memory and learning, but a common theme for all of them is the

strengthening of certain inputs over others on the cellular and synaptic levels.
Many investigators in the field of computational neuroscience are concerned
with defining theOVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY59Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.mathematical constraints of these processes. Their goal is to develop a deeper
understanding of the nature of information storage in the brain and how it

differs from information storage in conventional computers.
Messages Can Change Molecular States and Genetic
ExpressionNeural signaling comprises much more than stimulus-response patterns.
The molecular chemistry involved in transducing neural signals is an area of

intense scientific interest and often serves as the point at which pharmacological

treatments intervene. Excitation and inhibition of a neuron are mediated by ion

channels that selectively regulate the flow of small ions, especially sodium,

calcium, potassium, or chloride ions. Each ion channel is a complex molecule

that is embedded in the cell membrane and contains a pore through which

particular ions can pass. Most ion channels are either open or closed; these
states are often ''gated," or determined, by specific external influences. Some
channels are gated by the action of neurotransmitters, others by the voltage

difference across the membrane, and still others by mechanical stimuli, as

occurs in peripheral nerve endings to signal touch and pressure on the skin. The

regulation of gated channels gives rise to action potentials and involves many

different types of biochemical reactions that have implications for all kinds of

excitable membranes in the body, including skeletal and cardiac muscle cells,

egg cells of the ovary, and certain immune system cells.
The first step in synaptic transmission is the binding of a neurotransmitter
to a 
receptorŠsimilar to a key in a lock. Some receptors actually form an ion
channel when activated, and neurotransmitter binding to the receptor changes

the structure of the pore so as to facilitate or inhibit ions from crossing the

membrane. A specific type of acetylcholine receptor, which mediates muscle

movement, is part of an ion channel, as are certain receptor subtypes for gamma

aminobutyric acid (GABA), the receptor at which certain tranquilizers, such as
Valium®, act. Other neurotransmitter-receptor complexes, however, initiate a
complicated cascade of biochemical reactions that culminate in the structural

modification of distinct ion channels. Such cascades involve so-called second

messenger molecules, which function to activate other molecules.
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), a nucleotide molecule, is the
best understood of these second messengers. cAMP is formed after many

neurotransmitters attach to their receptors
Šincluding the type of receptor for
norepinephrine that mediates increases in heart rate and is blocked by the beta

blocker drugs that many heart patients
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY60Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.take. At this receptor, the binding of transmitters causes the linking of the

receptor to a protein, called a G protein, which transduces the signal by

activating an enzyme (adenylate cyclase) that in turn causes the production of

cAMP (Figure 3-3). cAMP then activates other enzymes (protein kinases) that
cause phosphate groups to be added to other molecules, some of which may

interact with the ion channel proteins. To make matters even more complex,

some G proteins are inhibitory and some excitatory to this cascade. Other
FIGURE 3-3
 The synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) that
results when transmitter (T) binds to the beta-adrenergic receptor (R) is

mediated through a transducer, or G-protein (G). GTP = guanosine

triphosphate; GDP = guanosine diphosphate. Adapted from Kandel and

Schwartz, 1985.
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL

HIERARCHY61Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.second messengers are lipids such as diacylglycerol, which activates protein
kinase C in a cascade of chemical reactions usually distinct from that involving

cAMP. Calcium, sometimes bound to proteins such as calmodulin, is yet a third

second messenger that functions to activate a number of different enzymes. It is

important to note that the chemical reaction cascades involving the three second

messengers described here often intersect at key molecular points, allowing the
different messenger systems to interact with each other.
Second messenger systems are a good example of the concept that the
effects of synaptic transmission are not limited to the regulation of ion channels

and the resulting excitation or inhibition of action potentials. Synaptic

transmission also influences, to a greater or lesser degree, all of the biosynthetic

processes of the cell, from the synthesis of neurotransmitters and receptors to
the synthesis of proteins necessary to maintain the cell's structure. Such effects
are the late consequences of cell activation and involve the regulation of genetic

expression.Certain genes found in human cells, including brain cells, are similar to
viral genes implicated in cancer. These so-called proto-oncogenes have been

found in brain cells, and it is thought that these genes function as third

messengers because they code for proteins that in turn regulate gene expression.

Soon after nerve injury, the expression of one of these oncogenes, called 
cfos,increases. The functional importance of this increase is not known but, among
other possibilities, may well have important consequences for cellular repair. As
mentioned previously, neurons synthesize different amounts of

neurotransmitters and other neurochemicals depending on the developmental

stage of the organism and other factors. The genetic regulation that controls the

balance of these biosynthetic processes is another area with critical implications

for normal and pathological brain functioning as well as for the response of the

brain to injury.Neuroscientists are also investigating the genes contained in cells of the
nervous system through gene mapping gene and protein sequencing techniques,

and antibody techniques. For example, antibodies can be used to isolate a

substanceŠa complex protein, for example
Šwhose molecular structure is not
known but whose presence is critical to some aspect of neural function. Once
the molecular structure is known, it is then possible to find the gene that codes
for that protein. Conversely, one can also use the genes as starting points to

isolate and characterize a specific protein. Application of techniques that permit

the isolation and sequencing of proteins has elucidated the structure of the

acetylcholine receptor mentioned earlier (
Figure 3-4
). The receptor is composed
of four large, related molecules (called sub-units, and one of these is repeated so

that five molecules make
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY62Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.up the receptor) that are arranged in a shape that resembles a thick spool. The
center of the spool is open and provides a channel through which ions can pass.

Each sub-unit of the receptor is coded by a separate messenger RNA (mRNA),

which have now been sequenced, leading to a greater understanding of the

structures of the genes themselves. Changes in gene expression, measured by

assay of the mRNAs for each sub-unit, have shown that, in the developing
junction between nerve and muscle, release of specific peptides from the
growing axons causes activation of the acetylcholine receptor genes and

stimulation of receptor synthesis. Such experimental strategies can now be

applied to the study of the molecular and genetic effects of neurotransmitters,

neuromodulators, and hormones that affect brain cells and, ultimately, behavior.
FIGURE 3-4
 A three-dimensional model of the "spool-shape" acetylcholine
receptor. Adapted from Kandel and Schwartz, 1985.
The application of molecular biological and genetic techniques in
OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY63Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BOX 3-2THE GENETICS OF COLOR VISION
On the deepest surface of the retina lie the primary receptors of the
human eye, called rods and cones. Rod cells, responsible for black-and-

white vision in dim light, are far more numerous than cone cells, which

enable us to perceive colors. Although Isaac Newton discovered the color

spectrum some 300 years ago, it was not until the late eighteenth century

that scientists began to understand the basis of color vision: light-

absorbing proteins called pigments that have overlapping but distinct

sensitivities to particular wavelengths of the visible spectrum. There are

three classes of cone cells: those containing red pigment, those

containing green pigment, and those containing blue.
Scientists now know that colorblindness, or the inability to
discriminate red and green, results from alterations in the genes that

encode these color pigments in the cone cells. That deficiencies in red-

green discrimination are more common in males than in females is

explained by the fact that the gene responsible for the variation is located

in the X chromosome. Males will be colorblind if the single X chromosome

they inherit from their mother carries the trait; females will be affected only

if both their X chromosomes are variant. Aberrations in blue sensitivity,

which affect males and females equally, are rooted in a gene on another,

non-sex chromosome.
In hopes of supplementing the findings of these classic genetic
studies, Jeremy Nathans and his colleagues at the Johns Hopkins

University School of Medicine applied modern scientific techniques to the

puzzle of abnormal color vision (Nathans, 1989). Using DNA hybridization,

they isolated the genes that code for the color pigments of the cone cells

and compared their structures in people with normal and variant color

vision. Interestingly, they discovered that although people have only one

copy of the gene that codes for red pigment, they have two or three

copies of the gene that codes for green pigment. When multiple copies of

a gene exist next to each other in this way, the copies have a tendency to

recombine in peculiar patterns when cell division occurs, a phenomenon

called unequal homologous recombination. Of the 25 subjects studied by

Nathans with abnormal red-green discrimination, all but one had DNA that

had been shuffled as a result of unequal homologous recombination,

confirming the hypothesis that when green pigment genes rearrange

themselves "unequally" or irregularly, deficiencies in color vision result.
Although much remains to be learned about the roles of cones and
pigments in color vision, the work of Nathans and his colleagues yields

interesting clues to the genetics behind what we see and what we cannot

see.OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL

HIERARCHY64Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.neuroscience is very recent and quite promising. Recent landmark
successes in neurogenetics have direct application to human health. As

scientists identify and characterize ion channels, proteins, receptors, and

neurotransmitters that play a role in disease, they gain clues to the location of

the genes that control the production of these elements (
Box 3-2
). Already some
neurological diseases are yielding to this approach. The genetic locus for
Huntington's disease was discovered by an interdisciplinary group of
researchers and has led to a test that predicts with remarkable accuracy whether

a person at risk for Huntington's will develop the disease. The abnormal

(mutated) genes for Duchenne's muscular dystrophy and neurofibromatosis

have also been identified. In the case of muscular dystrophy, identification of

the defective gene led to isolation of the protein dystrophin, for which the gene

codes. Information about dystrophin may well permit scientists to design

treatment strategies to replace the defective protein. Identification of the gene

for neurofibromatosis is also beginning to lead researchers to important clues

about the mechanism of that disease (see 
Box 2-1). Advances such as these are
the necessary first steps in disease prevention, but further progress depends on

basic scientific investigation into the regulation and expression of neural genes
and the functional consequences of that expression in the brain.
REFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY
Dudai, Y.1985. Genes, enzymes, and learning in 
Drosophila. Trends in Neuroscience8:18
Œ21.German, D. C., K. Manaye, W. K. Smith, D. J. Woodward, and C. B. Saper. 1989. Midbrain
dopaminergic cell loss in Parkinson's disease: Computer visualization. Annals of

Neurology26:507
Œ514.Kandel, E. R., and J. H. Schwartz, eds. 1985. Principles of Neural Science. New York: Elsevier.

Nathans, J.1989. The genes for color vision. Scientific American260(2):42
Œ49.Pavlov, I. P.1927. Conditioned Reflexes: An Investigation of the Physiological Activity of the
Cerebral Cortex, G. V. Anrep, trans.London: Oxford University Press.
Shepherd, G. M.1988. Neurobiology, 2nd ed.New York: Oxford University Press.

Tank, D. W., Sugimori, J. A. Connor, and R. R. Llinas. 1988. Spatially resolved calcium dynamics
of mammalian purkinje cells in cerebellar slice. Science242:773
Œ777.The following sources were also used as background for preparation of this
chapter but are not cited specifically in the text.
Darnell, J., H. Lodish, and D. Baltimore. 1986. Molecular Cell Biology. New York: Scientific
American Books, Inc.
Kelner, K. L., and D. E. Koshland, eds. 1989. Molecules to Models: Advances in Neuroscience.
Papers from Science 1986
Œ1989. AAAS Pub. No. 89-17S. Washington, D.C.: American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
Kuffler, S. W., and J. G. Nichols. 1977. From Neuron to Brain: A Cellular Approach to the Function
of the Nervous System. Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Assoc., Inc.
Ottoson, D., and W. Rost
ène, eds. 1989. Visualization of Brain Functions. New York: Stockton
Press.OVERVIEW OF NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH: A CLOSER LOOK AT THE NEURAL
HIERARCHY65Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Computer and Information Technology in
Biomedical and Neuroscience Research
A complex of computer-based resources that can greatly enhance
neuroscience research is an attainable goal. Current trends in information
technology offer an unprecedented opportunity for neuroscientists to expand
their use of hard-won data and to communicate these data more effectively to

other scientists. In addition, the sheer mass of neuroscience information

accumulated to date and the accelerating rate at which new results are being

obtained and reported are becoming major driving forces for the kind of

organization, structure, and accessibility that computer-based resources can

provide. The attractiveness of the present opportunity is also strengthened by

the increasingly intimate role of various computer-based instruments and

applications in neuroscience research. This chapter describes how a complex of

electronic and digital resources for neuroscience might work in the future, and

supports this description with examples obtained in part from the task forces

organized to provide advice to the committee and the open hearings the

committee sponsored. The chapter also dis-cusses the increasing reliance of
biomedical research on computerized resources and the current trends in
computer science and information technology that make the goal of a complex

of resources attainable.
A Neuroscience Laboratory of the Future Will Use a Variety
of Computer-based Tools
The neuroscience laboratory of the future may seem incredible from our
present viewpoint. But a neuroscientist who had fallen asleep over
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
66Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the microscope in 1970 would awaken today to an equally incredible vision of
color graphics workstations, shiny compact disks containing masses of data, and

electronic mail messages from colleagues worldwide. Any projections of the

future we might generate today are likely to fall short, in some respects, of what

will be possible by 2010.
The following scenario illustrates how an experiment might be done in a
neuroscience laboratory of the future. (The physiological, anatomical, and

biochemical processes it describes are consistent with known aspects of neural

function.) Although it is hypothetical and overly simplified, it makes explicit

the vision of a family of interrelated databases and other computer-based

resources for neuroscience research. Further, it illustrates how three-

dimensional graphics, databases, networks, and electronic journals will
contribute to research that proceeds more rapidly and efficiently than anything
we can imagine today, transcending present conventional information

boundaries.The futuristic scene opens in the laboratory of Jane Smith, who is studying
a brain region recently implicated in a particular behavioral disorder that

provides a model for human schizophrenia. She uses a new, highly sensitive

tract-tracing technique to map this area in rodents that have been genetically

engineered to express an altered form of a specific gene. These animals are

interesting because they are also deficient in a specific learning task, and this
behavioral deficit is quite similar to a behavioral deficit observed in
schizophrenic patients. To examine tissue blocks from her experiments for the

presence of tracer substances, Dr. Smith uses a microscope connected to a

computer workstation, which allows her to record the data onto maps of the

brain region and to store all of the data in a digital format. This recording

method permits rapid computer visualization of the data in three dimensions.
In her examination, Dr. Smith finds a tiny labeled cell group (area X)
embedded in the larger nucleus whose existence has not, to her knowledge,

been reported before. While she has the map from her experiment on the video

screen, Dr. Smith calls up the three-dimensional anatomical database for this

brain region and splits the screen to allow sufficient comparisons of her new

map with other maps of the nucleus that have been deposited in the database.
She looks at maps from normal animals and maps from genetically engineered
animals to see if area X exhibits the same general structure in both groups. One

of the maps seems to show a group of cells quite similar to area X. Dr. Smith

asks the computer to enlarge that map and show its precise location, compared

to her map. (The computer can do this because neuroscientists of the future

routinely include with their data
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
67Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.maps certain landmark designations that are used to align and bring into
conformity maps from different investigators.)
Dr. Smith finds that the two groups of cells are in precisely the same
location and that the structures of the cells match. She then types a message,

which is automatically forwarded to the scientist who contributed the map,

requesting more information about his work. Later that afternoon, Dr. Smith

receives a message from Robert Green, who says he had noticed this cell group

in certain kinds of labeling experiments but that it was not his primary interest.

Nevertheless, he has attached all the data he has regarding this experiment to his
message, with an offer to help in any way he can. Dr. Smith electronically
thanks Dr. Green and asks him if he is aware of any chemical characterization

of these cells. As the reply is negative, Dr. Smith enters the neurochemical

database for this region and pulls up maps showing the distribution of a variety

of neurotransmitters. She finds a map of the distribution of a particular protein

(zeta) that clearly includes area X and, again, asks for more information. A

documentary summary appears at the side of the screen describing the

identification of protein zeta by antibody techniques. The summary also states

that protein zeta has a specific distribution in the brain and that researchers

suspect that it affects potassium channels in the cells' membranes, making the

channels less likely to open during synaptic transmission. Dr. Smith transfers

the references for these observations into her personal reference files and asks if
protein zeta has been sequenced. The reply is that it has been partially
sequenced by a Dr. Ungaro in Italy and that the partial sequence is available in a

special part of the Protein Identification Resource (PIR) reserved for

preliminary data. (Dr. Ungaro, like Dr. Green, is pursuing another interest and

has deposited the partial sequence for use by other investigators.)
Dr. Smith enters the PIR and calls up the partial sequence for protein zeta
on one side of the screen. On the other side, she retrieves information about the

gene that has been altered in her experimental animals. The computer displays

the base pair sequence for the gene, followed by the RNA sequence for which

the gene codes. From the RNA sequence, the computer displays the expected

protein sequence. Dr. Smith instructs the computer to run a comparison of the

expected protein sequence with the partial sequence of Dr. Ungaro and
discovers a strong match. She immediately types a message to Dr. Ungaro
regarding this match and says that she would like to follow up on this

information. Dr. Ungaro replies that he is happy that the information was useful

and that he will amend the PIR entry to reflect the probable match and her plan

to pursue further study.
A few weeks pass, during which Dr. Smith completes another group
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
68Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of experiments. Her studies show that cells in area X are responsible for the
learning deficits in her genetically engineered animals and that protein zeta is an

abnormal form that results from the genetic alteration. The protein disrupts the

potassium channels by interfering with cyclic AMP, but a new drug that

increases the effectiveness of cyclic AMP blocks this effect in Dr. Smith's

animals. Moreover, this drug completely alleviates the learning deficits in these
animals. Dr. Smith submits these data to an electronic journal, transferring her
manuscript text, photomicrographs, sequence comparisons, and other data

directly from her computer to the journal. The journal electronically transmits

the manuscript to reviewers. Eventually, the manuscript is published in

electronic and conventional formats, and the accompanying data are deposited

into the appropriate databases. Work in other laboratories then begins to

document the biochemical mechanisms that have been discovered and the new

drug's effectiveness in human schizophrenics.
As new experiments proceed, Dr. Ungaro's protein is finally sequenced,
and this information, along with Dr. Smith's data, is moved by PIR's editors

from the preliminary data files of the PIR into its main files of verified data. Dr.

Green's contribution is acknowledged in the manuscript and in the anatomical

brain database. Such documentation is of great use to investigators who have

become interested in protein zeta and its role in schizophrenia. A contribution

index database keeps track of the results of data deposits such as those of Drs.
Green and Ungaro, and such records are often submitted, along with authored
publications, to university tenure and promotion committees.
Parts of this scenario could be implemented today; others await further
technological, and perhaps sociological, advances. But the useful, coordinated

complex of resources suggested in the story will not evolve on its own; it must

be planned and put into place. It is the consensus of this committee that now is

the time to begin that effort.
CRITICAL BREAKTHROUGHS, IMPORTANT
OPPORTUNITIESComputers and Computer Graphics Help Scientists Obtain
New Images
Neuroscience is an inherently visual science, and in this way it differs from
other scientific fields, based on mathematical calculations, that already have

benefited from advances in computer science. The widespread use of computers

in neuroscience had to wait for major technological breakthroughs in computer

graphics, which depended in large measure on increases in the power of

individual computers and the associated steep decrease in the cost of that

power. In 1945,
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
69Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.it cost approximately $1,000 to perform 1 million computer operations. In 1970,
the same number of operations cost less than 6 cents; in 1980, they cost 0.1

cent. By 1997, this cost is expected to decrease by a factor of 100. In terms of

time, in 1945, 1 million operations took a month; they took 0.1 second in 1980

and, in 1990, in the case of some of the most powerful workstations, roughly

2.5 milliseconds (U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, 1990).
Such trends are continuing in the present decade.
More than power, the memory capabilities of a computer determine its
cost. Again, consistent increases in memory, accompanied by decreases in cost,

have occurred over the past three decades (
Figure 4-1
). In 1965, a computer
with 64 kilobytes (KB) of memory cost about $200,000 (Bell, 1988) and was

used, for example, in expensive satellites and space probes, such as Voyager II.
Today, computers of that size cost about $100 and are used to drive popular
computer games (e.g., the small, hand-held version of Nintendo
®, Gameboy®).Why is a computer capable of running Voyager II necessary for a computer

game toy with a tiny video screen? The answer is that the graphics of the toy

and the ability to interact with those graphics require far more computer power

than is required by calculations (
Table 4-1
). Today's computer graphics
Šfromthe dazzling special effects of movies to the variety of the evening news

promotionsŠcould not have been accomplished without the recent
improvements in computer hardware and software.
Computer graphics is a subspecialty of computer science pioneered by
Ivan Sutherland and others in the early 1960s (Goldberg, 1988). The work of

these early investigators and the people they trained led to the development of

the first primitive graphics workstation less than 20 years ago. The Association

for Computing Machinery, one of two major associations of computer science,

has a special-interest graphics group that holds a convention every year. In
addition to scientific presentations and workshops, this convention includes
seminars on various kinds of graphics applications, a computer graphics art

show, and exhibits from numerous computer hardware and software companies.

The almost 40,000 who now attend this convention, ranging from Hollywood

artists to automotive engineers to defense contractors, are an indication of how

pervasive, and accessible, computer graphics have become in industry and

government (ACM SIGGRAPH, 1989).
The use of computer graphics in biomedical research is also becoming
pervasive (albeit not as quickly as in such fields as earth mapping, physics, and

space science) and is evolving into the concept of scientific visualization,

sometimes called visualization computing (National Academy of Sciences,

1989). In 1987 the National
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
70Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Science Foundation convened a panel to consider scientific visualization in
many fields, including biomedical science (McCormick et al., 1987). This panel

observed that the human eye recognizes geometric and spatial relationships

faster than it recognizes other relationships and that the visual display of data

would be more efficient for human pattern recognition than displays of numbers

and text. Thus, visualization
FIGURE 4-1
 The cost (in dollars) of computer memory (in megabytes), which
has decreased steadily since 1970. DRAM = dynamic random access memory.
Chart provided by Mark Duncan of ASKMAR, derived from a graph by Frank

Ura of Hewlett-Packard.COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
71Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.computing draws on computer graphics, image processing, computer-aided
design, signal processing, and user interface studies, with the goal of

''transforming the symbolic into geometric reality, [and] offering a method to

see the unseen" (McCormick et al., 1987).
TABLE 4-1 Text Versus Image Data: Byte Requirements
ApplicationExampleApproximate No. of Bytes
RequiredWord processingOne computer screen of
text, 25 rows 
× 80characters/row2,000 (2 KB)
Image processingLow-endaMagnetic resonance and

computed tomography
images262,144 (256 KB; 100
times more informationthan a screenful of text)
1,310,720 (1.25 MB)
High-endbComputer-aided design
(CAD; architecture and
engineering applications)
Volumetric Imaging
cRealistic three-dimensional
images with shadows,
highlights, reflections, and

transparencies4,294,967,296 (4 gigabytes;
16,000 times moreinformation than a

magnetic resonance or
computed tomography
image)Abbreviations:
Bit = binary digit, of which there are only two possible: 0 and 1;

Byte = the number of bits (usually 8) that represent one character;
Kilobyte (KB) = 1,024 bytes;
Megabyte (MB) = approximately 1 million bytes;

Gigabyte = approximately 1 billion bytes;
Terabyte = approximately one trillion bytes.
a 512 
× 512 pixel display (8 bits / pixel).
b 1280 
× 1024 pixel display (8 bits / pixel).
c 1K 
× 1K 
× 1K voxel display (32 bits / voxel).
One of the most successful applications of scientific visualization in
biomedical science has been the modeling of molecular structures from data

derived from x-ray crystallography. In the past, such structures were inferred

from the numerical coordinate data obtained in complex experiments and then

drawn by hand or modeled with sticks and balls to represent atoms or other

molecular components. These representations
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
72Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.depended on the imagination of viewers and their ability to visualize three
dimensions from a flat plane and a dynamic image from a static one. Now,

computer graphics use mathematical data to generate a moving, dynamic, three-

dimensional structure that can change its shape as a consequence of

"experimental" conditions entered into the computer or that can be rotated to

achieve a different perspective (
Plate 4-1
). These dynamic computer models are
sufficiently similar to the in vivo molecules that they may soon help scientists
to predict which drugs might stop viruses, how genes are turned on and off, or

how two molecules interact with each other (Howard Hughes Medical Institute,

1990). Not only are these models useful for data analysis but they greatly

enhance the communication of research results by making those results much

more accessible to scientists and nonscientists alike (U.S. Congress, Science

Policy Study, 1986).
Virtually every kind of data used in neuroscience can be collected, stored,
analyzed, and visualized on a computer. The raw data from some techniques are

already collected directly into computer-readable form. For example, in CT,

PET, and MRI scans, the data are collected in the computer as numbers, which

the computer uses to form images on its monitors. The images can be displayed
in a monochrome scale of gray, or they can be enhanced by assigning colors to
certain numerical ranges. In all present-day, computer-based image processing,

the numerical data rather than the images are stored, because the images can be

recreated from numbers at any time. Increasingly, electrophysiological data and

data from EEG and ERP studies are also collected in computer-ready form.

Later, the traces of electrical activity can be graphically reconstructed on a

computer for analysis (
Plate 4-2).Anatomical data can be computerized in a variety of ways. For example,
election microscopic photographs of brain tissue can be digitized, and regions

of these photographs can be analyzed for total surface area or volume using

readily available software programs. One group has reconstructed three-

dimensional images of the complex innervation patterns of the cells responsible
for body equilibrium from a montage of many electron micrographs (Ross et al.,
1990). Sections of whole brains have also been digitized and the sections

combined in a three-dimensional display so as to allow rotation and slicing of

the brain in any plane of section; information regarding neurochemistry or other

variables can then be overlaid on specific regions (
Plate 4-3
; Toga, 1989). An
effort to digitize brain sections is under way at the Comparative Mammalian

Brain Collection (CMBC), housed at the University of Wisconsin and Michigan

State University, to increase the usefulness of this important archival collection

(W. Welker, J. Johnson, and S. Greenberg, CMBC, personal communication,
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
73Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1990). Beyond its uses in basic science, digitization is also important to clinical
neuroradiology. When x-rays are transformed into digital files, the images can

be reconstructed in distant locations. This relatively easy method of transmitting

important medical records has spurred great interest in building a network

system to transmit such images among hospitals (Banks et al., 1986; Elliot et

al., 1990).Until recently, researchers were forced to trace individually stained
neurons by hand using a special accessory on a light microscope. Now,

however, these drawings can be done automatically with a computerized

confocal microscope that reconstructs neurons in three dimensions (
Figure 4-2
).The neuronal images can be studied on their own or used as templates to display

differential inputs to specific parts of a neuron. Computer graphics can also be
used to display data from pharmacological and neurochemical studies, which
normally generate numerical data. The computer can transform numerical

measurements, such as dose, response magnitude, and time, into three-

dimensional contoured histograms. Such wide-ranging capabilities give

investigators unprecedented flexibility in the collection, viewing, analysis, and

communication of neuroscience research data.
Increased use of computers in data collection and analysis is apparent from
the number of private companies that now market computer hardware and

software for neuroscience applications. At the Society for Neuroscience Annual

Meeting in 1990, 10 companies exhibited work-stations useful for neuroscience

research, and 43 companies offered software packages that did almost

everything from three-dimensional reconstructions of neurons to quantification
and graphic display of fluorescent color changes in ion-sensitive dye
experiments. The companies marketing these tools included microscope

companies, such as Zeiss and Leitz, as well as traditional computer firms, such

as Apple and IBM.
Further evidence of the increasingly important role of scientific
visualization in neuroscience comes in the priority given to biomedical

computing in universities and government laboratories. For example, Stanford

University, Washington University, the University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie

Mellon University, and the University of North Carolina, among others, have
electrical engineering or computer science departments with sections devoted to
the development of technologies, especially graphics and imaging, for

biomedical data collection and analysis. Researchers from these departments

work in conjunction or in collaboration with counterparts from biomedical

departments; some departments also have formal ties to the federally supported

supercomputing efforts (Twedt, 1990). At the National Institutes of Health,

many individual institutes maintain branches in which computer
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
74Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.scientists and software developers work on applications pertinent to the needs
of intramural researchers. For example, when a group of researchers at the

National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) developed a new experimental

technique and computer software for visualization and image analysis of brain

glucose metabolism, the software was freely shared with any investigator

interested in using the new technique (Goochee et al., 1980). NIH also
maintains a Division of Computer Research and Technology that, in addition to
NIH administrative computing oversight, conducts advanced research into such

areas as computer modeling of molecular structure, image processing, and

scientific workstation development (National Institutes of Health, Division of

Computer Research and Technology, 1989). NIH and the National Science

Foundation also provide a number of
FIGURE 4-2
 A spinocervical tract neuron from an adult cat's spinal cord. The
lower portion of the figure shows the horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-filled cell
that occupies one tissue section. The upper portion is a computer-generated
reconstruction from 12 60-micron-thick sections. The cell was identified and
stained by M. J. Sedivec, Appalachian State University, and L. M. Mendell,
State University of New York, Stony Brook; the reconstruction was performed

by J. J. Capowski, Eutectic Electronics, Inc. This photo appeared on the cover
of the 
Journal of Neuroscience
, March 1986, and was reproduced with
permission from Oxford University Press.
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
75Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.grants to develop useful computer tools for scientific research purposes
(National Center for Research Resources, 1990; National Science Foundation,

1991). Finally, the National Library of Medicine (NLM) has developed many

easily accessible biomedical databases. In addition, the NLM's Center for

Biotechnology Information, in conjunction with its efforts to develop useful

scientific databases and database linkages, is concerned with the incorporation
of computer graphics as user interface tools (National Library of Medicine,
1986).Considering the primitive state of computer science, especially computer
graphics, only 20 years ago, the contributions of these technologies to the

visualization of biological processes are quite remarkable. Future work

promises to permit scientists to view data in entirely new ways and to integrate

those data to a degree never before possible.
Database Technologies Help Organize our Knowledge
A major impact of computer technology has been to enable virtually
anyone to collect, store, and access many types of data in digital form and to

organize data files into discrete units or collections called databases. Although

the term 
database is relatively recent, the concept is as old as symbols carved
into clay. The ancient Egyptian records of a grain harvest were databases, as

was the census taken by Julius Caesar; the Yellow Pages is a modern example.

Computer databases thus reflect the same kind of diversity that other collections

of information have shown throughout history. One can classify databases
according to what kind of data they contain, how broadly accessible they are,
and how formally or informally they are structured (
Box 4-1
).Databases can be word, number, image, or sound oriented (Williams,
1990). Word-oriented databases are the most prevalent, and the recent growth in

their use has been phenomenal. In 1976 there were 750,000 on-line searches of

word-oriented databases (e.g., full-text databases, bibliographic databases, and

databases containing information synthesized from numerous sources.) In 1988,

however, this number rose to 28.3 billion separate queries (
Figure 4-3
).Although less common, the use of number-, image-, and sound-oriented
databases is also growing. In 1989 there were more than 5,000 databases of all
kinds, which were offered by nearly 900 vendors; they contained nearly 5

billion records (compared with 52 million records in 1975). These statistics do

not include the hundreds of thousands of private databases in use by individual

research scientists for their own purposes.
In terms of accessibility, databases range from entirely public, such as
those available on line in libraries, to entirely private, such as
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
76Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.those kept by an individual scientist for his or her own reference. For example,

databases printed out on paper or available on floppy or optical disks (e.g.,

compact-disk, read-only-memory, or CD-ROMs) can be sold or distributed to

the public and thus used in any location. 
Current Contents, a popular weekly
publication listing the tables of contents of selected scientific journals, is now

available in computer-readable form on disks. Other databases might be

semiprivate orBOX 4-1RELATIONAL DATABASES VERSUSOBJECT-
ORIENTED DATABASES
The database management system most widely in use today is the
relational system. In a relational database, information is organized in

tables. Many of the tables typically have common fields, allowing the user

to associate separate tables and to ask questions about the relationships

among different pieces of data. A relational neuroscience database, for

example, might include the following two tables: a list of drugs, including

their behavioral effects and the types of neurotransmitters through which

they exert these effects, and a list of anatomical structures, including the

predominant cell type in these structures and the neurotransmitter type

associated with these structures. Because these two tables have a field in

common (the neurotransmitter field), the database user can ask the

computer to briefly link the two tables and to generate a list of drugs and

their predominant anatomical sites of action.
One of the major advantages of a relational system is that each piece
of data must only be entered once, thus reducing the possibility of error on

the initial entry and when updating is required. Should new research

indicate that cocaine, for example, exerts its effects by acting on two

neurotransmitter systems instead of only one, this new data can be added

to the database and will remain linked to all other pieces of information to

which it has a relationship. Relational databases are typically used for

textual and not for image data.
Database management systems that use object-oriented techniques
represent the cutting edge in database technology and are expected to

progress rapidly in the coming decade. These systems are designed to

support applications with data structures (such as images) that do not fit

easily into the table-based structure of the relational system. In an object-

oriented system, data need not conform to a standard representation,

such as a table, because each piece of data is treated as a separate

entity and is stored with its own set of instructions for interacting with other

data. This system allows for much greater flexibility in the kinds of data

that can be included in a database, and also in the kinds of queries the

database can support.
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND

NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH77Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.semipublicŠshared by a specific group of people
Šsuch as several scientists
working together on a particular project.
FIGURE 4-3
 Growth of on-line searches of word-oriented databases between
1974 and 1988. Adapted from Williams, 1990.
The range of database structures is also broad. Formally structured
databases are administered, maintained, updated, and edited in a central

location. These databases are generally read-only and include bibliographic

reference databases, repositories of historical or archival material, certain types

of scientific databases, and directories of various sorts. At the opposite end of

the spectrum are informal databases, which are administered, maintained, and

updated by users. The user group can be large and membership can be open to

everyone, as with the computer bulletin boards that have become so popular.

But an informal database can also be structured by a small group of scientists
Šfor example, to keep a "lab notebook" together. Sometimes databases combine

both informal and formal components in a unified complex of files. Such a
complex might include a bulletin board component, to which users could add
data annotations, and a read-only component containing bibliographic reference

material. Advances in computer technology make such multicomponent

databases feasible by enabling the user to move freely from one component
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
78Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.to another. Even entirely separate databases are now collectively accessible by
software programs that guide users from one database to another. The flexibility

to be gained with the different kinds of databases ensures continuing increases

in use patterns.
The growth of biomedical databases mirrors the general trends described
earlier. Retrieval of information from the scientific literature is basic to the

conduct of biomedical research. Yet over the past 30 years, the number of

biomedical investigations, especially in the field of neuroscience, has increased

substantially, with many of these efforts branching into related subdisciplines.
Computer technology was applied to the management of this expansion by the
National Library of Medicine, the lead agency for managing and indexing

biomedical and scientific literature. In 1964 the NLM created the Medical

Literature Analysis and Retrieval System (MEDLARS), a computerized system

that catalogs and indexes the library's holdings. In the early 1970s the NLM

introduced MEDLINE, which provides on-line access to NLM's records over

telephone lines. Using a carefully formulated and controlled list of key words,

known as the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), users can obtain bibliographic

reference lists from MEDLINE for a broad range of scientific topic areas.
Today, in addition to MEDLINE, the NLM offers a number of different
kinds of on-line databases of scientific information, including information on

toxic substances (TOXLINE and its related databases, the Toxicology Data

Bank [TDB] and the Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances

[RTECS]) and medical information related to cancer (the Physician Data Query,

or PDQ), among others. Databases such as TDB and PDQ, which are often
called factual databases, are more than simply bibliographic records because
they contain synthesized information from a variety of sources (National

Library of Medicine, 1986). The NLM collaborates with other parts of NIH,

with universities, and with other research initiatives to develop a broad range of

databases for scientific research and medical practice, to establish directories of

these resources, and to design useful interfaces among them. In its long-range

plan, articulated in 1986, the NLM defined a number of trends for the future,

including databases containing image data, full-text storage and retrieval, and

electronic publishing of scientific literature.
Especially prominent among the biomedical databases developed outside
of the NLM are the protein sequence and genome databases, which serve at

least 23,000 scientists (
Table 4-2
). These databases provide a mechanism by
which extensive, complicated sequence and structural data can be compared to

what is already known. Comparisons using such databases are many times more

efficient than comparisons
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
79Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
80Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.done by hand and have resulted in new discoveries by database users (see
Box 2-1
). These databases are also a valuable source of experience and
knowledge for those involved in developing analogous resources for

neuroscience. For example, each of the protein sequence and genome databases

was developed independently, often by an individual scientist, and each has a

different history of funding, administration, oversight, software development,
and data organization (Smith, 1990; Vela, 1990). Although efforts are now
under way to integrate these databases, such integration is not without

considerable difficulty and expense.
Ideally, users should be able to access information from a number of
protein or genome databases, but currently this is impossible because

independent development has resulted in quite separate database structures. For

example, some of the early databases (e.g., the Protein Identification Resource

[PIR] and the Protein Data Bank [PDB]) were developed from isolated files of

information without the use of a database management system for indexing and
retrieving entries. This strategy worked only as long as the number of entries
was relatively small and the databases stood alone. Present efforts to link the

PIR and PDB must first establish a database management system for each and

create links between the two database environments. The National Center for

Biotechnology Information at the NLM is devising linkage software that will

make PIR and the Genetic Sequence Data Bank (GenBank) accessible by

similar means and commands. GenBank has also been working to strengthen its

links to the European Molecular Biology Library (EMBL) and the Japanese

DNA Data Bank. In contrast, the Genome Data Base (GDB) at Johns Hopkins

has planned for linkages to other databases from its inception.
The databases also display important differences in software development
and the availability of analytical tools. PIR includes some analytical software,

whereas PDB makes only the code available for analysis, which often leaves the

user confronted with unfamiliar software. Other databases, such as GenBank,

spend up to 50 percent of their budgets to develop software for analytical
purposes and for database conversion to more modern management systems.
Making these conversions is time consuming and costly, but also necessary to

extract the most useful information from these resources.
The protein sequence and genome databases reflect a variety of funding
mechanisms. GenBank, a collaborative project of Los Alamos National

Laboratory and Intelligenetics, Inc., is supported by the broadest range of

sources, including the National Science Foundation (NSF); the Departments of

Defense, Energy, and Agriculture; and NIH, through the NLM, the National

Center for Research Resources,
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
81Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. PDB receives funds
from NSF, NLM, and DOE. The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, a private

agency, currently funds the GDB and the On-line Mendelian Inheritance in Man

(OMIM) database. However, in the near future, GDB and OMIM will be

supported by federal funding.
In an effort sponsored in part by the NSF and NLM, the Corporation for
National Research Initiatives is developing an experimental National Digital

Library System (DLS). The initial target databases are MEDLARS and the

GDB and OMIM systems at Johns Hopkins University. DLS will network these

databases and employ ''knowledge robots" (knowbots
®) 1 to initiate and manage
complex, multiple-database searches. This system makes it unnecessary for

users to know any details of how to search a database, where the database is
located, or even how many different databases exist (Cerf and Kahn, 1988).
It is clear that much can be learned from the experiences of the protein and
genome databases. But as noted in the previous chapter, neuroscience data

differ significantly from protein and gene sequence data and present complex

problems in terms of three-dimensional displays and integration across varied

data types. Despite the growing use of database technology in individual

neuroscience laboratories, relatively few steps have been taken to construct

databases for general use by neuroscientists. Understandably, most

neuroscience databases either target specific regions of the brain, or are
designed as an organizational system (to which data can be added by the user)
or as a method for making archival data more accessible. Some of the

neuroscience database development efforts receive targeted funding; others do

not. These efforts are important because they demonstrate a growing scientific

need and address the various kinds of data inherent in neuroscience, especially

images. We describe two such efforts below.
A neuroscience information management system called 
Brain Browser
 has
been developed for use on Macintosh computers by a team of neuroscientists

with computer expertise (Bloom, 1989). The system is based on HyperCard 
®,which organizes information in a relational manner, similar to cross-referenced

index cards. Contained within the system is information regarding 300 brain

regions in the rat, including 900 separate circuits, and references. In addition,

the system includes a complete stereotaxic atlas for the rat brain, which can be

used as a graphic-based interface to access circuitry data (
Figure 4-4
). Rather
than being a self-contained, read-only system, 
Brain Browser
 can be expanded
by users, who may add "index cards" of their own references and data and
customize the database for their own use and that of others (if they share their

entries).COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
82Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FIGURE 4-4
 A typical computer screen from the 
Brain Browser
 softwareprogram. Figure courtesy of Floyd Bloom, Scripps Clinic and Research

Foundation. Reprinted with permission of Raven Press.
Another group of neuroscientists and computer scientists from three
universities is developing computer tools for high-resolution capture, storage,

and organization of neuroscience data (Hillman et al., 1990). Their objective is

to construct three-dimensional color atlases, based on real images of brain

sections, that are linked to other image, text, and numerical data regarding the

anatomy, chemistry, and physiology of specific brain regions. This work is also

intended to develop useful software for the extraction of important features and

for interfaces that allow transitions from one data type to another. All efforts are

focused on one brain region, the thalamic nuclei. Such a focus allows the

investigators, who are already expert in thalamic function, to assess more

adequately the usefulness and feasibility of the tools being developed.
These two examples may obscure the fact that the development of useful
tools to manage neuroscience information is really in its embryonic stages. The

majority of neuroscientists use computers for word processing or to organize

references and, sometimes, their data images. These are highly individual

approaches and vary widely in sophistication. The next section on networks

argues that electronic transmission of data sets, including images, most likely

will be an
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND

NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH83Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.integral part of science in the future. Whether neuroscience will be ready for
this kind of future depends on the actions taken now to develop the ability to

organize data and combine that organization with data collection.
Electronic Networks Greatly Increase Communication
The scientific enterprise is composed of men and women who generate
ideas, design ways to test those ideas, collect data, and communicate the ideas

and data in a variety of ways. The communication of ideas and results is as

important to the growth of knowledge as the data themselves. Scientists meet at

formal gatherings, discuss experiments with their colleagues, publish papers,

and talk to each other by telephone and electronic mail. One of the major goals
of computer network development is to create a communication environment
that is as free of barriers as possible
Šan environment that can support the rapid
communication of ideas and images at every stage of experimentation and

discovery. Some have envisioned this environment as a "National

Collaboratory"2 (Lederberg and Uncapher, 1989). Its cornerstone would be vast
networks of electronic links built on a foundation that was begun little more

than 20 years ago.
The first multipurpose wide area network (WAN) was developed in 1969
to link computers at 30 research campuses whose work was supported by the

Department of Defense. Called ARPANET, the network allowed the sharing of

large, expensive computers and facilitated electronic message delivery among

widely scattered university and industrial research sites throughout the United
States. ARPANET was extremely successful because of a specially developed
mechanism for routing messages, called packet switching. Packet switching is

unlike the circuit-switching mechanism that connects one telephone to another;

no actual circuit is established when a message is sent over a packet-switched

network. Rather, the messages are broken up into packets, like envelopes, with

address information attached. These packets move from one network node to

another, as a letter moves from post office to post office until it reaches its

destination. Electronic messages arrive within fractions of seconds, however,

not days (Kahn, 1987).
Local area networks (LANs) link computers across short distances (within
an office building or among university laboratories, for instance) and are often

linked themselves to national and international WANs. Since their introduction

in the 1970s, more than 5 million LANs have been installed. In 1973, the

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA), which funded the

development of ARPANET's
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
84Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.packet-switching technology, began a project to develop technology to
interconnect different packet-switching networks. A series of computer

communication protocols were developed for this purpose, along with

"gateways" to interlink different LAN and WAN computer networks. The so-

called TCP/IP protocol suite that resulted is used today to interconnect 5,000

networks in 35 countries supporting more than 300,000 computers that range
from supercomputers to workstations and even personal computers. The system,
which is called the Internet (Quarterman, 1989), is operated on a collaborative,

cooperative basis involving government, military, university, and industrial

resources and thousands of volunteers who keep the system operating.
In 1988, the National Science Foundation began work on the NSFNET to
interconnect a small number of supercomputer centers and to sponsor the

creation of intermediate-level, or regional, networks to provide access to the

NSFNET and its supercomputing resources. Some 13 supercomputer centers

and 400 universities are linked to the NSFNET, along with more than 2,000
other networks whose traffic the NSFNET supports. The NSFNET and its
"entourage" are now an integral, vital component of the international Internet.
The full utility of such large-scale networking can be realized only if
standards are established to enable effective communication among the

computer systems that constitute the network (National Academy of Sciences,

1989). The Internet Activities Board and its subsidiary groups, the Internet
Research and Engineering Task Forces, are responsible for guiding research and
development of standard protocols for Internet computer communication. The

quest for useful, yet practical, standards for the communication of numeric, text,

image, and other signals data continues and could play an important role in the

creation of an effective national neural circuitry database.
One of the most critical limitations of networks for scientific applications
is the capacity, or bandwidth, of the present links. Bandwidth refers to the

amount of data that can be transmitted per second. For example, NSFNET

began with links capable of transmitting 56 kilobits of information per second.
A full-text article from a scientific journal averages 20 kilobytes, or 160
kilobits; an abstract averages 16 kilobits. Thus, NSFNET's initial bandwidth

was sufficient to transmit three to four abstracts, but not even one entire journal

article, per second. In 1989, NSFNET upgraded its system to links capable of

transmitting 1.5 megabits per second
Šlarge enough for 10 full-text articles or
approximately 100 abstracts. Upgrades now in progress will increase the

NSFNET backbone-link bandwidth to 44.7 megabits per second, almost a 30-

fold increase in the amount of information transmitted every second. Traffic in

the NSFNET backbone has reached
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
85Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.nearly 5 billion packets per month, and the rate of increase is still substantial.
The introduction of 45 megabit-per-second capability into the NSFNET is an

intermediate step in the race toward gigabit-(a billion bits)-per-second service,

which will be needed as communication of image data becomes more prevalent.
A single line drawing or simple black-and-white picture represents the
same amount of data as an entire journal article of text. An uncompressed

transmission rate of 180 megabits per second is required to run a color movie on

a conventional TV screen in real time. Computer-generated images on high-

resolution screens require much more: 1.44 x 10
9 bits per second. Consequently,
for useful multimedia network transmission, transmission rates will have to
reach at least the gigabit-per-second range or higher. (A gigabit equals the

information contained in 80,000 double-spaced pages of text.)
The importance of building a nationwide high-bandwidth network is
underscored by the attention such a network is receiving from policymakers. An

early proposal for a nationwide system of electronic links among

supercomputers and libraries was made by Senator Albert Gore in 1979, and the

resulting legislation was considered by Congress in 1990 and is being

reintroduced this year (Gore, 1990). In 1985, Congress passed Senator Gore's
Supercomputer Network Study Act, authorizing the Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP) to analyze the need for such a network. Citing the

lack of adequate network technology for "scientific collaboration or access to

unique scientific resources" and the aggressive efforts of Japan and Europe to

upgrade their networks, the OSTP report, issued in 1987, strongly

recommended that federal resources be allocated to upgrade existing networks

and undertake the research necessary to advance network technology even

farther. In 1988, the National Research Council's National Research Network

Review Committee issued a report that expanded the specific recommendations

made by OSTP but also strongly recommended the implementation of a

National Research Network. This recommendation was strongly endorsed in

1989 by the National Academy of Sciences' Panel on Information Technology
and the Conduct of Research (National Academy of Sciences, 1989). A further
indication of the attention being devoted to this issue was a report entitled 
TheFederal High Performance Computing Program
, delivered to Congress in 1989
by the President's science advisor, D. Allan Bromley (Office of Science and

Technology Policy, 1989). This program plan again recommended a phased

development of a National Research and Education Network, now commonly

called NREN. Three major objectives specified by all of these initiatives were

(1) to upgrade the bandwidth of the backbone networks currently serving
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
86Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.science and education to at least gigabit-per-second speed beginning in the mid-
to late 1990s; (2) to develop appropriate technology and communication

standards that would significantly improve the ability to communicate over

electronic networks; and (3) to increase the ubiquity of networking (the NREN

program, in particular, proposes to establish connectivity between 1,000

research and education institutions).
Some Electronic Collaboratory Groups are Forming Now
A critical mass of enthusiasm has been building among legislators,
policymakers, and scientists about the possibilities offered by network

technology to provide an infrastructure for enhanced scientific collaboration.

An interesting project to realize the collaboratory concept is now under way

(Schatz, 1991). The project's objectives are to encode, in digital form, all

knowledge of the community of biologists who study the worm 
Caenorhabditiselegans and to construct an integrated computer environment to manipulate this
knowledge across the Internet. There are about 500 scientists in this

multidisciplinary "worm community," representing genetics, anatomy,

physiology, biochemistry, and neuroscience, and the community has always had

a high degree of openness in communication and data sharing. For example, for

more than a decade, the group has maintained a newsletter of news and research

findings to which anyone may contribute. On numerous occasions, the

newsletter has reported significant research in advance of formal publication,

thus functioning as an electronic bulletin board.
Genetic mapping is a major aim of the worm community, as it is of many
scientists engaged in the study of invertebrate models (National Research

Council, 1985). Alan Coulson and John Sulston have already established a

physical map database of 
C. elegans
 genes, using DNA fragments that they
made or that were sent to them by other researchers (Coulson et al., 1986).

About 70 percent of the worm's 100 million-base-pair genome has been mapped
thus far. This information, updated monthly through Bitnet and Internet, is
contained within a digital database that is distributed to several sites; from

there, the database can be accessed by modem or direct electronic connection

by any worm laboratory.
The current initiative intends to draw on the successful experience of the
physical map database and newsletter to build an electronic worm community.

Plans include making the entire body of 
C. elegans
 knowledge available in
digital form and constructing strong electronic platforms for informal

communication and to support powerful
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
87Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.analysis and annotation, as well as retrieval. This project in many ways could be
a "test bed" for neuroscience because it involves the conversion of many types

of data into digital forms suitable for inclusion in a coordinated, multimedia

research resource. For example, so much is known about the neurons that make

up the worm's nervous system that each neuron's developmental lineage, wiring

diagram, and physical location are understood. The organization of this neural
information into a mixed text-numerical-image database would be of
tremendous value to future work with data from more complicated organisms.
The openness of the worm community offers another important model for
developers of computerized resources for neuroscience because a major portion

of the current project involves the inclusion of informal data in the database and

the establishment of electronic means of communication. These informal data

include everything from recipes for laboratory reagents to intermediate

experimental results. How the various kinds of informal data are handled, how

continued openness is encouraged and rewarded, and how interfaces are
designed for the most efficient use of resources by the community will be
applicable in the larger context of neuroscience. Most important, because the

worm community cannot answer all the questions posed by the incorporation of

these technologies into the field of neuroscience, consideration of the worm

community's efforts will help to focus the design of specific pilot projects in the

larger neuroscience context.
CONCLUSIONThe role of electronic networks in biomedical science can be expected to
expand as network capabilities are upgraded. With these upgrades and the

implementation of such projects as the National Digital Library System and the

worm community initiative, the formation of national or international

collaboratories becomes a more realistic goal for many fields of science. For

neuroscience, high-resolution computer imaging and high-bandwidth
networking are converging, and major obstacles to the integration of enabling
technologies in the research enterprise are quickly diminishing. By beginning

now, the integration of these technologies into neuroscience will be ensured. As

an added benefit, integrating these technologies into a field as complex as

neuroscience will help to generate new ways of conducting scientific

exploration that will be applicable to all of biomedical and biological science.
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
88Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.REFERENCESACM SIGGRAPH. 1989. Computer Graphics: SIGGRAPH '89 Conference Proceedings23(3).
Banks, G., J. K. Vries, and S. McLinden. 1986. Radiologic automated diagnosis. IEEE195:228
Œ239.Bell, C. G.1988. Toward a history of (personal) workstations. Pp. 1
Œ47 in A History of Personal
Workstations, A. Goldberg, ed. New York: ACM Press.
Bloom, F.1989. Databases of brain information. Chapter 13 in Three-Dimensional Neuroimaging,
A. Toga, ed. New York: Raven Press.
Capowski, J. J., M. J. Sedivec, and L. M. Mendell. 1986. An illustration of spinocervical tract cells
and their computer reconstruction (cover). Journal of Neuroscience6(3).
Cerf, V., and R. Kahn. 1988. The Digital Library System: The World of Knowbots, vol. 1. Reston,
Va.: Corporation for National Research Initiatives.
Coulson, A., J. Sulston, S. Brenner, and J. Karn. 1986. Towards a physical map of the genome of
the nematode 
Caenorhabditis elegans
. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
USA83:7821
Œ7825.
Elliot, L. P., S. K. Mun, S. C. Horii, and H. Benson. 1990. Digital Imaging Network System (DINS)
Evaluation Report. Washington, D.C.: Department of Radiology, Georgetown University

Medical Center.
Goldberg, A., ed. 1988. A History of Personal Workstations. New York: ACM Press.
Goochee, C., W. Rasband and L. Sokoloff. 1980. Computerized densitometry and color coding of
[14C] deoxyglucose autoradiographs. Annals of Neurology7(4):359
Œ370.
Gore, A.1990. Networking the future. Washington Post, July 15.

Hillman, D. E., R. R. Llinas, M. Canaday, and G. Mahoney. 1990. Concepts and methods of image
acquisition, frame processing, and image data presentation. Pp. 3
Œ38 in Three-
Dimensional Neuroimaging, A. Toga, ed. New York: Raven Press.
Howard Hughes Medical Institute. 1990. Finding the Critical Shapes. Bethesda, Md.: Howard
Hughes Medical Institute Office of Communications.
Kahn, R. E.1987. Networks for advanced computing. Scientific American257:136
Œ143.Lederberg, J., and K. Uncapher, co-chairs. 1989. Towards a National Collaboratory: Report of an
Invitational Workshop. Rockefeller University, New York City, March 17
Œ18.McCormick, B. H., T. A. DeFanti, and M. D. Brown, eds. 1987Visualization in scientific
computing. SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics Newsletter21(6):1
Œ13.National Academy of Sciences. 1989. Information Technology and the Conduct of Research.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Center for Research Resources. 1990. Biomedical Research Technology Resources: A
Research Directory. Pub. No. 90-1430. Bethesda, Md.: National Institutes of Health.
National Institutes of Health, Division of Computer Research and Technology. 1989Annual Report.
Bethesda, Md.: National Institutes of Health.
National Library of Medicine. 1986. Obtaining Factual Information from Data Bases: Report of
Long Range Planning Panel 3. Bethesda, Md.: National Institutes of Health.
National Research Council. 1985. Models for Biomedical Research: A New Perspective.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Research Council. 1988. Toward a National Research Network. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.
National Science Foundation. 1991. Guide to Programs. Pub. No. 038-000-00585-5. Washington,
D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
89Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President. 1987. A Research and
Development Strategy for High Performance Computing. Washington, D.C.November 20.
Office of Science and Technology Policy, Executive Office of the President. 1989. The Federal
High Performance Computing Program. Washington, D.C.September 8.
Quarterman, J. S.1989. The Matrix. New York: Digital Press.

Ross, M. D., L. Cutler, G. Meyer, T. Lam, and P. Vaziri. 1990. 3-D components of a biological
neural network visualized in computer generated imagery. Acta Otolaryngologia

(Stockholm)109:83Œ92.Schatz, B. R.1991. Building an Electronic Scientific Community. Pp. 739
Œ748 in Proceedings of the
24th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, IEEE Computer

Society, vol. 3.
Smith, T. F.1990. The history of the genetic sequence databases. Genomics6:701
Œ707.Toga, A., ed. 1989. Three-Dimensional Neuroimaging. New York: Raven Press.

Twedt, S.1990. Biologists find speed, imaging powers of supercomputers key to research. The
Scientist(Aug. 20):10
Œ11.U.S. Congress, Office of Technology Assessment. 1990. Critical Connections: Communication for
the Future. OTA-CIT-407. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
United States Congress, Science Policy Study. 1986. The Impact of the Information Age on Science.
Hearings, vol. 10. Pub. No. 57-0950. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vela, C.1990. Overview of U.S. Genome and Selected Scientific Databases. Background paper
prepared for the Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, Institute of Medicine.
Williams, M. E.1990. The state of databases today: 1990. Pp. vii-xivin Computer-readable
Databases: A Directory and Data Sourcebook, K. Y. Marcaccio and J. Adams, eds. Detroit,

Mich.: Gale Research, Inc.
NOTES1. Knowbots is a registered trademark of the Corporation for National Research Initiatives.
2. The concept of a national collaboratory does not ignore the essentially international character
of science. Responsibility for the infrastructure of each national collaboratory should rest, as it
traditionally has, with the governmental agencies of each nation that places a priority on
scientific excellence. The international collaboratory would be created simply by establishing

links among these national resources.
COMPUTER AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICAL AND
NEUROSCIENCE RESEARCH
90Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Building Consensus, Identifying Needs
In meeting its charge, the committee consulted more than 150
neuroscientists and computer and information science experts who contributed
advice, comments, and suggestions regarding the desirability, feasibility, and
possible ways of implementing electronic and digital resources to enhance

neuroscience. As outlined in the introduction to this report, the committee

obtained these contributions through four mechanisms. The first was the

preparation of two background papers. One considered the development,

administration, architecture, use patterns, and funding of genome and other

scientific databases (Vela, 1990). The other described the results of a one-day

meeting of computer scientists from various disciplines who had been involved

in the Defense Mapping Agency's (DMA) program to digitize cartographic data

(Downs et al., 1990). The meeting was held to assess what could be learned

from the DMA's experience that might apply to implementation of a National

Neural Circuitry Database.
The second mechanism was the organization of four task forces composed
of neuroscientists and computer information specialists. Each of the groups met

for two days and were organized around neuroscience topic areas; they included
35 invited participants in addition to specific committee members. (
Appendix A
contains a description of the themes and a list of participants of each task force.)

Third, the committee solicited input from a number of other sources as an

additional information mechanism. Letters were sent to the present officers and

council members, as well as the past presidents, of the Society
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS91
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.for Neuroscience describing the study and inviting opinions and suggestions.
Similar descriptions with a request for input were also published in selected

scientific journals (for examples, see 
Appendix B
).Finally, symposia and open hearings were held in Washington, D.C., San
Francisco, and Chicago. Invitations to these events were sent to members of the

Society for Neuroscience within roughly a 300-mile radius of each meeting

location. The program for each meeting included scientific presentations by a

leading neuroscientist and by a scientist from the field of genetics or molecular

modeling with experience in the use of computer and information technology in
their research. Also on the agenda were demonstrations of prototype brain
databases and brain imaging technologies. Finally, each meeting included an

open hearing component in which selected committee members reviewed some

of the issues being considered in the study and subsequently opened the floor to

comments and suggestions from those in attendance. (
Appendix C
 contains lists
of speakers and demonstrators.)
The input received through these mechanisms reflected a wide variety of
experiences and outlooks. Among the neuroscientists involved, some were

already committed to the development of computer resources for research

purposes, some had no such commitment and were more neutral, and some

were frankly skeptical. In addition, they held a variety of posts, ranging from

journal editors to postdoctoral fellows and from those employed in large
laboratories to those working in single-person operations. Individuals in charge
of library resources, scientific database administration and design, and

biomedical computer applications were especially valuable participants. Each

subdiscipline of computer science
Šincluding database design, graphics,
software development, networks, and hardware design
Šwas represented. In
addition, participants came from academic departments, government

laboratories, and private industry.
Some separation of the topics covered in each of these information-
gathering activities was apparent. Participants in the open hearings and those

who responded to the committee's requests for opinions were concerned largely

with three issues: (1) the kind of database and the kinds of data that would be

useful to them in their research, (2) the possible institution of standard methods
of data collection, and (3) funding of the proposed project. In addition to these
matters, task forces devoted substantial time to technical issues and

administration, oversight, and implementation strategies. This chapter attempts

to capture the richness of the discussions that took place throughout these

activities and outlines the data on which the committee's recommendations are

based.BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS92
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BUILDING A USEFUL RESOURCE COMPLEX
The Data that are Included Must be Useful to Neuroscientists
The complexity of neuroscience dictates that the scope of the data included
in any complex of computerized resources eventually must be quite broad.

Although most participants viewed the establishment of such resources as

desirable, some felt that traditional archives of neuroscience information (e.g.,

libraries and journals) were adequate, thus obviating the need to expend scarce
funds on computerized information complexes. These dissenting views were
countered by evidence, presented by experts from medical libraries and

scientific databases, that clearly indicated an integral role for computerized data

storage and retrieval, including the linking of scientific databases, in future

library services. The majority of those giving input to the committee envisioned

the proposed complex of resources as necessarily containing more kinds of

information than are now or could in the future be contained in library reference

materials and published journals. For example, a journal article, available from

the library in full-text format with data graphs and figures, rarely presents all

the data that are available
Šdata that could be included in a digital format. A
graphically formatted synthesis could greatly facilitate understanding by

making the information visual. In addition, archival brain material, such as that
contained in the Yakovlev brain collection or the Comparative Mammalian
Brain Collection, is not available at all in libraries; it could be made much more

accessible through electronic networks and digital storage methods. Finally, the

vision of a complex of resources for neuroscience includes the incorporation of

informal data, such as preliminary results and interpretations, which would

provide a far richer base of information for research than is currently available.

(Although later sections of this chapter expand upon these nontraditional kinds

of information, they are mentioned here as components of the data that may be

included in the proposed resource complex.)
Given the vision of resources that go well beyond what may reasonably be
obtained from libraries, nearly every participant had an idea of what kinds of

research data would be most useful. Although these suggestions reflected a

broad range of possibilities, most participants saw two major data categories as

critical. The organizing structure for information about the brain is

neuroanatomy, which provides a construct for the functional expression of brain
activity. Therefore, it will be necessary to conjoin anatomy and function, and
this combination should guide decisions regarding the inclusion of highly

specific kinds of data.
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS93
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Primary among the anatomical data categories is information about the
pathways that interconnect brain regions. Representing such pathways in three

dimensions and in relation to standard brain atlas maps is highly desirable and

can serve a number of purposes. Viewing a particular pathway allows an

immediate appreciation of its complexity and may reveal the connections

among specific areas of interest. Depiction of those parts of the pathway that are
well documented as well as those parts that are tentative or unknown would
stimulate additional research to complete the mapping of the pathway. The

pathway map could also serve as an interface or entry point to archives of

relevant bibliographic references.
Most important, a pathway map could function as the skeleton on which to
hang information from multiple levels of the brain's hierarchy. For example, at

the cellular level of the hierarchy, the structural features or morphology of

different cell types are important. Because each brain region contains sets of

neurons with different structures, it is often important to know which structural
type actually contributes to a pathway to a distant brain region and which
structural type contributes only local connections. The neurochemistry of the

neurons in the pathway is also of interest at both the cellular and the systems

levels. Therefore, a number of participants requested that the proposed resource

complex support the ability to associate patterns of neurotransmitter distribution

with structural pathways. One scientist suggested that both visual and tabular

maps of the chemical systems of the brain would be of great help in his work.

Such maps would include the neurotransmitters, as well as the distribution of

specific receptor types and of drug binding sites in the brain.
There was consensus that any anatomical map must be related to function,
but the functions requested reflected the hierarchical level at which individual

scientists were working. Those studying cognitive processing and human brain

functions viewed the association of brain regions with specific aspects of

behavior as necessary to the usefulness of the map. Clinical neuroscientists

were interested in the association of behaviors (e.g., tremor, memory
dysfunctions, motor deficits) with particular brain regions. Basic researchers,
studying the electrophysiological responses of individual neurons or single-ion

channel responses, wanted the map to contain information about these

phenomena. Enthusiasm for including many kinds of synaptic-level information

was especially high among computational neuroscientists, which reflects their

interest in analyzing the functional consequences of ion channel diversity, in

terms of the nonuniform spatial distribution of channels and the varied response

properties of individual channels. Finally, some investigators interested in the

development of the nervous system
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS94
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.saw particular benefits in including brain maps of different species at different
developmental points as a way of comparing species.
Other kinds of data that were cited as central to neuroscience research were
protein and gene sequence and gene mapping data relevant to the brain. Many

developmental neuroscientists, through the use of simple organisms such as

worms and fruit flies, are now mapping the genes that control neural

development. As the genes that code for receptors and other molecules are

identified, these data become useful for researchers at other levels of the neural

hierarchy. Recent breakthroughs in identifying the genes responsible for such
diseases as muscular dystrophy and neurofibromatosis herald a new era in
defining the underlying causes of neural dysfunction. Against this backdrop,

most task force participants felt a pressing need to include genetic information

in any future computerized resource. Their suggestions ranged from the

establishment of linkages to existing genome databases to establishment of a

brain-specific gene database.
Although the examples given above are not exhaustive of all the
suggestions made to the committee, they illustrate the necessity, in the long

term, of including specific kinds of data at each level of the neural hierarchy

and the appropriateness of starting with the structural anatomy of the brain
.Computerized Resources Must Include a Variety of
CapabilitiesAcceptance and full use of computerized resources require certain features
or capabilities, apart from the actual data. For example, in molecular modeling,

the data are the coordinates obtained from crystallographic analysis. A useful

computerized resource must include the capability to transform those

coordinates into three-dimensional images and, further, to move these figures to

depict the binding of drugs to the molecule's active site. This capability is

afforded by the design of the software and the interfaces the user manipulates to
achieve the desired outcome. For neuroscience, the capabilities needed will
again reflect the diversity of experimental questions that can be asked. Although

it is impossible to separate completely the scope of the data to be included from

the capabilities of the systems that might be designed, many participants,

especially those with expertise in database development, stressed the value of

defining desired capabilities early in the planning stages.
Many of the participants providing input to the committee were
experienced in the development of prototype systems for research or education,

and this group suggested that certain capabilities were essential. For example,

the ability to browse through various kinds of data is critical to offering users

multiple entry points to access
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS95
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.information specific to their needs. Simultaneous display of textual and graphic
data or textual and numerical data was also suggested as a necessary feature.

These capabilities alone, however, may not be sufficient to ensure use of the

proposed resources to their full potential. Therefore, the committee and

participants discussed more specific features, designed around the needs of

neuroscientists from different subspecialties.
From the neuroscientists' point of view, an important systems capability
was the display of data with varied levels of realism. For example, a neuron can

be depicted as (1) a photomicrograph (taken through the microscope), (2) a two-

dimensional (flat) line drawing, or (3) a fully reconstructed three-dimensional

object. If a researcher were interested simply in identifying the cell type, the

abstract, flat drawing might suffice. But if he or she were interested in assessing
the method used in a particular experiment and in whether the neuron exhibited
any changes indicative of injury, the actual photomicrograph might be

necessary. In the ideal case, users could choose the level of abstraction

appropriate to their experimental needs.
Another capability requested by neuroscientists was the ability to extract
arbitrarily defined subsets of data. Using the pathway map as an example, an

investigator might want to know the locations of all cells in the pathway that

contained a specific neurotransmitter
Šacetylcholine, for example. Another
might want to see all neurons in the pathway that had axons that branched. Yet
another might want to know where in the pathway receptors for a specific drug
were located. One participant commented on the sometimes puzzling mis-match

between the locations of receptors for a certain neurochemical and the locations

of cells that contained that neurotransmitter. In his view, the ability to extract

receptor and transmitter information and to correlate the two maps would be

quite useful. In another neuroscientist's view, the results of computational

modeling were a data set well worth extracting. By displaying simultaneously

the activity of multiple circuits, it is possible to visualize parallel processing in

action.Another helpful feature for clinical neuroscientists and those involved in
human imaging is the ability to compare different brain images by precise

overlaying or co-registration of the images. Each brain differs from every other

in its exact shape and internal organization. In addition, technical factors, such

as how a PET scanner is aligned or the placement of the subject's head, can

affect the orientation of the images that are obtained. Schemes for minimizing
or correcting for these differences, to facilitate the comparison of different types
of images (PET, MR, or CT), have been developed and are being evaluated in

most major imaging centers. The task force concerned with
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS96
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.human imaging discussed these strategies at length, which include the use of
certain landmarks visible in every brain and the use of atlases that describe

coordinates for most major brain regions. More complex approaches use

experimentally defined algorithms to ''warp" one brain image to another. Once

these mechanisms are validated, their inclusion, as tools, in a complex of

computerized resources would allow investigators to pool images, obtain more
data, and thereby gain the maximum benefit from each experiment. Because
human subjects are rare and imaging experiments costly, this kind of capability

is particularly desirable. Efforts are already under way to share human images

among distant centers. Known as Brain Map, the activity is being coordinated

by a team of investigators at the Johns Hopkins University Medical School

(Science, 1990).Whatever capabilities the proposed complex of resources might include,
the consensus of participants in the committee's consultation process was that

these features must be defined by the needs of the users. Many participants

emphasized the need for a hands-on effort to generate a comprehensive list of

desired capabilities.Different Types of Databases are Required
There was an overwhelming consensus among all participants that a
National Neural Circuitry Database as a single entity was unworkable.

Participants advocated instead a complex of different kinds of databases,

combined with electronic communication facilities and other on-line research

tools, that would be interlinked to provide a resource for neuroscience research,

education, and clinical applications. In addition, a number of investigators,

citing the international character of science, called for the establishment of links
to and relationships with computerized resources outside the United States.
Throughout the task force meetings and open hearings, there was substantial

discussion of the kinds of databases that would be of use to neuroscience. It was

the task forces, however, that gave the matter its most indepth consideration.

Consequently, the definitions that follow derive largely from task force

recommendations. This emphasis on their work is probably a result of the

special efforts made to include in these groups individuals with expertise in

database administration and development, as well as those with interest in the

concept of electronic collaboratories.
One general theme that emerged was that a complex of electronic and
digital resources should include databases with varied levels of accessibility.

Some of the databases should be public resources and accessible by anyone;

others should be private and used only by individual
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS97
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.investigators or small groups. Still others should be semiprivate or semipublic,
for use by a possibly large, but finite, group of investigators. Within those

general categories, the task forces identified several different kinds of databases

that are expected to be useful for neuroscience.
  Reference databases
 would contain references to published journal
reports and review papers and would be accessible to as wide a group

of users as possible. These databases might be built on the kind of

information contained in more traditional databases, such as
MEDLINE, but they would be organized around graphic
representations of brain structures. The images would represent current

consensus views of various brain systems and might also show those

areas that required additional research. The committee learned from

individuals working with the genome databases that attempts are now

being made in that community to incorporate graphic representations

into those databases. The essentially visual character of neuroscience

data underscores the critical importance of images to the presentation

of information about the brain.
  Data banks
 would contain source or primary data, with references, that
could be deposited by investigators coincident with publication of their

research in standard scientific journals. Data banks would allow users
to view the complete data set from experiments and might contribute to
insights that would not be possible with standard journal formats.

These kinds of databases are already in use in the chemical sciences

and in the protein and gene sequencing and mapping communities

(Vela, 1990).  Informal resources
 include bulletin boards and electronic mail for
exchange of research methods, ideas, and sometimes raw data; these

resources might also be used to share software packages. Informal

resources are highly flexible and are often designed in response to
special user needs. As discussed in the previous chapter, they are an
important part of efforts in the worm community to facilitate open

communication and exchange (Schatz, 1991).
  National and international registries or directories
 were
recommended by each task force and by many other participants to

provide listings of different kinds of information. For example, it
would be helpful to have a registry of all neuroscientists who are now
developing or who have developed computerized data collection

strategies, or who have devised databases for storage and retrieval of

data, references, or other research information. Among the respondents

to the committee's request for opinions and the open hearing

participants, approximately 30 individuals were working on databases

or imaging protocols for basic and clinical neuroscience applications
Šand the committee had been unaware of their efforts. Another use for

such a registry would be to list data that are available for sharing.
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS98
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.  Research collaboration databases
 are semiprivate or semipublic
databases set up by defined groups of investigators for work on

specific projects. Such databases would contain raw data files, methods

descriptions, and other information useful to the conduct of the project.

A preliminary survey of long-distance collaborative activities in

neuroscience carried out by study staff reinforced the
recommendations of the task forces regarding this kind of database.
1The survey revealed that approximately 25 percent of all papers
published in one year in 
Brain Research
 and the 
Journal of
Neuroscience were reports of collaborative work done by two or more
geographically distant U.S. laboratories. Further, study staff asked 10

randomly chosen investigators from these groups if electronic

communication facilities, including image transmission, would have

helped their work. All responded in the affirmative.
  Specialty databases
 can also be set up by defined groups. For example,
Task Force 3 (see 
Appendix A
) suggested that such a database would
be of great use in brain studies with PET or MR imaging. If the

database were composed of multiple components, including references,

tools for matching or warping one brain image to another, and a

registry of available data, this specialty complex could aid the transfer

of information regarding human brain structure/function relationships
to a wide group of experts.
In summary, this section has outlined some of the key components of a
useful complex of electronic and digital resources, including a number of

different kinds of databases containing information from all levels of the neural

hierarchy. The capabilities afforded by the complex to browse through the data,
compare images, and extract specific subsets of information would enhance the
conduct of neuroscience research and provide assistance extending far beyond

what is now available. But the actual implementation of this complex is a

substantial undertaking, and an understanding of its challenges is essential for

success.THE CHALLENGES AHEAD
Technological Needs Require Planning and Attention to the
Most Likely AdvancesAlthough the current state of computer and information technology has
reached a point that makes the proposed complex of computerized
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS99
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.resources possible, a number of technical requirements must still be addressed.
Such topics received a great deal of attention during the task force deliberations.

In the three major areas of databases, networks, and imaging technologies,

imaging is the most advanced, from a technological standpoint, and therefore is

likely to present the fewest barriers to direct application to neuroscience.

Database and network technologies, although sufficiently mature to be applied
to neuroscience in a productive manner, will require more modification. To
transmit complex images, for example, networks must be upgraded according to

the plans formulated for the National Research and Education Network. The

task forces were unanimous in their support for careful planning to implement

high-bandwidth network links, with special attention to the concomitant

upgrades of the local area networks that link researchers inside universities with

the national networks. The task forces also emphasized that the use of optical

disks or other mass storage media to transmit data physically should be

encouraged to obviate complete dependence on network links.
Database management technology presents the most difficult technical
challenge in the initial implementation of the proposed resource complex.

Currently, the most popular and most useful database design is the relational

database; yet these databases cannot meet all of the eventual needs of the

neuroscience community because they do not handle image data well and

cannot display image and text data simultaneously. Object-oriented database
management systems can handle image data, but they may not be widely
available during the 1990s. Database developers from the task forces therefore

recommended starting with relational models and planning for the eventual

conversion to object-oriented systems.
Certain approaches may aid this planning. For example, the Entity
Relationship Model is a database design tool that is used to plan the

relationships to be set up in a database. In this model, definitions of individual

items and their relationships are established before the database is constructed.

These definitions are useful to plan both relational and object-oriented
management systems. An additional advantage to this approach is that, once
completed, it provides a record of the defined relationships, which facilitates

later modifications. The model currently is being used at the National Center for

Biotechnology Information at the National Library of Medicine in its effort to

link GenBank and the Protein Information Resource databases.
Another critical aspect of database design is user interfaces. This area is
quickly emerging as a unique subspecialty of computer science, combining

human factors research with interface software design and query language

development. Interfaces must be easy to use, yet
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS100
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.powerful enough to enable the user to extract needed information. Balancing
these two qualities is rarely easy, and many task force participants argued for

special attention to this issue. They also recommended early involvement of

user interface specialists and examination of the experiences of genome

database developers in the design of useful interfaces.
Underlying both database and user interface design questions is the
challenge of developing software that allows data to be accessible and usable.

Indeed, hardware problems are minimal compared with the problems associated

with developing software. For example, neuroscientists currently use a variety

of computers that run on different operating systems and employ a wide range

of software tools; as a result, communication among these systems is severely

limited. The task forces made a number of recommendations regarding this
problem. One was to develop platform-free software for the databases that
would be independent of the operating system being used in the local

computing environments and that could circumvent compatibility barriers.

However, a better approach might be to design translation programs that could

bridge the differences between software programs. In the experience of many

participants, software development represents a major portion of the costs

associated with database development. Therefore, active encouragement of so-

called "shareware" development may produce savings. Shareware is software

developed by individuals that subsequently is shared free of charge with others.

Examples include software developed in government laboratories, such as that

developed for image analysis of results from deoxyglucose experiments (see

Chapter 4
). The disadvantage of shareware is that often it is not as finely tuned
or as carefully maintained as commercially developed software and requires
those using it to make modifications for their own needs.
The general theme in the task force software discussions was the
advantage of being open to a variety of strategies. Also noted, however, was the

need to develop software tools that were directly applicable to research issues.

For example, the human imaging group (Task Force 3) identified the need for

improvements in the software for registering images with one another. In Task

Force 4, participants were acquainted with recent advances by industry and

academic research centers in designing software for fast searches of data within
a database, including scientific databases. A consensus emerged through these
discussions that computer scientists must work in close collaboration with

neuroscientists to address the complex problems of software development.
Another area of technological challenge is the mechanism of data
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS101
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.storage. Numerous storage options are available, but the choice depends on
neuroscientists' needs for specific kinds of data transmission. For example,

transmission over networks is compatible with central storage of data in

mainframe computers. Because networks currently are inadequate for image

transmission, however, transportable media such as optical disks or CD-ROMs

are an attractive alternative. Another advantage of transportable storage media
is that they may increase accessibility to information, allowing a wider user
group, including international users. One computer expert cautioned, however,

that the physical organization of the data through these storage mechanisms

should not be confused with the logical organization of the data themselves
Šsuch confusion would limit access to the data.
The final technical topic covered by the task forces was the development
of technical standards for data exchange. The technical issues inherent in

standards development are closely related to certain research issues and were of

great concern to those who attended the committee's open hearings or

contributed written commentary. The issue of standards is explored in the

following section.Standard Formats are Necessary, But They Must Evolve
The task forces outlined four categories of technical standards that need to
be developed and examined. First, for data representation, standard data

exchange formats are required for textual and numerical data and for the

generation of images and graphics. Second, for algorithm representation,

mechanisms for conveying new algorithms should be considered for a variety of

possible applications. Third, standard user-interface packages should be

considered as a way to reduce the barriers to the actual use of a given
computerized resource. Finally, standard communication protocols should be
expanded to provide the dynamic range of data accessibility required for

research-oriented databases. Each of these categories reflects the fact that

coordinated computer resources require a high level of standardization to

function smoothly. Data represented in a multitude of ways, with differing

algorithms and with different mechanisms for data access, are often difficult to

extract. Communication is further limited by different computing environments

and the ability of these environments to accommodate data in forms suitable for

transmission.How database developers approach these technical requirements can have
major consequences for the usefulness of the resource. Many neuroscientists

who commented on this issue expressed fears that standards might be imposed

on them to which they would have difficulty adapting. But the task forces

emphasized that standards should
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS102
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.evolve from experience and should be based on the needs of users. Their
philosophy was that if a standard method or format worked well, usually people

were willing to expend a little extra effort to take advantage of the resource for

which the standard was designed. In addition, some suggested that establishing

liaisons and joint efforts between the neuroscience community and standards

development groups (e.g., the standards working groups of the Internet
Activities Board) would help to increase awareness in broader user
communities of the special requirements of neuroscience data.
The evolution of standards must also begin with an awareness of the
specific scientific needs of the user community. One area of concern in

neuroscience is that of nomenclature. Disagreements over the names of brain

nuclei and subnuclei have been common since the beginning of neuroanatomy.

Synonymous terms are widespread but avoidable barriers to communication. A

number of participants asked for efforts to establish clear definitions of terms.

Others suggested that the NLM expand the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
in neuroscience subject areas. It might also be worthwhile to follow the lead of
the genome databases, which hold regular meetings of user representatives and

database managers to discuss nomenclature, as well as other issues.
The committee heard from several neuroscience groups that are already
attempting to develop standards. One of these was the imaging community,

whose members are seeking effective methods for comparing images. A

strategy that is being explored is the general use of an atlas of the human brain

as a standard reference frame for expressing neuroanatomical coordinates and

regional boundaries. Establishing such a standard might also help to define the
range of variability in human brain structure, something that currently is not
known. Clinical and basic neuroscientists also suggested standard annotation of

experimental data. In human imaging studies aimed at defining structure/

function relationships, certain baseline information is now recorded in highly

individual ways, which limits its usefulness. At a minimum, such information

might include age, handedness, sex, educational level, or any characteristic

feature of the subject or experimental group. Basic scientists interested in

comparing images (e.g., maps of receptor binding or immunocytochemical

localization) asked that images be tied to precise annotative information

regarding experimental conditions, calibrations, chemical methods, animal

weights, and other appropriate data.
In summary, any discussion of standards touches on technical, scientific,
and sociological issues (see National Academy of Sciences, 1989). Although

standards development is necessary and cannot be
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS103
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ignored, the clear majority of participants in the committee's consultative
process were in favor of allowing most standards to evolve, based on hands-on

experience and careful consideration of users' needs. What is critical to keep in

mind is that the design of usable standards, which do not involve large

investments of individual user's time, will determine, in part, whether an

electronic or digital resource will be widely used.
Technology Drives Sociological Change
The sociology of science can be defined as the ways in which scientists
work and how they interact. Different scientific fields and subspecialties may

display varying sociological attributes. Yet as most of us have witnessed in our

everyday lives, the incursion of technology can produce very profound changes

in sociological patterns. In each of the committee's consultative activities, from

task force meetings to open hearings, the question was asked: How will the
incorporation of electronic and digital resources in neuroscience change
neuroscience and neuroscientists? The challenge for the future is to understand

the technology's possible effects and to begin to develop the policies and

approaches necessary to cope with these effects.
One of the advantages of electronic communication and the establishment
of informal databases will be the ability to share data with one's colleagues or

with the entire community. Data sharing can greatly increase the amount of

information gleaned from each experiment and thereby quicken the progress of

investigation. In addition to publication of the results of an experiment or study,
data sharing could comprise very preliminary data or complete data sets. Yet
despite the benefits that can be expected, there are also perceived risks for the

investigator wishing to share data (Fienberg et al., 1985; National Academy of

Sciences, 1989). One risk is the investment of time in an activity that results in

no tangible benefit to the investigator. Methods for assigning credit to scientists

who contribute data to databases are rudimentary at present. Because journal

publications and other formal mechanisms for assigning credit for specific

scientific concepts and results carry substantial weight as benchmarks of an

individual's success in science, the matter of proper credit is important. Another

risk involves the rights of human research subjects. The strict guidelines that

protect the privacy and identity of human research subjects were developed

before electronic networks and digital databases were in common use. The
sharing of data (e.g., PET and MRI data) obtained from studies of human
subjects will require additional
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS104
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.consideration of methods to ensure confidentiality. Throughout its activities, the
committee heard strong arguments against any imposed policy of data sharing.

Rather, identification of the risks and disincentives to sharing should be a

priority, followed by formulation of policies to provide meaningful incentives

and protections for investigators who share their data. Finally, formal attention

should be paid throughout the development and use of computerized resources
to the ethical issues involved in data sharing, including those pertaining to the
privacy of human research subjects.
Task forces and other participants explicitly identified the risks they
perceived from data sharing and possible strategies for lessening those risks.

First, methods must be developed to ensure that proper credit is assigned to

those who contribute data for sharing
Šespecially if the sharing is with a group
that extends beyond formal collaborators. The responsibilities of the

investigator who shares the data, as well as those who use the data, need to be

defined. Mechanisms to protect all involved parties require careful reflection
and measured policy formulation. For example, journals devoted to gene
mapping and protein and gene sequencing are beginning to require that

investigators deposit their raw data as a condition of publication. Participants

suggested that a close examination of the benefits and difficulties attaching to

these journal practices would be helpful to the neuroscience field. Another

suggestion was to encourage university tenure committees in their decision-

making processes to consider certain type of data sharing, particularly sharing

of peer-reviewed data, as comparable to journal publication and teaching

competence. It was clear from the discussions that neuroscientists, and much of

the biomedical science community, are only beginning to grapple with the

issues inherent in data sharing. Given this context, continued analysis and

discussion are likely.
Another area of concern to participants was how to ensure that
computerized resources would be accessible to more than just a few well-

funded laboratories. The technological capabilities resident in neuroscience

laboratories cover a fairly broad range. Restricting access by limiting the

resources' usefulness to only highly sophisticated computer systems would be

highly undesirable. Participants also noted, however, that the recent trends of
computers becoming more powerful and, at the same time, cheaper will
continue unabated. In addition, computing style eventually diffuses within

specific user communities. Therefore, although initial planning phases might

concentrate on more sophisticated hardware, it is likely that such computers

would be generally available at lower cost only a few years down the line.

Nevertheless, many participants saw the development
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS105
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of mechanisms to increase access across a range of technological capabilities as
an important goal.
There is understandable resistance to the integration of technology into the
way people work. One senior administrator, who had seen the development of

computerized molecular modeling, expressed surprise about how long it took

investigators to embrace the technology and begin to benefit from it (see also

National Academy of Sciences, 1989). Throughout the committee's activities,

awareness of this kind of resistance brought repeated cautions that it would be

unreasonable to expect everyone to view the establishment of computerized
resources for neuroscience with the same enthusiasm. To deal with this reality,
most participants endorsed continued discussion and communication within the

neuroscience community. Some even suggested that professional societies (e.g.,

the Society for Neuroscience) might play a role in fostering communication

about these issues.A final sociological issue raised by the committee's activities relates to
changes in the work force that result from greater use of technology. It is

becoming more and more common for one person in a laboratory to be the

''computer expert." This person is called on to solve software problems and

make the laboratory's computers work effectively to support the group's

research. Ten years ago, these people were often undergraduate students, many

of whom were not planning to pursue a biomedical science career. Increasingly,
they are individuals who are trained in science but who also have experience
and interest in the technology that supports that science, thus earning the title

"scientist-programmers" (Anderson, 1989). As valuable as such people are,

their career possibilities are relatively constrained. Jobs, promotions, and tenure

traditionally are based on publication of research results, not the development of

useful technologies to conduct research. A complementary dilemma faces

computer scientists who are interested in biomedical science applications but

find it difficult to publish such work in the computer science literature. Many

participants stressed the value of scientist-programmers to the work of their

laboratories and voiced the hope that reward structures could be improved for

this new segment of the neuroscience work force.
The sociological implications of the increasing role of computer and
information technology in research touch many who work in the neuroscience

field (Denning, 1987), and consideration of these issues should be an integral

part of planning for the future. A common theme among the topics covered in

this section
Šsociological issues, the needed technical applications, and the
development and acceptance of standard data formats
Šis the absence of
experience on which beneficial
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS106
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.policies can be founded. Mechanisms to gain such experience constituted a
major topic of discussion for the task forces.
STRATEGIES FOR BUILDING A BASE OF EXPERIENCE
Pilot Projects are Good Starting Points
Although uniformly supportive of the long-range goal to integrate
computer and information technology into neuroscience research, all four task

forces strongly recommended the establishment of pilot projects, so that a badly

needed base of experience could be built. These views led to the concept of a

two-phase effort. The specific kinds of pilot projects that were suggested

differed from one group to another, but through communication among the task
forces, the suggestions coalesced into a unified concept for the committee's
consideration. Rather than separate entities, pilot projects should represent a

coordinated "family" of efforts with certain goals in common. Motivating the

suggestion of pilot projects was the belief that such an approach would allow

"in-house" development, controlled by the eventual users of the tools and

resources being examined. The importance of this kind of development was

stressed by several task force members with backgrounds in database design

and administration, as well as by the group that considered the Defense

Mapping Agency's experience in developing computerized tools (Downs et al.,

1990).A consensus emerged that groups of investigators should constitute this
pilot project program. Each of the groups would involve neuroscientists

working on a specific topic, some or all of whom would be geographically

separated. Task force members with experience developing databases

emphasized the importance of a single, clear, unifying concept behind each
group; they recommended that each group be organized around neuroscience
topic areas but include clear technological goals and objectives. Most important,

organization around neuroscience topics would ensure that the building of the

experience base proceeded in concert with continued research and discovery

about the brain and its functions.
The suggested goals of such a program were generated from discussions of
research and technical needs, challenges, and opportunities, which were

described in the first two sections of this chapter. Although each pilot project

would not necessarily address each issue, the overall goals of the program as a
whole would be the following:
   Develop digital data collection and storage methods for data at multiple
levels of the neural hierarchy.
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS107
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.   Identify the kinds of data, level of resolution, and experimental
information necessary to facilitate new insights and stimulate research.
   Examine and evaluate the various capabilities (e.g., browsing, graphic
interfaces) that can increase use of the resources and enhance access to

meaningful information.
   Develop a variety of databases, ranging from formal, consensus
databases to informal databases for research collaboration.
   Develop and experiment with different software for translation across
different computing environments, for user interfaces, for network

transmission of images, for data searching, and for image generation

and comparison.   Begin to develop standard data formats, nomenclature, and data
collection schemes, and to evaluate the evolution of these standards.
   Gain experience in data sharing and communication through electronic
means, including networks and transportable media.
   Communicate with others in the program to share and evaluate
experiences and technological developments.
The task forces considered a number of factors in relation to the
neuroscience topic areas that might be chosen for the pilot project program. One

was the differences among subspecialties of neuroscience in their computer

"readiness"Šthat is, the degree to which the data in a specific field are already
in digital form. For example, most of the data from human imaging studies are

in digital form; a pilot group working in that area could focus its work on the
goals of standards development or data sharing. In contrast, a group whose data
are largely in photographic or other nondigital forms might concentrate on

developing digital data collection mechanisms.
Different neuroscience subspecialties can also be separated by the
"horizontal" versus "vertical" range over which they extend in the neural

hierarchy. Those involved in mapping the locations of different

neurotransmitters or receptors might confine the majority of their research

questions horizontally to the cellular or systems levels of the hierarchy. In

contrast, researchers interested in pain, sleep, or substance abuse are often
interested in information that extends vertically to almost every level of the
hierarchy. Because such groups may well have different data collection and

management needs, including a range of neuroscience subspecialties in the pilot

projects would be advantageous.
In addition to groups that vary in readiness and research focus, task force
members also suggested the inclusion of groups with different kinds of

computer expertise. First, individuals with programming and computer graphics

expertise are needed. (Some of these experts
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS108
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.might be scientist-programmers; others might be computer experts who lack a
strong working knowledge of biology.) Second, the expertise of information

technology and networking personnel should be tapped. Finally, database

specialists should be involved. Again, each program group would not

necessarily include all of these experts
Šchoices would be based on the group's
defined goals. The task forces recognized that the inclusion of computer and
information science experts presented difficulties in that such arrangements are
not typical of the personnel structure in most federally funded biomedical

research projects. To offset these difficulties, task force members suggested that

sources of technical expertise, such as the National Center for Biotechnology

Information, university computer science departments, or supercomputer

research centers, be explored to ensure on-site availability of computer science

expertise.Finally, some task force members felt it was important to include
neuroscientists with various degrees of computer experience. Neuroscientists

with very little experience can provide insights about the usefulness of

prototype user interfaces and data organization schemes, as well as the

feasibility of standards protocols and methods for converting data to digital
forms. Further, communication among neuroscientists with such varied
experience will ensure an understanding of the needs of the larger neuroscience

community.In summary, the task forces made specific suggestions regarding the
critical need to begin to build a base of experience in the incorporation of

computer and information technologies into neuroscience research. In addition,

they made recommendations on the composition of pilot project groups and the

goals for the overall program. To coordinate these groups and provide a focus

for applying the experience they gain to the long-range goal, the task forces also
recommended to the committee that a coordinating structure be established.
Coordination, Oversight, and Evaluation Will be Needed
A key area of consensus among the task forces was that pilot projects
required coordination and that oversight and evaluation mechanisms were

crucial to the eventual implementation of a complex of computerized resources

for neuroscience (see also National Academy of Sciences, 1989). The

experiences of the task force members involved with development of the
genome databases underscored this need: each of the genome databases had
developed independently, and interlinking these disparate systems was proving

to be troublesome (Smith, 1990). On the other hand, an excess of central

oversight and planning can isolate users from the development process, as

occurredBUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS109
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.in the modernization efforts of the Defense Mapping Agency (Downs et al.,
1990). Therefore, task force members considered it essential to establish a

balance.The structures suggested for coordination of the pilot projects were varied.
Two of the task forces envisioned a multidisciplinary advisory board or

committee that would be responsible for coordinating the pilot project activities

and, possibly, for quality or editorial control of the contents of the database.

Another task force assigned the responsibility for coordination to a host

institution or core facility for each project. This host institution would document
and evaluate the communication and collaboration achieved through the pilot
project and evaluate standard data formats and software tools. In this scheme,

the final evaluation in advance of implementing the long-range goal of a

national effort would be conducted by a board composed of neuroscientists and

computer scientists. Finally, the fourth task force suggested that regular

meetings among the different pilot projects be held to validate data, assess

needs and progress, and coordinate the exchange of software, protocols, and

operational methods. In addition to these meetings, the task forces suggested

that a nonprofit organization, similar to the Human Genome Organization

(HUGO), be established. This organization would be responsible for long-range

planning and coordination among various federal funding agencies.
The task forces did not enumerate the responsibilities appropriate to these
various oversight structures. Nevertheless, they made numerous suggestions

about what tasks eventually could be assigned to such boards or organizations.

For example, a consensus brain database requires editors to ensure the quality

and accuracy of the information it contains. In addition, the efficient use of

large databases normally requires some training. Therefore, a service and

educational component was recommended. Another suggestion was the
establishment of boards for reviewing publications and data submitted to a
comprehensive brain database.
By the close of the committee's activities, there was a strong consensus
that the long-range goal of building a complex of computerized resources for

neuroscience was technically feasible and that the realization of this goal would

greatly enhance neuroscience research. The necessity of building a base of

experience from which to realize this goal was reinforced throughout the

meetings and open hearings. Key aspects of this base of experience should

include the involvement of neuroscientists with computer and information
scientists in pilot projects, the coordination and oversight of individual pilot
projects, and careful attention to the sociological and ethical issues inherent in

the use of computerized resources for science.
BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS110
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Funding the Effort is an Important Issue
The committee's activities took place against the backdrop of an
exceptionally difficult year in biomedical research funding. It was a year in

which emergency meetings were called to assess the effects of the funding crisis

on the future of biomedical science in the United States, and in which many

issues of 
Science or 
The Scientist
 contained an article about decreasing award
rates for grants or the disincentives to entering science as a career (Bloom and
Randolph, 1990; Culliton, 1990; National Academy of Sciences and Institute of
Medicine, 1990). Understandably, this climate left its mark on the opinions of

the participants in each of the consultative activities.
Nearly all participants argued that, if the establishment of a complex of
electronic and digital resources for neuroscience were important enough to

undertake, appropriation of additional funds for its establishment would be

necessary and justified. Most participants and respondents were enthusiastic

about the potential benefits to be gained from greater integration of

computerized resources in neuroscience and considered the additional
investment to be justified. As might be expected, the majority of those
expressing this view were neuroscientists with extensive experience in using

computers for their research. Yet the task force groups and open hearings

included neuroscientists with a range of computer experience. As the various

meetings progressed, most neuroscientists who had moderate to minimum

computer experience (and were often initially skeptical about the value of

computerized resources) became excited about the advantage such tools might

offer for their research. Nevertheless, despite this general enthusiasm, a few

participants and respondents were opposed to the initiatives being considered
Šfor two main reasons. First, they did not see enough benefit to justify the

expenditure of funds. Second, they were concerned that the initiative might

cause scarce funds to be sequestered and funneled to a small group of senior
scientists. Committee members carefully considered all of these views as they
developed their recommendations.
REFERENCESAnderson, G. C.1989. New initiatives aim to emancipate "scientist-programmers."The Scientist
(Sept. 18):23.
Bloom, F. E., and M. A. Randolph, eds. 1990. Funding Health Sciences Research: A Strategy to
Restore Balance. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Culliton, B. J.1990. Biomedical funding: The eternal crisis. Science250:1652
Œ1653.Denning, P. J.1987. The science of computing: A new paradigm for science: American
Scientist75:572Œ573.BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS111
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Downs, A., B. Waxman, and C. Pechura. 1990. Technological Implications of Cartography and
Remote Sensing for a National Neural Circuitry Database. Background paper prepared for

the Committee on a Neural Circuitry Database, Institute of Medicine.
Fienberg, S. E., M. E. Martin, and M. L. Straf, eds. 1985. Sharing Research Data. Washington,
D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Academy of Sciences. 1989. Information Technology and the Conduct of Research.
Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Academy of Sciences and Institute of Medicine. 1990. Forum on Supporting Biomedical
Research: Near-Term Problems and Options for Action. Summary of meeting held June

27, 1990. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Schatz, B. R.1991. Building an Electronic Scientific Community. Pp. 739
Œ748 in Proceedings of the
24th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences, IEEE Computer

Society, vol. 3.
Science. 1990. What's on your mind?Check Brain Map (Briefings). Vol. 250:1203.
Smith, T. F.1990. The history of the genetic sequence databases. Genomics6:701
Œ707.Vela, C.1990. Overview of U. S. Genome and Selected Scientific Databases. Background paper
prepared for Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, Institute of Medicine.
NOTE1. This preliminary survey was conducted by Elizabeth Meyer and Constance Pechura. For a
description of the methods used, contact the Institute of Medicine, Division of Health Sciences
Policy.BUILDING CONSENSUS, IDENTIFYING NEEDS112
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6The Brain Mapping Initiative: Committee
Conclusions and Recommendations
An environment of opportunity now exists to enhance neuroscience by a
more global incorporation of computer and information technologies into the
research enterprise. Yet it is also apparent from the experiences of other
scientific disciplines, including the gene mapping community, that to ensure the

greatest benefit, these technologies must be incorporated with care and with a

clear vision of the intended goal. When such efforts are successfully realized,

the benefit can be a great increase in our understanding of normal and

pathological processes in biology. As in all biomedical research, increased

knowledge and understanding lead to improvements in human health.
THE LONG-RANGE GOAL
Neuroscience is immensely diverse in its methodology and levels of
inquiry. To achieve true understanding, this diverse information must be
coordinated into a meaningful picture. The burden of this coordination rests on
individual neuroscientists, who necessarily spend the majority of their time

investigating the many highly specific processes of the brain. Placing those

detailed, specific data into the larger context of the multiple levels of brain

organization and of all other relevant information is almost impossible
Šforseveral reasons. Neuroscience, like many other scientific fields, is divided into a

range of specialties. The diversity of research methods generated by such

specialization makes it unlikely that any one individual can achieve sufficient

expertise in every method to allow for a learned interpretation
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS113Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of every reported finding in neuroscience. More important, the mass of detailed
information being generated at every level of neural organization is impossible

to grasp with conventional means. The investigator seeking information at even

a single hierarchical level or in regard to a specific neurobiological mechanism

is often daunted by how widely scattered that information may be throughout

scores of different journals, review papers, symposia summaries, and books.
Computer and information sciences have made impressive advances in the
past decade. The development of database technology has given all fields of

science new ways of organizing and retrieving data, and research into even

more sophisticated database designs is beginning to bear fruit. Emerging object-

oriented database technology, for example, will permit improved manipulation

and exchange of electronic images, it is hoped, by the end of this decade. Such
an advance is of particular importance to neuroscience, characterized by many
as a "visual science." Graphic imaging is another area of computer science that

has grown rapidly to a high level of sophistication. Generation of two- and

three-dimensional graphic images is becoming fast and simple, and the ability

to interact with such images has endowed researchers with a high degree of

flexibility in the use of these images. The combination of high-quality graphics

capabilities and powerful data collection and analysis workstations promises to

be an unprecedented resource for neuroscientists. It is already the case that

substantial amounts of neuroscience data are collected and analyzed using a

variety of computers and workstations, which run many different software

programs and employ a wealth of utilities and tools. Further, the infrastructure

is now under construction to link these and other, more highly developed
computerized research environments through high-speed computer networks
capable of transmitting text and image data in reasonable time frames.
The capabilities afforded by the recent advances in computer science now
provide the opportunity to put into context the explosion of information on the

brain, its circuitry, and its functions. Therefore,
the committee recommends that the Brain Mapping Initiative be established
with the long-term objective of developing three-dimensional computerized
maps and models of the structure, functions, connectivity, pharmacology, and
molecular biology of human, rat, and monkey brains
1 across developmental
stages and reflecting both normal and disease states.The committee envisions this objective to be accomplished in two
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS114Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.phases, beginning with phase 1 pilot projects, which will provide an experience
base for the fulfillment of phase 2.
The maps and models noted above would constitute a Brain Mapping
Initiative, but the committee's vision has a broader scope: not a single-entity

database but a complex of interrelated, integrated databases accessible from

individual laboratories. This resource would also incorporate additional tools

and utilities that would allow users to interact with the data to form new

associations, achieve nonstandard structural views, or otherwise change the data

presentation parameters to test new hypotheses or obtain replication of specific
experimental data in other systems, regions, states, or species. The committee
recognizes the enormity of such an undertaking and that its successful

implementation will require a transformation in the way information is

acquired, communicated, and analyzed by neuroscientists.
The committee views this endeavor as a long-term project to be
accomplished in two phases. Phase 1 would comprise the organized initiation of

seed or pilot projects with the overall goal of gaining experience in the

incorporation of the required technologies and applying that experience to the

long-range planning of phase 2. In addition, pilot projects would bring focus

and utility to information technology research in areas useful to neuroscience

research. Phase 2 would be the construction of a complete family of maps and

modelsŠall the elements necessary to provide a complex of electronic
resources to enhance neuroscience research.
Despite the broad scope and difficulty of such an effort, a number of
reasons argue for initiating the project at this time. Aspects of the technological

applications are, in fact, already being developed in a number of scattered

prototype projects in individual neuroscience laboratories. These include

prototype databases and three-dimensional reconstructions of brain structures

and cells. Exchange of digital data files and data format standards is also

evolving among certain neuroscientists from various subspecialties. To ensure

the coordinated establishment of an integrated group of resources useful to the
entire neuroscience community, however, the committee believes it is critical to
plan the implementation fully and with great care. This planning should be

based on experience with, for example, the use and development of standard

data formats, methods of handling different kinds of data, methods of oversight

and evaluation, and approaches to quality control and data security. In addition,

this planning and the initial implementation steps should be managed and

coordinated from the outset in a manner that facilitates cross-fertilization of

ideas and openness to emerging technologies. Such coordination will further

ensure the greatest general benefit and efficient use of fiscal
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS115Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.resources through planned integration of a variety of databases and other digital
resources.PHASE 1: IMPLEMENTATION
Phase 1 Projects Will be the First Step in Approaching the
ChallengeTo achieve the long-range goals noted above, the committee formulated a
number of other recommendations, the first of which relates to the initiation of

phase 1.The committee recommends the establishment of pilot projects or consortia.
These projects should be peer-reviewed by neuroscientists and computer
scientists; they should also be investigator initiated, involve geographically
dispersed laboratories, and include neuroscientists with varied levels of
computer experience. The projects should develop common formats for the

exchange of data and focus on different types of computer data representations
(geometric, structural, image, and free text). Selection of projects should be on
the basis of research quality and value to the evolution of a complex of
computerized resources for mapping the brain.
The phase 1 projects are intended to form a base of experience and provide
the necessary infrastructure for the successful development of phase 2 of the

Brain Mapping Initiative
Ša comprehensive brain mapping effort. Each pilot
project would be a consortium of several (three to six) research groups with the
primary goals of mapping brain anatomy, chemistry, and functions and forging

the pathways for the integration of computer and information technology into

the overall neuroscience research effort. Consortia could be organized among

geographically distinct institutions or as centers housed within a single

institution. If the centers approach were to be adopted, special attention should

be given to involving investigators from geographically distant institutions as

users of the resources being developed. Although the phase 1 projects should be

individually organized around specific research interests, as a whole they

should represent the diversity of neuroscience questions. (That is, the

organization should include both basic and clinical neuroscientific groups.) In

addition, research topics should reflect the vertical hierarchy of the brain, from

behavior to cells or molecules, as well as the horizontal range of inquiry, from
physiological to anatomical to chemical approaches. Finally, close collaboration
with computer scientists will also be necessary. Beyond these general goals,

many specific issues shouldTHE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS116Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.be addressed by the phase 1 projects, including kinds of databases, the scope of
the data to be included, sociological issues, and architectural and technical

requirements. These issues were discussed during task force meetings and open

hearings and are summarized in 
Chapter 5.The kinds of 
databases to be explored will vary because of the broad
range of information that is useful to working scientists. For example, published

reports from journals are a primary source of scientific data, but other, informal

interactions, including scientific meetings and individual discussions, often

provide scientists with deeper understanding. The databases developed for the
neuroscience field should attempt to include both kinds of information. Phase 1
projects could investigate the usefulness of the following kinds of databases:

reference databases, data banks, informal databases, international registries and

directories, research collaboration databases, and specialty databases (see

Chapter 5
). Each of these database forms needs to be thoroughly investigated by
phase 1 projects; however, certain resources should be implemented

immediately.The committee recognizes that neuroscience efforts proceed internationally
and recommends that an international registry of neuroscience databases and
contacts be established so that appropriate linkages can be created in the future.
Such a registry, which should be available through computer networks,
would help to identify what resources are currently available and also provide a
mechanism by which efforts could be coordinated. Further, it would enable

current investigators to develop interaction with others with whom data

collection strategies, design problems and solutions, and other related issues

could be discussed. It is expected that such a registry would initially contain

very few groups or databases but that it would grow as the phase 1 projects

proceeded.The committee recommends the establishment of an archive of public domain
software, accessible through computer networks.
The committee expects that phase 1 projects will have special needs for
novel software. Public domain software is available at little or no cost to anyone

who wants to use it, and these programs should be explored. In addition, such
an archive would encourage the formation of neuroscience ''news groups," or
groups of users with similar interests, who could communicate by computer

bulletin boards or electronic mail.
The 
scope of the data
 to be included in phase 1 projects must be
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS117Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.broad to be genuinely useful to neuroscience research, both immediately and
eventually for phase 2. Although some kinds of data have universal

applicability to all branches of neuroscience, other kinds are necessary only for

specialized groups of investigators. In addition, the range of data covered

should include normal and pathological states; it should also reflect changes

that occur during development and aging. In many respects, the kinds of data to
be included are relatively easy to define. The incorporation of diverse types into
a unified whole, however, will present a sizable challenge to phase 1

investigators and managers.There was consensus among the task forces and support from the wider
neuroscience community that anatomical data were the key data element and

might well serve as the "backbone" with which other data types can be

associated (see 
Chapter 5
). An analogy can be made that basic brain anatomical
maps or atlases are similar to LANDSAT images. Detailed information, such as

precise connections, neurochemistry, cell types, and physiological response
properties, can all be mapped onto those basic images in much the same way
roads and other landmarks can be mapped onto LANDSAT images (Downs et

al., 1990). Moreover, the level of resolution can change in both LANDSAT and

brain images: it can be adjusted up or down depending on the sensitivity of the

"sensors" employed. Thus, the location of pyramidal cells in a particular cortical

area could be mapped from medium-magnification light microscopic

examination. From higher level magnification (light or electron microscope),

the differential location of neurotransmitter substances or receptors could be

mapped onto a three-dimensional reconstruction of the pyramidal cell. At yet a

higher level, using sensitive electrophysiological sensors, the differential

locations of ion channels could be mapped. Such maps, which are prepared now

largely by hand, are important contributions to the construction of
computational models of neuronal function.
As outlined in 
Chapter 5
, sociological issues
 present some of the most
vexing problems in establishing any database or implementing any large-scale

initiative. Such matters are intimately joined with how people work on a daily

basis, the traditions they hold, and, often more important, how they are invested

personally in their work. Understandable sensitivity exists in such areas, and
careful attention to these issues is necessary for those involved with the
development and planning of electronic resources.
Including investigators with different levels of computer expertise in phase
1 projects will facilitate greater acceptance of computer technology by

emphasizing the varied needs of the neuroscience community and opening

important channels of communication. In terms of data-sharing,
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS118Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.sharing, the committee assigns no value judgment to either end of the
continuum of possible actions; that a continuum exists, however, must be

recognized and dealt with. The priority that phase 1 projects place on

establishing collaborative groups will dictate that attention be paid to data-

sharing mechanisms. As part of this effort, phase 1 projects should explore

methods to ensure that preliminary data are clearly labeled and that proper
credit will be given to those who contribute data for sharing. The committee
also encourages examination of the effects of policies already in place
Šthosedeveloped by the journals devoted to gene mapping and protein and gene

sequencingŠthat require data deposit as a condition of publication. In addition,
the committee supports the concept that university tenure committees should

begin to consider which kinds of data sharing should be viewed as evidence of

professional competence, comparable to journal publication and teaching

evaluations.If electronic resources are to be accepted and utilized, scientists must trust
the accuracy of the information contained within the resource. Therefore, phase

1 projects must begin to find ways to ensure such accuracy, especially of

information included in reference databases, data banks, and registries.

Mechanisms are needed to ensure the appropriate use of different levels of data

and to permit the deletion of information that becomes obsolete. Such

mechanisms may include management of the database by an editor (or group of
editors) who is an expert in the field and whose function would be analogous to
that of a journal editor.
Another important sociological issue facing phase 1 projects is the
acceptance of standards for data representation, data entry, nomenclature, and

methods of data annotation. Currently accepted methods of representing data

lack the level of precision required for coordinated computer resources. The

committee thus agrees with the views of task force and other study participants

that such standards are needed but that they should evolve from experience and

should be based on the needs of users, rather than imposed from some outside
source.In terms of the proposed complex's 
technical and architectural
requirements , definition and specification are impossible in the absence of a
concerted, hands-on effort to construct a usable computer resource. The

committee received valuable advice from its members, from task force

participants, and from other experts with experience in these kinds of efforts

(see Chapter 5
), and this advice is encompassed in a general framework in four
areas that should be explored by phase 1 investigators. Database management

technology is the first: in database planning, phase 1 investigators are
encouraged to seek input from such resources as the National Center for
BiotechnologyTHE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS119Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Information at the National Library of Medicine and from national
supercomputing centers, including the National Center for Super-computing

Applications and the Ohio and Pittsburgh Supercomputing Centers. Particularly

desirable is the involvement of established, successful university programs in

biomedical computing research.
Computer networks are the second technical requirement area to be
considered. The future of national and international computer networks is

particularly promising for the development of a brain mapping effort. The

committee strongly endorses international expansion of Internet,

implementation of the proposed National Research and Education Network, and

the upgrades planned for existing wide area network infrastructures, such as

NSFNET. Phase 1 projects should keep abreast of the developments in network
capabilities and remain aware of the policies that underlie concomitant upgrades
of university-controlled local area networks.
Compatibility of computer hardware and operating systems is the third
area for consideration in the architectural and technical requirements for a brain

mapping effort. It will be important to identify the operating systems that

neuroscientists use and to develop software that runs on various kinds of

systems. Another approach to compatibility is the design of data interchange

formats that allow for translation from one software program to another. These

and other approaches should be explored; however, care should be taken not to
limit compatibility by limiting access. A balance should be struck between
advanced access mechanisms, such as high-speed networks, and more

traditional mechanisms, such as telephone-based connections among personal

computers. In addition, different kinds of data storage options should be

explored.Finally, there are technical issues relating to the development of standards,
as well as the sociological issues mentioned in the previous section. The

identification of effective standards should be an early priority for phase 1

projects because the initial design of databases and communication protocols

must take such standards into consideration. In this area, the committee

encourages interaction between phase 1 investigators and the Internet Activities

Board's Engineering Task Force, which conducts specific development projects
for network data transmission. The committee also suggests cooperation with
the National Information Standards Organization (NISO), which is responsible

for the development of standards for library applications.
Phase 1 Projects Should be Centrally Organized
For phase 1 projects to provide the proper basis for the development
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS120Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.of a coordinated brain mapping effort, communication among the consortia and
some type of central oversight are needed.
The committee recommends that an administrative structure be established to
coordinate phase 1 activities. This Brain Map Advisory Panel (BMAP) should
be composed of neuroscientists and computer and information scientists, with
additional input from funding agency administrators. The panel would be
responsible for the overall direction, evaluation, and coordination of consortia

and for the development of necessary policies relating to establishment of a
brain mapping effort. The committee also recommends that the Advisory Panel
be responsible for consideration and development of editorial functions and
policies relating to the ethical and sociological issues that will arise, including,
but not limited to, correctness of information and quality control, intellectual

property rights, rights to privacy, and freedom of information.
The panel could also coordinate action by funding agencies and
other,related scientific initiatives. Finally, the panel would undertake the long-

range planning of phase 2.
As described earlier, the issues confronting the phase 1 projects are many
and diverse, ranging from sociological to highly technical areas. Each of the

consortia will need the kind of central clearinghouse for information that the

proposed panel can provide. For example, the panel can examine various

approaches to database design and weigh the outcomes against the scientific

needs of both specialized groups and the neuroscience community as a whole.

Of particular value to the coordinating function of the BMAP would be

establish contacts with other groups, including the astrophysics, earth mapping,

and global change research communities, to share information and discuss
common issues. An additional resource might be the Telescience Testbed
Program of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The panel can also collate measures of the actual use of developing
resources and of successful incentives for data sharing from among the various

consortia to obtain a clear picture of what works and what does not. In addition,

the panel could gather information from the consortia about emerging trends in

the computer industry that might affect the development of phase 2, suggest

more efficient data-handling methods, or facilitate more effective

communication protocols.
Mechanisms for integrating the developing technologies into the work
practices of neuroscientists will be another area of the panel's
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS121Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.concern. Providing quality service, education, and training is essential for the
sharing and effective use of research data. The panel's role in phase 1 should be

to develop an infrastructure to provide these components. Appropriate services

would include reliable access, distribution of data through a variety of means,

and documentation of database contents. In addition, consulting support for

local problems will be needed. Phase 2 efforts will also require several kinds of
training at diverse sites and the development of training materials. Inclusion of
panels and demonstrations at relevant scientific meetings should be explored as

options. The construction of a dynamic infrastructure will promote strong

interaction among development, service, and educational activities that will

significantly increase the usefulness of the resource.
The oversight provided by the panel should not occur in completely "top-
down" manner because such an approach could isolate the consortia from each

other and slow the transfer of important findings and developments.

Mechanisms should be found for organized cross-communication among the

consortia and the panel. One way to accomplish this communication would be

to include representatives from each consortium on the panel. Another

mechanism that deserves serious consideration is to hold regular meetings of
consortia investigators. Such an approach has been successful for certain
genome databases. For example, the principal investigators from each

consortium could meet semiannually or quarterly to present their work and

identify the advances made and the barriers encountered. The meetings thus

would provide the opportunity to validate data, assess needs and progress, and

coordinate the exchange of software, protocols, and operational methods. They

might also be used as a vehicle to obtain input from experts in neuroscience,

computer science, or industry who are not involved in the phase 1 projects or on

the panel but who have special skills that can be brought to bear on particular

problems and issues. The panel could also participate in these meetings to offer

input, receive requests for needed action, and provide a record of the

proceedings.Another responsibility of the panel would be to coordinate the
establishment of the international registry of neuroscience databases and

contacts, and the archive of public domain software that the committee has

recommended be established. In addition, the coordination of phase 1 projects

with other national and international efforts is extremely important. Therefore,
the committee recommends that the phase 1 and 2 projects of the Brain
Mapping Initiative maintain a close relationship with the gene mapping and
sequencing community and
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS122Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the Human Genome Project, and with other scientific computing efforts,
including network initiatives such as NSFNET and the proposed National
Research and Education Network. As part of these efforts, the committee
further recommends that linkages be established with protein sequence and
genome databases to enhance access to information about brain-specific genes.
Phase 1 Projects Will Require Additional Funding
Special challenges related to funding confront the implementation of the
phase 1 projects. The first is to determine a basic funding approach. There are

three ways in which federal dollars are provided for biomedical research. One is

by a contract mechanism in which a government agency funds projects that it

proposes, which are completed by an outside investigator according to a

contract written by the government agency. The government agencies then

oversee and supervise such projects. Contract mechanisms are often used by the

Department of Defense to fund research, but they represent a much smaller

portion of the funding provided by NIH and ADAMHA for biomedical research
(ADAMHA, 1988; National Institutes of Health, 1989). The other mechanism,
which is more typical of ADAMHA, NIH, and NSF funding, is that of grants to

investigators or groups of investigators for research projects that are proposed,

accomplished, and supervised by the investigators themselves (investigator-

initiated). The third funding mechanism, cooperative agreements involving

researchers and their universities, is currently used by the NSF for some

projects and functions like a combination grant/contract. The committee

received a great deal of input about the relative merits of these mechanisms,

especially regarding grants versus contracts. Generally, it favors the use of grant

mechanisms and cooperative agreements for funding the proposed initiative.

This judgment is based on the committee's belief that the development of usable

resources should be intricately combined with the research itself, and this dual

task can best be done by scientists actively involved in the research. The limited
use of contracts, however, may confer advantages during some aspects of phase
1 activities. Therefore,
the committee recommends that federal funding agencies develop requests for
applications and/or cooperative agreements to support the formation of
consortia and the activities of the Brain Map Advisory Panel. Limited use of
contract mechanisms should also be considered when appropriate to the overall
goals of the initiative.
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS123Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The second challenge is the fact that the proposed phase 1 organization is
not typical of the current administrative or funding structures employed by the

federal agencies responsible for the biomedical sciences. The typical structure

of NIH and ADAMHA funding is that individual institutes provide funding for

individual grants (R01s) or program project grants (P01s) for specific research

projects related to the institute's overall research program goals. Review of such
grants on the basis of scientific merit is accomplished either through the NIH
Division of Research Grants' study sections or through an individual institute's

scientific review groups.
The proposed oversight panel and consortia, each consisting of groups of
investigators (similar to program project groups), constitute a structure the

committee considers essential to the success of the Brain Mapping Initiative.

Such a structure, however, will require flexibility in the typical biomedical

funding mechanisms noted above and cooperation among different agencies.

The committee is not recommending a reorganization of the federal biomedical
research complex; nevertheless, it sees a critical need for greater
communication and cooperation among the components of the complex.

Further, this communication and cooperation might be extended to include

agencies outside the Public Health Service, such as the Departments of Defense

and Energy, as well as private agencies, foundations, and universities that

provide resources for biomedical science. To this end,
the committee recommends that phases 1 and 2 of the Brain Mapping Initiative
be international in scope and that they be funded by multiple sources in a
coordinated fashion. The structure for administering the funding should ensure

program stability and effectiveness. Possible funding structures include the
identification of a lead agency or institute, or the establishment of formal
administrative structures among two or more agencies.
The committee is also sensitive to the current fiscal restraints on the entire
U.S. biomedical research effort (National Academy of Sciences and Institute of
Medicine, 1990; Lederman, 1991). Given this reality, there is understandable
concern among scientists that large initiatives pose a threat to the survival or

health of individual investigator-based research. In the case of the Brain

Mapping Initiative, these fears are unfounded. The project proposed here would

constitute a very small part of the entire neuroscience research effort. Moreover,

the history of neuroscience abounds with examples of how technological

advances have provided the tools with which major discoveries
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS124Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.have been made, discoveries that have led directly to significant reductions in
human suffering. Incorporation of computer science and information

technology, to their full potential, into neuroscience research represents a

technological advance that will be analogous to, and may even rival, the

development of the oscilloscope and the electron microscope. It is important to

reiterate that these proposals are aimed toward coordinating what would be
widely separated activities into a unified effort. Only an effort of this kind can
provide the kind of coordination and careful planning for the future that uses

scarce resources efficiently and effectively and ensures greater use of the

emerging technology by the neuroscience community as a whole. Therefore,
the committee concludes that the expected benefits of the proposed Brain
Mapping Initiative justify the investment of necessary resources and
recommends the appropriation of additional funding to support the

establishment of phase 1 projects.
Phase 1 Projects Will Require a Certain Amount of Time
and SupportFive years is the minimum time that should be allowed for phase 1 projects
to reach the level of expertise and technological development necessary to

initiate phase 2. Further, as phase 2 is initiated, the phase 1 projects should be

kept in place
Šfor a period of time to be determined by the Advisory Panel
Šand, possibly, phased out gradually as phase 2 begins or simply incorporated

into the larger initiative.
The budget for phase 1 can be estimated at $10 million per year, with an
expected duration of five years. This amount is based on establishing five

consortia groups, each with a $2 million-per-year funding level. The $2 million

would be distributed among consortia participants; thus, individual funding

levels could range from $200,000 to $400,000 annually. This funding would be

used to cover the costs of investigator research support, computer systems,

software and software development, establishment of necessary local area

networks, and travel for consortia participants. The Advisory Panel would also

require support from these funds to cover travel and administrative costs.
PHASE 2: LONG-TERM INTEGRATION AND ITS
POTENTIAL BENEFITSThe brain presents some of the most fascinating, complex questions in
biological science. Neuroscience has amassed a substantial body of knowledge
about the structures of the brain and their specific functions, but in many ways
this mass of knowledge is only a beginning.
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS125Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.It is now time to fit the millions of pieces of the puzzle into place and bring
neuroscience to a point at which it can begin to alter the course of many

diseases and disabilities. The proposed Brain Mapping Initiative will allow

investigators studying the brain to view data in new ways, to share data with

each other, and to access needed data from any of the neuroscience

subspecialties. So enabled, neuroscientists will map the brain and its functions
to a degree only faintly imaginable even 20 years ago. The brain map that is
thus generated can be reasonably expected to contribute greatly to the

improvement of human health and the alleviation of some of the most

mysterious and intractable of human diseases.
Our society faces an already large and still growing burden from diseases
that affect the brain. Many of these diseases are multifactorial, making them

difficult to understand and difficult to treat. For example, addiction to cocaine

and other drugs has reached epidemic proportions (Gerstein and Harwood,

1990). Understanding the receptor systems of the brain that mediate these drugs'
effects and the brain regions that are affected is critical to achieve the kind of
useful treatments that have eluded us for years. But the problem becomes

exceedingly more difficult if the secondary effects of drug abuse are considered.

A 1988 national household survey conducted by the Research Triangle Institute

and the National Institute on Drug Abuse indicated that about 9.3 million

women in high-fertility age brackets (15
Œ35 years) had used an illicit drug at
least once in the year previous to the survey. With the overall expected birth

rate for a group in this age bracket taken into account, these figures suggest a

probable range of 350,000 to 625,000 annual fetal exposures to one or more

episodes of maternal drug consumption (Gerstein and Harwood, 1990; U.S.

General Accounting Office, 1990). Not only are many of these babies born

addicted to drugs, but the development of their brains has been altered, leading
to attention deficits and learning disabilities, among other problems. We need
desperately to understand and treat drug addiction, but we also need to

understand and treat or prevent the developmental deficits it causes. The

pressure to accomplish these goals is increasing rapidly. In another five years,

the drug-damaged children born this year will be entering the school systems of

many large cities in the United States. These schools will also be dealing with

other children who have been neurologically damaged
Šas a result of
malnutrition, lead poisoning, lack of adequate maternal prenatal care, and

untreated childhood diseases (Institute of Medicine, 1989). The resulting toll on

our precious human resources is obvious.
Every year, half a million children and adults experience brain and spinal
cord injuries (National Advisory Neurological and Communicative
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS126Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Disorders and Stroke Council, 1989). Most often, these injuries lead to paralysis
and lifelong disabilities. The mass of neuroscience research conducted to date

has brought us to the threshold of being able to prevent the devastating effects

of these injuries, but traversing that threshold will depend on the discoveries to

be made in the next decade. The same conditions apply to the treatment and

prevention of Alzheimer's disease. In the previous decade, we identified some
of the locations of damage caused by this disease, documented some of the
biochemical processes that are associated with that damage, and tested a variety

of pharmacological agents for their ability to slow the disease process. Yet here

again, we merely stand at the threshold.
It is enlightening to remember that virtually every system of the body is
affected by brain activity either through the central nervous system or the

peripheral nerves that constitute the sensory systems and the autonomic nervous

system. Thus, the study of neuroscience has the potential to contribute to the

development of treatments for many diseases that are typically not considered
neurologicalŠfor example, certain endocrine disorders, cardiac arrhythmias,
and gastric ulcers. In addition, many systemic disease processes result in

neurological problems that often have a metabolic basis but that are not

completely understood. Examples of these problems include the chronic pain

and nerve disorders that result from diabetes and the mental retardation caused

by thyroid insufficiency.An excellent climate of opportunity currently prevails to expand our
knowledge of brain functioning during the coming decade. Seizing this

opportunity, however, requires a concerted, interdisciplinary effort on the part

of basic and clinical neuroscientists worldwide. It is becoming clear that the

scientific enterprise in general relies increasingly on the use of sophisticated

methodologies and computer technologies. This committee has considered how
the full potential of computer technologies in neuroscience research can be
realized. It strongly believes that realization of this potential through the

establishment of the Brain Mapping Initiative is essential to ensure the greatest

benefit to society from neuroscience research.
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The committee recommends that the Brain Mapping Initiative be
established with the long-term objective of developing three-

dimensional computerized maps and models of the structure,
functions, connectivity, pharmacology, and molecular biology of
human, rat, and monkey brains across developmental stages and

reflecting both normal and disease states. The committee envisions

this objective to be accomplished in two phases, beginning with

phase 1 pilot projects, which will provide an experience base for

the fulfillment of phase 2.
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS127Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2. The committee recommends the establishment of pilot projects or
consortia. These projects should be peer-reviewed by

neuroscientists and computer scientists; they should also be

investigator initiated, involve geographically dispersed

laboratories, and include neuroscientists with varied levels of

computer experience. The projects should develop common
formats for the exchange of data and focus on different types of
computer data representations (geometric, structural, image, and

free text). Selection of projects should be on the basis of research

quality and value to the evolution of a complex of electronic

resources for mapping the brain.
3. The committee recognizes that neuroscience efforts proceed
internationally and recommends that an international registry of

neuroscience databases and contacts be established so that

appropriate linkages can be created in the future.
4. The committee recommends the establishment of an archive of
public domain software, accessible through computer networks.
5. The committee recommends that an administrative structure be
established to coordinate phase 1 activities. This Brain Map

Advisory Panel (BMAP) should be composed of neuroscientists

and computer and information scientists, with additional input from

funding agency administrators. The panel would be responsible for

the overall direction, evaluation, and coordination of consortia and

for the development of necessary policies relating to establishment
of a brain mapping effort. The committee also recommends that the
Advisory Panel be responsible for consideration and development

of editorial functions and policies relating to the ethical and

sociological issues that will arise, including, but not limited to,

correctness of information and quality control, intellectual property

rights, rights to privacy, and freedom of information.
6. The committee recommends that the phase 1 and 2 projects of the
Brain Mapping Initiative maintain a close relationship with the

gene mapping and sequencing community and the Human Genome

Project, and with other scientific computing efforts, including

network initiatives such as NSFNET and the proposed National

Research and Education Network. As part of these efforts, the
committee further recommends that linkages be established with
protein sequence and genome databases to enhance access to

information about brain-specific genes.
7. The committee recommends that federal funding agencies develop
requests for applications and/or cooperative agreements to support

the formation of consortia and the activities of the Brain Map

Advisory Panel. Limited use of contract mechanisms should also be

considered when appropriate to the overall goals of the initiative.
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS128Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8. The committee recommends that phases 1 and 2 of the Brain
Mapping Initiative be international in scope and that they be funded

by multiple sources in a coordinated fashion. The structure for

administering the funding should ensure program stability and

effectiveness. Possible funding structures include the identification

of a lead agency or institute, or the establishment of formal
administrative structures among two or more agencies.
9. The committee concludes that the expected benefits of the proposed
Brain Mapping Initiative justify the investment of necessary

resources and recommends the appropriation of additional funding

to support the establishment of phase 1 projects.
REFERENCESAlcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA). 1988. ADAMHA Funding
Mechanisms for Grants and Awards. Rockville, Md.: U.S. Department of Health and

Human Services.Downs, A., B. Waxman, and C. Pechura. 1990. Technological Implications of Cartography and
Remote Sensing for a National Neural Circuitry Database. Background paper prepared for

the Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database, Institute of Medicine.
Gerstein, D. R., and H. J. Harwood, eds. 1990. Treating Drug Problems, vol. 1. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press
Institute of Medicine. 1989. Research on Children and Adolescents with Mental, Behavioral, and
Developmental Disorders: Mobilizing a National Initiative. Washington, D.C.: National

Academy Press.Lederman, L. M.1991. Science: The End of the Frontier?Science251(Jan. 11, insert): 1
Œ19.National Academy of Sciences and Institute of Medicine. 1990. Forum on Supporting Biomedical
Research: Near-Term Problems and Options for Action. Summary of meeting held June

27, 1990. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
National Advisory Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke Council. 1989. Decade
of the Brain: Answers Through Scientific Research. NIH Pub. No. 88-2957. Bethesda,
Md.: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health.
National Institutes of Health. 1989. NIH Data Book. Pub. No. 90-1261. Bethesda, Md.: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
U.S. General Accounting Office. 1990. Drug Exposed Infants: A Generation at Risk. Testimony
before the Committee on Finance, U.S. Senate. Pub. No. GAO/T-HRD-90-46.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. General Accounting Office.
NOTE1. These species are intended as starting points. The committee also recognizes the need to
include data from other, vertebrate and invertebrate, species.
THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS129Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE BRAIN MAPPING INITIATIVE: COMMITTEE CONCLUSIONS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS130Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes131Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ATask Force Topics and Rosters
Task Force 1
Task Force 1 met in Washington, D.C. on January 30 and 31, 1990. The
group examined the issues related to establishing a complex of automated
resources for neuroscience research from the perspective of those working in
neurophysiology, neuroanatomy, and other fields in which the hierarchical

character of neural systems must be considered.
Gordon M. Shepherd,
* Yale University School of Medicine
Vinton Cerf,
* Corporation for National Research Initiatives
David G. Amaral, Salk Institute
Joseph Capowski, Eutectics Electronics
Edward G. Jones, University of California, Irvine, College of Medicine

David Lipman, National Center for Biotechnology Information

Clifford Lynch, University of California, Oakland

David A. McCormick, Yale University School of Medicine

Scooter Morris, Genentech

Clint Potter, National Center for Supercomputing Applications

Bruce Schatz, University of Arizona

Terrence J. Sejnowski, Salk Institute
* Member, Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database.
TASK FORCE TOPICS AND ROSTERS133
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Task Force 2
Task Force 2 met in Washington, D.C. on February 1 and 2, 1990. The
group examined the relevant issues in relation to mapping the presence of

neurotransmitters, receptors, or changes in glucose metabolism, blood flow, or

ion concentration in specific regions of the brain (i.e., autoradiographic and

densitometric data).
Joseph T. Coyle,
* Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Diane C.P. Smith,
* Xerox CorporationMichael J. Kuhar, NIDA Addiction Research Center

Charles Molnar, Washington University

Virginia M. Pickel, Cornell University, School of Medicine

Arthur W. Toga, University of California, Los Angeles

Oleh Tretiak, Drexel University
Stanley J. Watson, University of Michigan School of Medicine
Turner Whitted, Numerical Design Ltd.

William Yamamoto, George Washington University Medical Center
Task Force 3
Task Force 3 met in Irvine, California, on March 5 and 6, 1990. The group
examined the issues from the perspective of those involved in human brain

imaging, including PET scanning, MRI visualization, CT scanning, and the

combination or overlaying of these images.
Marcus E. Raichle,
* Washington University School of Medicine
Jerome R. Cox,
* Washington University
Karen J. Berkley,
* Florida State University
Verne S. Caviness, Massachusetts General Hospital

Alan Evans, Montreal Neurological Institute

Peter Fox, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine

David LaBerge, University of California, Irvine

Martin Reite, University of Colorado
Larry Squire, Veterans Administration Medical Center, San Diego
Chris Wood, Los Alamos National Laboratory
Task Force 4
Task Force 4 met in Irvine, California, on March 7 and 8, 1990, and
examined the issues in relation to the generation of a comprehensive
* Member, Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database.
TASK FORCE TOPICS AND ROSTERS134
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.brain mapping project aimed toward the storage and possible display of
organized knowledge about the structure and functions of the brain.
Donald J. Woodward,
* University of Texas Health Science Center
James Kajiya,
* California Institute of Technology
Floyd E. Bloom, Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation

Dean Hillman, New York University Medical Center

Richard Lucier,
* Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine
Bruce McCormick, Texas A & M University

George Paximos, University of New South Wales, Australia
Larry W. Swanson,
* University of Southern California
David Van Essen,
* California Institute of Technology
James Winget, Silicon Graphics

Kwang-I Yu, TRW
* Member, Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Neural Circuitry Database.
TASK FORCE TOPICS AND ROSTERS135
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BSamples of Requests for Opinions
The following request for opinions was published in the 
Society for
Neuroscience Newsletter, Trends in Neuroscience, Communications of the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM),
 and the Journal of NIH Research
.Request for Opinions Concerning a National Neural
Circuitry Database
The Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences has formed
a study committee to examine the desirability, feasibility, and possible ways of

establishing a National Neural Circuitry Database (NNCD). It is planned that

the report of this committee, including specific recommendations, will be issued
in January 1991. Under consideration is an NNCD that would contain textual
and graphic information on the anatomy, physiology, chemistry, and

pharmacology of rat, monkey, and human brains. The database would, through

two- and three-dimensional graphic display, permit the users to rotate or slice

images in order to access various types of information regarding brain structure

and function. Further, such a database could allow for the electronic storage and

transmission of neuroscience data; thus, the database could function as a vehicle

for basic and clinical neuroscience research collaboration and data sharing.
The study committee recognizes the critical need for any eventual NNCD
to be planned carefully with the highest priority assigned to the needs of the

potential users in the neuroscience community. Therefore,
SAMPLES OF REQUESTS FOR OPINIONS136
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.the committee invites any interested persons to offer their opinions, suggestions
and/or concerns on this matter in writing to:
Constance Pechura, Ph.D.
National Academy of Sciences
Institute of Medicine, Room 324
2101Constitution Avenue, N.W.Washington, D.C.20418
Please confine your comments to no more than two, single-spaced,
typewritten pages. It would be most useful if comments were received by 
April30, 1990, but all comments received by May 31, 1990, will be considered.
The study is being conducted by the Institute of Medicine/National
Academy of Sciences with funds provided by the National Institute of Mental

Health, National Institute on Drug Abuse, and National Science Foundation.
The following letter was sent to the current and past presidents and
councilors of the Society for Neuroscience.
December 21, 1989
Dear _______________:
There have been discussions among members of the Society for
Neuroscience for a number of years regarding the ever-burgeoning amount of
data generated by neuroscience research and how the management of this vast
knowledge base is becoming impossible for individual investigators. Such

discussions often include the possibility of establishing some kind of database

for neuroscience, and a few neuroscientists have begun to develop small,

prototype databases for their own areas of interest. In response to these

interests, the National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute on Drug

Abuse, and the National Science Foundation have requested the Institute of

Medicine/National Academy of Sciences to form a study committee to examine

the desirability, feasibility, and possible ways of establishing a National Neural

Circuitry Database (NNCD). I agreed to chair this committee, composed of

neuroscientists and computer scientists, because I believe that such a project

requires the kind of careful consideration and objective assessment that an IOM

study can provide. In addition, although the usefulness of an NNCD might be
imagined, the actual establishment of such a resource would present a daunting
challenge in terms of organization, planning, and funding. Therefore,
SAMPLES OF REQUESTS FOR OPINIONS137
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.I would like the committee to draw from as broad a range of experience and
expertise as possible. With that commitment in mind, I am inviting you, the

current and past presidents and councilors of the Society for Neuroscience, to

offer your thoughts, suggestions, and concerns regarding our study.
The kind of NNCD that we have been charged to assess would be intended
as a resource for basic and clinical neuroscience. It would not be a simple

bibliographic reference source; rather, it would contain textual and graphic

information on the anatomy, physiology, chemistry, and pharmacology of rat,

monkey, and human brains. It is envisioned that the database would, through
two- and three-dimensional graphic displays, permit the users to rotate or slice
images in order to access various types of information about brain structure and

function. Further, such a database could allow for the electronic storage and

transmission of neuroscience data; thus, it could function as a vehicle for

research collaboration and data sharing.
Although we also intend to request opinions from neuroscientists through
published solicitations and open forum meetings, I feel that your experience in

the leadership of the Society can lend a special perspective to this issue. Please

send your reply to the IOM study director, Dr. Constance Pechura (listed
below); she will compile the responses and send copies to me. Connie will also
be available by phone if you have any questions or need any additional

information.I greatly appreciate your time and thought in responding to this request.
With best regards in the New Year,
Sincerely,Joseph B. Martin, M.D., Ph.D.
ChairmanCommittee on a National Neural Circuitry Database
SAMPLES OF REQUESTS FOR OPINIONS138
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CLists of Speakers and Demonstrators in
Symposia and Open Hearings
Neuroscience Symposium and Open HearingNational Academy of SciencesWashington, D.C.June 15, 1990CARLA J. SHATZ

Stanford University School of Medicine
''Correlated neural activity and visual system development"

RICHARD J. ROBERTS

Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory

"Predictive sequence motifs in proteins"

GORDON SHEPHERD
*Yale University School of Medicine

Open Hearing
: "Creating a national neuroscience resource"
* Member, Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Neural Circuitry
Database.LISTS OF SPEAKERS AND DEMONSTRATORS IN SYMPOSIA AND OPEN HEARINGS139
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Washington Computer DemonstrationsWARREN YOUNG

Scripps Clinic & Research Foundation

STEVE WERTHEIM
Harvard University

STEVE GREENBERG, WALLY WELKER

University of Wisconsin

ARTHUR TOGA
University of California, Los Angeles
Neuroscience Symposium and Open HearingUniversity of CaliforniaSan FranciscoJune 26, 1990ROBERT L. MACDONALD

University of Michigan

"Regulation of single channel properties of native and cloned GABA 
Areceptors"
ROBERT LANGRIDGE

University of California, San Francisco

"Computational molecular biology"

DAVID VAN ESSEN
*California Institute of Technology

Open Hearing
: "Creating a national neuroscience resource"
San Francisco Computer DemonstrationsWARREN YOUNG

Scripps Clinic & Research Foundation

ARTHUR TOGA
University of California, Los Angeles

JONATHAN NISSANOV

Drexel University* Member, Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Neural Circuitry
Database.LISTS OF SPEAKERS AND DEMONSTRATORS IN SYMPOSIA AND OPEN HEARINGS140
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Neuroscience Symposium and Open HearingNorthwestern UniversityChicago, IllinoisJuly 12, 1990CHRISTOF KOCH

California Institute of Technology

"Computing optical flow in men, monkeys, and machines"

PETER L. PEARSON

The Johns Hopkins University

"The development and implementation of databases for mapping the human

genome"
DONALD WOODWARD
*University of Texas Health Science Center

Open Hearing
: "Creating a national neuroscience resource"
Chicago Computer DemonstrationsSTEVE WERTHEIM
Harvard University

ARTHUR TOGA
University of California, Los Angeles

STEVE GREENBERG
University of Wisconsin

JONATHAN NISSANOV

Drexel University* Member, Institute of Medicine Committee on a National Neural Circuitry
Database.LISTS OF SPEAKERS AND DEMONSTRATORS IN SYMPOSIA AND OPEN HEARINGS141
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.SAMPLES OF REQUESTS FOR OPINIONS142
Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.IndexAAdenosine monophosphate, 
60-62, 69Advisory bodies, 
16-17, 18, 110, 121-123
,128-129
Alcohol abuse, 
7, 8, 18, 34, 41-42, 44, 45,124Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental HealthAdministration, 
8, 18, 44, 45, 124Algorithms, 
11, 97, 102Anatomy and anatomical data, 
2, 10,73-74, 103, 118, 136axons, 55-56, 58, 96behavioral studies, 
51blood-brain barrier, 
56brain function and, 
3, 6, 14, 15, 25, 26,53-56, 93-94cerebral cortex, 
4, 5, 6, 32, 34, 39, 40,51, 53, 58, 118magnetic resonance imaging, 
9, 39-40,52-53, 73, 96-97, 99pain, 35-36, 37pilot projects, 
15, 115schizophrenia, 
6, 38, 39, 67-69substance abuse, 
5, 34, 35visual perception, 
4, 31-32, 33, 34see also
 NeuronsAnimal studies, 14, 50, 51, 53, 67-69, 82,95, 114, 115, 127drug studies, 
34, 55genetic studies, 
87-88monkey studies, 
14, 32, 51, 114pain, 
37visual perception, 
32Antibodies, 43, 55, 62Architecturesbrain, 6, 10computer, 
3, 117, 119-120parallel processors, 
54ARPANET, 
84Artificial intelligence, 
54, 59Association for Computing Machinery, 
70Attitudes, 
17, 106, 111Axons, 
55-56, 58, 96INDEX143Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.BBasic research, 
2, 19, 21, 23, 52, 94, 103,116Behavioral factors, 
3, 15, 48-53, 94genetic influences, 
15, 50, 51schizophrenia, 
37-38, 40, 67substance abuse, 
5see also
 Motor functions;
Sensory perception
Bibliographic databases, 
9, 77, 78, 94, 98,117Binding, biochemical, 
see ReceptorsBiochemistry, 
2, 10, 25, 52, 53, 60-65, 74behavioral effects, 
51databases, 
9, 12, 17, 29-30, 68-69,79-82, 94, 98developmental processes and, 
57, 126genetic regulation, 
27immunocytochemistry, 
55, 56-57neuronal, 
54-57, 58pain, 36, 37pilot projects, 
15schizophrenia, 
6, 27, 38-40, 68substance abuse, 
5, 34, 35visual perception, 
4, 33see also
 Molecular processes;
PharmacologyBlood-brain barrier, 
56Blood flow, 
52Brain Browser
, 82, 83Brain Map, 
97Brain Map Advisory Panel, 
16-17, 18,121-123
, 128-129
Brain Mapping Initiative, 
3, 8, 13-19, 26,44-45, 114-129
Brain nuclei, 
5, 31, 34, 50, 53, 54, 67Brain Research
, 99Bromley, Allan, 
86CCaenorhabditis elegans
, 87-88Cancer, 30, 53, 62Cartography, 
10, 91CD-ROM, 
102Cerebral cortex, 
53, 58, 118electrical activity, 
51schizophrenia, 
6, 39, 40substance abuse, 
5visual perception, 
4, 32, 34Clinical research, 
2, 6, 19, 21, 23, 37, 52,94, 116behavioral/emotional disorders, 
52pain, 
6, 37Collins, Francis, 
30Communication, 
1, 2, 8, 23disorders, 
41pain research, 
36social aspects, 
104-107software, 
15, 101see also
 Consortia;NetworksComputer simulations, 
14, 22, 73pattern recognition, 
4, 71visual perception, 
33x-ray crystallography, 
8-9, 72-73Confidentiality, 
see Privacy rightsConsortia, 
15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123-124
, 128Contracts, federal, 18, 123-124Coordination, 
2, 22-23, 25advisory bodies, 
16-17, 18, 110,121-123
, 128-129
Brain Mapping Initiative, 
3, 8, 13-19,26, 44-45, 114-129consortia, 
15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123-124
, 128databases, 
10, 15-16electronic collaboratory groups, 
87-88long-term, 
125-127
pilot projects, 
13, 14-15, 109-110,120-123
INDEX144Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.professional organizations, 
7, 10, 23, 43,70, 74, 91-92symposia, 
10, 23, 92, 139-141see also
 Standards
Corporation for National Research Initia-
tives, 
82Cost and cost analyses
computer operations, 
69-70database software, 
81imaging technology, 
97mental disorders, 
41, 44neurological diseases, 
7, 41, 44, 126research financing, 
8, 18-19, 105, 125substance abuse, 
34, 41Coulson, Alan, 
87Current Contents
, 77DData banks, 
98, 117Databases, 
1-2
, 8, 9-11
, 15-16, 23, 67,76-84, 91, 97-99, 100, 107 -108, 114,117attitudes about, 
17bibliographic, 
9, 77, 78, 94, 98, 117biochemical processes, 
9, 12, 17, 29-30,68-69, 79-82, 94, 98Brain Mapping Initiative, 
3, 8, 13-19,26, 44-45, 114-129coordination of, 
10, 15-16evaluation, 
16genome, 
9, 12, 29, 41, 79-82, 87-88, 91,95, 98, 103, 105, 128images in, 
9-11
, 77, 83, 85-86, 93-97,98-99, 100, 114, 117, 136informal data in, 
77, 88, 93, 98, 104,108, 117international issues, 
11, 15-16, 17, 81,97, 98-99, 117, 128management of, 
3, 10, 11, 22, 29, 77,79, 81, 82, 83-84, 100-101
, 119-120molecular data, 
9, 12, 17, 29-30, 68-69,79-82National Neural Circuitry Database, 
3,11, 14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 -138
object-oriented, 
77, 100, 114on-line, 
9, 76, 79-82, 97pain, 
6, 37preliminary findings data, 
12protein sequencing, 
9, 12, 17, 29-30
,68-69, 79-82, 95, 105, 128public, 
97-98published articles, standards for inclu-
sion in, 12, 92, 110, 119relational, 
77, 82, 100schizophrenia, 
6-7, 40-41, 67-69software, general, 
81, 101substance abuse, 
5, 35textual data, 
11, 76, 93, 96, 102, 116, 117university-associated, 
82, 83, 97visual perception, 
33Data storage, 
101-102
, 107Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, 84Defense Mapping Agency, 
10, 91Department of Agriculture, 
81Department of Defense, 
10, 18, 81, 84-85,91, 124Department of Energy, 
18, 44, 81, 82, 124Department of Veterans Affairs, 
8, 44Developmental processes and stages, 
14,27, 50, 94-95, 114, 127neurochemistry, 
57, 126schizophrenia, 
6, 37, 40visual defects, 
32, 53INDEX145Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Diseases and disorders, 
7, 9, 14, 41-42, 53cancer, 
30, 53, 62cost of, 7, 41, 44, 126motor functions, 50-51neurofibromatosis, 
30, 65, 95neurological, general, 
1, 7, 21, 27,41-42, 43, 53, 56-57, 65, 95, 114,118, 126, 127pain, 5-6, 35-37visual deficits, 
4, 31, 32, 33, 53, 64see also
 Injuries;
Mental illness;
Substance abuse
Digital graphics, 73-74
cartography, 
10, 91DNA, 
64, 81, 87Dopamine, 
6-7, 34, 38, 40, 54Drug abuse, see Substance abuse
EEducation, 
110, 122learning processes, 
15, 51, 59, 67Electroencephalographic recordings,
51-52, 73Electron microscopes, 
43, 54, 58, 73, 125Electrophysiology, 
43, 54, 73, 94, 118behavioral research, 
50-52event-related potential, 
52, 73ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118neuronal, 
55, 57, 58, 59, 60, 68, 94, 118pain, 36visual perception, 
33, 52Emotion, 3, 15, 25, 27, 32, 34, 36, 48-53see also
 Mental illness
Ethics, 
16, 105, 110, 118-119, 121privacy rights, 
16, 104-105
, 121see also
 Intellectual property
European Molecular Biology Library, 
81Evaluation, 
15, 23databases, 
16data sharing and, 
12, 16, 23, 104, 105,108, 118-119imaging techniques, 
96-97peer review, 
12, 14-15, 17, 105,116-117
, 128pilot projects, 
13, 14-15, 108, 109-110,116-117
, 122, 128Event-related potential, 
52, 73FFederal government, 
7-8
, 23, 44, 45-46,74-76, 81-82, 128-129Brain Map Advisory Panel, 
16-17, 18,123-124
, 128-129
contracts, 
18, 123-124grants, 
18, 111, 124networks, 
85-87National Neural Circuitry Database, 
3,11, 14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 -138
National Research and Education Net-
work, 17, 18, 86, 87, 100, 120, 128NSFNET, 9-10
, 17, 85-86, 120, 123,128see also specific agencies
The Federal High Performance Comput-
ing Program, 86Foundations, 
8, 18, 44, 46Freedom of information, 
16, 121public domain, 
16, 17, 97-98, 117-120
,128Free text, see Textual dataFunding, 7-8, 12, 13, 44, 45-46, 81-82,92, 111, 121, 123-125Brain Map Advisory Panel, 
16, 18-19,121, 128-129foundations, 
8, 18, 44, 46grants, research, 
18, 111, 124INDEX146Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.GGenBank, 81Genetics, 25, 27, 30, 60-65, 92, 122-123
behavioral, 
15, 50, 51color vision, 64DNA, 
64, 81, 87emotion, 
15learning, 
51neurofibromatosis, 
30RNA, 
57, 63, 68schizophrenia, 
6-7, 38, 40-41, 67-69Genomes, 6, 17, 27, 62, 110, 113,122-123
, 128animal studies, 87-88databases, 
9, 12, 29, 41, 79-82, 87-88,91, 95, 98, 103, 105, 128Human Genome Project, 
17, 110, 123,128networks, 
87-88
Geographical factors
consortia, 
15, 116, 128laboratory locations, 
12, 14, 116-117
, 128Geometric data, 
116Glia, 56Gore, Albert, 
22, 86Grants, research, 
18, 111, 124Graphics, 
7, 8-9, 13, 14, 26, 67-76, 96, 98,102, 114, 136computer simulations, 
4, 8-9
, 14, 22, 33,71, 72-73HyperCard, 
82pain, 37standards, 11, 98-99visual perception, models of, 
4, 33see also
 Images and image processing
Gusella, James, 
30HHistorical perspectives, 
32, 50, 64, 70, 78,124-125
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
8, 44Hubel, David, 32Human-computer interface, 
11, 12,100-101
, 102-103
, 109see also
 GraphicsHuman Genome Project, 
17, 110, 123, 128HyperCard, 82IImages and image processing, 
7, 9, 11, 26,39-40, 74, 91, 100, 108 , 114, 116computer simulations, 
4, 8-9, 14, 22, 33,71, 72-73databases, 
9-11, 77, 83, 85-86, 93-97,98-99, 100, 114, 117, 136evaluation, 
96-97magnetic resonance imaging, 
9, 39-40
,52-53, 73, 96-97, 99networks, 
9-10, 82, 83, 88, 100, 102,103, 108object-oriented databases, 
77, 100, 114pattern recognition, 
4, 71PET scanning, 
6, 9, 39-40, 52, 53, 73,96-97, 99see also
 Graphics;Vision and visualizationImmunocytochemistry, 
55, 56-57Informal data, 
77, 88, 93, 98, 104, 108, 117Information management, 
1, 3, 22, 26-30
,43-44databases, 
3, 10, 11, 22, 29, 77, 79, 81,82, 83-84, 100-101, 119-120INDEX147Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Injuries, 7, 21, 27, 52, 56, 62, 126-127pain and, 
5-6, 36, 37visual perception, 
33Institute of Medicine, 
1, 22, 136Intellectual property, 
12, 16, 104, 105,118-119
, 121public domain, 
16, 17, 97-98, 117-120
,128Intelligenetics, Inc., 
81International Brain Research Organiza-
tion, 
43International perspectives and programs,
18, 43, 117, 124-125
, 129databases, 
11, 15-16, 17, 81, 97, 98-99,117, 128networks, 
9, 85, 87, 97, 117, 120research policy, 
2, 23Internet, 85, 87, 120Ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118JJapanese DNA Data Bank, 
81Journal of Neuroscience, 99LLearning processes, 
15, 51, 59, 67Legal issues
freedom of information, 
16intellectual property, 12, 16, 104, 105,118-119
, 121privacy rights, 
16, 104-105
, 121public domain, 
16, 17, 97-98, 117-120
,128Local area networks, 
84-85, 100, 120Los Alamos National Laboratory, 
81MMacArthur Foundation, 
8, 44Magnetic resonance imaging, 
9, 39,52-53, 73, 96-97, 99Magnetoencephalography, 
52Mathematics, 
59-60, 73, 116Memory, 94animal/human, 
51, 59computer, 
26, 70, 102Mental illness, 
1, 7, 27, 41-42, 43, 44, 52affective disorders, 
7, 41-42National Institute of Mental Health, 
1, 2,22, 23, 75schizophrenia, 
6-7, 27, 37-41
, 52, 67-69Microcircuits, 
26, 57-60national database, 
3neural, 
3, 26, 27, 35, 53-54, 59, 85Microprocessors, 
26Models, 22, 88, 100, 114-117Brain Mapping Initiative, 
3, 8, 13-19,26, 44-45, 114-129computer simulations, 
4, 8-9, 14, 22, 33,71, 72-73molecular, 
92, 95, 106Molecular processes, 
2, 14, 25, 57, 60-65,114, 127antibodies, 
43, 55, 62databases, 
9, 12, 17, 29-30, 68-69
, 79-82emotion, 
15modeling, 
92, 95, 106PET scanning, 
6, 9, 39-40, 52, 53, 73,96-97, 99schizophrenia, 
40substance abuse, 
5visual perception, 
4, 33x-ray crystallography, 
8-9, 72-73see also
 Genetics;Protein sequencing;
ReceptorsMonkey studies, 
14, 32, 51, 114Motor functions, 
33, 34, 36, 48, 50-51, 94INDEX148Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.NNathans, Jeremy, 
64National Academy of Sciences, 
86National Center for Biotechnology Infor-
mation, 100, 109, 119-120
National Center for Research Resources, 
81National Digital Library System, 
88National Information Standards Organiza-tions, 
120National Institute for General Medical
Sciences, 82National Institute of Mental Health, 
1, 2,22, 23, 75National Institute of Neurological Disor-
ders and Strokes, 41National Institute on Drug Abuse, 
1, 2,22, 23, 126National Institutes of Health, 
7-8
, 18, 44,45, 74-76, 81, 124see also specific institutes
National Library of Medicine, 
9, 22, 76,79, 81-82, 100, 103National Center for Biotechnology
Information, 100, 109, 119-120National Neural Circuitry Database, 
3, 11,14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 -138National Research and Education Net-
work, 17, 18, 86, 87, 100, 120, 128National Research Council, 
86National Science Foundation, 
1, 2, 8, 18,22, 23, 44, 70-71, 75-76, 81, 82NSFNET, 
9-10, 17, 85-86, 120, 123, 128Networks, 
1, 7-8, 9-10, 11, 14, 21-22, 23,83, 84-88, 93, 100, 108 , 
120communications software, 
15, 101, 108,120data standards, 10, 11, 15, 85, 87, 92,98-99, 102-104
, 108, 109, 110, 116,119, 120images, 
9-10, 82, 83, 88, 97, 100, 102,103, 108international perspectives, 
9, 85, 87, 97,117, 120Internet, 85, 87, 120local area, 
84-85, 100, 120neural, 
2, 25, 27National Neural Circuitry Database, 
3,11, 14, 22, 26, 91, 97, 136 -138
National Research and Education Net-
work, 17, 18, 86, 87, 100, 120, 128NSFNET, 
9-10, 17, 85-86, 120, 123, 128on-line databases, 
9, 76, 79-82, 97public domain, 
16, 17, 97-98, 117-120
,128social aspects, 
104-107standards, 
10, 11, 15, 85, 87, 116university, 
85, 120wide area, 
84, 85Neural hierarchy, 
2, 3, 10, 15, 27, 48-65
,94, 95, 99, 107, 108Neurons, 27, 43, 55-65, 74, 94axons, 55-56, 58, 96circuitry, 
3, 26, 27, 35, 53-54, 59, 85electrophysiology, 
55, 57, 58, 59, 60,68, 94, 118ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118networks, 
2, 3neurochemistry, 
54-57, 58synapses, 
27, 57-62
, 68, 94see also
 ReceptorsNeurofibromatosis, 
30, 65, 95Newton, Isaac, 64INDEX149Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Nonprofit organizations, 
see Foundations
NSFNET, 9-10, 17, 85-86, 120, 123, 128OObject-oriented databases, 
77, 100, 114Office of Naval Research, 
44Office of Science and Technology Policy,
86On-line databases, 9, 76, 79-82, 97Organizational issues, 
2, 8, 84, 121-122research hierarchy, 
3, 27-28, 31see also
 Coordination;
Information managementOscilloscope, 43, 125PPagels, Heinz, 
21Pain, 5-6, 35-37Parallel processors, 54Pattern recognition, 
4, 71Pavlov, Ivan, 50Peer review, 12, 14-15
, 17, 105, 116-117,128Pew Charitable Trusts, 
8Pharmacology, 
14, 35, 52, 60, 74, 114, 127dopamine, 
6-7
, 34, 38, 40, 54see also
 Substance abuse
Physiology, 
2, 14, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 43,53-54, 55, 57, 114, 136anatomy and brain function, 
3, 6, 14, 15,25, 26, 53-56, 93-94pain, 35-37pilot projects, 
14schizophrenia, 
38visual perception, 
2, 3, 4, 14, 25, 31-34see also
 Electrophysiology
Pilot projects, 
13, 14-15, 19, 92, 95-96,107-109
, 116-117
, 118, 120, 122,123-125
, 128, 129anatomy, 
15, 115coordination, 
13, 14-15, 109-110
,120-123
evaluation, 
13, 14-15
, 108, 109-110,116-117
, 122, 128Policy issues, general, 
2, 16, 23Positron emission tomography, 
6, 9,39-40, 52, 53, 73, 96-97, 99Privacy rights, 
16, 104-105
, 121Private sector, 74foundations, 
8, 18, 44, 46Problem solvingalgorithms, 
11, 97, 102artificial intelligence, 
54, 59Professional organizations, 
7, 10, 23, 43,70, 74, 91-92consortia, 
15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123-124
, 128symposia, 
10, 23, 92, 139-141Projections, 
67, 113-116
, 125-127
networks, 
86-87Protein sequencing, 
62, 122-123
databases, 
9, 12, 17, 29-30, 68-69,79-82, 95, 105, 128Protein synthesis, 
57Prototypes, 
see Pilot projects
Public domain
databases, 
97-98software, 
16, 17, 117-120
, 128Public Health Service, 
18, 124Publications, 
28, 43, 98, 99, 105bibliographic databases, 
9, 77, 78, 94,98, 117newsletters, 
87standards for related data in databases,
12, 92, 110, 119study methodology, 
10, 92INDEX150Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.QQuality control, 16, 121, 122see also
 Evaluation;
StandardsRReceptors, neuronal, 
5, 6-7, 34, 35, 38,39, 40, 52, 58, 60-63
, 94 , 
96, 126Reference databases, 
see BibliographicdatabasesRelational databases, 77, 82, 100Researchbasic, 2, 19, 21, 23, 52, 94, 103, 116clinical, 
2, 6, 19, 21, 23, 37, 52, 94, 116costs, 8, 18-19, 105, 125fragmentation of, 
3, 13, 43-44policy, 
2, 3, 23see also
 Technological innovations
Research Triangle Institute, 
126RNA, 57, 63, 68Robotics, 
4SSchizophrenia, 
6-7
, 27, 37-41, 52, 67-69anatomical data, 
6, 38, 39, 67-69
behavioral factors, 
37-38, 40, 67cerebral cortex, 
6, 39, 40chemical processes, 
6, 27, 38-40
, 68databases, 
6-7, 40-41, 67-69developmental aspects, 
6, 37, 40genetics, 
6-7
, 38, 40-41, 67-69Sensors, electronic, 4, 118Sensory perception, 
25, 27, 48, 52pain, 5-6, 35-37see also
 Vision and visualization
Sex differences, 
64Sociological issues, 
12-13, 104-107
, 110,117, 118-119, 121, 126attitudes, 
17, 106, 111pain, 
37privacy rights, 
16, 104-105
, 121standard data formats, 
12, 118-119
see also
 Intellectual propertySociety for Neuroscience, 
7, 10, 23, 43,74, 91-92Software, 
74-75, 108, 109database, 
81, 101human-computer interface, 
11, 108public domain, 
16, 17, 117-120
, 128telecommunications, 
15, 101, 108, 120Sulston, John, 
87Standards, 
22data formats, 10, 11, 12, 15, 85, 87, 92,98-99, 102-104
, 108, 109 , 
110, 116,119, 120graphics, 
11, 98-99publication, 
12, 92, 110, 119social factors, 12Study methodology
consortia, 
15, 16, 17, 116, 121, 122,123-124
, 128symposia, 
10, 23, 92, 139-141see also
 Task forces
Substance abuse, 
4-5
, 7, 34-35, 41-42, 50,126alcohol abuse, 
7, 8, 18, 34, 41-42, 44,45, 124anatomical data, 
5, 34, 35animal studies, 34, 55chemical processes, 
5, 34, 35cost of, 34, 41databases, 
5, 35National Institute on Drug Abuse, 
1, 2,22, 23, 126INDEX151Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Supercomputer Network Study Act, 
86Supercomputing centers, 
120Sutherland, Ivan, 
70Symposia, 
10, 23, 92, 139-141Synapses, 27, 57-62, 68, 94axons, 55-56, 58, 96ion channels, 60, 68, 94, 118TTask forces
study methodology, 
23, 91-92, 97, 100,101, 107, 111, 136-138
topics and rosters, current study, 
133-135
visualization, 
70-72Technological innovations, general, 
2, 6,7, 42-44, 51-53, 99-102, 124-125
social factors, 104-107
Telecommunications,
see Communication;
NetworksTextual data, 
11, 116, 76, 93, 96, 102, 116UUniversities and colleges, 
109databases, 
82, 83, 97data-sharing controls by, 
12, 105, 119graphics developments, 
74networks, 
85, 120User interface, 
see Human-computer inter-
faceVVision and visualization, 4, 13, 26, 29,31-34, 67, 70-73anatomical data, 
4, 31-32, 33, 34of brain function, 
2, 3, 4, 14, 25, 31-34,43, 53-54cerebral cortex, 
4, 32, 34chemical processes, 
4, 33color, 31, 64deficits, 
4, 31, 32, 33, 53, 64developmental processes, 
32, 53electrophysiology, 
33, 52neurons, 
4, 32, 33pattern recognition, 
4, 71physiology, 
2, 3, 4, 14, 25, 31-34x-ray crystallography, 
8-9, 72-73WWhite, Ray, 
30Wide area network, 
84, 85Wiesel, Torsten, 
32Women, 126XX-ray crystallography, 
8-9, 72-73X-rays, 74INDEX152Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 2-1
 Maps of the monkey cerebral cortex, with the visual processing
region shaded. A and B are two-dimensional representations of the cerebral

cortex from different perspectives. C is a two-dimensional map of an
ﬁunfoldedﬂ cortex, in which topological relationships are preserved and areal
distortions kept to a minimum. This map was generated manually from the
contours through a series of histological sections. Figure courtesy of David
Van Essen, Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology.
153Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 2-2
 Opiate receptor localization in spinal cord by autoradiography. High densities of opiate receptors (dark orange) are found in 
the dorsal
horn, an area associated with pain perception. Autoradiographic imaging is useful for exploring sites of drug action and for un
derstanding how
drug exert their effects. Image courtesy of Michael J. Kuhar, Neuroscience Branch, National Institute of Drug Abuse Addiction R
esearch Center.
154Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 2-3
 Infrared thermograph of a patient with post-herpetic neuralgia, a
condition involving persistent pain in areas affected by a herpes zoster
infection at least three months after healing of the skin lesions. Areas of
pathological pain are associated with increased skin temperature (red

represents highest skin temperature). Figure reprinted from Rowbotham and
Fields, 1989, with permission from Elsevier Science Publishers.
155Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 3-1
 Computerized PET images showing the changes in local blood flow in the brain, associated with local changes in neuronal activi
ty,
that occur during different states of information processing. Image courtesy of Marcus Raichle, Department of Neurology, Washin
gton University
School of Medicine.
156Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 3-2
 Cell frequency maps illustrating the regional distribution of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in three normal and three parkinso
nian
brains. The colored areas represent region that contain different frequencies of cells (e.g., white areas contain 1-1,800 cells
 per square millimeter
(cells/mm2) and red areas contain 7,2019,000 cells/mm2). The higher frequencies of cells are markedly reduced within the substa
ntia nigra in the
three parkinsonian brains. Reprinted from German et al., 1989, with permission from 
Annals of Neurology
.157Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 3-3
 False color map of intracellular calcium concentration in a guinea
pig cerebellar Purkinje cell at the onset of a wave of complex spike activity. A

high calcium conentration is observed in the outer portions of the dendritic
tree. The map was produced from microfluorometric imaging of the
fluorescent calcium indicator fura-2. Image courtesy of D.W. Tank and J. A.
Connor, Molecular Biophysics Department, AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray
Hill, NJ; M. Sugimori and R. R. Llinas, Department of Physiology and
Biophysics, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY.
Reprinted with permission of 
Science.158Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 3-4
 Computer-enhanced image of vasopressin heteronuclear RNA in
the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus (PVN), as revealed by in situ

hybridization utilizing a probe directed against vasopressin intronic (VP InI)
gene sequences. The image is derived from an autoradiograph and
demonstrates expression of the VP gene in functionally distinct divisions of the
PVN (posterior magnocellular (PM) and medial parvocellular (MP) region).
Intronic in situ hybridization allows localization of shortlived heteronuclear
RNA at the cellular level, and in combination with computer-based image
analytic procedures can reveal rapid stimulusinduced changes in gene

expression in discrete neuronal populations. Image provided by James P.
Herman and Stanley J. Watson, Mental Health Research Institute, The
University of Michigan.
159Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 3-5
 Photomicrographs of dendrites from the brains of a A, a young
animal, and B, an aged animal, and B, an aged animal. The extensions from the

main dendritic shaft are dendritic 
ﬁspines.ﬂ Note the thinning of dendritic
spines in the aged brain. C. Color-enhanced freeze-fracture of a single
dendritic spine. Photomicrographs courtesy of Fidia Pharmaceutical
Corporation.160Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 4-1
 A computer model of an enzyme molecule, the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) protease. The structure was solved by
members of the Crystallography Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick Cancer Research Facility, using synthetic prote
in supplied by the
California Institute of Technology. Molecular graphics by the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) Computer Graphics 
Laboratory
using UCSF Midas-Plus. Copyright, Regents, University of California. Reprinted with permission.
161Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 4-2
 Computer-assisted reconstruction of EEG activity. Computer software is used to transform an analog EEG signal into quantitativ
eform, in this case to examine the amplitude of activity of a specific frequency band (the Delta band). The EEG distribution is 
displayed over the
entire scalp (nose is up). The delta power distribution of a normal person is seen in A while B shows the result obtained in a 
patient with an
aneurysm of the left posterior communicating artery. Figure provided by M. E. Sumas and P. G. Newlon, Department of Neurosurger
y, Eastern
Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia.
162Mapping the Brain and Its Functions: Integrating Enabling Technologies into Neuroscience ResearchCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLATE 4-3
 Three-dimensional reconstruction of a monkey brain. The cortex
has been rendered from histology, and the coronal section depicts glucose
utilization derived from autoradiography. Image courtesy of Arthur W. Toga,
Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, University of California, Los Angeles, School

of Medicine.163