DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18260Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data inElectronic Health Records: Workshop Summary88 pages | 6 x 9 | PAPERBACKISBN 978-0-309-26804-2 | DOI 10.17226/18260Joe Alper, Monica N. Feit, and Jon Q. Sanders, Rapporteurs; Board on the Healthof Select Populations; Institute of MedicineCollecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Joe Alper, Monica N. Feit, and Jon Q. Sanders, 
RapporteursBoard on the Health of Select Populations 
Collecting Sexual Orientation 
and Gender Identity Data 
 in Electronic Health Records
 Workshop Summary
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The workshop that is the subject of this workshop summary was 
approved by the Governing Board of the National Research Council, whose 
members are drawn from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the 
National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. 
This activity by the National Academy of Sciences was supported in part by 
the National Institutes of Health under Contract Number HHSN263201200074I, 
with additional support from The California Endowment under grant number 
20121371, and the California HealthCare Foundation, based in Oakland, Califor
-nia, under grant number 17133. The views presented in this publication do not 
necessarily re˜ect the views of the organizations or agencies that provided sup
-port for this activity.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-26804-2
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-26804-4
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 
334-3313; http://www.nap.edu.
For more information about the Institute of Medicine, visit the IOM home page 
at: 
www.iom.edu. 
Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
The serpent has been a symbol of long life, healing, and knowledge among almost 
all cultures and religions since the beginning of recorded history. The serpent 
adopted as a logotype by the Institute of Medicine is a relief carving from ancient 
Greece, now held by the Staatliche Museen in Berlin.
Suggested citation: IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2013. Collecting sexual orientation and 
gender identity data in electronic health records: Workshop summary.
 Washington, DC: 
The National Academies Press.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ﬁKnowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.ﬂ ŠGoetheAdvising the Nation. Improving Health.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˚t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˚c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˚c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. Charles 
M. Vest is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the fed
-eral government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined 
by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both 
the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in 
providing services to the government, the public, and the scienti˚c and engineer
-ing communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. Charles M. Vest are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PLANNING COMMITTEE ON COLLECTING 
 SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA 
 IN ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS
1IGNATIUS BAU
 (
Chair
), Independent Health Policy Consultant, San 
Francisco, California
NANCY BATES,
 Senior Researcher for Survey Methodology at the U.S. 
Census Bureau, Washington, DC
DANIEL KASPRZYK,
 Vice President and Director, Center for Excellence 
in Survey Research, NORC at the University of Chicago, Bethesda, 
Maryland
HARVEY J. MAKADON,
 Clinical Professor of Medicine at Harvard 
Medical School and Director of the LGBT Health Education Center 
at the Fenway Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
IOM Staff
MONICA N. FEIT,
 Senior Program Of˚cer
JON Q. SANDERS,
 Program Associate
ANDREA COHEN,
 Financial Associate
FREDERICK (RICK) ERDTMANN,
 Director, Board on the Health of 
Select Populations
1 Institute of Medicine planning committees are solely responsible for organizing the 
workshop, identifying topics, and choosing speakers. The responsibility for the published 
workshop summary rests with the workshop rapporteurs and the institution.
vCollecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.This workshop summary has been reviewed in draft form by indi
-viduals chosen for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in 
accordance with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s 
Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is 
to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution
 in making its
 published workshop summary as sound as possible and 
to ensure that the workshop summary meets institutional standards for 
objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to the study charge. The review 
comments and draft manuscript remain con˚dential to protect the integ
-rity of the process. We wish to thank the following individuals for their 
review of this workshop summary:
Leslie Calman,
 Mautner Project: The National Lesbian Health 
Organization
Kevin Johnson,
 Vanderbilt University Medical Center
Susan Queen,
 Of˚ce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
 
Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services
David Vawdrey,
 Columbia University
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they did not see the ˚nal draft of the 
workshop summary
 before its release. The review of this workshop sum
-mary was overseen by
 Hugh Tilson, 
University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill. Appointed by the Institute of Medicine, he was responsible 
Reviewers
vii
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii REVIEWERSfor making certain that an independent examination of this workshop 
summary was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the ˚nal content of this workshop summary rests entirely with the 
rapporteurs and the institution.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Many individuals were responsible for organizing the workshop and 
producing this summary. The planning committee would like to thank 
Institute of Medicine staff members Monica Feit, Jon Sanders, Andrea 
Cohen, Rick 
 Erdtmann, Hannan Braun, and Colin Fink. Joe Alper, the 
lead rapporteur, deserves special acknowledgment for writing the ˚rst 
draft of this summary. We also thank the speakers and participants of the 
workshop who lent their insights to the topic and contributed to the dis
-cussions throughout the day. Finally, we thank the sponsors of the work
-shop: The California Endowment, the Cali
 
fornia HealthCare Foundation, 
based in Oakland, California, and the National Institutes of Health. The 
workshop would not have been possible without their generous support.
Acknowledgments
ix
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ACRONYMS
 xiii
1 INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
 1 About This Summary, 2
2 CLINICAL RATIONALE FOR COLLECTING SEXUAL 
 ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
 5 Access to Care, 7
 The Impact on Quality of Care, 8
 Supporting Patients in the Collection of Data, 9
 Discussion, 13
3 FEDERAL PERSPECTIVE ON THE USE OF ELECTRONIC 
 HEALTH RECORDS TO COLLECT SEXUAL ORIENTATION 
 AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
 15 
 Efforts at the Department of Health and Human Services, 16
 The View from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, 17
 Health Resources and Services Administration Perspective, 18
 Con˚dentiality, Privacy, and the Health Insurance Portability 
 and Accountability Act, 21
 Discussion, 23
Contents
xi
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii CONTENTS4 EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES IN CLINICAL 
 SETTINGS
 25
 Patient Self-Identi˚cation in Electronic Health Records, 26
 The Mayo Clinic Experience, 29
 The Kaiser Permanente Experience, 30
 The Fenway Health Experience, 31
 The Vanderbilt University Experience, 33
 Supporting Providers in the Collection of Data, 35
 Discussion, 36
5 DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING QUESTIONS FOR 
 COLLECTING DATA ON SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND 
 GENDER IDENTITY
 39
 Gender Identity Data Collection, 40
 Developing a ﬁPerfectﬂ Sexual Identity Measure, 41
 Assessing Sexual Identity and Behavior in California™s 
 Diverse Population, 42
 Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in the Electronic 
 Health Record: A User and Vendor Perspective, 45
 Discussion, 47
6 CLOSING REMARKS
 51
REFERENCES
 53
APPENDIXES
A Workshop Agenda
 55
B Registered Workshop Attendees
 59
C Biographical Sketches of Workshop Speakers
 63
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.AHA
 American Hospital Association
AHRQ
 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
CDC
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CHIS
 California Health Information Survey
CMS
 Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
EHR 
 electronic health record
FTM
 female to male transgender
GI
 gender identity
HEI
 Healthcare Equality Index 
HHS
 Department of Health and Human Services
HIPAA
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
HIT
 Health Information Technology
HITECH
 Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical 
Health 
HIV
 human immunode˚ciency virus
HRSA
 Health Resources and Services Administration
IOM
 Institute of Medicine
Acronyms
xiii
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv ACRONYMSLGBT
 lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender
MTF
 male to female transgender
NCHS
 National Center for Health Statistics
NHANES
 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
NHIS
 National Health Information Survey
NSFG
 National Survey of Family Growth 
OIPDA
 Of˚ce of Information Products and Data Analysis
ONC
 Of˚ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information 
Technology
SAMHSA
 Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
SO
 sexual orientation
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1Introduction and Overview
1In 2011, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) released the report 
The Health 
of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building a Foundation for 
Better Understanding, the ˚rst comprehensive compilation of what is 
known about the health of each of these groups at different stages of life. 
This report also outlined an agenda for the research and data collection 
necessary to form a fuller understanding of this subject. 
One of the recommendations in this report was that, provided that 
privacy concerns could be adequately addressed, information on patients™ 
sexual orientation and gender identity
2 should be collected in electronic 
health records, just as information on race and ethnicity is routinely 
 
collected. Such data are essential because demographics provide the 
foundation for understanding any population™s status and needs. This 
recommendation recognized that the possible discomfort on the part of 
health care workers asking questions about sexual orientation and gen
-der identity, a lack of knowledge by providers about how to elicit this 
1 The planning committee™s role was limited to planning the workshop, and the workshop 
summary has been prepared by the workshop rapporteurs as a factual summary of what 
occurred at the workshop. Statements, recommendations, and opinions expressed are those 
of individual presenters and participants, and are not necessarily endorsed or veri˚ed by the 
Institute of Medicine, and they should not be construed as re˜ecting any group consensus.
2 In the 2011 Institute of Medicine report, sexual orientation was ﬁconceptualized in terms 
of sexual attraction, behavior, identity, or some combination of these dimensionsﬂ (p. 12). 
Gender identity was de˚ned using the Bockting (1999) de˚nition as ﬁone™s basic sense of 
being a man, woman, or other gender (such as transgender)ﬂ (IOM, 2011, p. 318).
11Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
information, and some hesitancy on the part of patients to disclose this 
information may be barriers to the collection of meaningful data on sexual 
orientation and gender identity.
As the next step in exploring this recommendation, an ad hoc com
-mittee was assembled to plan and conduct a public workshop on col
-lecting sexual orientation and gender identity data in electronic health 
records (see Box 1-1). The workshop, held on October 12, 2012, featured 
invited presentations and facilitated discussions about current practices 
around sexual orientation and gender identity data collection, the chal
-lenges in collecting these data, and ways in which these challenges can 
be overcome.
ABOUT THIS SUMMARY
This document was prepared by rapporteurs Joe Alper, Monica N. 
Feit, and Jon Q. Sanders for the Board on the Health of Select Popula
-tions of the Institute of Medicine (IOM) as a factual summary of what 
occurred at the workshop Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender 
Identity Data in Electronic Health Records. The workshop speakers and 
BOX 1-1
 Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will plan and conduct a public workshop on collect
-ing  sexual orientation and gender identity data in electronic health records. The 
workshop will feature invited presentations and facilitated discussions about cur
-rent practices around sexual orientation and gender identity data collection, the 
challenges in collecting these data, and ways in which these challenges can be 
overcome. 
Areas of focus for the workshop will include the clinical rationale behind col
-lecting these data, standardized questions that can be used to collect these data, 
mechanisms for supporting providers and patients in the collection of these 
data, technical speci˜cations involved in creating standards for sexual orienta
-tion and gender identity data collection and exchange, and policy considerations 
related to the Health Information Technology (HIT) Meaningful Use process being 
overseen by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).
The committee will develop the workshop agenda, select invited speakers 
and discussants, and moderate the discussions. Invited participants will include 
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) health care consumer advocates, 
providers with experience working with LGBT populations, HIT vendors and other 
HIT specialists, health care administrators, and policy makers. A workshop sum
-mary will be prepared by a designated rapporteur in accordance with National 
Research Council policies and procedures.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
 3presentation topics were selected to cover a range of important issues in 
data collection on sexual orientation and gender identity for inclusion 
in an electronic health record. However, it was impossible to include all 
potential topics during the course of a 1-day workshop, and speakers 
could not exhaustively cover all relevant ˚ndings and issues for each 
topic in their presentations. Consequently, some relevant topics could not 
be included in the workshop and, by extension, are not included in this 
workshop summary. In accordance with the policies of the IOM, the sum
-mary does not attempt to establish any conclusions or recommendations 
about needs and future directions, focusing instead on issues identi˚ed 
by the speakers and workshop participants.
Whenever possible, ideas presented at the workshop are attributed 
to the individual who expressed them. Any opinions, conclusions, or 
recommendations discussed in this workshop summary are solely those 
of the individual participants and should not be construed as re˜ecting 
consensus or endorsement by the workshop, the Board on the Health of 
Select Populations, the Institute of Medicine, or the National Academies. 
The workshop agenda is in Appendix A, a list of registered participants 
is in Appendix B, and biographical sketches of the workshop speakers 
are in Appendix C. 
The 19 presentations at the workshop are divided into 5 chapters 
following this introductory chapter. (For clarity, the presentations have 
been somewhat reorganized from the agenda.) Chapter 2 discusses the 
clinical reasons to collect data on sexual orientation and gender identity, 
both from a population perspective and as it applies to an individual™s 
health care. This chapter also presents some compelling personal stories 
illustrating the barriers and discrimination that lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
and transgender (LGBT) people experience in the health care system. 
Chapter 3 examines the role that the federal government is playing in 
developing methods for collecting sexual orientation and gender identity 
data in electronic health records and ensuring that these methods protect 
patient privacy and con˚dentiality. Chapter 4 describes the experiences 
of several health care systems in developing and implementing questions 
on sexual orientation and gender identity and incorporating the data 
in electronic health records. Chapter 5 examines the issues involved in 
developing standardized questions for collecting data on sexual orienta
-tion and gender identity and provides examples of questions that have 
been ˚eld-tested and deployed in actual clinical settings. Chapter 6 pro
-vides comments from participants and the workshop organizing commit
-tee chair™s ˚nal observations on themes that arose during the workshop.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2Clinical Rationale for Collecting 
 Sexual Orientation and 
Gender Identity Data
1Harvey Makadon began his talk by recognizing the Surgeon General™s 
report 
Healthy People 2020
, which, for the ˚rst time, acknowledged that 
health disparities exist in LGBT populations. Health disparities among 
LGBT people are rooted in bias, stigma, discrimination, and social deter
-minants of health, not genetics or other molecular issues, or even sexual 
orientation and gender identity, said Makadon. Therefore, he said, sys
-tems changes and educational changes can make a signi˚cant difference 
1 This section is based on the presentations of Harvey Makadon, Clinical Professor of 
Medicine at the Harvard Medical School and Director of the National LGBT Health Educa
-tion Center at The Fenway Institute; and Beverly Tillery, Director and Community Educator, 
Lambda Legal.
Key Points Raised by the Speaker
Health disparities among LGBT people are rooted in bias, stigma, discrimina
-tion, and social determinants of health, not genetics or other molecular issues.
Discrimination against and substandard care for LGBT people is prevalent.
Information about sexual orientation and gender identity is critical to address
 ing 
issues of access to care and quality of care.
Education of clinicians, health system staff, and patients is essential to 
 improve 
the collection of information on sexual orientation and gender identity. 
5Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
in the ability of the health care profession to provide quality, accessible 
care for LGBT people. ﬁThat is an important theme that we need to keep 
in mind,ﬂ said Makadon.
At one time, hospitals were taking the lead in eliminating health care 
disparities among minority populations, but that role is now being shared 
more equally by community health centers and a variety of enabling 
organizations. Nonetheless, hospitals continue to be a key leader in this 
area, and the American Hospital Association (AHA) has issued the Health 
Research and Education Trust Disparities Toolkit for collecting race, 
 
ethnicity, and primary language information from patients. In issuing 
this toolkit, the AHA noted that disparities in health care can be addressed 
through a quality-of-care framework if data on race, ethnicity, and pri
-mary language are available. A 2003 report from Physicians for Human 
Rights, 
The Right to Equal Treatment
, reiterated this message when it stated 
that data collection is not only central to quality assurance but also to help ensure nondiscrimination in access to care. 
Makadon said that by the same token, health disparities that affect 
LGBT people will only be addressed if the health system collects data on 
sexual orientation and gender identity. The IOM, in its report 
The Health 
of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building a Foundation for 
Better Understanding
, noted the direct bene˚t of collecting data on sexual 
orientation and gender identity for individual patients. Only by ask-ing patients about their LGBT status and collecting data on the LGBT 
population will it be possible to end LGBT invisibility in health care. As 
Makadon put it, ﬁI would say that unless we can do something about col
-lecting data on LGBT people, we can™t assure anyone that LGBT people 
are receiving quality care.ﬂ He then asked the workshop audience to think 
about the following questions:

Has a clinician ever asked about your sexual history, including 
behavior, health, and satisfaction?

Has a clinician ever asked you about your sexual orientation? 

Has a clinician ever asked you about your gender identity?
Based on his experience, Makadon estimated that 10 to 20 percent 
of people would answer yes to the ˚rst question, but that close to zero 
would answer yes for the second and third questions. Given that there are 
medical issues related to sexual orientation and gender identity, it seems 
that it would be dif˚cult to provide good medical care for LGBT people 
without that information, and it is equally challenging to assess the qual
-ity of care being provided to the LGBT population. He also remarked 
that the invisibility of the LGBT population results from a combination of 
patient reluctance to divulge information on sexual orientation or gender 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CLINICAL RATIONALE
 7identity and physician discomfort or ignorance about the importance of 
this information. 
In terms of sexual orientation, Makadon continued, it is not simply a 
matter of identifying someone as gay, lesbian, bisexual, or heterosexual. 
Rather, he said, the real question is about how people see themselves, 
how they actually behave, and what their desires are. Some people, for 
example, are attracted to others of the same sex but have never acted on 
that desire, yet they want to talk to their physicians about those thoughts. 
ﬁUnless you can get that information and engage people in conversation, 
you are not going to help somebody who is thinking about whether or 
not they may be gay or lesbian or bisexual, but hasn™t acted on it because 
they don™t feel comfortable with it. So we have to be thinking about how 
we get at this information,ﬂ Makadon explained. 
To back up this assertion, he cited a 2006 study from the New York 
Department of Mental Health that found 9.4 percent of men who identi
-˚ed as heterosexual had had sex with a man in the previous year. These 
men were more likely to belong to minority racial and ethnic groups, be 
of lower socioeconomic status, be foreign-born, and not use a condom. In 
another study, between 77 and 91 percent of lesbians reported that they 
had at least one prior sexual experience with men, and 8 percent reported 
having sex with a man in the prior year. He added that while these exam
-ples might seem obvious to those attending the workshop, they are not 
obvious to most nurses or doctors because they do not learn about this 
kind of discordance between sexual identity and sexual behavior in medi
-cal school. Yet, for clinicians, it can be helpful to understand the different 
dimensions and manifestations of sexual orientation in order to build a 
better therapeutic relationship with their patients.
ACCESS TO CARE
According to the aforementioned IOM study, lesbians and bisexual 
women may use preventive health services less frequently than hetero
-sexual women. From his experience as a clinician, Makadon said that he 
expects that reduced access to care applies to gay men and transgender 
people as well. What this reduced access to care translates into, he said, 
is that LGBT people do not receive the right preventive health screening 
that they need, and the only way to remedy that situation is to identify 
these populations. 
As an illustration of the importance of identifying LGBT people, 
Makadon cited 2009 data from the Centers for Disease Control and Pre
-vention (CDC) that showed that 61 percent of new cases of HIV infection 
were among men who have sex with men. This number, which has been 
climbing annually since 2006, came as a surprise given that the number 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
of HIV cases overall remained constant, and it likely re˜ects the fact that 
prevention efforts are not reaching men who have sex with men but do 
not identify as gay when asked on a survey. This is particularly true 
among black men between the ages of 13 and 29 who have sex with men, 
a population in which there has been an almost 50 percent increase in the 
incidence of HIV cases between 2006 and 2009. 
These data highlight the fact that LGBT people are not one homoge
-neous group, but rather that they re˜ect the same cultural diversity seen 
throughout the general population. Understanding the cultural diversity 
among, in this case, men who have sex with men, is going to be key 
to developing ways to reach underserved populations, but that lesson 
applies to all LGBT people, said Makadon. That understanding cannot 
start without data about these underserved populations. 
In terms of understanding the T in LGBT, the IOM report noted that 
there are signi˚cant health disparities that have been documented among 
transgender people. It is critical that clinicians have information on a 
patient™s gender identity, gender expression, birth sex, medical history, 
and current anatomy. The only way to get this information is by educating 
both clinicians and the transgender community about the importance of 
discussing these issues to ensure access to high-quality care. The clinician, 
said Makadon, has to be the point person in gathering this information, 
but the ˚eld needs to ˚gure out ways to help clinicians so that they do 
not spend all of their time just gathering data and not having time to talk 
to their patients.
THE IMPACT ON QUALITY OF CARE
To illustrate the importance of all clinicians, not just the primary 
care physician, having information about a patient™s gender identity, 
 
Makadon discussed two case studies. The ˚rst case involved a 50-year-
old woman who developed a high fever and chills after head and neck 
surgery. The infection source turned out to be the patient™s prostate gland, 
which nobody knew she had because nobody had asked about her gender 
identity and she had not volunteered this information. She could have 
received much quicker treatment for her infection had her surgeon and 
the hospital staff known she was a transgender woman. 
The second case involved a 55-year-old man who came to his physician 
with pain and on X-ray appeared to have metastases from an unknown pri
-mary cancer. Evaluation ultimately showed that he had developed 
 cancer 
in his residual breast tissue that remained after having ﬁtop 
 surgeryﬂ to 
remove his breasts. None of his physicians were aware that he was a trans
-gender man, so he had not been advised to have routine breast screening 
even though his mother and sister had also had breast cancer.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CLINICAL RATIONALE
 9Makadon then discussed some of the new opportunities that exist for 
gathering patient information on sexual orientation and gender identity 
that take advantage of patient portals that many health care systems have 
now installed (Figure 2-1). These portals are designed to enable patients to 
input information about themselves in the privacy of their homes, which 
could be particularly important for LGBT people. Another approach that 
some health care systems are testing is to use iPads handed out at the 
registration desk to enable patients™ to enter data in private, rather than 
as verbal answers to what can be embarrassing or awkward questions. 
That information can then become part of the electronic record that all 
of an individual™s clinicians would have access to without the need to 
question the patient. 
In closing, Makadon said that there are a few issues that need to be 
considered in preparation for collecting LGBT data in clinical settings. 
Clinicians, he said, need to learn about LGBT health issues and the range 
of expression related to identity, behavior, and desire. Health care system 
staff members also need to understand these concepts given that patients 
often report that uncomfortable questions come up at the reception desk, 
not in the exam room. Patients, too, need to learn about why it is impor
-tant to communicate this information and to feel comfortable that it will 
be used appropriately. Finally, collecting data on sexual orientation and 
gender identity is critical and has to be done sensitively, without assump
-tions, and for every patient along with all other demographic data. ﬁOur 
task is to improve quality and access to care for all, including LGBT 
people, and that starts with more data collection,ﬂ said Makadon. 
SUPPORTING PATIENTS IN THE COLLECTION OF DATA
In 2009, Lambda Legal, together with more than 100 partner organi
-zations, surveyed 4,916 people representing a diverse sampling of LGBT 
communities and people living with HIV, regardless of sexual orienta
-tion, gender identity, HIV status, race, ethnicity, age, and geography. The 
resulting report, 
When Health Care Isn™t Caring: Lambda Legal™s Survey on 
Discrimination Against LGBT People and People Living with HIV
, was the 
˚rst to document refusal of care and barriers to health care among LGBT 
and HIV communities on a national scale, said Beverly Tillery. She added 
that the ˚ndings were surprisingly high in terms of discrimination and 
substandard care. For example, 56 percent of lesbian, gay, or bisexual 
individuals and 70 percent of transgender people said that they had expe
-rienced discrimination or received substandard care. Nearly 8 percent 
of lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and almost 27 percent of transgender 
people reported being refused needed health care. More than 10 percent of 
lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and more than 15 percent of transgender 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 FIGURE 2-1
 New opportunities for gathering LGBT data during the process of care. 
NOTE: EHR = electronic health record.
SOURCE: Makadon presentation.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CLINICAL RATIONALE
 11people reported having had the experience of a health care professional 
who refused to touch them or used excessive precautions before touching 
them. Almost 11 percent of lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and almost 
21 percent of transgender people said that they had experienced a health 
care professional use harsh or abusive language with them and 4 percent 
of lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and almost 8 percent of transgender 
people described receiving physically rough or abusive treatment from 
a health care professional. In nearly every case, people of color and low-
income people had higher rates of experiencing discrimination.
In terms of barriers to care, the survey found that signi˚cant percent
-ages of LGBT individuals expressed concerns about accessing health care. 
Nine percent of lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and almost 52 percent 
of transgender people feared they would be refused medical service; 
more than 28 percent of lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and 73 percent 
of transgender people expressed concern that medical personnel would 
treat them differently than non-LGBT people; 49 percent of lesbian, gay, 
or bisexual people and almost 90 percent of transgender people said 
there were not enough health professionals who were adequately trained 
to care for them because of their sexual orientation or gender identity 
status; more than 24 percent lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and more 
than 50 percent of transgender people said there were not enough sup
-port groups; and almost 29 percent of lesbian, gay, or bisexual people and 
almost 59 percent of transgender people said there were not enough sub
-stance abuse programs for LGBT individuals. Again, the numbers were 
all higher in people of color. 
As part of this project, Lambda Legal and its partners also collected 50 
personal stories that provided real-life illustrations of the discrimination 
and substandard care LGBT people experience. Among the stories that 
Tillery recounted were

Jodi from Atlanta, who had to seek emergency room care.
 ﬁThe 
nurse comes into the room to get my information. Among her list 
of questions was whether I was single or married. Well, I had a 
union that was not recognized in Georgia, but it would not have 
been accurate to answer either single or married. The nurse wanted 
an emergency contact and wanted to know if there was anyone 
with me, and if so, what was their relationship to me. I panicked 
for a minute. 
ﬁI was scared to admit my life partner was in the waiting room. 
I was morti˚ed to say I was single. My head was swimming try
-ing to think of a lie about who my partner was. Should I be safe 
and say she was a friend? If so, she would be denied visitation if 
something went wrong. Should I lie and say she was my sister? 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
How humiliating. I was afraid that if I admitted to being gay with 
a partner that I might get sub-par care and even have my care and 
life sabotaged. 
ﬁAfter delaying, I felt I would take the risk and say that my 
relationship does not ˚t into one of the boxes on your form. When 
the nurse looked confused, I confessed that I was gay and that my 
life partner was in the waiting room. She looked confused again, 
and after a pause, said, ‚Uh, oh, huh, never heard that before.™ 
 
Luckily, that is the worst that happened, but no one should have 
to go through even that much.ﬂ

Joe from Minneapolis. 
ﬁI was 36 years old at the time of this story 
and an out gay man. I was depressed over the breakup of an 8-year 
relationship. The doctor I went to see told me that it was not medi
-cine I needed, but to leave my dirty lifestyle.ﬂ

Emile in Boise.
 ﬁI™m a post-operative trans woman who began my 
gender transition in 2004. After talking about transitioning with 
my family M.D., she agreed to continue her medical relationship 
with me. Because she was not experienced with treating a trans 
person or prescribing hormone replacement therapy, she referred 
me to a local endocrinologist. When I called to set up an appoint
-ment, I was told by the secretary, we don™t treat people like you. 
I called two other local endocrinologists and was told the exact 
same thing.ﬂ

Tory from Portland.
 ﬁI went to visit my school™s health clinic for 
an annual check-up. While I was ˚lling out my health history 
information sheet, I was pleasantly surprised to ˚nd that the sheet 
indicated both male and female partners, the number of partners, 
and the type of birth control I used. I thought this was a great 
example of LGBT-friendly medical facilities. Unfortunately, when I 
was called into the exam room, the nurse didn™t read the form and 
proceeded to ask me if I was sexually active and used condoms. 
ﬁWhen I replied no and told the nurse that I was a lesbian, she 
was shocked. After that, the appointment was awkward, and I felt 
as though the nurse was not willing to touch me because I was a 
lesbian. The entire awkward conversation and exam could have 
been avoided if the nurse had only read the information sheet she 
was given. It just goes to show you that having an LGBT-friendly 
question form does not make a clinic LGBT-friendly.ﬂ

Lee from Lock Haven, Pennsylvania.
 ﬁFortunately, my primary 
care physician is awesome. She takes good care of me and has since 
I was 15 years old. I am able to completely be out and honest with 
her. Although we may not always agree on non-treatment-related 
topics, she is fair and non-judgmental. Unfortunately, I have been 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CLINICAL RATIONALE
 13subjected to ignorance by specialists, female gynecological special-ists, and one male plastic surgeon.
ﬁOne simply refused to believe that I was not sexually active 
with men and refused to believe that I did have sex with women. 
Others struggle with my identity. I identify primarily as male, but 
I still have to cope with having a female body and keep it healthy. 
I™m blessed to be healthy these days. I have never been evasive 
about my person, and I have found that when I™m able to openly 
discuss my body and my life, I am able to make informed, rational, 
and essential decisions about my health.ﬂ
In closing, Tillery emphasized the critical need to gather information 
in order to identify health care disparities in LGBT communities. It is clear 
from the data that Lambda Legal collected, she said, that LGBT people 
experience real discrimination and a signi˚cant level of it, which makes 
them cautious about getting the health care they need. It is also impor
-tant, she added, to focus on con˚dentiality and privacy because privacy 
breaches can have repercussions that go far beyond health care. In many 
states, she reminded the audience, it is still legal to be ˚red for being 
LGBT. She recommended that data collection be optional with a sense of 
informed consent that involves educating patients about why these data 
are important, and how and when they will be used. 
DISCUSSION
During the discussion session, Makadon was asked if the Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) or electronic health record system 
vendors were working on developing requirements and standards for 
the collection of this information. Robert Tagalicod, from CMS, answered 
that both his agency and the Of˚ce of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology (ONC) are working closely with the vendor com
-munity to develop certi˚cation standards. Makadon said that from his 
understanding, the issues are not technical ones but involve de˚ning the 
questions that need to be asked and structuring those questions appropri
-ately. As an example, he said that while it is important to ask about gender 
identity, it is equally important to ask birth sex in order to have accurate 
information about a patient™s anatomy. 
It is also important, he added, to think about these questions in a 
way that works for transgender people but also for everyone else so that 
everyone feels comfortable that these are routine questions that are being 
asked because they are important for the health care of a signi˚cant num
-ber of individuals. He recounted the furor that arose when Massachusetts 
instituted a requirement to collect data on race and ethnicity because most 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
people did not understand the need for this information. Now, the public 
understands, for example, that untreated high blood pressure is more 
prevalent in the African American community. 
Leslie Calman, of the Mautner Project: The National Lesbian Health 
Organization, asked if Makadon had any insights into how to communi
-cate these issues to her community. She noted that she regularly encoun
-ters lesbians, particularly older lesbians, who are terri˚ed of having this 
information available and are particularly terri˚ed that they will ˚nd 
themselves in a situation where they have an accident, go to the hospital, 
and receive poor care because they are lesbians. Makadon agreed that this 
fear is real in the LGBT community, particularly among older individuals. 
In a ˚nal comment, Jesse Ehrenfeld, from Vanderbilt University, noted 
that a prospective clinical trial that he and his colleagues recently ˚nished 
showed that patients are more honest about their personal information 
when they provided it at home. 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.3Federal Perspective on the 
 Use of Electronic Health Records 
to Collect Sexual Orientation 
and Gender Identity Data
11 This section is based on the presentations of Donald Moulds, Acting Assistant Secretary 
for Planning and Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services (HHS); Robert 
Tagalicod, Director, Of˚ce of eHealth Standards and Services, CMS; Sylvia Fisher, Director, 
Of˚ce of Research and Evaluation, Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA); 
Yael Harris, Director, Of˚ce of Health IT & Quality, HRSA; Sue McAndrew, Of˚ce for Civil 
Rights, HHS; and Deven McGraw, Director, Health Privacy Project, Center for Democracy 
and Technology.
Key Points Raised by the Individual Speakers
The federal government has implemented a data progression plan that will 
 
ultimately integrate sexual orientation and gender identity variables into national 
health surveys.
While questions about sexual orientation are now being ˜eld-tested, there are 
still important issues about gender identity variables that need to be resolved 
before those questions would be ready for ˜eld tests.
Stage 2 meaningful use regulations for EHR adoption do not include the col
-lection of LGBT data, as there was concern over the lack of consensus on 
de˜nitions, and on the standards for structured data entry for gender identity 
and sexual orientation.
EHR adoption by federally funded community health centers, which provide 
services to many LGBT people, exceeds the national average and can serve 
as a model for wider adoption by other health care systems.
15
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Since 2009, two federal laws have raised the visibility of data collec
-tion as a tool for reducing health care disparities. The Affordable Care 
Act requires that all surveys sponsored by the Department of Health and 
Human Services (HHS) collect information on race, ethnicity, sex, primary 
language, and disability status. The law also allows HHS to collect addi
-tional demographic data, including data on sexual orientation and gender identity, to better understand health care disparities. 
In addition, the Health Information Technology for Economic and 
Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, which was included as part of the Ameri
-can Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, provides HHS with the 
authority to establish programs to improve health care quality, safety, 
and ef˚ciency through the promotion of health information technology, 
including electronic health records and private and secure electronic 
health information exchanges. Six speakers at the workshop discussed 
the steps that the federal government is taking to promote the collection 
of sexual orientation and gender identity data as an integral part of efforts 
to reduce health disparities among LGBT people.
EFFORTS AT THE DEPARTMENT OF 
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
In 2011, HHS released a data progression plan intended to begin the 
integration of sexual orientation and gender identity variables into HHS 
national health surveys, explained Donald Moulds. The main objective 
of the plan, he said, is to carry out a series of cognitive lab and ˚eld tests 
leading to the inclusion of sexual orientation questions on the National 
Health Interview Survey (NHIS), the department™s ˜agship survey for 
collecting health data on the civilian population in the United States. 
HHS is now in the ˚nal stages of ˚eld testing the questions about sexual 
orientation that have been developed, and Moulds stated that testing has 
gone ﬁextremely well.ﬂ 
The expectations are that HHS will incorporate the new questions 
into the core questionnaire of the National Health Information Survey in 
January 2013. ﬁThe inclusion of this question or these questions will be 
a major accomplishment and will be a complement to the current collec
-tion of sexual orientation questions in the National Health and Nutrition 
Examination Survey, the NHANES, and the National Survey of Family 
Growth,ﬂ said Moulds. In addition, the Agency for Healthcare Research 
and Quality (AHRQ) included for the ˚rst time a focus on health care 
for LGBT populations in the 2011 
National Health Disparities Report
, the 
agency™s annual publication on disparities in health care services. 
For gender identity, HHS has held two roundtable meetings with 
researchers, experts, and interested stakeholders to discuss the health data 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL PERSPECTIVE
 17needs and methodological issues of collecting information on transgender 
populations. An important ˚nding from these meetings, Moulds said, 
was that there is a need for further discussions on how best to measure 
gender identity. 
THE VIEW FROM THE CENTERS FOR 
MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES
The ﬁmeaningful useﬂ of electronic health records provision of HITECH 
is a powerful tool for getting pertinent data, including LGBT data, to better 
the health and well-being of all Americans, said Robert Tagalicod. CMS, 
he explained, oversees more than just Medicare and Medicaid; it also runs 
the Child Health Insurance Program, the new health insurance exchanges 
 
created by the Affordable Care Act, and the Innovation Center. Overall, 
CMS oversees approximately $1 trillion annually in health care transactions. 
In 2012, CMS established the Of˚ce of Information Products and Data 
Analysis (OIPDA) to lead the agency™s initiative to modernize CMS™s 
intricate data systems and policies and help the agency to achieve the 
greatest improvements in health care delivery. The agency, said Tagalicod, 
sees this as a mission-critical initiative to use data and analytics to guide 
the agency™s evolution from fee-for-service to value-based purchasing 
of health care, an approach that links reimbursement to quality and ef˚
-ciency of care rather than the sheer volume of care. The data and informa
-tion resources available under this initiative include

Medicare Geographic Variation Trend Data, a unique dataset that 
leverages nearly 5 billion Medicare claims in an easy-to-use data 
format that provides key metrics at the state and hospital referral 
region levels.

Medicare Enrollment Dashboard, which provides, at a single loca
-tion, comprehensive statistics or summary statistics on Medicare 
enrollment Parts A, B, and D, and Medicare Advantage.

Medicare & Medicaid Research Review
, an online journal.

CMS Data Navigator, a Web-based search tool that readily connects 
researchers, policy makers, and the general public to CMS data.
The idea driving the development of each of these tools, he added, is to 
liberate and democratize data in order to inform a wide range of pro
-grams as contemplated by the Affordable Care Act. Moreover, the goal 
is to make data accessible in real time in the same way that credit card 
charges are available to consumers within seconds of a transaction. 
Tagalicod then spoke about Section 4302 of the Affordable Care Act, 
which allows the Secretary of HHS to develop standards for categories of 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
data that CMS should collect. Under this authorization, CMS™s Of˚ce 
of Minority Health is working to incorporate data standards related to 
LGBT health into the agency™s data collection efforts. He also noted that 
CMS oversees the Medicare and Medicaid Electronic Health Records 
(EHRs) Incentives Program that provides incentives to providers for the 
meaningful use of EHRs. The standards for meaningful use of electronic 
health records are being released in stages. In August 2012, CMS issued 
its ˚nal regulations for the second of three states of the meaningful use 
incentive program. 
During the public comment period for the Stage 2 meaningful use 
regulations, there was overall public support for including LGBT data as 
part of the overall demographic objective, with the majority of the com
-ments supporting an optional versus required criteria. There was concern, 
Tagalicod noted, over the sensitive nature of collecting this information 
and over widespread collection by administrative staff. And a signi˚cant 
number of comments questioned the clinical bene˚t of collecting the 
information. 
In the end, the ˚nal Stage 2 rule did not include the collection of LGBT 
data, as there was concern over the lack of consensus on de˚nitions and 
on the standards for structured data entry for gender identity and sexual 
orientation. In addition, there was concern about the applicability to all of 
the various eligible professionals, eligible hospitals, and so-called Critical 
Access Hospitals regarding their scope of practice. Going forward, said 
Tagalicod, CMS needs to settle on a usable structured data de˚nition and 
the terms used in that de˚nition. It also needs to develop a way to inte
-grate that data into a data collection system that incentivizes the use of 
those data and does not merely set off a wave of box checking. The goal 
should be better care and better health, at a lower cost, without endanger
-ing the patient or negatively impacting the quality of that care.
HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES 
ADMINISTRATION PERSPECTIVE
The mission of the Health Resources and Services Administration 
(HRSA), said Sylvia Fisher, is ﬁto improve health and achieve health 
equity through access to quality services, a skilled health workforce, and 
innovative programs.ﬂ She noted that HRSA is committed to addressing 
the health care needs of LGBT communities. Accordingly, data collection 
and program policies are continuously reviewed to ensure that HRSA pro
-grams address LGBT health care disparities to the fullest extent possible. 
As a result of these reviews, the agency revised its funding applications 
to state explicitly that all LGBT populations are a service population of 
focus. Language was also included specifying that community health 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL PERSPECTIVE
 19care centers can apply for HRSA funding to meet the needs of LGBT 
communities.
To keep health center personnel and staff well informed about the 
needs of LGBT populations, HRSA recently signed a cooperative agree
-ment with Fenway Health in Boston to create a National Training and 
Technical Assistance Center. This center will provide technical support to 
all of HRSA™s community health centers on the needs of LGBT persons 
and populations. Fisher acknowledged that this is an ongoing subject that 
requires continuous monitoring and intervention at its health centers. 
In order to assist its community health centers in meeting the needs of 
LGBT patients, HRSA is gathering data on sexual orientation and gender 
identity with respect to health care settings. These data are shared with 
the community health centers.
Using a set of analytics tools, HRSA is now trying to assess where its 
community health centers are with regard to adoption of EHRs and where 
they are in achieving Stage 1 and Stage 2 meaningful use adoption. Yael 
Harris noted that Federally Quali˚ed Health Centers annually report data 
to HRSA as part of their grantee requirements. Based on data reported in 
December 2011, 85 percent of the community health centers had some sort 
of EHR and an additional 10 percent planned to purchase one in the next 
12 months. Some 90 percent of the centers planned to apply for meaning
-ful use incentive funds, and 50 percent were working with one of the 62 
Regional Extension Centers funded through the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act to provide information and technical assistance to small- 
to medium-sized provider practices to support meaningful use of EHRs.
In a survey conducted earlier by George Washington University™s 
Geiger Gibson Community Health Research Foundation, Harris noted 
that 70 percent of community health centers were using electronic records, 
but only 45 percent were completely electronic, using no paper in their 
collection of patient data. The discrepancy with the numbers reported to 
HRSA in December 2011 may indicate increased levels of adoption of elec
-tronic records. These numbers exceed the national rates for ambulatory 
care providers. In addition, 67 percent of the community health centers 
that serve migrant populations, 66 percent of those that provide health 
care for the homeless, and 73 percent of those associated with public 
housing units have an EHR. Additionally, of the 73 percent of the health 
centers that provide behavioral health services, about 50 percent use an 
EHR and are integrating the behavioral health components with their 
regular EHR. Most of the clinicians working at those facilities now have 
access to information on their patients™ mental health as well as primary 
care needs. The goal, Harris added, is to have all 1,200 community health 
centers meet meaningful use standards and become examples for other 
health care providers in their communities. 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Achieving adoption of EHRs by rural health clinics has been a par
-ticular challenge, Harris said. According to a recent survey by the Health
-care Information and Management Systems Society, EHR adoption in 
rural settings is lagging, in part because of broadband access issues but 
also because of workforce training issues and limited funds to install 
EHR systems. HRSA, said Harris, is working closely with the Of˚ce of 
the National Coordinator, the Department of Agriculture, and the Federal 
Communications Commission to address these barriers. 
HRSA is also the home of the Ryan White HIV/AIDS program, which 
includes the 900 Ryan White clinics.
2 The agency supports a wide range of 
activities addressing the needs of men who have sex with men and 
 others 
who have HIV and AIDS, with a particular focus on men who have sex 
with men and who are also persons of color. ﬁWe want to be sure that 
there is quality care that is provided to them that is non-judgmental, accu
-rate, provides for their needs, and also ensures that they receive and have 
access to those services,ﬂ Fisher explained. HRSA has also been collecting 
data since 2000 on transgender clients who receive services through Ryan 
White, though the agency found that the initial effort to collect data could 
have been improved. As a result, HRSA convened a meeting in 2005 of 
transgender clients who had HIV in order to get a better sense of how 
to ask the questions around gender identity. As a result of that meeting, 
HRSA now has two categories for transgender people: the male to female 
option and female to male option. She stressed that they are continuing 
to monitor these data collection efforts.
According to Fisher, the populations served by Ryan White clinics are 
those that most need electronic health records because they are popula
-tions that most need care coordination. A survey conducted in the sum
-mer of 2011 found that more than 78 percent of Ryan White clinics use 
an EHR. Some 97 percent are electronically capturing patient history and 
demographic data, 94 percent are capturing clinical notes electronically, 
and 84 percent view lab results electronically. Problem areas still exist in 
terms of electronic prescribing, ordering laboratory tests, and capturing 
information speci˚c to the Ryan White program in EHRs. Fisher noted 
that one strength of the Ryan White information technology effort is that 
while con˚dentiality is protected, data can be analyzed to ˚nd gaps and 
disparities. She added that 51 percent of Ryan White clinics report quality 
measures directly to HRSA from their EHRs. 
Fisher noted, too, that HRSA is proud to serve as a co-chair, along 
with the Of˚ce of Minority Health, of the LGBT Work Group that is part of 
the Healthy People 2020 initiative. One product of the Work Group was a 
2 The Ryan White program is a federal program that provides services to low-income 
individuals with HIV/AIDS.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL PERSPECTIVE
 21proposal to collect population-based data on LGBT people. This proposal 
was approved by HHS. In 2011, HRSA began reporting for the ˚rst time 
health data about women who are lesbian or bisexual through 
Women™s 
Health USA
, an annual HRSA publication. This report included data on 
breast cancer and other health conditions as well as domestic violence, 
depression, and other psychological issues. HRSA plans to continue pub
-lishing updated data annually.
On a ˚nal note, Harris spoke about the work that HRSA is doing to 
identify health care disparities as part of a national quality strategy that 
involves multiple agencies within HHS. As part of this effort, HRSA is 
focusing on disparity-sensitive conditions that were identi˚ed in 2010 by 
the National Quality Forum. She also addressed the lack of a business case 
for providers to adopt the EHR except for the incentive programs, a major 
obstacle to a more widespread adoption of EHRs outside of HRSA-funded 
health care settings. ﬁUntil we make it a seamless process whereby you 
enter your data electronically and you can have real time data to track 
how you are doing in quality and where you can interact and improve, 
we really are not helping providers,ﬂ she said. ﬁThe goal is to make it 
seamless for providers to report to CMS, to report to HRSA, to report to 
other federal agencies, and also to develop the datasets they need in real 
time to track and identify areas of disparity so that they can improve the 
quality of care they provide.ﬂ
CONFIDENTIALITY, PRIVACY, AND THE HEALTH 
INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT
The Of˚ce for Civil Rights in HHS administers the privacy and secu
-rity rules embedded in the Health Insurance Portability and Account
-ability Act (HIPAA). These rules, explained Sue McAndrew, protect iden
-ti˚able health information that is held or obtained by most health care 
providers, as well as certain other parties such as health plans and, soon, 
business associates. The rules work by limiting how the covered entities 
can use and disclose identi˚able health information, and they also pro
-vide certain rights for individuals with respect to their own information. 
Providers have an obligation as custodians of protected information to 
safeguard it and ensure that it is not misused or disclosed without permis
-sion of the individual. 
In addition, the HIPAA security rule provides more de˚nitive stan
-dards for safeguarding information that exists in electronic form (e.g., 
in an EHR). The goal of the security rule is to ensure that that electronic 
information remains con˚dential and that the integrity of the informa
-tion is maintained. An important component of the security rule is that 
it also has provisions to ensure that the data are available to those who 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
need them when they need them, so there is balance between security and 
availability that the Of˚ce for Civil Rights works to maintain in collabora-tion with the ONC and other of˚ces within HHS. McAndrew also noted 
that the Affordable Care Act provides the Of˚ce for Civil Rights with new 
enforcement authority to ensure that, with regard to health programs 
or activities, individuals should not be excluded from participation in, 
discriminated against, or denied bene˚ts based on race, color, national 
origins, age, disability, or sex, which includes discrimination on the basis 
of gender identity and sex stereotyping. 
HIPAA™s privacy rule has no authority in terms of data collection, 
explained McAndrew. That is, HIPAA does not regulate the types of data 
that health plans and health care providers collect, nor does it regulate 
what can and cannot be put into a medical record. Those matters fall 
under the jurisdiction of the states and professional associations. HIPAA 
only comes into play once data are collected, and then only when they 
are associated with an individual. With the exception of psychotherapy 
notes, HIPAA does not give preferential treatment or heightened privacy 
protections to any speci˚c type of health or demographic information. 
However, states and individual providers can create additional protec
-tions for types of data, such as HIV status. Individuals can also ask their 
providers to provide additional protection for speci˚c data, but providers 
are not required to agree to that request.
The HIPAA privacy rule does give entities regulatory permission to 
use protected health information for core purposes of providing health 
care to their patients. The Of˚ce for Civil Rights, however, asks that insti
-tutions consider how to limit who should have access to that information, 
a concept known as ﬁminimum necessary.ﬂ The regulations also allow 
general sharing, within this minimum necessary concept, with payers in 
order for the health institutions to get paid for their services. McAndrew 
stated that her of˚ce is committed to the electronic health record enter
-prise, and that it works closely with ONC and others to make sure that 
the privacy rule is there to underscore and to give certain foundational 
privacy protections to information in EHRs. 
Balancing Privacy and Security Concerns with Data Flow
ﬁWe know we need to collect the data, and we know we need to 
use them, but what kind of assurances can we give people about who™s 
going to have access to those data and how con˚dential we can keep 
them?ﬂ asked Deven McGraw. Answering that question, she said, is 
critical to ensuring that the nation gets the maximum bene˚t in terms 
of improving health care and reducing health disparities from the wide
-spread adoption of EHRs. The goal is to enable data ˜ows that are 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.FEDERAL PERSPECTIVE
 23 
necessary for improving individual and population health in a way that 
patients trust.
While she noted that there are some additional protections for data 
collected in federally funded substance abuse treatment programs, those 
will not apply to sexual orientation and gender identity data. HIPAA pro
-vides the prevailing set of rules for these data. Something not mandated 
by HIPAA is who gets to see what pieces of a patient™s medical record. 
Health care delivery organizations decide which of their employeesŠ
whether it is the front desk clerk, the billing clerk, or whomeverŠhave 
access to particular types of data in the medical record.
One challenge, she noted, arises from the document-centric way 
in which EHRs collect, present, and share data. This document-centric 
approach has developed largely in response to the meaningful use provi
-sions that require a consolidated data document be sharable among medi
-cal providers. The bene˚t to that approach is that it provides a relevant 
summary of care for a provider, but the disadvantage is that it is dif˚cult 
then to segment data, particularly in the case where a patient wants to 
restrict sharing of certain types of data. ONC has created a data segmenta
-tion initiative to actively explore this challenge. McGraw remarked that 
she is encouraged by this effort and believes that a way will be found to 
effectively identify and separate some data from the overall EHR. 
Other issues to consider are how to standardize sexual orientation 
and gender identity data and where exactly to place it in the EHR. These 
decisions will impact the solution for segmentation. Overall, McGraw 
stated her opinion that the technical community will come to an agree
-ment soon on how to collect sexual orientation and gender identity data, 
how to standardize those data, and where speci˚c data will be populated 
in EHRs so that important demographic data can be provided while 
privacy and con˚dentiality protections can be applied to certain data. 
She addressed the workshop participants in closing by saying, ﬁIn many 
respects, one could say that optimistically, and I am an optimist, that you 
all are right in the right place at the right time. You might feel behind, but 
since we don™t really know how to segment the information yet and we™re 
working on it, coming in on this phase in those discussions may actually 
turn out to be a little fortuitous.ﬂ 
DISCUSSION
In response to a question from Alex Gonzalez, medical director at 
Fenway Health, about how to treat mental health records that are part of a 
shared EHR, McAndrew said that anything incorporated into the general 
medical record is not shielded under the special mental health provisions. 
Only in cases where the records are maintained separately are they subject 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
to additional protections, she added. In that case, they cannot be shared 
even for treatment purposes without the authorization of the individual. 
Ignatius Bau asked McAndrew about the kind of outreach or educa
-tion planned around the letter that came from the Of˚ce for Civil Rights 
clarifying that section 1557 under the Affordable Care Act would protect 
against discrimination on the basis of gender identity. He also asked how 
that ˚ts into broader nondiscrimination protections. She replied that both 
the letter and a set of frequently asked questions are available on the 
Of˚ce for Civil Rights website. She said her of˚ce is continuing to work on 
both additional regulations and outreach materials. McAndrew noted that 
there is a shared interest within the department to ensure that discrimina
-tion on the basis of gender identity and sex stereotyping is not occurring. 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4Existing Data Collection 
Practices in Clinical Settings
11 This section is based on the presentations of Shane Snowdon, Director, LGBT Health 
& Aging Program, Human Rights Campaign Foundation, and Founding Director, Center 
for LGBT Health and Equity, University of California, San Francisco; John Knudsen, Chief, 
LGBTI Practice Task Force, Mayo Clinic; Ronald Copeland, President and Executive Medi
-cal Director, Ohio Permanente Medical Group; Alex Gonzalez, Medical Director, Fenway 
Health; Jesse Ehrenfeld, Assistant Professor of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt Univer
-sity; and Robin Weinick, Associate Director, RAND Health.
Key Points Raised by the Individual Speakers
Transgender people are more likely to want to self-identify as such in an EHR 
than are lesbian, gay, or bisexual people. It is important, then, to consider these 
differing sensitivities when designing and implementing questions for use in a 
patient portal or EHR.
The primary concerns about collecting data on sexual orientation and gender 
identity among LGBT people relate to privacy and use: who is going to ask 
these questions, who will be able to see this information, and how will it be 
used to bene˜t the patient?Soliciting input from patients and clinicians, and gaining buy-in from health care 
system administrators, is critical to developing appropriate and useful data-
collection tools for deployment across a health care system.
Training health care system staff about working with LGBT people and the 
sensitivities involved in collecting data on sexual orientation and gender identity 
is essential for successful implementation of these tools.
25
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Though the use of EHRs to collect data on sexual orientation and 
gender identity is still evolving, a number of health care systems around 
the nation are in the process of developing and implementing questions 
to gather that data. These health care systems include both single-city 
organizations that largely serve an LGBT population to huge, multistate 
providers whose treatment population includes LGBT people. This chap
-ter relates some of these health care systems™ experiences and includes 
lessons that they have learned and suggestions for others who want to 
collect data on sexual orientation and gender identity in their EHRs.
PATIENT SELF-IDENTIFICATION IN 
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORDS
Each year, hundreds of health care facilities use the online national 
Healthcare Equality Index (HEI) survey, managed by the Human Rights 
Campaign, to evaluate themselves against established criteria for LGBT 
patient-centered care. Shane Snowdon explained that this is the only sur
-vey in the country that invites hospitals and outpatient clinics to examine 
their practices and policies from an LGBT perspective, report those prac
-tices and policies, and receive education and feedback about them. In the 
latest survey, completed in March 2012, 122 responses were received; 12 
responses came from LGBT clinics, with the remaining 110 coming from 
general health facilities. Most of the latter facilities are in urban locations 
and consider themselves progressive or on the leading edge of health care. 
There are three types of LGBT patient data: same-sex partnership, 
transgender status, and sexual orientation. Patients, said Snowdon, have 
very different attitudes toward each of these types of data and about 
whether and when they want to volunteer or be asked about them. Same-
sex partner
 
ship, she added, is often overlooked in these discussions about 
LGBT-relevant data, but patients consider it extremely important. ﬁPatients 
with same sex partners really want to at least be offered the option to say 
that they have a same sex partner,ﬂ said Snowdon. ﬁThey do not want to 
look at or hear the options single, married, widowed, divorced.ﬂ 
Re˜ecting this preference, 58 percent of the facilities that participated 
in the HEI survey said that they do offer a partner or signi˚cant other 
option, either on a paper form or an EHR, and while this question is likely aimed at different-sex partners, same-sex partner couples appreciate the 
option. Of the facilities included in the survey, 37 percent are in so-called 
registration states that offer same-sex couples the opportunity to register 
their relationship status and receive various health care rights and respon
-sibilities, and some 75 percent of the facilities in a registration state offer 
a registered domestic partner drop-down option. Snowdon pointed out 
that patients often want to volunteer their same-sex partnership during 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES
 27the admitting process and to have their partnership recognized in the 
health care setting. 
An increasing number of transgender people, Snowdon continued, 
want to self-indentify as such despite the fear and anxiety they may have 
about doing so. They do, however, want people to know how to commu
-nicate with them respectfully, appropriately, and accurately. They want 
the entire health care systemŠthe labs running clinical assays, the phar
-macies ˚lling prescriptions, and their physiciansŠaware of their sex at 
birth because transgender people know that information is important for 
them to receive the best care. Having said that, the most recent HEI survey 
found that only three clinicsŠtwo that speci˚cally serve an LGBT popula
-tion, the other serving a general populationŠoffer a drop-down option 
for transgender status on their EHR. However, 78 facilities reported that 
they are actively considering a drop-down option on transgender status. 
The one general health facility that has a drop-down option has retained 
ﬁmaleﬂ and ﬁfemaleﬂ as the options in the existing gender ˚eld, in order 
to match legal identi˚cation and insurance information, but also indicates 
ﬁtransgender MTF [male to female]ﬂ or ﬁtransgender FTM [female to 
male]ﬂ in a prominent drop-down list that a patient can access at their 
choosing. Snowdon noted that the facility made this modi˚cation to the 
standard EHR without involving the vendor. 
In contrast to the situation with transgender people, who increas
-ingly want to self-identify, lesbian, gay, and bisexual people seem more 
reluctant to self-identify in the context of an EHR, Snowdon said. Provid
-ing information in an EHR allows providers to know more about their 
patients, but many lesbian, gay, and bisexual people do not necessarily 
want their providers to know about their sexual orientation. EHRs are 
also envisioned to allow information to be shared more widely, and, 
in Snowdon™s opinion, many lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients do not 
want that information shared widely, if at all. While EHRs can be used to 
empower patients, many patients feel that being confronted with routine 
sexual orientation questions is disempowering. 
Summarizing what she and her colleagues have learned over the 
years, Snowdon said that lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients have many 
concerns regarding volunteering information about sexual orientation in 
the health care setting. They are unsure whether to respond in terms of 
attraction, behavior, or identity. In her opinion, women in particular are 
unsure about whether the question refers to today, the past, or the future 
because they tend to view themselves as more sexually ˜uid. Re˜ecting 
this challenge, medical students are now taught that sexual orientation 
occurs on a spectrum that is not necessarily ˚xed over a lifetime. They 
are also taught to not ask about sexual orientation, but rather to ask their 
patients about actual behavior. 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Lesbian, gay, and bisexual patients worry, often with reason she said, 
that they will be treated differently if their sexual orientation is known. 
They may even delay and avoid care because of how they feel they will 
be treated, not just by physicians, but by the nurses, the allied health 
professions, and other facility employees. ﬁSo it isn™t just a question of, 
‚Are my data going to be held con˚dentially in the research phase or in 
the EHR?™ﬂ said Snowdon. ﬁIt is, ‚I don™t even want you to ask me unless 
I volunteer it.™ﬂ This concern is especially prevalent, she added, in the 
29 states in which lesbian, gay, and bisexual people do not have legal 
protections. 
Only 26 percent of facilities record sexual orientation in print or 
in an EHR, and no general health facilities record sexual orientation 
in an EHR using a drop-down option. Instead, the patient will note 
their sexual orientation on a print form or the provider will enter the 
patient™s sexual orientation in print or electronic notes. In contrast to 
same sex partnership and transgender status, which patients often 
want to volunteer, no general health facility reported patient requests 
to indicate sexual orientation at admitting or registration. 
On the basis of these ˚ndings, Snowdon made the following 
recommendations:

Explore not only the phrasing of sexual orientation questions and 
con˚dentiality of data in research but also who will be asking those 
questions, what training will those asking the questions receive, in 
what context will they ask the questions, and to what extent will 
the information be available within the health care system.

Convene diverse groups of patients to discuss their concerns 
because they are likely to differ substantially by gender, age, 
income, race and ethnicity, and health condition.

If routine sexual orientation questioning is incentivized or other
-wise encouraged, it will be essential to provide widespread patient 
education and empowerment activities, to require facilities to have 
meaningful nondiscrimination policies and staff training in place, 
and to teach health care providers in a systematic way how to dis
-cuss sexual orientation sensitively with patients.
Concerning this last point, Snowdon said it would be interesting to 
see an initiative from CMS that would require LGBT nondiscrimination 
policies to go hand-in-hand with incentivizing data collection. As a ˚nal 
note, Snowdon said that EHRs need to be modi˚ed, both by vendors and 
facilities, so that LGBT patients can always, if they wish, ask that infor
-mation on same-sex partnership, transgender status, and sexual orienta
-tion be recorded. In doing so, however, it is essential to remember that a 
patient™s desire to volunteer that data can vary tremendously. 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES
 29THE MAYO CLINIC EXPERIENCE
The Mayo Clinic, said John Knudsen, has only recently begun an 
effort to gather information on sexual orientation and gender identity. He 
noted that the Mayo Clinic started on its path thanks to what he called 
a union of forces that included four reportsŠHHS™s 
Healthy People 2020
 report, the IOM™s 2011 report on the health of LGBT people, the Joint 
Commission report 
Advancing Effective Communication, Cultural Compe
-tence, and Patient- and Family-Centered Care for the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, 
and Transgender (LGBT) Community
, and the HEI surveyŠas well as a 
receptive leadership that includes clinicians and the Mayo Clinic LGBT 
Employee Resource Group. This resource group, explained Knudsen, 
started the process by requesting that the Mayo Clinic identify a group 
of providers in its primary care practice who were ﬁLGBT-friendly,ﬂ and 
this led to an effort to collect data on some of the dif˚culties experienced 
by both LGBT patients and employees. 
This data collection effort is being led by the Mayo Clinic™s clinical prac
-tice committee, which heard a wealth of personal and painful 
 stories that 
patients and employees shared about suboptimal care they had received 
from the organization. Mayo Clinic™s leadership responded by creating the 
LGBT Practice Task Force, which was charged with studying the situation 
with regard to LGBT people and to develop recommendations that would 
facilitate and sustain an inclusive and welcoming environment for the 
Mayo Clinic™s LGBT patients and families. This effort also included intersex 
people, those born with an ambiguity about their sex assignment. 
One of the factors complicating efforts to collect data on LGBT and 
intersex people at the Mayo Clinic is that it is not just a hospitalŠit 
includes group practices and multispecialty practices based in Arizona, 
Florida, and Minnesota, and a regional health care system that includes 71 
communities, 900 physicians, and 12,000 allied health staff spread across 
Iowa, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. In addition, the Mayo Clinic system uses 
three different EHRs. To address this last issue, the Mayo Clinic system 
has developed an enterprise-wide data governance and health informa
-tion coordination policy that is creating uniformity and standardization 
across the entire system. 
Another complication arises from the fact that the Mayo Clinic system 
uses patient portals to input information, but this information is managed separately from the EHR. Knudsen explained that there is currently no 
mechanism or interface for transmitting data from the patient-provided 
information portals into the EHR. He noted, too, that changes are likely 
to be slow in being enacted, giving the example of the more than 4 years 
it took to make a change in the collection of race and ethnicity data based 
on recommendations from a research team. In terms of LGBT data, a 
stewardship group is developing a recommended list of data elements 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
and business rules around these data elements and codes. An external 
standards team will develop language and standards that will then need 
to be endorsed and approved by multiple stakeholders and Mayo Clinic 
leadership, all of which will be coordinated by the enterprise project 
management of˚ce at the Mayo Clinic. As a ˚nal note, Knudsen said that 
the goal of all of this activity is to collect data that will be able to trigger 
alerts for screening and preventive health services, track quality metrics, 
and create research opportunities.
THE KAISER PERMANENTE EXPERIENCE
Like the Mayo Clinic, Kaiser Permanente is also in the early stages of 
collecting data relevant to sexual orientation and gender identity. 
 Kaiser, 
as the nation™s largest not-for-pro˚t health plan, has long served a diverse 
population that today comprises more than 230 granular ethnicities 
speaking more than 170 different languages, said Ronald Copeland. As a 
result, Kaiser has had a great deal of experience managing and optimizing 
diversity to improve care for its patients and enhance the performance of 
its workforce. 
When Kaiser ˚rst introduced its EHR and began collecting data on 
its membership, its internal KP Pride Caucus, which consists of LGBT 
employees, questioned why the EHR collected data on race, ethnicity, and 
language, but not sexual orientation and gender identity. The answer was 
that the organization did not have the capacity to collect these data and it 
had concerns about the sensitive nature of asking questions about sexual 
orientation and gender identity. Instead of jumping right into what could 
have been a troublesome area, the leadership at Kaiser intended to phase 
these questions in based on internal research and in conjunction with an 
education and awareness campaign.
To drive this effort forward, Kaiser created two study groups, one 
focused on data collection and implementation, the other on referral 
processes to physicians who were knowledgeable about and sensitive to 
issues speci˚c to LGBT populations. The data collection study group oper
-ated from the assumptions that future legislation will require and regulate 
the collection of LGBT data and that data will be collected in 
 Kaiser™s 
HealthConnect EHR. It also assumed that technical issues about data 
structure and de˚nition of terms could be overcome based on 
 Kaiser™s 
experience with race, ethnicity, and language data and that while the ˚nal 
implementation may look different in each of the organization™s regions, 
the data format would be identical. Finally, the study group assumed 
that individuals will have the right to refuse to answer questions about 
sexual orientation or gender identity. The study group recommendations 
are presented in Box 4-1.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES
 31In the second phase of Kaiser™s efforts, the organization has created 11 
centers of excellence that are research units within its clinical space. These 
units are designed to take ideas, create models, pilot the models, work out 
the details, and then present them for further evaluation across the entire 
organization. Action teams are now looking at issues involving technol
-ogy and systems, operations and work˜ow, education and training of 
staff, and brand strategy. The technology and systems action team, for 
example, intends to develop and implement a valid and reliable system 
for storing, collecting, and using LGBT and intersex data by the end of 
the second quarter of 2013. Operating with the same deadline, the opera
-tions and work˜ow action team will embed in the Kaiser infrastructure 
a clinician referral system while the education and training action group 
develops education and training programs that advance different levels of 
core competency in caring for LGBT and intersex people. The ˚nal phase 
will implement the process.
THE FENWAY HEALTH EXPERIENCE
The mission of Fenway Health, an independent, federally quali˚ed 
health center in Boston, is to enhance the health of the LGBT commu
-nity and other people in its neighborhoods and beyond through access 
to the highest-quality health care, education, research, and advocacy, 
explained Alex Gonzalez. In 2011, Fenway Health served some 18,000 
unique patients, and Gonzalez estimated that maybe half of the patients 
are lesbian, gay, or bisexual, and another 800 are transgender. He based 
BOX 4-1
 Recommendations from Kaiser™s Study Group for 
 Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Questions
The Kaiser study group recommended the collection of self-identi˜ed data at 
the Patient level, and recorded in Kaiser™s EHR system:
1. 
 Sexual Orientation 




2. 
 Gender Identity









3. 
 Sexual Behavior





SOURCE: Copeland presentation.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
these estimates on his experience taking care of patients over the past 
7 years.
While Fenway Health has been using an EHR system since 1997, 
it has captured sexual orientation and gender identity data only in an 
unstructured format as part of a careful social history or behavioral health 
intake. That kind of data, said Gonzalez, is trackable only by doing a chart 
review, which is unrealistic for 18,000 patients. Beginning in December 
2011, Fenway Health began collecting sexual orientation data on the reg
-istration form along with other demographic data, and it added informa
-tion on gender identity in August 2012 (see Box 4-2). Text on the form 
indicates that the information is for demographic purposes only and will 
not impact patient care. The registration form also comes with a pam
-phlet on patient rights that includes an explanation of con˚dentiality and 
articulates a philosophy of respect for each patient as an individual with 
unique health needs. In addition, Fenway Health now prints out a patient 
pro˚le for patients who are already registered and are returning to care in 
order to have the patient double-check his or her own information. The 
patient pro˚le also helps capture sexual orientation and gender identify 
data on people who have been long-time patients.
BOX 4-2
 Fenway Health Registration Form



 Š Lesbian, gay, or homosexual
 Š Straight or heterosexual
 Š Bisexual
 Š Something else Š Don™t know


 Š Female
 Š Male Š Genderqueer or not exclusively male or female





 Š Female
 Š Male



 Š Yes
 Š No Š Don™t know
SOURCE: Gonzalez presentation.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES
 33The registration form has one question designed to capture sexual 
orientation data in a structured format and three questions to capture 
data on gender identity, which are currently being pilot-tested. For sexual 
orientation identity, two versionsŠone with a write-in option and one 
withoutŠwere pilot-tested. For gender identity, Fenway Health convened 
a patient advisory committee and surveyed transgender patients on their 
preferences. 
Gonzalez said that since implementing these questions in its informa-tion packets and patient pro˚les, there has been no discernible pattern of 
non-response to the sexual orientation and gender identity 
 questions, nor 
have there been reports from front desk staff or providers of patients ask
-ing why they are being asked these questions. It is his opinion that LGBT 
patients seem to appreciate being asked the questions, while non-
LGBT patients seem to be unaffected by the questions. For trans
 
gender 
patients, the data collected during the test phase suggest that there are 
several groups of transgender persons. There were those who identify 
with their af˚rmed gender and do not identify as being transgender as 
well as those who do identify as being transgender. There were also those 
who identify along a non-binary spectrum, or as genderqueerŠneither 
male nor female. So far, Fenway Health has been able to capture struc
-tured data on 11-12 percent of all of its patients. Since the addition of the 
sexual orientation question in December 2011, roughly one-third of all 
patients have answered it. The questions on gender identity were only 
added in August, making it too soon to have acquired meaningful data. 
In his ˚nal remarks, Gonzalez discussed some additional consider
-ation for transgender patients. Third-party payment systems require that 
name and sex be recorded in the EHR as they are listed with the insurer. 
This can be an alienating experience as insurance information often does 
not match identity. However, transgender patients report that they feel 
empowered when their preferred name and pronoun are recorded in a 
way that is honored by all staff at Fenway Health. 
THE VANDERBILT UNIVERSITY EXPERIENCE
It is important to remember, said Jesse Ehrenfeld, that the vast major
-ity of LGBT patients across the United States receive their health care from 
non-LGBT af˚liated medical facilities such as Vanderbilt and that facilities 
such as Vanderbilt also have a large number of LGBT 
 employees, stu
-dents, and patients. He estimated that at his institution, around 5 percent 
of the patients are LGBT and intersex people and added that in 2009, the 
Vanderbilt University Medical School initiated an extensive curriculum 
reform effort to bring LGBT health education to the forefront. Vanderbilt 
has revised its clinical intake forms to ensure that they are inclusive and 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
that they provide the necessary information to maximize the value of its 
EHR for providing care for its patients. It also launched a new program 
for LGBT health and created the nation™s second LGBT of˚ce in an aca
-demic medical center. (The University of California, San Francisco, had 
the ˚rst.) 
With that institutional climate as background, Ehrenfeld discussed 
the work that he and his colleagues are carrying out on identifying bar
-riers to disclosure of LGBT and intersex status by patients and how they 
have been using informatics tools to identify LGBT patients in their efforts 
to evaluate and reduce health care disparities. In a study conducted by 
colleague Sarah Fogel, participants recruited from gay and lesbian com
-munity centers were asked questions about their willingness to disclose 
their sexual orientation to a provider. The study had a diverse group of 
subjects in terms of race, ethnicity, age, and education level, and 84 per
-cent of the participants had disclosed their sexual identity to a health care 
provider. This study identi˚ed a long list of facilitators to disclosure, such 
as the health care provider asking about the patient™s sexual identity or 
making clear that this information was important for the patient™s care. It 
also identi˚ed a long list of barriers to disclosure, such as the sexual iden
-tity information is written into the patient™s medical record and that staff 
other than the health care provider would have access to this information. 
Ehrenfeld then described some of his work using natural language 
processing to ˚rst identify LGBT and intersex patients from electronic 
health records that already exist and then determine how LGBT and 
intersex status affects treatment, diagnosis, and health outcomes. 
 Natural 
language processing, he explained, uses advanced algorithms and the 
rules of the English language to analyze free-text data, such as that 
in unstructured text notes in medical records, for speci˚c information 
through trial and error. Using this approach on its entire enterprise data 
warehouse, Ehrenfeld and his collaborators were able to identify several 
thousand unique patients using search terms such as homosexual, LGBT, 
gay, lesbian, receptive partner, and others. They have since re˚ned their 
search technique using concepts such as negation logic, semantic search, 
and other natural language processing tools to reduce a 22 percent false 
positive rate to three percent. Additional work is under way to further 
reduce the false positive rate to close to zero. An initial ˚nding from an 
analysis of the identi˚ed records was that it takes an average of 30 months 
between the time of a patient™s ˚rst visit and when LGBT status appears 
in the medical record, and that patients had an average of 17 clinical 
encounters in which LGBT status was identi˚ed.
Ehrenfeld described Vanderbilt™s approach to modifying its clinical 
intake forms and EHRs. This effort started with an extensive consensus-
building process that involved Vanderbilt leadership, its patient and fam
-Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES
 35ily council, a growing list of clinical departments, and its cultural and 
linguistic council. This process resulted in four recommendations that 
Ehrenfeld said are worth adopting at all medical centers:
1.
 Patients should have the opportunity to self-identify their sexual 
orientation and gender identity.
2.
 Patients should have the opportunity to de˚ne their relationship 
status.
3.
 Patients should have the opportunity to identify their family.
4.
 Patients should be asked about power of attorney/health care 
proxy and advanced health directives.
Vanderbilt has now developed a three-stage implementation plan for 
modifying the 210 unique clinical intake forms used by its 95 physician 
practices. The recommended text for use on the intake forms includes 
two parts. The gender identi˚cation section asks for patients™ legal name; 
their preferred name, if different; their sex at birth; and their gender 
identityŠmale, female, transgender, and prefer not to answer. The sexual 
orientation section asks if the patient is heterosexual, straight, lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, queer, something else, or prefer not to answer. In developing 
these questions, the Vanderbilt team considered the same issues that the 
previous speakers had identi˚ed: Who is asking the questions? Where is 
the information recorded in the EHR? How often is the patient asked for 
this information? What to ask in terms of identity versus behavior?
In summary, Ehrenfeld made the following three recommendations:
1.
 Self-identi˚ed orientation, gender identity, and sexual behavior 
should be collected during routine clinical encounters in order to 
improve health outcomes. 
2.
 When collecting sexual orientation and gender identity data on 
health care intake forms, patients should have the right to opt out. 
3.
 Prior to collecting this information, health care institutions should 
develop and widely distribute educational materials, not just for 
staff but also for patients, that explain clearly why developing 
and collecting this information is important and how it remains 
con˚dential.
SUPPORTING PROVIDERS IN THE COLLECTION OF DATA
Given the importance of training providers and health care system 
staff prior to introducing questions about sexual orientation and gender 
identity, it is critical to begin thinking about how to accomplish that train
-ing early in the process, said Robin Weinick. For most health care systems, 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
training will likely need to be done using some kind of video tool given 
that the people who need training are going to be dispersed, both in terms 
of location and time. Training methods must also take into account that 
three-quarters of all of˚ce visits nationally are to practices with ˚ve or 
fewer clinicians. And most of those practices do not have the resources to 
conduct extensive training programs.
Though there are important differences between collecting race and 
ethnicity data and sexual orientation and gender identity data, there 
are lessons to be learned from the experience of introducing race and 
ethnicity data into medical records. The ˚rst lesson is that the language 
provided to guide those who ask these questions must be well de˚ned, 
that is, there should not be much left to the imagination of the person who 
is asking the question. A corollary to this lesson is that the information 
learned when testing questions in a research or survey context are not 
automatically transferrable to a clinical context, said Weinick. 
A second lesson learned from collecting race and ethnicity data is that 
it is extremely helpful to prepare an introductory statement for the data 
collectors to use that explains why it is important to gather the informa
-tion. That introductory statement serves the dual purpose of explaining 
to the patient and the staff who are going to ask these questions why the 
information is important to collect.
Another important lesson is that it is important to keep staff calm by 
identifying potential patient and staff objections in advance and build 
those into the training. Scripting responses so that staff can start to get 
comfortable with various situations is helpful, as are role-playing exer
-cises. Another way to reassure staff is to provide them information from 
pilot data collection studies that show that if questions are asked in the 
right way, patients do not get angry. In addition, repetition is critical 
to making staff feel at ease. Weinick explained that the goal of training 
should be to drive home two points: (1) do not make assumptions about 
a patient based on how they look, act, or sound, and (2) patient self-
identi˚cation is the only thing that matters. 
Three additional factors go into successful training of the people who 
will be asking these questions. First, they need to understand as con
-cretely as possible why the issue is important. Second, they need to know 
clearly and very speci˚cally what they are being asked to do. And, ˚nally, 
they need to have skills and scripts for addressing patient concerns. 
DISCUSSION
Aaron Tax, from Services and Advocacy for GLBT Elders, asked the 
four speakers about their experiences in collecting sexual orientation 
and gender identity data for elderly persons who may be more reluctant 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXISTING DATA COLLECTION PRACTICES
 37because of personal experience to divulge this information. Ehrenfeld 
said that his team certainly observed a generation gap in the willingness 
to self-identify on intake forms. Gonzalez said that Fenway Health™s 
approach to this problem has been to retain the ability to ask about 
sexual orientation and gender identity in the clinical setting rather than 
during registration because it is easier to put people at ease and educate 
them about why this information is important. Snowdon noted that this 
is not just a problem at the older end of the spectrumŠa large longitudi
-nal study of youth conducted by the Human Rights Campaign found a 
similar reluctance among youth between 16 and 24 years of age. Harvey 
Makadon noted, though, that in his experience, older LGBT people feel 
more comfortable when they talk to their physicians about their sexual 
orientation or gender identity because it makes them feel that their health 
care professional is listening to them.
George Brown of the Department of Veterans Affairs asked how inter
-sex people are supposed to identify themselves when the sex-at-birth 
question offers just male or female options. Snowdon replied that these 
choices are dictated by insurance company systems that only accept male 
or female. In that respect, that ˚eld only re˜ects the legal identi˚cation or 
insurance record of the patient. Intersex status is collected in the gender 
identity drop-down list. 
Barbara Warren, director for LGBT Health Services at Continuum 
Health Partners in New York, relayed her experiences in working with 
the New York State Of˚ce of Mental Health to add questions on sexual 
orientation and gender identity to the standard patient admissions form. 
The challenges she faced in adequately training personnel was re˜ected 
in the low rate of practices in New York State including those questions 
and the resulting small amount of data that was obtained. She added 
that they were still working to improve the training component. Weinick 
responded to this comment by discussing the need to approach repetitive 
training creatively. She used sexual harassment training as an example 
of training that uses role playing and vignettes to reinforce the training 
components. 
The issue for some LGBT patients, explained Snowdon, is that just 
being asked these questions will make them very anxious and may make 
them less likely to seek care. She asked if there was an equivalent of that 
in race and ethnicity. Rebecca Fox, of Wellspring Advisors, pointed out 
that collecting ethnicity data in a community clinic in Arizona, and ask
-ing about a patient™s Latino background, may make some patients very 
 
anxious. It could lead them to not seek care because they are afraid of 
being asked what about their racial and ethnic background and that may 
bring up fears around immigration status. Weinick agreed that while bias 
against race and ethnicity differs somewhat from bias against sexual ori
-Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
entation or gender identity, there is some overlap in terms of fear possibly 
driving patients away from health settings. Bau commented that there 
were similarities with language. For example, in some cases when patients 
are asked if they need language assistance, they refuse because they mis
-takenly believe it will make them vulnerable to discrimination. In fact, the 
right to language assistance is guaranteed and could bene˚t them. 
In response to a question from Eva Powell, from the National Partner
-ship for Women and Families, about whether natural language process
-ing could be used in combination with information gathered directly 
from the patient as a means of improving the quality of the resulting 
data,  Ehrenfeld said that the natural language processing methods were a 
research tool, not an operational tool. He does not expect natural language 
processing to be used in an operational setting, though it could be used in 
a quality improvement setting. He added that natural language process
-ing will not provide useful information if the physician has never asked 
the patient about sexual orientation or gender identity or if the patient has 
never volunteered that information. 
When asked by Susan Queen from the Of˚ce of the Assistant Secre
-tary for Planning and Evaluation at HHS about whether information from 
a patient portal can be transferred directly to an EHR, Knudsen said that 
yes it can, and that at the Mayo Clinic, patient-provided information is 
incorporated into the EHR. Ehrenfeld added that at Vanderbilt, informa
-tion from the patient portal is ˚rst veri˚ed by the provider before it is 
added to the patient™s EHR. 
Queen asked Copeland if the response categories for Kaiser™s sexual 
orientation question was a set of ˚xed categories or did it prompt the 
individual to write in a response. Copeland replied that at the present 
time, the patient writes in the response. He added that in all of their data 
collection of this type Kaiser tries to have some predetermined responses, 
but they also want to have the patient self-identify whenever possible. 
They have found that, in terms of engaging patients, using the terms the 
patient uses is probably the most effective way to move forward with con
-versations between patients and clinicians and care teams. In his opinion, 
this approach is preferable to forcing them to make a choice and ˚t it into 
a category that has already been pre-determined.
A participant attending by phone asked about patient autonomy and 
whether the data collected could be used for research without patients™ 
consent. Knudsen said that in Minnesota patients sign a form that can 
remove their data from any future research. This means that even if 
a researcher has approval from an institutional review board, certain 
patients can opt out of the research and they are given the opportunity to 
make that decision when they are seen as patients.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5Developing and Implementing 
Questions for Collecting Data on 
 Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
1ﬁIn a perfect world,ﬂ said panel moderator Nancy Bates, of the  Census 
Bureau, ﬁwe wish we had some tested, generally accepted, embedded set 
of standard questions for gender identity and sexual orientation that 
worked in all different settings and for all populations. We aren™t there 
yet.ﬂ However, researchers are working toward that perfect world, and 
1 This section is based on the presentations of JoAnne Keatley, Director, Center for Excel
-lence for Transgender Health, University of California, San Francisco; Kristen Miller, 
 
Director, Question Design Research Laboratory, National Center for Health Statistics; David 
Grant, Director, California Health Interview Survey; Edward Callahan, Professor of 
 Family 
and Community Medicine, University of California, Davis, Health System; and Denise 
 
Rasmussen, Epic Systems Corporation. 
Key Points Raised by the Individual Speakers
To address limitations in the way gender identity is represented in EHRs, a 
two-question approach may provide more accurate information while affording 
more respect to transgender people. 
Experience from surveys shows that it is feasible to collect accurate information 
about sexual identity and behavior in a diverse population. 
EHR users and vendors are working together to address issues relating to 
data collection on sexual orientation and gender identity in order to develop 
standardized questions that best serve the needs of patients.
39
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
workshop participants heard from several of those who have expertise 
in this area and who conveyed some of the lessons they have learned in 
survey settings and other settings. In this chapter, ˚ve speakers discuss 
efforts to design questions for collecting data on sexual orientation and 
gender identity.
GENDER IDENTITY DATA COLLECTION
A working de˚nition of the word transgender, said JoAnne Keatley, 
is a person whose gender identity or gender expression differs from the 
sex assigned to them at birth. She reiterated a comment made earlier in 
the workshop that many transgender people do not like to self-identify 
as transgender, instead wanting to have their af˚rmed gender recognized 
without it being connected to their transgender history. She also pointed 
out the distinction between gender identityŠan internal sense of self 
regarding genderŠand sexual orientation, which is a feeling of sexual or 
romantic attraction to gender or gender expression of other individuals 
and is not necessarily linked to anatomy. This distinction can cause con
-fusion in health surveys, an example being the case of a man who is in a 
relationship with a transgender woman often being categorized as a man 
who has sex with a man when in fact that may not be the perception of 
that particular individual. In fact, there is a history of the CDC capturing 
transgender individuals and their partners under the men who have sex 
with men category. 
In Keatley™s opinion, EHRs currently have limitations in the way they 
represent gender identity. If a transgender person™s sex is listed in terms 
of anatomy and the only mention of that person™s transgender status is 
in a provider note, other providers may not go to the notes section of the 
EHR and the result can be a disconnect that impacts the patient. Another 
limitation concerns denial of care from insurance coding that has to be 
gender-speci˚cŠif a transgender female is identi˚ed as female on an 
EHR, they may be denied prostate screening. To address these limita
-tions, the Center of Excellence for Transgender Health recommends that 
transgender-inclusive data be collected using two questions. First, ask 
about the person™s current gender identity, and then ask for the person™s 
assigned sex at birth. Asking about current gender identity ˚rst honors 
the patient™s gender expression by allowing the patient to self-identify in 
their current gender identity. It may be necessary to ask additional ques
-tions to specify current anatomy, but that can be done through drop-down 
menus or through provider questions.
Regarding implementation, the ˚rst step is to update the health care 
system™s data collection forms and databases to include the two-question 
system. The CDC, Keatley noted, implemented the two-question system 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING QUESTIONS 41in 2011 in its adult HIV case report form and its Enhanced HIV/AIDS 
Reporting System. She added that CDC data collected using the two-
question system registered a 64 percent increase in transgender people 
compared to just asking current gender identity without asking about 
sex assigned at birth. 
The next step in implementation is to train all staff and health care 
professionals to ask questions about gender identity correctly and consis
-tently. Then, it is important to educate funders, health departments, and 
government agencies about the need to aggregate and disseminate the 
collected data. Only through data aggregation and dissemination will it 
be possible to determine the size of the transgender population and iden
-tify speci˚c health risks and health care needs of transgender people. The 
last step is to use the disseminated data to improve services and programs 
for transgender people. 
DEVELOPING A ﬁPERFECTﬂ SEXUAL IDENTITY MEASURE
Developing the sexual identity question for the National Health Inter
-view Survey (NHIS) involved multiple steps that Kristen Miller described, 
starting with settling on what exactly the survey needed to measure. 
Sexual orientation, she said, is not a measurable concept, but rather is a 
generic catch-all term that describes an essence of how an individual feels. 
Instead, sexual orientation is an amalgam of three other concepts: sexual 
behavior, sexual attraction, and sexual identity. 
Sexual behavior looks at actual same-sex versus opposite-sex sexual 
behavior and is not necessarily consistent with self-conception or pre
-sentation of self. One problem in designing a question to quantify sexual 
behavior is that de˚nitions of what counts as ﬁsexﬂ vary across sub-
groups. Sexual attraction refers to same sex versus opposite sex or gender 
desire, and it, too, is not necessarily consistent with self-conception or 
presentation of self. Sexual attraction is a latent and elusive phenomenon 
that is neither tangible nor observable. Miller said that the problem with 
designing a question to quantify sexual attraction is that there are differ
-ent variations in what people think of as sexual attraction. Sexual identity 
describes an individual™s conscious identi˚cation of an understanding of 
self, and in that respect, is similar to racial identity because it represents 
the individual™s relationship to their social world. Sexual identity is a 
complex phenomenon that may ˜uctuate.
The key to designing questions around these three concepts is to not 
con˜ate them, Miller stated, adding that the term ﬁsexual orientationﬂ 
should be eliminated when used with scienti˚c data because it does not 
re˜ect the realities of people™s lives. This is particularly true, she added, 
for women, and in her mind, the use of the term ﬁsexual orientationﬂ does Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
a disservice to the LGBT community. She also noted that in designing 
questions, it is important to consider whether the questions will be asked 
in a provider™s of˚ce or by a ˚eld survey interviewer. 
Over the past decade, the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) 
has used a number of different questions to collect data on sexual identity 
in a variety of surveys, and the data are inconsistent across these surveys. 
The result, said Miller, is a distorted picture of what is happening within 
the lesbian, gay, and bisexual community. In a 2002 survey that used the 
terms heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual to refer to sexual orienta
-tion, lesbians were identi˚ed as the most obese group of sexual minorities. 
In contrast, a 2006 survey that used the terms ﬁstraight or heterosexual,ﬂ 
ﬁgay or lesbian or homosexual,ﬂ and ﬁbisexualﬂ found that lesbians were 
the least obese group. 
To develop the sexual identity questions for the NHIS, Miller and her 
colleagues conducted seven cognitive tests involving 377 cognitive inter
-views. They also conducted a number of quantitative studies and exam
-ined a variety of different surveys that used some variation of a sexual 
identity question. These studies showed that LGBT people answer ques
-tions from a different perspective than nonŒsexual minority individuals, 
and that this difference stems in large part from the fact that nonŒsexual 
minority people are unfamiliar with the terms used in the questions. 
Based on these ˚ndings, the NCHS revised the questions designed for 
the NHIS based on three principles. First, use labels that respondents use 
to refer to themselves. Second, do not use labels that respondents do not 
understand. Third, use follow-up questions to meaningfully categorize 
ﬁsomething elseﬂ and ﬁdon™t knowﬂ answers. Following these principles, 
the NCHS developed the sexual identity questions listed in Box 5-1.
She noted that though the second question includes a transgender 
option, this is not meant to be a transgender question. Rather, it is meant 
to address the complex relationship between gender and sexual identity. 
In closing, Miller said that this set of questions successfully categorized 
all but a few respondents, and that these questions will be included in 
the next NHIS. 
ASSESSING SEXUAL IDENTITY AND BEHAVIOR 
IN CALIFORNIA™S DIVERSE POPULATION
The California Health Information Survey (CHIS) is an omnibus, 
multilingual, public health telephone survey of 42,000 to 56,000 Califor
-nia households conducted biannually since 2001 and continuously since 
2011. CHIS has included sexual identity questions since 2001 and gender 
of sexual partner questions since 2003. The questionnaire development 
process, explained David Grant, involves multiple stakeholders organized 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING QUESTIONS 43BOX 5-1
 NCHS Sexual Identity Questions


 Lesbian or gay
 Straight, that is, not gay 
 Bisexual
 Something else Don™t know
By Something Else
  
You are not straight, but identify with another label such as queer, trisexual, 
omnisexual, or pan-sexual
 You are transgender or transsexual 
 You have not or are in the process of ˜guring out your sexuality
 You do not think of yourself as having a sexuality
 You personally reject all labels of yourself
 You made a mistake and did not mean to pick this answer 
 You mean something else
 What do you mean by something else? __________________________ 
By Don™t Know

 You don™t understand the words
  
You understand the words, but you have not or are in the process of ˜guring 
out your sexuality
 You mean something else
 What do you mean by something else? __________________________ 
SOURCE: Miller presentation.
into an advisory board, technical advisory committees, and both ad hoc 
and topic-speci˚c workgroups. The general rule with CHIS is to never 
write new questions but to use questions from other well-established 
surveys. One caveat is that questions designed for data collection using 
registration forms or patient portals can be dif˚cult to use in a phone 
survey, so questions are often adapted for that particularly medium, as 
well as to account for the linguistic diversity in California. Extensive 
testing and training and ongoing monthly monitoring of live interviews 
completes the process.
In the ˚rst CHIS cycle in 2001, the survey asked two sexual identity 
questions of adults under age 65. The ˚rst was a yes-or-no question: Are 
you gay, lesbian, or bisexual? The word lesbian was omitted if the respon
-dent was male. If yes, the second question clari˚ed the answer to the ˚rst 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
question. There was a concern that there would be a signi˚cant hang-up 
rate with these questions, but, in fact, these questions posed no more of 
a problem than other questions in the survey. An issue that did arise was 
that respondents would often answer the ˚rst question by stating their 
sexual identity, which created problems for the interviewers and slowed 
down the interview process. An analysis of the 2001 survey data high
-lighted the need for sexual behavior questions, and these were added in 
2003. Beginning in 2003, they have asked a single sexual identity question 
that reads, ﬁDo you think of yourself as straight or heterosexual; as gay, 
lesbian, or homosexual; or bisexual?ﬂ There is also the option of opening 
a text box and inputting an answer verbatim. In addition, there are two 
questions on sexual behavior. In cycles since 2003, these questions have 
been only asked of adults under the age of 70 because of a high rate of 
misclassi˚cation concerning the word ﬁbisexualﬂ in adults over age 70. 
Discussing data from CHIS 2009, Grant noted that about 3 percent 
of men reported that they had exclusively male sex partners in the pre
-ceding 12 months, and about 1.6 percent of women reported having 
exclusively female sex partners in the preceding 12 months. Less than 
0.5 percent of both men and women reported having sex partners of both 
sexes. From the sexual identity questions, about 2.5 percent of men iden
-ti˚ed as gay or homosexual, and 1.1 percent of women identi˚ed as gay, 
lesbian, or homosexual. One percent of men and 1.7 percent of women 
identi˚ed as being bisexual. Non-response to these questions was low, 
about 2-3 percent. In contrast, 23 percent of the sample refused to answer 
questions on household income. Non-response, which combines ﬁdon™t 
knowﬂ and refusals, was highest among Cantonese and Spanish speakers. 
Women who spoke Asian languagesŠCantonese, Korean, Mandarin, and 
 
VietnameseŠwere two to six times less likely to respond than men, which 
Grant said was unexpected. 
In summarizing the lessons learned from over a decade of surveys, 
Grant said that it is clearly important to collect data on sexual identity in 
EHRs. ﬁElectronic health records have great potential, especially for trans
-gender populations because even in a large survey like CHIS, we™re likely 
to pick up very few or too few to make much statistical inference about 
that population,ﬂ he explained. He added that the CHIS results show that 
it is feasible to collect relatively accurate information about sexual identity 
and behavior in a diverse population, but that the wording of questions is 
important, as is the setting in which the questions are asked.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING QUESTIONS 45SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY IN THE 
ELECTRONIC HEALTH RECORD: 
 A USER AND VENDOR PERSPECTIVE
The University of California, Davis (UC Davis) Health System began 
collecting demographic data in its EHR in 2009. At the time it was felt by 
the Health System™s EHR task force that it could not include sexual orien
-tation or gender identity information in the EHR. A subsequent decision 
to appoint a new task force on inclusion of sexual orientation and gender 
identity in the UC Davis Health System elicited opposition from some 
administrators who felt that clinicians would not be comfortable discussing 
this issue or that the topic was too sensitive to be discussed in the context 
of an EHR. And even though this resistance was eventually 
 overcomeŠ
UC Davis was set to roll out its sexual orientation and 
 gender identity 
questions in November 2012ŠCallahan said this experience convinced 
him that the only way that this information will be collected in EHRs on a 
widespread basis is if the federal government requires it to happen.
The taskforce saw this opposition as an opportunity to make a com
-pelling case to both the clinical and LGBT communities for the need to 
collect these data. In essence, said Callahan, the task force developed 
a business case based on the premise that there are signi˚cant, even 
devastating, health disparities that LGBT people experience because of 
the de facto ﬁDon™t Ask, Don™t Tellﬂ attitude that pervades the medical 
community. ﬁIf we can desensitize our providers to be able to talk about 
sexual orientation and gender identity,ﬂ said Callahan, ﬁthey might learn 
that LGBT people are part of us, not some group of ‚other.™ﬂ In fact, the 
task force™s efforts, he said, are changing attitudes and the culture at UC 
Davis. One tangible result of this attitude change is the development of 
a new medical school curriculum that incorporates LGBT health issues 
across the entire 4-year process. 
One of the most compelling pieces of evidence for including sex
-ual orientation and gender identity data in EHRs, said Callahan, comes 
from Caitlin Ryan and the Family Acceptance Project at the University of 
 
California, San Francisco. In a 2009 study, Ryan focused on young adult 
LGBT people and looked at their self-reports of how much acceptance and 
support they received from their families as they came out and the current 
status of their health. For those who got little support, the adverse effects 
were large: 8 times the amount of suicidal ideation, 8.4 times the amount 
of suicide attempts, almost 6 times the amount of serious depression, and 
signi˚cant increases in illegal drug use and unprotected sex. These data 
point to the value of being able to identify these young adults and provide 
them with necessary counseling and other health services. 
For the past 3 years, Callahan and his collaborators at UC Davis have 
been conducting Grand Rounds about LGBT health disparities and are 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
in the process of rolling out some written educational materials for all of 
the system™s providers. They are also surveying these providers to iden
-tify those who are willing to be listed as LGBT friendly. The UC Davis 
Health System is going to use the MyChart patient portal feature of the 
Epic
2 EHR to provide a questionnaire that patients can answer in the pri
-vacy of their own home that includes questions about sexual orientation 
and gender identity. It is also working with Epic to systematize where and 
how questions on sexual orientation and gender identity are located in 
the EHR. One idea is to tie the EHR to systematic prompts in response to 
certain answers to these questions. For example, when someone identi˚es 
as being transgender, the prompts would alert the care provider about 
what organ systems need to be monitored, what kind of preventive care 
needs to be presented, and how best they can be a good provider for that 
person. Callahan noted that Epic appears willing to make these changes 
to its EHR system. 
In fact, said Denise Rasmussen, Epic is eager to receive input from 
users as to how to collect information on sexual orientation and gender 
identity in its EHR systems. Epic already has a ˚eld to capture informa
-tion on sexual partners and runs reports and triggers alerts based on the 
sex of that partner. She noted, too, that at least some of the 260 organiza
-tions that use Epic have extended the sex category list to capture items 
related to gender identity and sexual orientation. 
What would be helpful to Epic as an EHR vendor, she said, is a more 
standardized way to document information about sexual orientation and 
gender identity and more direction on where each birth sex, legal gen
-der, and identi˚ed gender should be used in terms of billing, health 
information exchanges, clinical decision support, and preparing materials 
designed for patients. Epic is also concerned about who should document 
this information and who should be allowed to see it. For example, while 
it is obvious that the primary care physician should see this information, 
should the patient™s chiropractor? 
Regarding technical issues, Rasmussen said that Epic knows that it 
needs to create a new ˚eld or ˚elds to represent the sex of a patient in 
a way that better captures birth sex, legal gender, and identi˚ed gender 
and then display that information in appropriate places in the EHR. The 
company is also interested in making alerts more meaningful, that it is 
alerting the primary care physician to the issues that are appropriate to 
the patient in front of them: telling a physician to order a prostate exam 
for a female-to-male transgender patient is not helpful. 
2 Epic is a company that makes software, including EHRs, for health providers and facili
-ties. They are one of several large commercial vendors.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING QUESTIONS 47DISCUSSION
When asked by Jessica Xavier from HRSA why the NHIS includes 
a question about gender identity rather than behavior, Miller answered 
that the NHIS is a vehicle for collecting basic health data and including 
questions about sexual behavior would not be appropriate in the sur
-vey. She added that the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) and 
the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) are 
more appropriate 
 venues for asking sexual behavior questions. Clinton 
 
Anderson of the American Psychological Association asked Miller about 
the signi˚cance of the placement of the sexual identity and the sexual 
behavior questions. Miller explained that the placement of questions is 
important because respondents get cued in to certain topics. For example, 
if a question focusing on reproduction is asked after a number of behav
-ioral  questions, a respondent may be cued up to provide a sexual behavior 
answer. In contrast, asking the question as part of a demographic section 
may cue respondents to indicate sexual identity rather than behavior. 
Aaron Tax asked Grant if he had been able to identify questions that 
worked better with older adults who do not always understand terms like 
ﬁbisexualﬂ and Grant indicated that he hopes to add a question developed 
by Miller and her colleagues to the CHIS in 2013 that would be easier for 
older adults to understand. He added that moving away from the terms 
heterosexual and homosexual may help better identify bisexual older 
adults. 
There was some discussion around the term ﬁsexual orientation.ﬂ 
While Miller asserted during her talk that the term is not a measurable 
concept, Harvey Makadon pointed out that the term is commonplace and 
any attempt to substitute ﬁsexual identityﬂ or another term for it would 
be challenging. Miller responded that ﬁsexual orientationﬂ is a catchall 
phrase and does not provide constructs around which scienti˚c questions 
can be developed. Makadon, however, said that he thought of orienta
-tion and identity as the same thing and questioned the need to abandon 
ﬁsexual orientation.ﬂ 
In response to questions from Bates and John Knudsen, Keatley dis
-cussed the two-question approach. She explained that the CDC™s one-
question approach provided the following response options: 

male 

female 

transgender male to female 

transgender female to male 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
The two-question model asks about current gender identity separate 
from sex assigned at birth. She further explained that for the gender iden
-tity question, the suggested drop-down options are

male 

female 

transgender woman 

transgender man 

gender queer 

open-ended
For the open-ended option, they ask people to specify so that they 
capture those data. Gal Mayer, medical director at Callen-Lorde Com
-munity Health Center in New York, who was participating by phone, 
e-mailed that at their community health center they do ask the sex at birth 
and current gender identity questions, the two-step process that Keatley 
discussed. However, they also ask sex listed on health insurance for bill
-ing purposes and that becomes the ˚eld for that particular purpose.
Leslie Calman noted that she was struck by the ambivalence that 
continually is expressed about who needs to know these data. On the one 
hand, she explained, we know that being a self-identi˚ed lesbian or gay 
man creates all kinds of health issues from childhood that relates to stress 
and discrimination. On the other hand, it is not clear who needs to know 
this information. For example, does a chiropractor need to know? Perhaps 
it is irrelevant. But maybe the patient™s back is out of whack because she is 
a lesbian; not because she has sex with women, but because of the stresses 
of being a lesbian. She noted that it has been a thread throughout the 
entire day, and it presents a dilemma for patients. Rasmussen responded 
that there was no clear answer. She theorized that it is a generational 
divide, with younger people more open to sharing this information with 
a wider range of care givers and older people being more hesitant to make 
these data widely available. Callahan added that as the culture shifts, he 
expects this will be less of a problem. Shane Snowdon responded to this 
by saying that in her opinion it was not only older people who were hesi
-tant to disclose their sexual orientation, but younger people as well. She 
noted that San Francisco is an LGBT-friendly city, but that her experience 
working in a medical center there highlights that discrimination for sexual 
and gender minorities exists.
In response to a question from Harvey Makadon about how Epic 
is working with clients to coordinate efforts to develop a common 
approach to collecting sexual orientation and gender identity data in 
EHRs, 
 Rasmussen explained that Epic had an LGBT breakout group at 
its user group meeting in September 2012. This user group had 10 to 15 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.DEVELOPING AND IMPLEMENTING QUESTIONS 49organizations participating and there was a good exchange of information 
about what each organization was doing and how Epic might approach 
this problem until standards are developed. This is a work in progress, 
she added, and this group plans to meet frequently to provide advice 
to Epic. ﬁAs a vendor, we hate to push something out that is then going to 
change. If we™ve pushed that out, all of the different organizations will be 
collecting this information, and then potentially have to collect it again,ﬂ 
she said. 
Ignatius Bau asked if sexual orientation was a ˚eld that users have 
customized and added to Epic products. Rasmussen said requests for 
adding a ˚eld on sexual orientation had come up and that it was relatively 
easy to do. She noted that the work˜ow around transgender documen
-tation was more complicated. In response to a question about vendors 
working together around the issue of standards for EHRs, Rasmussen 
replied that while a standard that all vendors could follow would be 
ideal, what will likely happen is that each vendor will develop their own 
standards and then work together to map ˚elds from each other™s EHRs 
so that they can exchange data accurately. This is the approach vendors 
have used in the past.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6Closing Remarks
Prior to offering his thoughts, Ignatius Bau, chair of the planning 
committee, opened the ˜oor for ˚nal comments. Barbara Warren said that 
it was gratifying to see the people in the room working on this issue. She 
encouraged those who are moving ahead to pilot programs and document 
their experiences. It will be helpful, she added, to understand what is 
working and where the challenges are. This will not only help those cur
-rently in the ˚eld but will assist eventually in disseminating these lessons 
to others. Kellan Baker of the Center for American Progress cautioned 
against entering a new regime of ﬁDon™t Ask, Don™t Tellﬂ in health care. 
He noted that people did not have to choose between preparing patients 
to disclose their sexual orientation and gender identity and training pro
-viders and health staff to elicit this information, but could do both. He 
encouraged workshop participants to stay focused on both the training 
component and the data collection component, so that ﬁwe arrive at a 
place where providers know that they should ask and patients feel like 
they can tell.ﬂ Finally, Kathryn Wetherby from the Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) reminded everyone 
that SAMHSA and other federal agencies are actively working on data 
segmentation and standardization and she encouraged those working on 
this issue to let EHR vendors know which data ˚elds would be helpful.
Bau thanked everyone for their participation and then listed the themes 
that struck him as important during the presentations and discussions:
51
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
1.
 LGBT people experience signi˚cant health care disparities and the 
Obama administration and HHS are committed to identifying and 
addressing those disparities through the use of data.
2.
 To address health care disparities in the LGBT population, it is 
important to identify and understand the barriers that these Ameri
-cans face and to determine if nondiscrimination policies meant 
to eliminate those barriers are truly protecting LGBT individuals 
when they seek health care in real-world settings.
3.
 ﬁIf you are not counted, you do not count.ﬂ The health of every 
individual depends on disclosing sexual orientation and gender 
identity, so it is important to educate LGBT people about the need 
for them to self-identify while at the same time creating a safe 
environment conducive for doing so.
4.
 In addition to technical issues about the questions they need to ask 
their patients, health care providers have their own fears and biases 
that will require a signi˚cant amount of education to address, both 
on an individual and institutional level.
5.
 Employee resource groups in an institution can become a powerful 
and important internal force of change.
6.
 The use of language in questions about sexual orientation or iden
-tity and gender identity is becoming more precise and that will 
improve the quality of the resulting data collected using these 
questions.
7.
 It is important as a matter of principle that data is always collected 
through a self-identi˚cation process and that there is always an 
opt-out option available to patients.
8.
 Though the questions or processes for data collection have room 
for improvement, data collection should start now to better under
-stand the health care issues experienced by LGBT people.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Bockting, W. O. 1999. From construction to context: Gender through the eyes of the trans
-gendered.
 SIECUS Report 
1(Oct/Nov):3-7.
HHS (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services). 2011. 
Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans
-gender health. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topicsobjectives2020/
 overview.
aspx?topicid=25 (accessed October 29, 2012).
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2011. 
The health of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people: 
Building a foundation for better understanding. 
Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.
The Joint Commission. 2011. A
dvancing effective communication, cultural competence, and 
 
patient- and family-centered care for the lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) com
-munity: A ˜eld guide
. Oak Brook, IL: The Joint Commission. http://LGBTFieldGuide.
pdf (accessed October 29, 2012).
Physicians for Human Rights. 2003. The right to equal treatment
. http://www.paeaonline.org/
index.php?ht=a/GetDocumentAction/i/135605 (accessed October 24, 2012).
Ryan, C., D. Huebner, R. M. Diaz, and J. Sanchez. 2009. Family rejection as a predictor of 
negative health outcomes in white and Latino lesbian, gay, and bisexual young adults. 
Pediatrics
 123(1):346-352.
References
53
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix A
Workshop Agenda
National Academy of Sciences Building
2101 Constitution Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 
Friday, October 12, 2012
8:30-8:45
 Welcome and Opening Remarks
  Ignatius Bau, Planning Committee Chair
8:45-9:25
 Federal Perspective
  Dr. Donald Moulds 
  Acting Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation 
  Department of Health and Human Services 
  Dr. Sylvia Fisher
  Director, Of˚ce of Research and Evaluation
  Dr. Yael Harris
  Director, Of˚ce of Health Information Technology and 
    
Quality
  Health Resources and Services Administration 
55
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
  Mr. Robert Tagalicod 
  Director, Of˚ce of eHealth Standards and Services 
  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
9:25-9:50
  
Clinical Rationale for the Collection of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data
  Dr. Harvey Makadon
  Clinical Professor of Medicine, Harvard Medical School
9:50-10:05 
 Break
10:05-12:00
 Existing Practices
  Moderator: 
Harvey Makadon, Planning Committee
  Ms. Shane Snowdon 
  Director, LGBT Health & Aging Program
  Human Rights Campaign Foundation
  Dr. John Knudsen
  Chief, LGBTI Practice Task Force, Mayo Clinic 
  Dr. Ronald Copeland
  President & Executive Medical Director, Ohio 
    
Permanente Medical Group 
  Dr. Alex Gonzalez
  Medical Director, Fenway Health
  Dr. Jesse Ehrenfeld
  Assistant Professor, Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt 
    
University 
  Discussion
 12:00-12:30
 Supporting Providers in the Collection of Data
  
Dr.
 Robin Weinick
  Associate Director, RAND Health
12:30-1:15
 Lunch Break
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 571:15-2:25 
 Developing Standardized Questions
  Panel moderator: 
Nancy Bates, Planning Committee
  Ms. JoAnne Keatley
  Director, Center of Excellence for Transgender Health at 
    
University of California, San Francisco 
  Dr. Kristen Miller 
  Director, Question Design Research Lab, National Center 
    
for Health Statistics 
  Dr. David Grant
  Director, California Health Interview Survey 
  
Discussion 
2:25-3:25
 Technical Considerations
  Moderator: 
Ignatius Bau, Planning Committee Chair
  Dr. Edward Callahan 
  Professor, Family and Community Medicine,  
    
University of California, Davis, Health System 
  Ms. Denise Rasmussen 
  Clinical Informatics, Epic Systems Corporation 
  
Discussion
3:25-3:35
 Break
3:35-4:30
 Con˜dentiality and Privacy Concerns
  Moderator:
 Dan Kasprzyk, Planning Committee
  Ms. Sue McAndrew
  Deputy Director, Health Information Privacy, Of˚ce for 
    
Civil Rights 
  Department of Health and Human Services 
  Ms. Deven McGraw
  Director, Health Privacy Project, Center for 
    
Democracy & Technology 
  
Discussion
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
4:30-5:10
 Supporting Patients in the Collection of Data
  Ms. Beverly Tillery
  Director, Community Education, Lambda Legal
5:10-5:30
 Discussion and Comments
  Ignatius Bau, Planning Committee Chair 
5:30
 Adjourn
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix B
Registered Workshop Attendees
Clinton Anderson, American Psychological Association
Kellan Baker, Center for American Progress
Angela Bates, Department of Health and Human Services
Judith Bradford, Fenway Health
George R. Brown, Mountain Home VA Medical Center
Diane Bruessow, Gay and Lesbian Medical Association
Sean Cahill, The Fenway Institute
Leslie Calman, Mautner Project: The National Lesbian Health Organization
Erin Clark, Johns Hopkins University
Richard Clarkson, Callen-Lorde Community Health Center
Chipper Dean, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Emily DeCoster, Health Resources and Services Administration
Christina Dragon, Health Resources and Services Administration
Prashila Dullabh, National Opinion Research Center
Ted Eytan, DC Kaiser Permanente
Rebecca Fox, Wellspring Advisors
Bob Freeman, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
Candace Gibson, National Latina Institute for Reproductive Health
Alison Gill, The Trevor Project
William Grace, Of˚ce of AIDS Research, National Institutes of Health
Joseph Goulet, Department of Veterans Affairs
Heron Greenesmith, Family Equality Council
James Halloran, Department of Veterans Affairs
Justin Hentges, National Institutes of Health
59
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Hutson Inniss, National Coalition for LGBT Health
Jesse Joad, Gay and Lesbian Medical Association
Enid Light, National Institutes of Health
Kali Lindsey, National Minority AIDS Council
Rachel Logan, North American Management
Natalya Maisel, VA Palo Alto Health Care System
Kristin Mattocks, VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System
Alexis Matza, U.S. Veterans Administration
Gal Mayer, Callen-Lourde Community Health Center
Castilla McNamara, National Institute on Deafness and Other 
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health
Phillip Melemed, Total Health Care, Inc.
Jonathan Moore, Department of Health and Human Services
Gwendolyn Moscoe, PeaceHealth Southwest Medical Center
Susan Newcomer, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development
Katherine Nicodemus
Daniel Nugent, National Minority AIDS Council
Kathleen O™Leary, National Institutes of Health
Jennifer Park, Of˚ce of Management and Budget
Patrick Paschall, National Gay and Lesbian Task Force
A. J. Pearlman, Department of Health and Human Services
Johnette Peyton, North American Management
Eva Powell, National Partnership for Women & Families
Susan Queen, Of˚ce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services
Lydia Remington, North American Management
Leo Rennie, American Psychological Association
James Scanlon, Of˚ce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation, Department of Health and Human Services
Hillary Schneller, National Women™s Law Center
Carl Streed, Jr., American Medical Association
Molly Sugrue, William F. Ryan Community Health Center
Cassandra Surber, Department of Health and Human Services
Nathan Tatro, American Psychological Association
Aaron Tax, Services and Advocacy for GLBT Elders
Geri Tebo, Of˚ce of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 
Department of Health and Human Services
Kate Tipping, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Helen Tran, Asian American Justice Center
Hector Vargas, Gay and Lesbian Medical Association
Barbara Warren, Beth Israel Medical Center
Isaiah Webster, National Association of State and Territorial AIDS Directors
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 61Elizabeth Wehr, National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development
Kathryn Wetherby, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration
Amy Wilson-Stronks, Wilson-Stronks, LLC
Gooloo Wunderlich, Committee on National Statistics, National 
Research Council
Jessica Xavier, Health Resources and Services Administration, HIV-AIDS 
Bureau
Vera Yakovchenko, Department of Health and Human Services
Nora Yates, The New York State Of˚ce of Alcoholism and Substance 
Abuse Services
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendix C
Biographical Sketches of 
Workshop Speakers
Edward J. Callahan, Ph.D., is the Associate Dean for Academic Per
-sonnel & Professor of Family and Community Medicine, University of 
California, Davis, School of Medicine. Since 2009, Dr. Callahan has led 
the Task Force for Inclusion of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity 
in the Electronic Health Record at the University of California, Davis. 
As a scholar, Dr. Callahan has studied physician-patient interaction and 
health outcomes and as an educator he developed educational efforts in 
Culture in Medicine and early efforts to understand and reduce health 
care disparities. 
Ronald L. Copeland, M.D., FACS,
 is President and Executive Medical 
Director for the Ohio Permanente Medical Group. Dr. Copeland is the 
President and Executive Medical Director of the Ohio Permanente Medical 
Group, with executive responsibility for all clinical care services provided 
to Ohio Kaiser Permanente members. He is a Board Certi˚ed General 
Surgeon, a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons, and continues 
a limited practice. After 15 years in this role, effective January 1, 2013, 
Dr. Copeland will move from Cleveland, Ohio, to the California Bay area 
to become Senior Vice President, National Diversity Strategy and Policy 
and Chief Diversity Of˚cer for Kaiser Foundation Hospitals and Kaiser 
Foundation Health Plan, Inc. out of the Program Of˚ce in Oakland, Cali
-fornia. A native of Rochester, New York, Dr. Copeland earned his B.A. 
degree from 
 Dartmouth College and his medical degree from the Univer
-sity of 
 
Cincinnati Medical College. He completed his residency in General 
63
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Surgery at the State University of New York, Upstate Medical Center in 
Syracuse. He joined Kaiser Permanente in 1988 after a 6-year honorable 
tour of duty in the U.S. Air Force Medical Corps. Dr. Copeland serves 
on several Kaiser Permanente national committees, including Co-Chair, 
Kaiser Permanente National Diversity Council, KP Institute for Culturally 
Competent Care. Additionally, he serves on the boards of several not-
for-pro˚t community organizations, including the Cleveland Museum 
of Natural History, The Cleveland Free Clinic, and the Minority Organ 
Tissue and Transplant Education Program (MOTTEP, Chairman). He has 
previously served on the Greater Cleveland and National American Heart 
Association Boards and currently serves as a Power to End Stroke Ambas
-sador, as well as a member of the AHA Diversity Leadership Committee. 
He is a frequent lecturer on leadership development, culturally competent 
care, and community health issues.
Jesse M. Ehrenfeld, M.D., M.P.H.,
 is an Assistant Professor at 
 Vanderbilt 
University Medical School in the Departments of Anesthesiology and 
Biomedical Informatics. Dr. Ehrenfeld is a board-certi˚ed 
 anesthesiologist 
with an extensive background in clinical research, advocacy, and health 
care policy. He serves as Director of the Center for Evidence-Based 
 
Anesthesia, Director of the Perioperative Data Systems Research Group, 
and Medical Director for Perioperative Quality at Vanderbilt University 
Medical School. He is also a co-director of the Vanderbilt Program for 
LGBTI Health, and a Course Director for both the School of Medicine™s 
Continuity Clinical Experience and the immersion course titled ﬁSex, 
Sexuality, and Sexual Health.ﬂ Dr. Ehrenfeld™s research and policy inter
-ests include biomedical informatics and the application of information 
technology to increase patient safety and reduce health disparities. His 
research has been funded by NIH, the Anesthesia Patient Safety Foun
-dation, and the Foundation for Anesthesia Education and Research. His 
work has led to the presentation of more than 100 abstracts at national/
international meetings and the publication of dozens of manuscripts in 
high-impact journals. He has co-authored 10 clinical textbooks. For the 
past decade, Dr. Ehrenfeld has advocated on behalf of LGBTI patients, 
students, and trainees in his role as Chair of the Massachusetts Commit
-tee on LGBT Health, Chair of the Massachusetts General Hospital LGBT 
Employee Resource Group, a member of the Board Committee on Quality 
at Fenway Community Health Center, and more recently, as co-director 
of the Vanderbilt University Program for LGBTI Health and a member 
of the Association of American Medical College™s LGBTI Liaison Group. 
Dr. Ehrenfeld holds an M.P.H. from the Harvard School of Public Health, 
and an M.D. from The University of Chicago. He completed residency and 
served as informatics fellowship director for the Department of Anesthesi
-Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 65ology at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston. Dr. Ehrenfeld has 
received numerous teaching awards and serves on several distinguished 
national committees including the American Society of Anesthesiologists 
Standards & Practice Parameters Committee, the 
New
 England Journal of 
Medicine
 Publications Committee, and the American Medical Association 
Public Health Committee. Dr. Ehrenfeld, a Lieutenant Commander in the 
U.S. Navy, also serves as a medical reserve of˚cer.
Sylvia Fisher, Ph.D.,
 is the Director in the Of˚ce of Research and Evalu
-ation in the Of˚ce of Planning, Analysis and Evaluation, at the Health 
Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). In her position, Dr. Fisher 
manages evaluations of diverse federal health programs about health 
care workforce, maternal and child health, and primary health care ser
-vices. Formerly a research psychologist at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
Of˚ce of Survey Methods Research, she specialized in the application 
of cognitive methods to improve the quality of large government sur
-veys. As Director of Evaluation in the Child, Adolescent and Family 
Branch at SAMHSA from 2004 to 2010, Sylvia was project of˚cer for the 
national evaluation of the systems of care program. She has been a coun
-selor and psychological evaluator with children and adults with diverse 
clinical needs; has taught graduate and undergraduate courses in mea
-surement, evaluation, systems change, and psychological assessment at 
 
several higher education institutions; and has presented and published 
in numerous academic and professional venues. Her extensive efforts to 
improve the health and well-being of LGBT populations include serving 
on both the 
Healthy People 2020
 Committee on LGBT populations and 
the National Action Alliance on Suicide Prevention LGBT Task Force. 
While at SAMHSA, she launched and chaired a national workgroup to 
address the needs of youth in systems of care who are LGBT and their 
families. She received the Leadership Award for Outstanding Volunteer 
Service from the Lesbian Services Program of the Whitman-Walker Clinic 
in 
 Washington, DC. Sylvia is lead editor of the recently published volume 
Improving Emotional and Behavioral Outcomes for LGBT Youth: A Guide for 
Professionals
.Alex Gonzalez, M.D., M.P.H., 
is the Medical Director at Fenway Health 
in Boston, Massachusetts. As Medical Director of Fenway Health, Alex 
oversees a staff of more than 50 physicians, physician assistants, nurse 
practitioners, nurses, medical assistants, and clerical staff in the delivery 
of medical care to Fenway™s approximately 17,000 patients. Programs 
within the Medical Department include outpatient primary care; specialty 
clinics in alternative insemination, nutrition, diabetes, HIV, pulmonology, 
podiatry, general infectious disease, transgender health, women™s health, 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
and male and female colposcopy; complementary therapy services in 
massage, chiropractic, and acupuncture; nursing programs such as team-
based nursing, the weekly hepatitis immunization and STD clinic, and the 
patient triage line; and community-based programs such as the biannual 
mammogram van. Alex obtained a bachelor of science degree in biology 
from Tulane University and a combined medical and public health degree 
from the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine. He completed 
his internship and residency training in Primary Care Internal Medicine 
at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center. He is currently an Instructor of 
Medicine at Harvard Medical School, and he has worked at Fenway since 
2005.
David Grant, Ph.D., is the Director of the California Health Interview Sur
-vey (CHIS) at the University of California, Los Angeles, Center for Health 
Policy Research. Dr. Grant joined the CHIS team in 2001 and became proj
-ect director in 2006. He is responsible for all aspects of CHIS, including 
the planning, data collection, and dissemination phases of CHIS. For 20 
years, Dr. Grant has been involved in applied social research at academic 
and public agencies. In addition to population health and survey meth
-odology, his research has focused on urban poverty and demography. Dr. 
Grant received his undergraduate degree at the University of Michigan 
and his master™s and doctorate degrees (1998) in sociology at UCLA.
Yael Harris, Ph.D., MHS, 
is the Director in the Of˚ce of Health IT & 
Quality at the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA). 
The Of˚ce of Health IT & Quality provides technical assistance, support, 
and leadership across the agency to support improved care for safety net 
populations through the effective use of health information technology. 
Prior to her arrival at HRSA, Dr. Harris led the Of˚ce of Evaluation within 
the Of˚ce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology 
(ONC), initiating and overseeing the evaluation of ONC™s grant programs 
to support and advance the adoption of electronic health records. She 
also led ONC™s national measurement of EHR adoption in both ambula
-tory and inpatient settings. Dr. Harris currently co-chairs a cross federal 
Telehealth workgroup and a cross federal mobile health workgroup and 
represents the safety net community on the Health IT Policy Committee™s 
Meaningful Use workgroup where she focuses on quality improvement 
and population health. Prior to joining the ONC, Dr. Harris worked for 
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services where she led efforts on 
measurement and quality improvement in long-term and post acute care. 
Before joining the federal government, Dr. Harris worked for a Med
-PAC, a congressional advisory body, Georgetown University™s Institute 
for Health Care Policy & Research, and served as an adviser to senior 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 67staff on the House Ways and Means Subcommittee on Health. She holds a 
doctorate in public policy from the University of Maryland and a master™s 
degree in health sciences from Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Harris is 
an associate professor at the Erickson School of Aging where she teaches 
courses on technology and aging services.
Joanne Keatley, MSW, 
is the Director at the Center of Excellence for 
Transgender Health, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF). 
JoAnne was born in Mexico City and became a U.S. citizen in 1986. Ms. 
Keatley received a master of social welfare degree from the University of 
California, Berkeley. Beginning at CAPS in 1999, JoAnne directed numer
-ous NIH transgender research projects, developed and directed trans
-gender intervention projects, and is a recognized international expert in 
trans
 
gender health and HIV issues. Currently she directs the Center of 
Excellence (CoE) for Transgender Health and is also the Minority AIDS 
Initiative Program Manager at the Paci˚c AIDS Education and Training 
Center (PAETC) at UCSF. JoAnne has served on the UCSF Chancellors 
Advisory committee on LGBT (CACLGBT) issues since 2000 and leads 
the CACLGBT transgender subcommittee. In addition, she has consulted 
on transgender health at the Centers for Disease Control and Preven
-tion (CDC), Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA), and 
the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAM
-HSA). In 2010, she was invited to speak on transgender issues at the 
White House Of˚ce of National AIDS Policy (ONAP) meeting on HIV 
and Aging. As Director of the CoE for Transgender Health, Ms. Keatley 
is responsible for overseeing all aspects of the CoE scope of work. She 
develops the infrastructure to support successful and sustainable trans
-gender programs, provides day-to-day leadership of CoE staff, oversees 
the National Advisory Board, supervises the design and implementation 
of all educational and marketing materials, identi˚es potential funding 
sources, and assures the quality of all deliverables.
John Knudsen, M.D.,
 is the Chair of the LGBTI Practice Task Force at 
the Mayo Clinic. The Mayo Clinic LGBTI Practice Task Force which was 
formed in January 2012 by the Mayo Clinic Rochester Clinical Practice 
leadership to research, assess, and develop recommendations that facili
-tate building and sustaining an inclusive and welcoming environment 
for LGBTI patients and their families who seek medical care from a Mayo 
Clinic facility. This effort is coordinated with the Mayo Clinic Of˚ce of 
Diversity and Inclusion to address speci˚c strategic goals, including 
increasing patient diversity and identifying and eliminating health dis
-parities while becoming a national leader in the science and promotion 
of health equity. The effort was initiated following a presentation from 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
the LGBTI Mayo Clinic Employee Resource Group to clinical practice 
leadership identifying speci˚c patient care related issues encountered by 
Mayo Clinic LGBTI employees and their families while seeking care at 
Mayo Clinic. Dr. Knudsen™s professional background includes Assistant 
Professor of Radiology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine; Staff Radiolo
-gist at Mayo Clinic for 21 years with subspecialty practice focus in Ultra
-sound and Abdominal Imaging; and Former Associate Chair for Clini
-cal Practice in the Department of Radiology at Mayo Clinic Rochester, 
Minnesota. He has spent 12 years at Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota 
(2000-present), and 9 years at Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville, Florida (1991-
2000). Dr. Knudsen completed his residency training at Mayo Clinic in 
Rochester, Minnesota (1986-1990) and Abdominal Imaging fellowship at 
Duke University Medical Center (1990-1991). 
Harvey J. Makadon, M.D.,
 is Clinical Professor of Medicine at Harvard 
Medical School and Director of the National LGBT Health Education 
Center at The Fenway Institute, a division of Fenway Health, Boston. He 
is a member of the Division of General Medicine at Beth Israel 
 Deaconess 
Medical Center in Boston, where he has had a primary care practice and 
served as Vice President of Medical Affairs. He is currently the LGBT 
Advisor in Harvard Medical School™s Of˚ce for Recruitment and Multi
-cultural Affairs. Dr. Makadon is the lead editor of 
The Fenway Guide to 
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health
, published by the American 
College of Physicians in 2008. In addition to writing numerous articles 
and chapters related to LGBT health, he served on the Committee on 
LGBT Health Issues and Research Gaps and Opportunities of the Institute 
of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences for 
The Health of Lesbian, 
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Under
-standing
 in March 2011. He spoke at a White House Conference on HIV 
and the LGBT Community in April 2012. Dr. Makadon was the recipient 
of the Community Service Award (2000) and the Harold Amos Diversity 
Award (2008) at Harvard Medical School; an Achievement Award from 
the Gay and Lesbian Medical Association; and the Michael Tye Leader
-ship Award (2004) from Fenway Health.
Sue McAndrew, J.D., 
is the Deputy Director for Health Information Pri
-vacy at the Of˚ce for Civil Rights (OCR) in the U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS). As Deputy Director, Ms. McAndrew has 
responsibility for implementing and enforcing the Privacy and Security 
Rules issued pursuant to the Health Insurance Portability and Account
-ability Act of 1996 (HIPAA). She also has the responsibility for the Health 
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009 
(HITECH) that sets forth a plan for promoting health information tech
-Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 69nology and electronic health information exchange to improve quality of 
care and establish a foundation for health care reform. Ms. McAndrew has 
worked primarily on the HIPAA Privacy Rule for HHS since May 2000 
and is the senior adviser to the director of OCR on health information 
privacy and technology matters. In 2006, the Secretary of HHS delegated 
to OCR the responsibility for enforcement of the con˚dentiality protec
-tions for patient safety work product under the Patient Safety and Quality 
Improvement Act of 2005 (PSQIA); in May 2008, the Genetic Information 
Non
 discrimination Act (GINA) that prohibits most health plans from 
using or disclosing genetic information for underwriting purposes was 
added; and in July 2009, responsibility for the HIPAA Security Rule was 
transferred from CMS to OCR. The HIP Division leads these new enforce
-ment efforts within OCR. Ms. McAndrew has more than 20 years of 
federal government experience. Ms. McAndrew received her J.D. from 
Georgetown University Law Center and, prior to joining HHS, practiced 
law in the District of Columbia, including 12 years at Wilmer, Cutler & 
Pickering (now WilmerHale).
Deven McGraw, J.D., 
is the Director of the Health Privacy Project at the 
Center for Democracy & Technology. Ms. McGraw is active in efforts to 
advance the adoption and implementation of health information tech
-nology and electronic health information exchange to improve health 
care. She was one of three persons appointed by Kathleen Sebelius, the 
Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), 
to serve on the Health Information Technology (HIT) Policy Committee, 
a federal advisory committee established in the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act of 2009. She co-chairs the Committee™s Privacy and 
Security ﬁTiger Teamﬂ and serves as a member of its Meaningful Use, 
Information Exchange, and Strategic Plan Workgroups. She also served 
on two key workgroups of the American Health Information Community 
(AHIC), the federal advisory body established by HHS in the Bush admin-istration to develop recommendations on how to facilitate use of health 
information technology to improve health. Speci˚cally, she co-chaired 
the Con˚dentiality, Privacy, and Security Workgroup and was a mem
-ber of the Personalized Health Care Workgroup. She also served on the 
Policy Steering Committee of the eHealth Initiative and now serves on its 
Leader ship Council. She is also on the Steering Group of the Markle Foun
-dation™s Connecting for Health multi-stakeholder initiative. Ms. McGraw 
has a strong background in health care policy. Prior to joining CDT, Ms. 
McGraw was the Chief Operating Of˚cer of the National Partnership for 
Women & Families, providing strategic direction and oversight for all of 
the organization™s core program areas, including the promotion of initia
-tives to improve health care quality. Ms. McGraw also was an associate in 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
the public policy group at Patton Boggs, LLP, and in the health care group 
at Ropes & Gray. She also served as Deputy Legal Counsel to the Gover
-nor of Massachusetts and taught in the Federal Legislation Clinic at the 
Georgetown University Law Center. Ms. McGraw graduated magna cum 
laude from the University of Maryland. She earned her J.D., magna cum 
laude, and her L.L.M. from Georgetown University Law Center and was 
Executive Editor of the 
Georgetown Law Journal
. She also has a master of 
public health from Johns Hopkins School of Hygiene and Public Health. 
Kristen Miller, Ph.D.,
 is the Director at the Question Design Research 
Laboratory, National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS), at the CDC. 
Dr. Miller is a senior methodologist whose writings have focused on ques
-tion comparability, including question design and equivalence for lower 
SES respondents and the improvement of evaluation methods for cross-
cultural and cross-national testing studies. Through her tenure at NCHS, 
she has led collaborative international testing projects with collaborators 
including the European Social Survey, the World Bank, the World Health 
Organization, and the United Nations. Dr. Miller holds a Ph.D. in Sociol
-ogy from the University of Delaware.
Don Moulds, Ph.D., 
is the Acting Assistant Secretary for Planning and 
Evaluation at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. In 
August 2012, Don Moulds assumed the role of Acting Assistant Secre
-tary for Planning and Evaluation at the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services after serving as Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary 
since July 2009. Dr. Moulds is currently the Department™s liaison to the 
U.S. Interagency Council on Homelessness and to the White House on the President™s Strong Cities, Strong Communities initiative. He works closely 
with the Department of Housing and Urban Development on numerous 
initiatives affecting common target populations, including homeless indi
-viduals and families, and is overseeing multiple case 
 studies and demon
-strations aimed at identifying successful interventions for homelessness. 
He is currently overseeing the development of the National Strategy to 
End  
Alzheimer™s Disease, and is a member of the Federal Advisory Coun
-cil on Alzheimer™s Research, Care, and Services. Prior to becoming Prin
-cipal Deputy Assistant Secretary, Dr. Moulds served as Vice President for 
the California Medical Association™s Center for Medical and Regulatory 
Policy. In that capacity, he oversaw the development of the association™s 
health policy initiatives, guided its positions on legislation, and oversaw 
all of its regulatory work. From 2004 through 2007, Dr. Moulds was the 
director of the Senate Of˚ce of Research, the 
 bipartisan research arm 
of the California State Senate. There he was responsible for developing 
the Senate™s research agenda on everything from health care to water 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 71policy, overseeing the Senate™s policy-related publications, and managing 
the Senate™s relations with the federal government. From 1998 through 
2004, Dr. Moulds served as Principal Consultant to Senate President Pro 
 
Tempore, John Burton, and was the lead staffer in the Senate on numerous 
issues, including insurance, health system reform, and select labor issues. 
Dr. Moulds has served on numerous boards and commissions, including 
the State Compensation Insurance Fund Board, the Advisory Board of 
the California Health Policy Research Council, the Advisory Board of the 
 
Sacramento Campus of the University of Southern 
 California, the Advi
-sory Committee of the Workers Compensation Research Institute, the 
Steering Committee of the University of California™s Policy Research Cen
-ter, and the State of California Health Insurance Portability and Account
-ability Act Implementation Advisory Board. He holds a B.A. degree from 
Bates College and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in philosophy from the Uni
-versity of Illinois. He has taught philosophy and ethics courses at the 
University of Illinois, Harvard University, and California State University, 
Sacramento.
Denise Rasmussen, R.N., is a nurse on the clinical informatics team 
at Epic. Her nursing background is in pediatrics and her background 
with Epic is in implementation. She has been with Epic for 10 years and 
has implemented the inpatient software at a variety of organizations, 
including Kaiser Permanente and the Cleveland Clinic. One of her many 
roles is to work with the development team on driving the future of the 
applications. 
Shane Snowdon 
works in on the LGBT Health & Aging Program at the 
Human Rights Campaign. The Human Rights Campaign, which admin
-isters the national Healthcare Equality Index for hospitals and other 
facilities, is the largest LGBT organization in the United States. Shane 
previously founded and led the Center for LGBT Health and Equity 
at the University of California, San Francisco, for 14 years the nation™s 
only LGBT of˚ce in a health care or health education setting. She has 
provided LGBT health training and consulting for hundreds of hospitals, 
health professional schools, and other health organizations throughout 
the country. She has also written extensively on LGBT health, serving as 
Project Adviser for The Joint Commission™s 
LGBT Field Guide
 (2011) and 
as lead author of 
Recommendations for LGBT Equity & Inclusion in Health 
Professions Education
 (2012). Shane has designed and convened numerous 
LGBT health meetings, including the annual LGBTQI Health Forum for 
Health Professional Students and the National Summit on LGBT Con
-cerns in Medical Education for faculty and administrators. She also serves on the boards of the National LGBT Health Coalition, the Paci˚c AIDS 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72 COLLECTING SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY DATA
Education & Training Center, and the Alliance Health Project. Shane™s 
groundbreaking work has received extensive recognition, including the 
Health Achievement Award of the Gay & Lesbian Medical Association, 
the Transgender Law Center Ally Award, the KQED Local Hero Award, 
and the University of California Award for Exceptional University Service 
and Award for GLBT Leadership. 
Robert Tagalicod 
is the Director of the Of˚ce of eHealth Standards and 
Services, at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services and its 
Senior Agency Of˚cial for Privacy. In this capacity, he leads and directs a 
multi-billion-dollar effortŠthe Medicare and Medicaid Electronic Health 
Records (EHRs) Incentive ProgramŠto promote the adoption and mean
-ingful use of EHRs in the United States as part of health care transfor
-mation: better care, better health, at lower cost without compromising 
quality. In addition, he oversees the implementation of Administrative 
Simpli˚cation (i.e., Operating Rules for HIPAA Transactions), including 
ICD-10. Previously, Rob was the Deputy Director and Acting Director of 
CMS™s Of˚ce of Communications and also served as Special Assistant in 
the Of˚ce of the Administrator, assisting with oversight and reporting 
on key ARRA initiatives such as HITECH, Prevention, and Comparative 
Effectiveness Research. Rob brings his 20+ years of management practice 
in the areas of health policy, program operations, communications, and 
˚nance, as well as his experience in project and performance manage
-ment of several health initiatives for state and county health systems in 
California and the University of California, San Francisco.
Beverly Tillery
 is the Director of Community Education and Advocacy 
at Lambda Legal. Lambda Legal is the oldest and largest national legal 
organization committed to achieving full recognition of the civil rights of 
 
lesbians, gay men, bisexuals, transgender people, and people with HIV. 
Tillery coordinates Lambda Legal™s education and outreach work that 
actively engages the LGBT community and its allies in the ongoing ˚ght 
for equality and justice. Through community forums, educational pro
-grams, and by building relationships with other organizations, Lambda 
Legal seeks to build a greater understanding of the issues it addresses 
through its litigation. Lambda Legal informs people about LGBT issues 
and rights and then gives them the tools to take individual and collective 
action to gain full equality of LGBT people and people with HIV in our 
society. Tillery has dedicated the past 15 years of her career to ˚ghting all 
forms of oppression and working for social and economic justice through 
community-based direct action organizing, labor organizing, human 
rights and political advocacy, and popular education. Prior to joining 
the staff at Lambda Legal, she coordinated the Immigrant Worker Rights 
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 73 
Project at the New York Coalition for Occupational Safety and Health. 
Tillery also worked as the Outreach Coordinator at Amnesty International 
where she developed a national ˚eld organizing program, and at the 
Service Employees International Union where she lead organizing cam
-paigns to help health care workers form a union. She has designed and 
facilitated hundreds of trainings and workshops on a variety of subjects 
including organizing skills. She has also served as the President of the 
Board of the National Organizer™s Alliance, a national organization of 
social justice organizers. 
Robin M. Weinick, Ph.D., 
is the Associate Director at RAND Health. 
Dr. Weinick™s speci˚c areas of responsibility include RAND Health™s con
-tract business line, managing policy and processes related to bid decisions, 
procurement, and administration of government and nonpro˚t contracts, 
with an emphasis on contracts with the Department of Health and Human 
Services. She also plays a key role in research staff recruitment and devel
-opment, as well as business planning. As RAND Health™s senior leader 
on the East Coast, she frequently represents the unit in discussions with 
key contacts in government agencies, nonpro˚ts, and nongovernmental 
entities based in the National Capitol region. Dr. Weinick is also a Senior 
Social Scientist at RAND. Her research focuses on improving the quality of 
medical care in the United States, with emphasis on developing and evalu
-ating practical tools for use in the health care system, the development and 
use of measures for monitoring the status of health care, and supporting 
their use in driving both health system improvement and public policy 
initiatives. Dr. Weinick brings an extensive background in a wide variety 
of issues related to racial/ethnic disparities, including projects designed 
to provide guidance to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regarding 
implementing disparities provisions of its Medicaid pay-for-performance 
program, and studies of the impact of pay-for-performance on dispari
-ties, and of quality improvement efforts related to reducing disparities in 
small physician practices. A previous project resulted in lead authorship 
of 
Creating Equity Reports: A Guide for Hospitals
, which provides tools to 
help hospitals assess and understand racial/ethnic disparities in their 
performance measures. Dr. Weinick has played a national role in advanc
-ing health care provider collection of race/ethnicity data from patients, 
and has conducted extensive training of hospital registrars in this area. 
Prior to joining RAND, Dr. Weinick was a Senior Scientist in the Institute 
for Health Policy at Massachusetts General Hospital and an Assistant Pro
-fessor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School. She has a 10-year history 
of federal service in a variety of positions at the Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, and holds a Ph.D. from the Johns Hopkins Univer
-sity School of Public Health.
Collecting Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Data in Electronic Health Records: Workshop SummaryCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.