DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18414Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop onCurrent Knowledge and Research Gaps78 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38687-6 | DOI 10.17226/18414Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts and Warnings: A Workshop on CurrentKnowledge and Research Gaps; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board;Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilGeotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts and Warnings: 
 A Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesGeotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW
 Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Gov
-erning Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from 
the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engi
-neering, and the Institute of Medicine. 
Support for this project was provided by the Department of Homeland Secu
-rity under contract number HSHQDC-11-D-00009, task order number HSHQDC-
12-J-00189. Any opinions, ˜ndings, or conclusions expressed in this publication 
are those of the authors and do not necessarily re˚ect the views of the organiza
-tions that provided support for the project.
International Standard Book Number-13
 978-0-309-28985-6
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-28985-8
This report is available from:
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
500 Fifth Street, NW

Washington, DC 20001 
Additional copies of this report are available from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 

334-3313
; http://www.nap.edu. 
Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding 
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its mem
-bers, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advis
-ing the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors 
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education 
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. C. D. 
Mote, Jr., is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The 
National Research Council
 was organized by the National Academy of 
Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology 
with the Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal 
government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the 
Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the 
National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in pro
-viding services to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering 
communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the 
Institute of Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., are chair and 
vice chair, respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.iv
OTHER RELATED REPORTS OF THE COMPUTER 
SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: Summary 
of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps (2013)
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Summary 
of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps (2011)
Improving Disaster Management: The Role of IT in Mitigation, 
Preparedness, Response, and Recovery (2007)
The Internet Under Crisis Conditions: Learning from September 11 
(2003)
Limited copies of CSTB reports are available free of charge from
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board
National Research Council
The Keck Center of the National Academies
500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001
(202) 334-2605/cstb@nas.edu
www.cstb.org
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS: 
 A WORKSHOP ON CURRENT KNOWLEDGE 
AND RESEARCH GAPS
ELLIS M. STANLEY, SR., Independent Consultant, Atlanta, Georgia, 
Chair
ART BOTTERELL, Carnegie Mellon University, Silicon Valley
K. MANI CHANDY, California Institute of Technology
DENNIS S. MILETI, University of Colorado, Boulder
HELENA MITCHELL, Georgia Institute of Technology
RAMESH R. RAO, University of California, San Diego
SHASHI SHEKHAR, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
MING-HSIANG TSOU, San Diego State University
Staff
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
LINDA WALKER, Senior Program Assistant
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Oracle (retired), 
Chair 
JACK L. GOLDSMITH III, Harvard Law School
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study 
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID E. LIDDLE, US Venture Partners 
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist, CSTB
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director, CSTB 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, 
 see its website at http://www.cstb.org, write to CSTB, 
 National Research Council, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001, 
call (202) 334-2605, or e
-mail the CSTB at cstb@nas.edu.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
Following earlier workshops organized by separate National Research 
Council (NRC) committees that explored the public response to 
alerts and warnings delivered to mobile devices
1 and alerts and 
warnings delivered using social media,
2 the Department of Homeland 
Security™s Science and Technology Directorate asked the Computer Sci
-ence and Telecommunications Board of the NRC to convene a workshop 
to examine more precise geotargeting of alerts and warnings.  This report 
presents a summary of a February 21-22, 2013, workshop organized by 
the NRC™s Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts and Warnings: Cur
-rent Knowledge and Research Gaps. The workshop brought together 
social science researchers, technologists, emergency management profes
-sionals, and other experts to explore (1) what is known about how the 
public responds to geotargeted alerts and warnings; (2) technologies and 
techniques for enhancing the geotargeting of alerts and warnings; and (3) 
open research questions about how to effectively use geotargeted alerts 
and warnings and technology gaps. The complete statement of task for 
the workshop is provided in Box P.1, and the workshop agenda is pro
-vided in Appendix A.
1  National Research Council, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Sum
-mary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps,
 The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2011.
2  National Research Council, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social Media: 
Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps, 
The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2013.
Preface
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
This report summarizes presentations made by invited speakers and 
other remarks by workshop participants. In keeping with the workshop™s 
purpose of exploring an emerging topic, this summary does not contain 
˜ndings or recommendations. Nor, in keeping with NRC guidelines for 
workshop reports, does it necessarily re˚ect consensus views of the work
-shop participants or the organizing committee. The summary draws on 
the prepared remarks of workshop presenters, comments made by work
-shop participants, and the ensuing discussion. 
The ˜rst two chapters of this report summarize presentations and 
discussions on the value of geotargeted alerts and warnings (Chapter 1) 
and technologies and tools for geotargeted alerts and warnings (Chapter 
2). Chapter 3 summarizes the research questionsŠre˚ecting gaps in our 
present understandingŠthat were identi˜ed by workshop participants 
during the course of the workshop. Appendix A provides the workshop 
agenda, and speaker biosketches are provided in Appendix B. Appendix C 
provides biosketches of the committee members.
Ellis Stanley, 
Chair
Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts and Warnings: 
Current Knowledge and Research Gaps
BOX P.1
 Statement of Task
An ad hoc steering committee will plan and conduct a public workshop that 
will consider the potential for more precise geographical targeting to improve 
the effectiveness of disaster alerts and warnings; examine the opportunities 
presented by current and emerging technologies to create, deliver, and display 
alerts and warnings with greater geographical precision; consider the circum
-stances where more granular targeting would be useful; and examine the po
-tential roles of federal, state, and local agencies and private sector information 
and communications providers in delivering more targeted alerts. The com
-mittee will organize the workshop to include a mix of individual presentations, 
panels, breakout discussions, and question-and-answer sessions to develop an 
understanding of the relevant research communities, research already com
-pleted, ongoing research, and future research needs. Key stakeholders would 
be identi˜ed and invited to participate. The committee will develop the work
-shop agenda, select and invite speakers and discussants, and moderate the 
discussions. An unedited (verbatim) transcript of the event would be prepared. 
A report summarizing the committee™s assessment of what transpired at the 
workshop would also be prepared.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance 
with procedures approved by the National Research Council™s 
Report Review Committee. The purpose of this independent review is 
to provide candid and critical comments that will assist the institution in 
making its published report as sound as possible and to ensure that the 
report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and respon
-siveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We 
wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Hisham Kassab, MobiLaps, LLC,
Robert Kraut, Carnegie Mellon University,
Leslie Luke, San Diego County Of˜ce of Emergency Services,
Patrick P. Meier, Qatar Foundation Computer Research Institute,
Richard Muth, Baltimore County School District,
Brenda Phillips, Oklahoma State University, and
Robert Sproull, Oracle (retired).
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by Joseph Traub, 
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSColumbia University. Appointed by the National Research Council, he 
was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of 
this report was carried out in accordance with institutional procedures 
and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility 
for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely with the authoring com
-mittee and the institution.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
1  
THE ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS 
 1 IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 Current and Future Vision for the Integrated Public Alert and 
   
Warning System, 3
 Some Current Knowledge and Research on Geotargeted 
   
Alerts and Warnings, 8
 Hazard Type and Geotargeting, 15
 Data Security and Privacy Challenges, 19
2  
TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR GEOTARGETED 
 24
 ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 Continuing Opportunities for Using Traditional 
    
Technologies for Geotargeted Alerts and Lessons for the 
 Use of New Technologies, 25
 Technologies for Geotargeting Alerts Over the Internet, 29
 Mobile Device Location Determination Capabilities, 31
 Current and Future Technologies for Geotargeting Alerts to 
   
Mobile Devices, 32
3 RESEARCH NEEDS AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
 35
 Facilitating and Improving Public Response, 35
 Value of Geotargeted Information, 36
 Developing and Deploying Technology, 37
 Respecting Privacy and Meeting Security Needs, 38
 Facilitating and Encouraging Use by Practitioners, 38
Contents
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii CONTENTSAPPENDIXES
A Workshop Agenda
 41
B Biosketches of Workshop Speakers
 46
C Biosketches of Committee Members
 60
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11The Role of Geotargeted Alerts and 
Warnings in Disaster Response
This report summarizes a February 2013 workshop organized by the 
National Research Council™s Committee on Geotargeted Disaster 
Alerts and Warnings: Current Knowledge and Research Gaps. In 
the context of alerts and warnings,
1 geographical targeting, or geotarget
-ing, refers to the effort to transmit alerts only to those recipients physically 
located in a geographic area affected by an event and/or are at risk. 
Geotargeting is a two-step process. The ˜rst is the geo-de˜nition of 
the targeted area is (e.g., a county or a geographic polygon). The second 
is the geo-delivery of the message to recipients within the targeted area. 
Both steps are susceptible to imprecision. In the case of geo-de˜nition, 
some alerting systems only allow the de˜nition of an area down to the 
county level, even if the actual affected area is only a section within it. In 
the case of geo-delivery, receipt of wireless transmissions cannot be lim
-ited precisely to a speci˜c region. Any imprecision in one or both steps 
results in imprecision in the overall geotargeting.
At a 2011 CSTB workshop, it was observed that ﬁ[l]ocalization of 
1  An 
alert
 noti˜es the recipient that something signi˜cant has happened or may happen, 
and a warning, which typically follows an alert, provides more detailed information describ
-ing the event and indicates what protective action should be taken by the recipient.
 The 
distinction between alerts and warnings is not always clear-cut because a warning can also 
serve as an alert, and an alert may include some information about protective measures. 
Technology has further eroded the distinction. For example, sirens have evolved to provide 
both a siren sound (the alert) and a spoken message (which, depending on how much detail 
it contains, might be considered a warning).
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
. . . messages by county or equivalent jurisdiction might be too coarse-
grained, especially in the case of large counties and highly localized 
events.ﬂ
2 Past research has shown that speci˜c and clear information, 
including which locations are and are not at risk, increases the likelihood 
that people take protective action. The less precise the geotargeting, the 
more likely the recipient will ignore the alert, or choose to opt out of the 
alerting system, because they are not sure whether the message applies 
to them. When alerts and warnings are delivered to broader populations 
than those actually affected by an event, more people than are actually at 
risk may be sent messages to take action. This chapter explores discus
-sions held by panel members and attendees of the February 2013 work
-shop on public response to geotargeted alerts and warnings.
There are several systems that provide geotargeted alerts today, with 
various degrees of precision. Some, such as the so-called ﬁreverse-911ﬂ 
systems, can dial groups of landline telephone subscribers and can achieve 
a high degree of precision because they are capable of calling sub
 
scribers 
located within a speci˜c polygon. On the other hand, wireless-based 
systems, such as the Emergency Alert System (EAS), are inherently less 
precise because of the wireless fencing issue. In the case of the national 
Wireless Emergency Alerts (WEA) system, alerts are transmitted to cel
-lular phones using cellular broadcast technology.
3 Only cellular 
 towers 
mapped to the geo-de˜ned region broadcast the message. However, 
the geotargeting precision of WEA in its initial rollout was additionally 
affected by a design decision to limit geo-de˜nition to the county level. 
Another system is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra
-tion (NOAA) weather radio, which uses dedicated radio frequencies and 
special-purpose receivers. It delivers weather and other hazard alerts 
and allows users to limit alarms to only those alerts designated for their 
location by specifying regions that are largely aligned with counties or 
portions of counties. Other services allow recipients to subscribe to alerts 
for geographic areas of interest to them, regardless of their actual physi
-cal location. Generally, such systems are not considered to possess true 
geotargeting capability.
Better localization might be provided by re˜nements to existing alert
-ing systems or the use of new technologies. For example, some tighter 
localization is possible with the current WEA technology, but overlaps 
in coverage of individual cellular towers limit the precision that is pos
-sible. Additionally, if alert messages include information about the target 
2  National Research Council, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices: Sum
-mary of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps,
 The National Academies Press, 
Washington, D.C., 2011.
3  WEA was formerly known as the Commercial Mobile Alerting System.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 3region, then software running on the receiving mobile device may be able 
to ˜lter the alerts based on the device™s location. Existing technologies 
allow mobile phone positions to be determined with suf˜cient accuracy 
for most applications, at least outdoors, and emerging technologies prom
-ise signi˜cant improvements to indoor location measurement. Much of 
the second day of the workshop was spent exploring changes to existing 
technologies or new technologies for increasing the precision of geotar
-geted alerts; these discussions are explored in Chapter 2.
CURRENT AND FUTURE VISION FOR THE INTEGRATED 
PUBLIC ALERT AND WARNING SYSTEM
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) oversees 
development and operation of the Integrated Public Alert and Warnings 
System (IPAWS), a national system for delivering emergency alerts and 
warnings to the public. One component, WEA, which is in the process of 
being rolled out, delivers alerts to cell phones using a special broadcast 
channel in cellular telephone systems. The message and associated meta
-data are formatted according to the Common Alerting Protocol (CAP) 
standard. Presentations by Denis Gusty from the Science and Technology 
Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS S&T), Wade 
Witmer from FEMA, and Mike Gerber from the National Weather Service 
(NWS) described the current state of IPAWS and WEA and outlined future 
plans for both.
The Federal Communications Commission, in cooperation with cel
-lular telephone carriers, established a cell phone alert program, originally 
known as the Commercial Mobile Alert System. DHS S&T and FEMA 
have worked with the cell carriers on deployment and testing of the 
program, which is now known as WEA.
4 A voluntary program for the 
cellular carriers, it speci˜es that participating carriers target government-
originated emergency alert messages to the cell towers that lie within the 
counties affected by an alert. Messages are limited to 90 characters, which 
limits WEA to providing brief alerts to inform recipients that an event is 
occurring and that they need to seek additional information. It provides 
three types of messages: alerts issued by the president, alerts involving 
4  WEA was established in response to the Warning, Alert, and Response Network Act (P.L. 
109-347) passed by Congress in 2006. The Federal Communications Commission proposed 
and adopted the network structure, operational procedures, and technical requirements for 
WEA in 2007 and 2008, in cooperation with commercial wireless providers. Subsequently, 
the Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate and the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency have worked with the wireless carriers on deployment 
and testing of the system. The present design supports only 140-character messages and 
messages that ˜t into a single cell broadcast.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
imminent threats to life and safety, and AMBER alerts (law enforcement 
bulletins in child-abduction cases). Mobile device users can opt out of all 
but the presidential alerts. However, some devices, such as those run
-ning the Android operating system, divide the imminent threats into two 
categories, extreme (e.g., tornados, extreme wind, or tsunami) and severe 
(e.g., ˚ash ˚ood, dust storm, or blizzard) and permit users to opt out of 
severe alerts but still receive extreme alerts. 
WEA is designed to complement, not replace, other existing dissemi
-nation methods/channels supported by the IPAWS architecture (Figure 
1.1). The central gateway, the IPAWS Open Platform for Emergency Net
-works, which is managed by FEMA, provides access to federal, state, 
local, territorial, and tribal authorities. Emergency managers are issued 
digital certi˜cates to authenticate their access to the system and use com
-mercial software to prepare and transmit messages. 
The CAP standard supports the use of FIPS codes,
5 which desig-5  FIPS localization is based on standardized codes for county and equivalent geographical 
entities previously de˜ned in the now-withdrawn Federal Information Processing Standards 
(FIPS) 6-4 standard and now de˜ned by the American National Standards Institute INCITS 
31:200x standard.
1-1FIGURE 1.1
 Structure of the Integrated Public Alerts and Warnings System. 
Source: D. Gusty, ﬁOverview of the Commercial Mobile Alert System (CMAS) 
Research and Development Effort,ﬂ presentation at the Workshop on Geotargeted 
Alerts and Warnings, Washington, D.C., February 2013.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 5nate counties and subdivisions within a county, to de˜ne the targeted 
area. (Another standard, speci˜c area message encoding, is still used by 
weather radios and is discussed in Chapter 2.) CAP also supports the use 
of a list of polygon vertex coordinates to specify the boundaries of a tar
-geted area. The NWS has for a number of years de˜ned smaller polygons 
for many of their severe weather alerts, and local agencies have found it 
bene˜cial to target alerts to areas much smaller than a county. Carriers 
have also developed approaches to target smaller areas than required by 
WEA, although neither perfectly targets the speci˜ed polygon (Figure 
1.2). Today, each of the three major carriers uses one of these approaches 
to target only cellular towers in the appropriate portion of a county when 
subcounty-level alerts are issued. 
Current Use of the Integrated Public Alerts and Warning 
System and the Wireless Emergency Alerts
Today, over 150 entitiesŠincluding approximately 75 counties, 
25 states, and the Commonwealth of Puerto RicoŠhave access to the 
IPAWS-
OPEN
 gateway, which allows them to transmit messages to cel
-lular phones (using WEA), radio and television (using the Emergency 
Alert System), and NOAA weather radios. In addition, the NWS can send 
weather alerts, and the National Center for Missing and Exploited Chil
-dren can send 
AMBER alerts. FEMA receives about four new applications 
a week for access to IPAWS-
OPEN
, and the system is projected to grow to 
include as many as 10,000 entities. 
In 2010, the NWS was the ˜rst to use the system. Initially, messages 
were sent only to weather radios, but are sent now to other alerting sys
-tems, including WEA. For WEA, the NWS created template text for nine 
different types of warnings (a small subset of the templates for EAS). 
These templates are based on those designed for use in EAS but edited 
to adhere to the CAP standard and limited message length of WEA (Box 
1.1). The NWS is currently exploring ways to give forecasters additional 
capabilities to customize messages and add geographic information. 
Current Research Initiatives
DHS™s Commercial Mobile Alert Service (CMAS), Research, Devel
-opment, Testing and Evaluation Program, established as a result of the 
Warning, Alert, and Response Network Act,
6 is responsible for coordinat
-ing WEA testing, developing recommendations and guidance for its use, 
6  Title VI of P.L. 109-347.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
County boundaryAlert area polygon1-2aFIGURE 1.2
 Options for mapping alert polygon regions to cellular towers. The 
circles surrounding each tower represent that tower™s transmission reach; the 
shading indicates that the tower is sending an alert.  SOURCE: W. Witmer, FEMA, 
ﬁIntegrated Public Alerts and Warning System,ﬂ presentation at the Workshop on 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings, Washington, D.C., February 2013.
.County boundaryAlert area polygon1-2b(a) Regulatory requirements require that a carrier targets an entire county area.
(b) An alert message is transmitted by each cellular tower located within the 
polygon.
(c) An alert message is transmitted by each cellular tower that provides coverage 
in the polygon.
County boundaryAlert area polygon1-2cGeotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 7and funding research and development to enhance alerting systems. The 
act speci˜es research in the following speci˜c areas:
˜˚
Improving geotargeting of mobile alerts and warnings, including 
geotargeting granularity, geotargeting in border areas, public response 
consideration to geotargeting, and alternative technologies to improve 
current and future geotargeting capabilities; and 
˜˚
Improving public response to mobile alerts and strategies, includ
-ing reaching special and diverse populations, information diffusion, and 
BOX 1.1
 WEA Message Templates Originated by 
the National Weather Service
Tsunami warning
  
Tsunami danger on the coast. Go to high ground 
or move inland. Check local media.ŠNWS 
Tornado warning
  
Tornado Warning in this area til hh:mm tzT. Take 
shelter now. Check local media.ŠNWS
Extreme wind warning
  
Extreme Wind Warning this area til hh:mm tzT 
ddd. Take shelter.ŠNWS 
Flash ˚ood warning
  
Flash Flood Warning this area til hh:mm tzT. 
Avoid ˚ooded areas. Check local media.ŠNWS
Hurricane warning
  
Hurricane Warning this area til hh:mm tzT ddd. 
Check local media and authorities.ŠNWS Typhoon warning
  
Typhoon Warning this area til hh:mm tzT ddd. 
Check local media and authorities.ŠNWSBlizzard warning
  
Blizzard Warning this area til hh:mm tzT ddd. 
Prepare. Avoid Travel. Check media.ŠNWS 
Ice storm warning
  
Ice Storm Warning this area til hh:mm tzT ddd. 
Prepare. Avoid Travel. Check media.ŠNWS
Dust storm warning
  
Dust Storm Warning in this area til hh:mm tzT 
ddd. Avoid travel. Check local media.ŠNWS
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˘˛ˆ
“ˆ‘‘
‘‘
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
public response to WEA initiation, message content, message frequency, 
follow-up, and source.
DHS is currently funding research by the University of Maryland™s 
National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Response to Terror
-ism on comprehensive testing of imminent threat messages for mobile 
devices and public response and social media (this work is discussed in 
the section, Current Research on Message Length, Geographical Informa
-tion, and Geotargeted Alerts) and at the University of Southern Missis
-sippi on geotargeting and other communication approaches for at-risk 
communities. A broad agency announcement for additional research and 
development has been issued, and additional awards are expected in 
2013. 
SOME CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND RESEARCH 
ON GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
In a panel exploring some of the current research on geotargeted 
alerts and the public response, Timothy Sellnow, University of Kentucky, 
discussed the role of geotargeted information in effectively communicat
-ing risk; Michele Wood, California State University, Fullerton, examined 
the various ways that geotargeted information can be communicated; 
Brooke Liu, University of Maryland, discussed hazard types and pro
-tective actions as they are related to geotargeted information; and Ken 
Rudnicki, City of Fairfax, Virginia, discussed tools used by emergency 
managers to geotarget alerts and warnings. 
Wood summarized the results of decades of research on what types 
of alert and warning message content will motivate appropriate and 
timely action by the public (Box 1.2). Wood also discussed sense-making, 
a human process that occurs in the time between the receipt of an alert 
or warning and the time the recipient takes protective action. Message 
recipients will try to make sense of the message, con˜rm the message 
by seeking additional information, personalize the message to their own 
circumstances, and only then decide what action they should take. A key 
question is whether geotargeting can help reduce this delay in taking 
protective action.
Role of Geotargeted Information in Effectively Communicating Risk
Geotargeting allows an alert or warning message to be tailored 
according to the nature of the hazard faced at a particular location and 
the protective action appropriate for someone at that location. Receipt of 
a geotargeted message also strengthens the recipient™s perception that 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 9BOX 1.2
 What Is Known About Effective Alerts and Warnings
Several decades of research on public response to alerts and warnings have 
yielded an understanding of how to best formulate an alert or warning message. 
Key insights from this work are given below.
Message Content›ˆ˜˚˛˝˙
 Exactly what protective action can be taken to best pro
-tect health and safety, and how will it be done.
›ˆ
 When protective action should be performed, when it 
should be completed, and when the threat has ended.›ˆ
 What locations are at risk and who should take protec
-tive action.
›ˆ
 What the impending hazard is, what the 
potential consequences of the hazard are, and how the protective action can 
reduce harm.›ˆ
 Who is providing the messageŠwhich should be selected 
based on who would be viewed as the most credible source for the affected 
population, often several sources.
Message Style›ˆ
 Message is simply worded, free of jargon, and uses words that 
people can understand.›ˆ
 Message provides precise and unambiguous information. 
›ˆ
 Message contains correct and complete information that is up-
to-date, as free from errors as possible, and corrected when better information 
is known.›ˆ
 Message is stated authoritatively and con˜dently, even when 
there may be uncertainty about elements of the message content, especially 
about the protective action to be taken.
›ˆ
 Message explains any changes from past messages and does 
not provide con˚icting information that may create uncertainty.
Message Delivery
›ˆ Messages may need to be sent multiple times during an 
emergency.
›ˆ
 Messages should be sent using all available alert and 
warning systems. 
Contextual Factors 
›ˆ Demographic factors, including socioeconomic status, age, eth
-nicity, and gender.
›ˆ
 The roles of individuals within and outside of the family, including family size, child ages, pets, and greater community 
involvement.
›ˆ Personal experiences of prior disaster. 
›ˆ Pre-event knowledge related to the hazard, the protective 
actions, and the warning system. 
›ˆ
 Indicators in one™s environments such as rain, wind, 
or smoke. 
›ˆ
 Seeing or hearing about others taking the recommended 
protective action.
‘‘‘
‘–ƒ⁄‹“ˆ
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
he/she is indeed at risk and should take protective action. Finally, because 
receipt of a geotargeted message can substitute for lengthy descriptions of 
what areas are at risk, the message content can focus on the hazard and 
recommended public actions. (The latter is of particular value in systems 
that strictly limit message length.)
Timothy Sellnow reported a recent experiment testing the different 
wording for a message on a food safety recallŠfor example, Do message 
recipients understand how to protect themselves? and Do they intend to 
follow the instructions? Box 1.3 lists the various message variables tested. 
The fourth test message was geotargeted by stating explicitly that the 
affected food product was distributed in the recipients™ area.
Sellnow and his colleagues had two hypotheses: (1) the ef˜cacy scores 
for behavioral intention, which indicate that a recipient intended to take 
protective action, would rise after receiving 
any 
of the four messages, 
and (2) the geotargeted message (message 4) would result in the highest 
level of ef˜cacy and behavioral intentions. Hypothesis 1 proved true; 
recipients™ had a greater sense of behavioral intention. This con˜rms that 
those who receive a speci˜c message about appropriate response believe 
they have the skills and intend to take suggested action. Perhaps more 
related to the workshop topic, hypothesis 2 also proved true; when a 
message is geotargeted, messages attract more attention, and recipients 
better understand potential risk. Sellnow stated that they have found this 
consistently across several experiments that examined geotargeted alerts 
and warnings. Additional key observations and open questions offered 
by Sellnow include the following: 
BOX 1.3
 Message Variance in Food Recall Experiment
Message 1: Risk certainty (certain consequences) and expert opinions (cogni
-tive salience).
Message 2: Risk certainty (certain consequences) and concrete experience/
personal stories about sickness and death (emotional salience).Message 3: Expert opinions (cognitive salience), personal stories (emotional 
salience), ambiguous risk cause (uncertain consequences), multiple behavioral 
options (multiple ef˜cacious actions).Message 4: Risk certainty with speci˜c and geotargeted behavioral directives. 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 11˜˚
Past work has shown how an optimal message can be communi
-cated in a limited time, but further research is needed on whether and how 
an optimal message can be conveyed in limited 
length
 (e.g., in WEA).
7 ˜˚
Some elements of geotargeting have been shown to improve self-
ef˜ciencyŠthat individuals know what the appropriate action is and 
believe they can complete itŠbut further work would improve under
-standing of how other message variables, such as message source or alert 
type, structure, and delivery systems, affect response.
˜˚
The previous experience of message recipients with disasters 
remains a potentially confounding factor that this work did not control 
for. What impact might such experience have, and how might it be con
-trolled for in future experiments needs further research?
˜˚
Recent research in health communications has shown that differ
-ences in recipients™ learning styles, or the way in which an individual 
best acquires or processes new information, may signi˜cantly affect their 
ef˜cacy. How do learning styles affect the ef˜cacy of geotargeted alerts?
˜˚
What are the optimal strategies with respect to the number and 
timing of messages at various points in an emergency? For example, when 
is it helpful to issue alerts as soon as a potential risk emerges? and Are 
there circumstances under which alerts are best deferred until the actual 
event onset?
˜˚
What types of hazards need what types of alerts or warnings? How 
does the prevalence of a particular hazard affect public response and alert 
needs?
Communicating Geotargeted Information
Michele Wood discussed the three general ways to communicate what 
areas are at risk: text that names locations or describes the boundaries of 
the area, pictures that show a map of the area, or geotargeted delivery of 
alerts or warning messages so that only affected populations will receive 
the messages.
Text-De˜ned Geolocation Information
Many alerting systems can transmit only text messages and thus must 
rely on text to convey geographical information. Possible approaches 
include the following:
7  B. Reynold and M. Seeger, Crisis and emergency risk communication as an integrative 
model, 
Journal of Health Communications
 10:43-55, 2005.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
˜˚
General text: ﬁ
Tornado warning in this area until 12:00 
PM
 Moun
-tain Standard Time, take shelter nowŠNWS.ﬂ
 Although the message is 
short, recipients may not be able to tell whether they have been geotar
-geted (unless the message explicitly states they were) or whether they are, 
in fact, located in the affected area. 
˜˚
Named locations: ﬁRadiological hazard warning in Los Angeles, 
Orange, and Riverside counties until 12:00 AM PST. Take shelter now.Š
DHS.ﬂ
 This message names all the locations affected. However, this type 
of message is longer than necessary (and possibly longer than can be 
accommodated in systems that only transmit short messages). Addition
-ally, the boundaries of the area affected by a hazards may not correspond 
well with the boundaries of cities, counties, or other named places.
˜˚
Descriptive boundaries:
 ﬁFire warning in area bounded by North 
West Parkway/E-470 on the north, Highway C-470 on the south, High
-way 285 on the west, and the eastern boundaries of Adams and Arapahoe 
counties until 12:00 AM PST. Take shelter now.ŠNWS.ﬂ
 Although this 
approach makes it possible to de˜ne more precisely the area at risk, it 
does so with greater message length. Furthermore, it can be dif˜cult to 
identify suitable boundaries that precisely describe the area at risk and 
that can be easily understood by recipients. Messages that depend on 
detailed local knowledge are especially dif˜cult for visitors or new resi
-dents to interpret.
Using Maps and Images to Geotarget Messages
Maps are, of course, the canonical way to represent geographical 
regions. Map data are generally readily available, and it can be easy to 
clearly mark areas at risk through shading or coloring. Adding a marker 
for the recipient™s location further personalizes the information. If the 
system does not allow the recipient™s location to be shown (which relies 
on capabilities in the device receiving and displaying the message), a 
recipient may not readily see whether he/she falls within the affected 
area. Maps can also be dif˜cult to display on devices with small screens 
(such as cell phones) or with low resolution (such as non-high-de˜nition 
televisions). Another challenge is that not all message recipients will be 
adept at interpreting the map.
Geode˜ned Message Delivery
The third method for geotargeting messages is to target delivery of 
the messages to affected areas and provide the recipient with an indica
-tion that the message was targeted. For example, the message might 
include the text ﬁIf you receive this message, you are at risk,ﬂ so the 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 13recipients understand that they are within the targeted area and are at 
risk. This strategy will work best if the alerting and warning system can 
target a suf˜ciently ˜ne-grained location. (See Chapter 2 for a discussion 
of these capabilities.) Messages that purport to be geotargeted but are, 
in fact, delivered well outside the region actually at risk may be ignored 
because the recipient is not sure whether the message applies to him/her 
speci˜cally. 
Current Research on Message Length, Geographical 
Information, and Geotargeted Alerts
Brooke Liu, Michele Wood, and their research collaborators, are cur
-rently studying the relationships that text alerts, length, and geotargeting 
have on public response. The research considers how to optimize mes
-sages within the length constraints of major text alerting systemsŠWEA 
(90 characters), SMS and Twitter (140 to 160 characters), and the instruc
-tional ˜eld of an EAS message (1,380 characters). The research team is 
attempting to answer the following questions:
˜˚
How can 90-character messages be optimized? How is public 
response affected by location speci˜city, the sequence of the location 
information, and the source of the information?
˜˚
What is the relative importance of the key message elements in 
1,380-character messages? 
˜˚
Can these ˜ndings be generalized across different types of hazards?
˜˚
What is the relative ef˜cacy of different (message length and loca
-tion speci˜city) message types?
Because WEA messages are limited to 90 characters, additional 
research and thought are needed to understand what should be com
-municated to people ˜rst, second, third, and so on. In thinking about 
this question, Liu developed a matrix of imminent threat hazards and a 
sequence of protective actions that may need to be taken by an affected 
population.
8 For example, a primary action in response to a chemical 
spill might be to shelter in place, and a secondary action might be to get 
decontaminated. The open question is when geotargeting makes the most 
sense for which alerts. Liu and her team believe that this is affected by 
several factors: alert type and format, hazard type and available content, 
8  The complete matrix can be found in National Consortium for the Study of Terrorism 
and Responses to Terrorism, 
Hazards and Protective Actions Sequence Matrix: Comprehensive 
Testing of Imminent Threat Public Messages for Mobile Devices,
 2013, available at http://www.
start.umd.edu/start/publications/HazardsAndProtectiveActionsSequenceMatrix.pdf.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
and lead time. Additional open research questions identi˜ed by Wood 
and Liu include the following:
˜˚
How does geotargeting affect people who are visually impaired?
˜˚
How does map literacy affect public response to geotargeted alerts?
˜˚
Does precise location language reduce time spent milling? Is this 
true across hazards?
˜˚
What limits does technology place on the ability to geotarget alerts?
˜˚
What is the most ef˜cient combination of text, image, and 
geo-delivery?
˜˚
What public education is needed to help the public understand 
geotargeted alerts and new alerting systems?
Use of Geotargeted Information by Emergency Managers
Ken Rudnicki discussed the capabilities emergency managers have to 
issue geotargeted alerts and warnings. Each tool has different geotarget
-ing capabilities, as follows:
˜˚
EAS provides information to television viewers and radio listen
-ers. Although the messages generally contain descriptions of what areas 
are at risk, because they reach everyone served by a broadcaster or cable 
system, they are often disseminated to a large number of people who are 
not at risk. 
˜˚
NOAA weather radios can be kept in constant standby mode, have 
alarms that can wake people who are sleeping, and support those with 
impaired vision. However, radios must be purchased and kept powered 
on by the end user. 
˜˚
Subscription-based SMS text systems are used by many jurisdic
-tions and institutions to send text messages that provide alerts about 
hazards and other items of interest, such as severe traf˜c alerts. Although 
these systems typically allow users to sign up for particular geographical 
areas of interest, the technology does not support delivery based on the 
recipient™s current location. As opt-in systems, they reach only people 
who sign up for the service. 
˜˚
Reverse-dialing systems, currently one of most precise geotarget
-ing systems, allow emergency managers to telephone individual homes 
within a given geographical region quickly. The population coverage of 
this technology is diminishing now that an increasing number of house
-holds no longer have a landline telephone. 
˜˚
Third-party smartphone applications have also become more pop
-ular. These systems can use the phone location to provide alerts. Similar 
to subscription SMS text systems, users must opt in by downloading 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 15the application on their phone. Additionally, since a third party man
-ages applications, emergency managers have no understanding of who 
is receiving the alerts. 
˜˚
WEA has numerous advantages over prior alerting tools; however, 
the very short message limits what can be communicated to recipients. 
While WEA provides county-level geotargeting by cell tower, there is still 
the potential for bleed over into unaffected areas. Furthermore, as it is a 
newer system, some practitioners and recipients are not fully aware of the 
capability or how best to use WEA.
HAZARD TYPE AND GEOTARGETING 
The second session focused on the geotargeting needs and challenges 
for particular hazards. Thomas Cova, University of Utah, discussed wild
-˜re events; Steven M. Becker, Old Dominion University College of Health 
Sciences, discussed radiological and nuclear incidents; and Peter LaPorte, 
Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA), discussed 
transportation system emergencies. 
Wild˜re Events
Wild˜re events provide signi˜cant challenges and opportunities for 
geotargeting alerts. While some wild˜re movement is slow, allowing for 
proactive evacuation, shifting winds can quickly alter the course of the 
˜re, which results in a need for fast evacuations of very speci˜c areas. 
Thomas Cova presented the following case studies to illustrate how geo
-targeted messages might be used in wild˜re events:
˜˚
The evacuation area for the 2012 High Park Fire in Colorado was 
described as ﬁCR44H three miles south to just north of Stringtown Gulch 
Road, the entire Rist Canyon area, CR27E to Stove Prairie and south to 
Davis Ranch Road and Whale Rock Road.ﬂ Such a description poses two 
challenges: ˜rst, it cannot be understood by someone not very familiar 
with the area, and second, it turns out that this description does not, in 
fact, de˜ne a closed polygon. 
˜˚
The evacuation zone established for the 2007 Angora Fire provides 
an example of how a very small and precise evacuation zone can be estab
-lished using polygons. The evacuation order had 100 percent compliance 
for two reasons: (1) the warned area was small and highly targeted and 
(2) the ˚ames from the rapidly moving ˜re provided environmental cues 
that action needed to be taken. The Angora ˜re also illustrates some of 
the complexities posed by geography. Because many of the roads in the 
neighborhood led into the ˜re™s path, many evacuees had to ˚ee on foot.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
˜˚
In the case of the 2000 Cerro Grande Fire in Los Alamos, New 
Mexico, emergency responders had as much as a week to carefully plan 
and carry out evacuations. They were also aided by very detailed emer
-gency plans already in place, given the proximity of the U.S. Department 
of Energy laboratory. As the time to evacuate approached, houses in 
each designated zone were noti˜ed using a reverse 911 telephone dialing 
system of the need to evacuate and given instructions on when and by 
which roadways they should evacuate. The evacuation was completed 
quite swiftly, in 2.5 hours, and with almost 100 percent compliance. 
Geotargeting could also provide an opportunity for time-sequenced 
changes in the recommended protective action for those who have not 
followed previous instructions. For example, the ˜rst alert within an area 
would instruct recipients to evacuate, a second would recommend that 
remaining residents shelter in place, a third would recommend sheltering 
in a refuge, and a fourth would recommend ˜nding a safe area (a protec
-tive structure or body of water).
9 Radiological and Nuclear Incidents
There are different types of radiological and nuclear incident types, 
including the unintentional release of radioactive material from a con
-tainer break, nuclear accident at a nuclear power plant or nuclear fuel 
processing site, and an intentional radiological or nuclear incident, either 
a radiological dispersal device (i.e., dirty bomb) or a nuclear explosion of 
an improvised device. For each type of event, the right protective action 
information needs to be disseminated to the right people as quickly as 
possible. Steven Becker discussed the substantial challenges of messaging 
during radiological and nuclear incidents, including the following:
˜˚
Uncertainties in determining the composition and direction of 
radioactive plumes, changing conditions that require frequent changes in 
information, and, when terrorism is suspected, concern about additional 
attacks. 
˜˚
The potential for widespread fear, profound sense of vulnerability, 
and a continuing sense of alarm and dread, which research has shown to 
be associated with emergencies involving radiation. Fatalism is particu
-larly high with radiological events, and reportedly especially high within 
9  T.J. Cova, F. Drews, L. Siebeneck, and A. Musters, Protective actions in wild˜res: Evacu
-ate or shelter-in-place? 
Natural Hazards Review
 10(4):154-162, 2009.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 17minority populations.
10
 There is a high propensity to ˜ee in these situa
-tions, and compliance with shelter-in-place instructions may be poor. 
˜˚
The complexity of and unfamiliarity with radiation-related con
-cepts and terms.
Although there are messages, templates, and questions and answers 
that have been developed and vetted for technical accuracy and ef˚-cacy, less is known about how these messages can be communicated in a 

shorter format. There is also a large demand by affected populations for 

graphics of the affected area, especially in regard to plume maps. Mes
-sages also need to be tested and developed that can address the problem 

of fatalism.
Fukushima Dai-ichi Nuclear Accident
During the March 2011 Japan Earthquake, the Fukushima Dai-ichi 
Nuclear Generating Station, one of the largest such installations in the 
world, was severely damaged. It would become clear that large amounts 

of radioactive material had been released, that there were threats of addi
-tional releases, and that a large area needed to be evacuated. Although 

plans had been created for areas immediately surrounding the plant, the 

evacuation zone became much larger, complicating evacuation planning 

and execution. The event provided valuable lessons in communicating 

during nuclear and radiological incidents:
˜˚
Evacuation orders for radiological events need to include infor
-mation about direction of the plume so that people can take appropriate 

action. This information was not provided because scientists felt that the 

plume model was not fully developed and because emergency manag
-ers feared that people would panic if they were provided incomplete 

information. Unfortunately, the decision to withhold information resulted 

in people in some communities actually evacuating into the path of the 

plume.
˜˚
Emergency plans need to handle cases where the infrastructure is 
degraded. At Fukushima, individual emergency plans had been devel
-oped for earthquakes, tsunamis, and nuclear accidents. But when all three 

occurred nearly simultaneously, many of the shelters or evacuation routes 

were no longer usable. Similar concerns apply to the communication 

infrastructure needed to alert the population and coordinate emergency 

response.
10
  S.M. Becker, Emergency communication and information issues in terrorist events in
-volving radioactive materials, 
Biosecurity and Bioterrorism
 2(3):195-207, 2004.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
˜˚
Messaging strategies and preparedness education need to include 
methods for the public to recognize genuine communications and identify 
misinformation. Various credible-looking but false messages were sent 
to people in the affected area. This resulted in people taking potentially 
unsafe or useless actions, such as purchasing large amounts of iodized 
salt in the false belief that this would provide useful protection against 
radioactive iodine isotopes.
11Public Mass Transportation Systems
Peter LaPorte, director of emergency management for WMATA, dis
-cussed the challenges of communicating with riders of public transpor
-tation systems. Most messages to the public relate to system delays or 
temporary closures, while a much smaller number are issued when pas
-sengers are directly affected by breakdowns or other problems. Many 
alerts are to notify riders about delays owing to train, track, or signal 
problems that require trains moving in opposite directions to share a 
single track temporarily. Alerts may also cover scenarios that have a larger 
and longer impact on riders, such as a broken rail or a station ˜re. In these 
incidents, it is important to convey what the public should expect in terms 
of delays or closures. Some scenarios, such as an individual on the tracks, 
pose a different challenge because authorities are trying to understand a 
complicated and potentially serious situation at the same time that the 
public and the media also want to understand what happened. Did some-one jump? Was someone pushed? Did someone fall? 
Messages are delivered through multiple channels. Within the system, 
WMATA can use electronic message boards and public address systems 
in the stations and public address systems on board the trains. WMATA 
also provides text message and email alerting and allows customers to 
subscribe to alerts by line and time of day. WMATA alerts regarding major 
delays are also picked up by alerting systems operated by local jurisdic
-tions and the media. In some scenarios, such as when a train is disabled 
between stations, responders may be needed on the scene to directly com
-municate appropriate action and to avoid unsafe actions by passengers. 
The various capabilities for alerting the public all have certain limita
-tions. For example, cellular coverage in the underground portion of the 
system is not complete, although a congressional mandate to provide full 
11  Discussion of ways to identify and correct misinformation during disasters is discussed 
in depth in the previous report, National Research Council, 
Public Response to Alerts and 
Warnings Using Social Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps, 
The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2013.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 19coverage is expected by the end of 2014. In addition, public address sys
-tems in the trains and stations may not be audible to all riders.
WMATA™s alerting process also includes alerting and contacting local-
jurisdiction emergency or transportation staff. WMATA works closely 
with the federal Of˜ce of Personnel Management (OPM) during severe 
weather events to consider the impact of service disruptions on the fed
-eral workforce; many private organizations also follow the OPM™s lead. 
WMATA also works with local trade organizations to communicate 
with local workforces. Responding to emergencies within the system 
involves close cooperation and careful coordination with county and city 
authorities and ˜rst responders in Maryland, Virginia, and the District of 
Columbia. 
DATA SECURITY AND PRIVACY CHALLENGES
Panelists Patrick McDaniel, Pennsylvania State University, Marc 
Armstrong, University of Iowa, Darrell Ernst, private consultant, and 
Kevin Pomfret, Centre for Spatial Law and Policy, examined data security 
and privacy concerns associated with geotargeted alerts and warnings.
De˜ning Security and Privacy
Security was de˜ned by Patrick McDaniel as when a device, system, 
or service acts as expected. When a system is secure, information is legiti
-mate and unmodi˜ed, only authorized parties can participate, access is 
available, and, where needed, secrecy (not to be confused with privacy) is 
available. In the context of alert and warning systems, security concerns 
include ensuring that only those who are authorized can send alerts, that 
messages cannot be modi˜ed or forged to misinform the public, and that 
messages cannot be suppressed through damage to or overload of the 
delivery system. 
Privacy, as de˜ned by McDaniel, means that an individual controls 
what information about that individual is exposed and to whom, when, 
and for what purpose. Privacy is often a negotiated and constantly evolv
-ing term. The issue is mostly of control, not exposure, and privacy starts 
with informed consent. Users often trade some information for a bene˜t; 
they need to understand this implicit transaction. If a company collects 
information for a bene˜t then uses that information for an undisclosed 
purpose, that is a violation of privacy. While the majority of privacy 
conversations involve knowing a user™s physical location, collection of 
location over time can provide a very detailed outlook of an individual. 
Users often have different reactions to a service provider having location 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
information versus the government having the same information.
12
 The 
design of an alert and warning system is in˚uenced by both security and 
privacy, and retro˜tting a system to consider these concerns is dif˜cult.
A geotargeting service might adhere to some of the following basic, 
demonstrable, and testable principles and standards to provide security 
and privacy:
˜˚
All alerts must be delivered without modi˜cation.
˜˚
Only authorized parties are able to transmit alerts.
˜˚
All alerts must be received within a speci˜ed period. An example 
of this is E911, which requires that a location of a user within 300 meters 
can be found within 6 minutes. 
˜˚
Alerts must be delivered only to the designated area.
˜˚
Alerts must not substantially affect the infrastructure over which 
they are transmitted.
˜˚
Users must be able to control or know what personal information 
is exposed to the service provider and how the service provider will use 
the information.
De˜ning Geoprivacy
Marc Armstrong de˜ned geoprivacy as an individual being secure 
from unwanted observations and tracking. Currently there are require
-ments involving location data and mobile devices. This includes E-911, 
which requires that mobile devices periodically report locations based on 
Global Positioning System (GPS), cellular towers, or Wi-Fi locations. Simi
-lar location data are often shared with third-party application developers, 
who may also then share the data with others. Risk associated with this 
behavior includes further disclosure of information, consumer tracking, 
identity theft, threats to physical safety, and surveillance. 
There are some techniques to preserve geoprivacy while still pro
-viding location-based services. One is areal masking, in which location 
information is sent only when someone enters a particular region. Travel 
within the region would not need to be known. However, this would 
delay the immediate arrival of geotargeted noti˜cations to the end uses. 
Current work is being done that highlights these masking techniques and 
a recently founded company, iGeoLoqi, has developed tools that incor
-porate some of these techniques, which provide location information and 
broadcast push noti˜cations, and individuals trigger the messages by 
entering, staying, or leaving a location.
12
  U.S. Government Accountability Of˜cer, Mobile Device Location Data, 2012, available 
at http://www.gao.gov/assets/650/648044.pdf.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 21Legal Issues Around Geotargeted Alerts 
Kevin Pomfret de˜ned spatial law as the set of legal issues associated 
with geospatial technology and the collection, use, and transfer of location 
information and other types of spatial data. Spatial law involves a range 
of issues, including privacy, intellectual property and licensing, data qual
-ity and liability, national security, open records, the Freedom of Informa
-tion Act, and other government regulations. Location information creates 
challenges distinct from those created by traditionally protected personal 
information (such as social security numbers and ˜nancial information). 
For example, someone who does not have other information about a 
person™s identity can, nonetheless, readily infer where the person works 
and where the person lives. In addition, location data are generated dif
-ferently from other sorts of personal information, making the de˜nition 
of ﬁpublicﬂŠlong an analytical tool used in assessing privacy and other 
impactsŠa challenge. For example, individuals move (change location) 
through public spaces, and most government privacy policies have excep
-tions for ﬁpublicly available information.ﬂ
Even as compelling new applications for location information are 
being developed and deployed, privacy advocates urge careful consid
-eration of how this information might be used and how to protect the 
privacy of users. Media scrutiny is having an impact on this discussion. 
For example, due to media coverage, organizations are pulling back the 
use of location tracking tools. Short Pump Mall in Richmond, Virginia, 
decided against using a mobile application after media scrutiny criticiz
-ing its privacy implications,
13
 and a New York community stopped using 
publicly available aerial imagery to identify unregistered and untaxed 
pools. Additionally, Congress has considered several pieces of legislation 
addressing location privacy, and regulatory authorities are examining 
ways to address this issue. However, geolocation information is often just 
part of a longer list of issues surrounding privacy. 
Previously enacted privacy legislationŠsuch as the Commercial Pri
-vacy Bill of Rights Act of 2011, BEST Practices ACT, Do Not Track Me 
On-line Act, Consumer Privacy Protection Act of 2011, and an update to 
Children™s Online Privacy Protection ActŠmay provide a foundation for 
future legislation protecting location information. Many of these laws are 
13
  Richmond Times-Dispatch
, Town Center™s Monitoring Policy Creates Backlash, posted 
November 26, 2011, available at http://www.timesdispatch.com/business/town-center-
s-monitoring-policy-creates-backlash/article_7b6bd70f-7bc8-5564-a417-7856266079f5.html.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
based on the principles of fair information practices (FIP).
14
 Elements of 
FIP include notice and transparency, consent and use limitations, access 
and participation, integrity and security, and enforcement and account
-ability. However, there are challenges in applying FIP to geolocation infor
-mation: How will ﬁprecise geolocation informationﬂ be de˜ned? How do 
you provide adequate notice on a mobile device? In which contexts are 
opt in or opt out the appropriate forms of consent? What is a consumer™s 
right to have geolocation information corrected or deleted? and How long 
should geolocation information be permitted to be stored?
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) is examining privacy-protecting 
practices and has broad authority under Section 5 of the Federal Trade 
Commission Act. These actions include bringing action against companies 
that do not comply with their own privacy policies and against companies 
that do not adequately protect personally identi˜able or other sensitive 
personal information. A December 2012 FTC report, ﬁProtecting Con
-sumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid ChangeŠA Proposed Framework for 
Business and Policymakersﬂ provides a list of the FTC™s best practices for 
mobile privacy (summarized in Box 1.4).
 15
Technologies That Support Privacy
In 1992, Darrell Ernst began developing a technology to geotarget 
alerts while preserving privacy. This technology would send an alert to a 
wide area,
 and a location-aware device would determine if the alert was 
relevant to individual users. The technology was originally developed 
to aid in risk communication to military personal (information regard
-ing detected missile launches is broadcast to speci˜cally programmed 
handheld devices carried by personnel in the ˜eld). If a device received 
such a message and determined it was in the warning area, it would 
notify the user. A general application of the technology could allow for 
more privacy-sensitive alerting. Since the device itself assesses and ˜lters 
messages, the authorities sending the messages do not need the ability to 
track where end users are. Receivers for this type of alert broadcast could 
be placed in a wide variety of devices, including in-home appliances that 
are programmed with their static location. Called GEOcast, SquareLoop 
14
  Fair Information Practicies (FIP) were developed by the Federal Trade Commission 
in the mid-1990s in response to concerns of how online entities collect and use personal 
information. Current FIP principles can be found at http://www.ftc.gov/reports/privacy3/
fairinfo.shtm. 
15
  Federal Trade Commission, 
Mobile Privacy Disclosures: Building Trust Through Trans
-parency,
 Staff Report, February 2013, available at www.ftc.gov/os/2013/02/130201mobile
 privacyreport.pdf.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ROLE OF GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS IN DISASTER RESPONSE
 23licensed this technology and continues to further its development for 
alerts and warnings.
16
Workshop attendees noted that some current alerting systems use 
similar privacy-protecting methodology. For example, with WEA, cellular 
towers determine if they are within a given alerting area and send alerts 
to all phones within the designated area. Much of the second-day discus
-sion at the workshop focused on technologies, such as the one described 
above, that would support better localization by the device itself. If a 
device had more precise knowledge of its location, this information would 
not necessarily need to be shared with alerting authorities. 
16
  See http://www.squareloop.com/.
BOX 1.4
 The Federal Trade Commission™s Best Practices for Mobile Privacy
Provide timely privacy disclosures to consumers and obtain their explicit 
consent before allowing apps to access and collect certain sensitive data and 
content;Consider developing and implementing a visual ﬁdashboardﬂ that displays 
for consumers the types of data accessed and collected by apps;
Consider designing, testing, and implementing intuitive and simple icons to 
depict certain app privacy practices;
Implement and enforce contractual obligations for, and promote best 
practices and educational information to, app developers that address mobile 
privacy;
Consider providing consumers with clear disclosures about the extent of 
prerelease review and postrelease compliance checks that platforms undertake 
for apps that can be downloaded from the platform; and
Consider offering a Do Not Track (DNT) option.
˛
……
—–
ˆ–ƒ⁄‹“ˆ
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24
2Technologies and Tools for 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings
Several recent innovations or capabilities under development provide 
some of the necessary ingredients for an end-to-end, all-hazards 
warning system that fully exploits geographical information: 
˜˚
The Common Alerting Protocol (CAP) standard for formatting 
alerts includes geographical locations by Federal Information Processing 
System (FIPS) code or vertices of polygons to de˜ne affected regions along 
with information about the source and nature of the alert and the action 
to be taken. 
˜˚
Cellular phones and other mobile devices ﬁknowﬂ where they are 
located (at a minimum using mandated E911 location capabilities and, 
increasingly, using embedded Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers 
and other location information such as nearby wireless access [Wi-Fi] 
sites) and increasingly possess considerable processing power, high-res
-olution displays, and the like. More generally, computing devices, such 
as laptops, desktops, and cable set top boxes, either can establish their 
location or can easily be out˜tted to determine such information using 
one or more of the approaches listed above. Wired devices can also use 
knowledge about the physical location of the networks to which they are 
attached to establish their location. Applications either built in or installed 
on these devices can be used to receive and present targeted alerts and 
warnings. Importantly, even if the systems designed to transmit alerts/
warnings cannot precisely send messages only to the desired set of recipi
-ents, the receiving device can use knowledge of its location, together with 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 25geographical information coded in the message, to deliver messages only 
to someone at the speci˜ed location.
˜˚
Tools for geotargeting at various resolutions are becoming increas
-ingly available, and these have been adopted by the advertising industry. 
The alerting community may be able to adopt or adapt capabilities being 
developed and used for advertising.
Much of the second day of the workshop focused on new and emerg
-ing technologies and tools for determining location and disseminating 
geotargeted alerts and warnings.
CONTINUING OPPORTUNITIES FOR USING TRADITIONAL 
TECHNOLOGIES FOR GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND 
LESSONS FOR THE USE OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES
Although discussion at the workshop tended to focus on new tech
-nologies, particularly mobile devices, several presentations examined 
how older technologies can be used in ways that provide enhanced 
geotargeting capabilities. Rick Wimberly, Galain Solutions, examined 
reverse-dialing alerts; John Kean, NPR Labs, discussed innovations in 
radio broadcast; Bruce Thomas, Midland Radio Corporation, examined 
weather radios; and Ron Boyer, Boyer Broadband, discussed alerting over 
cable television systems.
Telephone Alerting
Reverse-dialing alerts allow for of˜cials to auto-dial landlines, or 
mobile numbers of registered users, within a certain area and play a pre-
recorded alert. As noted by workshop participant Ken Rudnicki, City of 
Fairfax, Virginia, reverse-dialing systems are currently one of the better 
tools emergency managers have to provide geotargeted alerting. How
-ever, the system still has several challenges.
1 The challenges, as discussed 
by Rick Wimberly, include the following:
˜˚
When large sets of numbers are dialed, this can overwhelm local 
phone switches and cause calls to be dropped.
˜˚
The signi˜cant decrease in the number of households with land
-lines reduces the reach of these systems. Reverse-dialing systems can 
1  In a 2012 article, Rick Wimberly examined the shortcoming of these systems during the 
2012 Colorado wild˜re where approximately 25,000 of the 118,000 reverse-dialing alerts 
were not delivered. See R. Wimberly, Flawed delivery: Do alert noti˜cations fail to live up 
to expectations, 
Emergency Management Magazine
 5(7):22-35, 2012.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
reach mobile devices, but this requires subscribers to register their phone 
numbers. Despite communities aggressively encouraging people to reg
-ister, registration rates for mobile subscribers across the country are still 
well below 10 percent. 
˜˚
Reverse-dialing systems are not particularly effective at delivering 
messages to those with disabilities. 
˜˚
Reverse-dialing systems are expensive, and local jurisdictions may 
not be in a position to purchase or modernize a system. 
Radio Broadcast Technologies
NPR Labs, a small, self-supported broadcast technology research and 
development out˜t operated by National Public Radio, is currently exam
-ining the use of two new technologies that may bene˜t alerting: broadcast 
repeaters and the use of the radio broadcast system (RBDS).
NPR Labs partnered with Geo-Broadcast Solutions (GBS) to examine 
the performance and use of GBS technologies known as ZoneCasting 
and MaxCasting. In both technologies, a group of synchronous repeat
-ers repeats the signal of the primary station using lower power and 
transmitter heights. In MaxCasting, the nodes are time-aligned to the 
primary transmitter to reinforce or extend coverage. In ZoneCasting, the 
individual nodes can be used to send distinct programming to different 
locations. Figure 2.1 demonstrates how these tools can expand coverage 
of a radio station and also provide separate coverage by zone.
John Kean discussed how both tools support alerting: ˜rst, they extend 
the reach of radio alerts to communities currently poorly served by single 
radio transmitters; and, second, by supporting distinct programming by 
different nodes, they enable geotargeting of alert and warning messages. 
Although they require new equipment on the part of the broadcaster, they 
have the advantage of requiring no new equipment for the public. 
NPR Labs is also working to demonstrate the use of RBDS to reach 
at-risk populations, including those with hearing impairments. RBDS is a 
standard to embed small amounts of digital information in conventional 
radio broadcasts that almost all FM stations are capable of supporting. It 
is currently used most often to transmit and display song or other pro
-gram information and is commonly found in automobile radios. One of 
the objectives of the NPR Lab project is to experiment with using RBDS to 
send text information using household receivers to people with hearing 
impairments to explore how effectively this technology would reach this 
large segment of the public.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 27FIGURE 2.1
 Radio broadcast coverage of KVIL-FM, Dallas, Texas. 
NOTE: Radio coverage in images b-d is indicated by shading; darker areas have 
basic coverage, and lighter areas have increased coverage, including indoors and 
in previously terrain-blocked areas. SOURCE: John Kean, NPR Labs, presenta
-tion at the Workshop on Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings, Washington, D.C., 
 February 2013.
(a) KVIL-FM is a class C FM station, the largest classi˜cation for stations. The 
station has coverage of approximately 
24,000 square miles (with a coverage ra
-dius of 88 kilometers). A smooth circle 
usually represents this coverage; how
-ever, coverage is not that consistent.
Circle added by NPR Labs, map copy
-right 2013 Google.
(b) Broadcast is a terrestrial signal, so 
the signal strength is impacted by ter
-rain. Coverage is also lost due to less ef
-˜cient antennas and building penetra
-tion. For this station, coverage should 
be approximately 6,373,000 people. 
When terrain sensitivity and indoor 
penetration are factored in, coverage 
shrinks to about 3,173,000 people.
(d) When ZoneCast nodes are added 
to Denton, the signal can reach indoors 
and also allows for special announce
-ments to separate areas.
(c) Denton, Texas, falls within the sta
-tion™s coverage area; however, almost 
the entire town sits within an area 
where there is little to no coverage. 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
NOAA Weather Radio
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) 
Weather Radio (NWR) was originally developed in the 1950s and 1960s 
to provide weather observations and forecasts to those in ˚ight or at sea. 
In 1974, an outbreak of 146 tornadoes within a single day spurred the 
expansion of the service. Bruce Thomas noted that today, more than 1,000 
broadcast transmitters provide coverage across the United States and its 
territories.
NWR uses the Speci˜c Area Message Encoding (SAME) standard 
to geotarget its alerts. Adopted in 1988, SAME was the ˜rst geotargeted 
alerting standard and remains an important foundation for geotargeted 
alerts to this day. SAME allows NWR to target at the FIPS code level. This 
generally means at the county level (or equivalent geographical area); 
however, large cities located within counties may have their own unique 
FIPS and SAME codes. Additionally, high-risk areas may have a unique 
SAME, such as areas around a nuclear power plant. More precise geo
-targeting may be possible by adjusting the ˜rst digit of the SAME code. 
Cable Television
Boyer discussed current capabilities and opportunities for enhanced 
alerting over cable networks (more formally known as multichannel 
video programming distributors or MVPDs). Currently, cable providers 
are required to distribute presidential alerts, test their alert system weekly, 
and monitor two Emergency Alert System (EAS) origination sources. 
Many operators support additional alerting capabilities on a voluntary 
basis. 
Today, an alert received from EAS is distributed to all the subscribers 
to a cable system, even though they may live outside the speci˜c region 
that is the subject of the alert. In principle, modifying cable boxes to know 
their location and ˜lter messages accordingly could provide better geo
-targeting. Boyer explained that this is not entirely straightforward since 
cable boxes have been designed chie˚y to decode video content, were not 
designed to be location-aware, and the systems that would be needed to 
link a subscriber™s cable box to the subscriber™s address in the MVPD™s 
billing or operational systems do not exist today. 
A second option would be to determine location via service nodes 
within the cable system. However, these do not necessary follow the 
geopolitical boundaries commonly used to geotarget alerts. Boyer noted 
that, as a result, adding enhanced geotargeting to MVPDs will most likely 
require enhancements to the entire networks, not just a single network 
element.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 29TECHNOLOGIES FOR GEOTARGETING 
ALERTS OVER THE INTERNET
Although television is still the primary source by which the public 
receives information about disasters, this is rapidly changing as individu
-als spend more time using the Internet for infotainment. Richard Barnes, 
BBN Technologies, discussed the challenges of alerting over the Internet, 
and Hisham Kassab, MobiLaps, discussed how alerts and warnings can 
be introduced into streaming video content.
In principle, alerting over the Internet appears to be a straightforward 
task requiring, essentially, the delivery of a suitably formatted document 
that the Internet-connected device can render, something that is done 
trillions of times a day. However, this would require that the location of 
the Internet-connected device can be established by some combination 
of the device itself and the network and that a device either monitors for 
alert information or the alert can be placed in an information source that 
is already being monitored by the device. 
Geotargeting Using Internet Protocol
Richard Barnes explained that geolocating based on Internet protocol 
(IP) address is very limited and generally relies on privately managed 
databases that match IP addresses to physical addresses. IPV6 has extra 
space, a 128-bit address, and many hoped that this extra space could be 
used to insert geolocation information and allow for better IP topology-
based geolocation. However, IP addresses are assigned based on the net
-work topology, not physical geography. In addition, IPV6 might make 
IP-based geolocation more dif˜cult because the larger address space may 
make it more dif˜cult to complete network traces used to determine 
location. Essentially, IPV6 has the same geotargeting capabilities as IPV4, 
where geotargeting using network tracing can be done in a metro area. 
(Law enforcement can obtain additional information on a geolocation of 
an IP address from a service provider with a subpoena.) 
Another method for geotargeting would be to incorporate alert and 
geographical information in an information source that a user already 
frequently monitors. For example, an alert could be sent to Facebook, 
which would then send the alert to all of its subscribers in Nebraska. 
This bounds delivery of alerts to speci˜c channels, and these platforms 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
have their own challenges in accurately geolocating their subscribers and 
geotargeting messages.
2 Alerting Over Streaming Video
Increasingly, Hisham Kassab noted, Internet-delivered services, such 
as Hulu Plus, Net˚ix, and YouTube, that stream video over the Internet 
are starting to be used in place of traditional broadcast and cable televi
-sion for which alerting systems already exist. There are a variety of ways 
to deliver and display alerts on Internet-connected devices like comput
-ers, tablets, or game consoles, including streaming video services and 
the applications that display them. With the right modi˜cations, these 
services can be used to receive and display geotargeted alerts delivered 
or triggered by the video stream and displayed by the application used 
to view the content.
There are four steps to streaming video, content creation (e.g., Warner 
Brothers ˜lms a television episode), content provision (e.g., Hulu licenses 
content and makes it available to its subscribers), content transmission 
(e.g., the viewer streams content over a Comcast broadband connection), 
and content presentation (an application running on a device displays 
the content). It obviously is not practical to insert alert information at the 
content creation step, but alerts could potentially be inserted at any of 
the other three steps, each with a differing capability to geotarget alerts:
˜˚
Content provider.
 Two possible mechanisms could be used to geo
-target at the content provider level: the billing address, as a proxy for 
location, or an IP address. Both of these have limited accuracy because a 
person may be accessing content away from their home, and IP address 
databases are not always accurate, as discussed in the previous section. 
˜˚
Content transmission. ISPs may be able to use their knowledge about 
network topography to determine the physical location of their users. 
˜˚
Content presentation
. End-user devices, most notably tablets and 
smart phones, often have some information on their location. An alert 
could be inserted into the video stream, and once the alert reaches the 
device, an application could use its location to determine if the informa
-tion is relevant. 
2  For discussion of the challenges of alerting over Facebook and other social media plat
-forms, see National Research Council, 
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social 
Media: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research Gaps, 
The National Academies 
Press, Washington, D.C., 2013.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 31MOBILE DEVICE LOCATION DETERMINATION CAPABILITIES
There are several ways in which a mobile user™s location might be 
determined. Farshid Alizadeh, Skyhook Wireless, Larry Dodds, TruePosi
-tion, and Ayman Naguib, Qualcomm, presented potential technologies for 
determining mobile device location.
Mobile Location Determination Using Wi-Fi Access Points
Traditionally, mobile device location has been established using two 
methods: GPS, which is fairly accurate but only works outside and takes 
signi˜cant time to obtain a location ˜x and cellular tower triangulation, 
which has comparatively poor accuracy but provides a faster location 
˜x. Skyhook incorporates a third source, Wi-Fi access point signals. The 
technology works by matching access point and cell tower signals to a 
proprietary location database. The technology has a median accuracy of 
20 to 40 meters and can return a location ˜x within a few seconds, and 
currently, Skyhook has almost 400 million access points in its database. 
 A unique challenge to using Wi-Fi access points is their dynamism. 
Wi-Fi access points are under varying people™s control and are dynamicŠ
being moved, being removed, and being added. To compensate for this, 
Skyhook relies on a huge redundancy in these access points. Additionally, 
the location database is updated frequently. For example, when a user 
sends a snapshot of surrounding access points to Skyhook servers, not 
only does the system return a location, but it also incorporates those data 
into the database to calibrate the location of the access points. 
Mobile Location Determination Using Television Broadcast Signals
TrueFix TV Positioning, developed by TruePosition, uses over-the-air 
(OTA) television broadcast signals to determine mobile device location. 
Similar to using Wi-Fi signal strength to determine location, these devices 
search for local broadcast signals and use the signal arrival times, which 
are directly proportional to the distance to the transmitter, to determine 
the location. A key bene˜t of this technology is that it can be used in 
indoor and urban environments where GPS signals are not able to pen
-etrate building structures. According to Dodds, about 95 percent of the 
U.S. population lives in areas where the OTA coverage is suf˜cient to 
determine position. However, to fully use OTA for mobile device locating, 
a television-band receiver would need to be added to handsets. 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
Mobile Location Determination Using Uplink Time Difference
UpLink Time Difference of Arrival (U-TDOA), also developed by 
TruePosition, uses the time of arrival of signals at multiple cellular towers. 
Measurements are made using devices that are 1,000 times more sensitive 
than traditional base stations and are located at or near cellular towers. 
Several measurements are sent to a central node that calculates the loca
-tion with fairly high accuracy, typically within a 50-m radius of the correct 
position. The technology is widely used today by cellular companies to 
provide E-911 services. 
Indoor Geolocation of Mobile Devices
Indoor geolocation is more dif˜cult because GPS and other signals 
used to determine location do not readily penetrate building structures, 
and because a signi˜cantly higher accuracy is needed indoors. Naguib 
noted that a 10-meter error while driving is barely noticeable, but it would 
be problematic for someone navigating through a building. 
Qualcomm is developing an indoor positioning technique that uses 
three additional data sources to determine indoor positioning:
˜˚
Wi-Fi measurements;
˜˚
Building maps, which provide additional information on what 
locations are viable (places the receiver could not be located, such as 
within a wall) and routing information (transitions that are impossible, 
such as crossing through walls); and
˜˚
Sensors on the phone such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, and 
compasses that can be used as an inertial navigation system by which a 
prediction is made based on relative motion of the device from its previ
-ous position. 
CURRENT AND FUTURE TECHNOLOGIES FOR 
GEOTARGETING ALERTS TO MOBILE DEVICES
As described in Chapter 1, WEA provides limited capabilities for geo
-targeting alerts to mobile users. New technologies and innovations may 
provide additional capabilities for alerting and more narrowly de˜ned 
geotargeting. George Percivall, Open Geospatial Consortium, discussed 
the use of Short Message Service (SMS) to report geotargeted informa
-tion; J.T. Johnson, Weather Decision Technologies, described a third-party 
application for geotargeted weather alerts; and John Davis, Sprint, dis
-cussed possible approaches to enhancing the geotargeting capabilities of 
WEA.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
 33Geotargeting of SMS
SMS is almost universally supported on mobile phones and widely 
used to send and receive text messages. George Percivall discussed the 
Open Geospatial Consortium™s (OGC™s) work to develop a standard, 
Open GeoSMS, for representing location information in SMS messages. 
The location can be displayed in a mapping tool or used to retrieve satel
-lite images or other information about the location. Open GeoSMS was 
used in the mobile phone app Find Me Maybe, which was developed and 
deployed for limited use during Hurricane Sandy in 2012. The tool also 
subscribed to the FEMA SMS alert service. 
Third-Party Application Capabilities
Using an application on a mobile device and location information 
from that device is another method for geotargeting alerts. One such 
application is iMap Weather Radio, which was developed by Weather 
Decision Technologies (WDT). iMap Weather Radio communicates NWS 
alerts to the public with the goal of providing some of the key features of 
NWR (e.g., always on and provides an alert tone that awakens users) on 
smartphones, which are much more widely deployed. J.T. Johnson noted 
that iMap Weather Radio offers the following features:
˜˚
Phone wakes up automatically with alerts;
˜˚
Alerts are for current location and for additional saved locations;
˜˚
Interactive maps provide radar view, alert polygons, and phone 
location; and
˜˚
Text and text-to-speech of alerts reaches drivers or those with 
visual impairments.
To improve accuracy and continuity, WDT uses triple redundant feeds 
from the NWS and clusters of redundant computers; the data center has 
an uptime of 99 percent. WDT has also begun working to incorporate 
CAP EAS into iMap Weather Radio by using the FM channel. WDT also 
works with local media so that an individual receiving an alert can then 
watch the local television news directly within the application, either as 
real-time content or prerecorded material.
Carrier Geotargeting of WEA
As discussed in Chapter 1, targeting methods used by carriers to 
deliver WEA vary. Geotargeting an alert to a small, de˜ned area is the 
ultimate goal in the alerting community. John Davis highlighted chal
-Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
lenges and opportunities for better geotargeting of mobile devices. These 
include the following:
˜˚
The current deployment of the long-term evolution (LTE)
3 standard 
may provide a partial solution. With LTE, cellular IDs, which are used to 
determine if a tower is within the alerted area, are assigned to individual 
antennas on each tower, rather than the tower as a whole. This may allow 
for tighter sectioning of geographical regions within the tower™s signal. 
˜˚
The use of GPS is a possibility for determining a mobile device™s 
location, but may pose a challenge if the GPS initiates a request to carrier 
networks to request location information. Davis noted that this may cre
-ate congestion in the network and cause its failure. Furthermore, Davis 
reiterated that GPS inside buildings or on subways is a challenge, and 
commercial needs will drive the development of tools to allow this. 
˜˚
Alerting systems may not need to do the geotargeting. A phone™s 
position may be determined by a combination of technologies, as described 
in previous sections, and then the phone can determine if an alert applies 
to its location. 
˜˚
Another challenge is that geotargeting capabilities vary across car
-riers and devices and are an area of extreme competition between carriers. 
This creates barriers to discussions across organizations. 
˜˚
The size of the message is probably the greatest hindrance. Davis 
explained that the biggest gain in encouraging appropriate public 
response, with the least impact on networks and devices, is the modest 
expansion of message information. An option to do this is to allow pagi
-nation of a messageŠthat is, a series of messages that together provide 
the full alert text.
3  Long-term evolution is often marketed as 4G LTE.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35
3Research Needs and 
Implementation Challenges
The following sections outline research opportunities and associated 
implementation challenges identi˜ed by attendees of the workshop. 
The opportunities and challenges compiled here by the commit
-tee from presentations and discussions at the workshop do not re˚ect a 
consensus of the committee or the workshop participants, nor are they 
intended to be a comprehensive list of research questions.
FACILITATING AND IMPROVING PUBLIC RESPONSE
While there are decades of research on public response to traditional 
alert and warning technologies, less is known about how the public may 
respond when new technologies are used for alerts and warnings. As 
noted in Chapter 1, much research is currently being done to answer 
several of the questions around public response, including the following:
˜˚
What are the opportunities for optimizing message content, struc
-ture, and alert delivery systems?
˜˚
To what extent could more precise geotargeted alerts and warnings 
reduce mortality, morbidity, human suffering, and other costs associated 
with disasters? 
˜˚
How can better communication of locations at risk and appropri
-ate protective actions for each location help reduce delay in recipients™ 
taking protective actions, for example, because less time is spent seeking 
additional or con˜rming information or milling?
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
˜˚
What are opt-out rates and causes? Would more tailored opt-out 
options reduce the opt-out rate? For example, would allowing people to 
opt in or out of speci˜c categories or sources of warnings help? If so, is 
there an optimal level of granularity for such selections? How can people 
be encouraged to opt back in? 
˜˚
For a given alerting system, what is the most effective repetition 
frequency for messages and the most effective update interval during an 
extended emergency?
 Does this depend on the nature of the hazard or 
message?
˜˚
How can one determine the effectiveness of the alerts or warnings 
issued during an event? Can the effectiveness of particular messages or 
systems be measured directly? If not, are there indirect indications that 
can be used to gauge effectiveness?
VALUE OF GEOTARGETED INFORMATION
Geotargeted information can be presented in several ways: for exam
-ple, text that includes a place name (e.g., city, county, or zip code), a map 
that clearly delineates the affected area, a map that shows the affected area 
and includes the location of the message recipient, or some combination 
of these. Open research questions regarding the display and presentation 
of geotargeted information include the following:
˜˚
How would using multiple approaches to communicate geotar
-geted alerts and warnings enhance personalization of risk and subsequent 
public protective action response? What combinations of text and maps 
would best motivate recipients to take protective action?
˜˚
Does the content of the messageŠfor example, the hazard being 
warned about or the protective action being urgedŠplay a role in which 
presentation method is best?
˜˚
Given that targeting and sending messages to recipients in unnec
-essarily large geographic areas can lead to frustration and opting out, 
what is the most effective size of geotargeting boundaries? 
˜˚
If maps are incorporated into alerts, what is the most effective 
method to represent, transmit, and display them? For example, should 
the maps be represented as raster or vector images? What image size and 
resolution are best? What level of compression is needed? Should mes
-sages contain the maps themselves or just links (e.g., URLs) to the maps? 
˜˚
How will map literacy in the general populace affect pub
-lic response? Will map literacy need to be incorporated into disaster 
education?
˜˚
What are the most effective design and visualization principles for 
geotargeted alerts? Which map symbols, scales, labels, and point of inter
-Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.RESEARCH NEEDS AND IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES
 37ests would be most effective? Should a standardized set of map symbols 
for displaying various disaster scenarios be developed? 
˜˚
What can be learned and applied to alerting tools by examining the 
use and innovations of mobile and location-based advertising?
˜˚
How can geotargeted messages be made more accessible, espe
-cially for individuals with disabilities?
DEVELOPING AND DEPLOYING TECHNOLOGY 
Communication technologies have greatly evolved in the past decade 
and will continue to evolve. While much of this innovation is driven by 
non-disaster response sectors, these technologies will inevitably shift how 
best to communicate with the public during disasters. Research gaps con
-cerning the use of new technologies include:
˜˚
How can new technologies developed by the private sector be 
adapted quickly and effectively for delivering geotargeted alerts and 
warnings? What is the role of the third-party developers (e.g., smartphone 
applications) in delivering geotargeted alerts and warnings? 
˜˚
What respective roles will special-purpose alert and warning sys
-tems (e.g., WEA or NWR) and general-purpose messaging systems (e.g., 
SMS or social media) play in delivering alerts and warnings to the public? 
What are the bene˜ts and challenges of each type of alert system? How 
do they complement each other?
˜˚
What legal, regulatory, technology standard, or other barriers stand 
in the way of rapidly deploying new technology for delivering alerts and 
warnings?
˜˚
How can the gap between what is understood about public 
response and the technology available for delivering alerts be closed?
˜˚
How do new technologies and public use of these technologies 
affect network traf˜c?
˜˚
What is the future role of sensors within an alerting system? 
˜˚
WEA is currently limited to text only. What additional technologies 
are needed to extend WEA to include either images or links to maps? 
˜˚
As recipients receive messages on their various computing and 
mobile devices, they may wish to forward those messages to others via 
text or email or to social media sites. Additionally, they may want to sim
-ply link to additional information. How can these capabilities be incor
-porated in alerting systems? What strategies and techniques can be used 
to decrease bandwidth requirements?
˜˚
How can existing systems and new technologies incorporate the 
needs of at-risk populations, including those with physical or mental 
disabilities?
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
RESPECTING PRIVACY AND MEETING SECURITY NEEDS
Concerns over privacy are prevalent in discussions surrounding the 
use of mobile devices and the use of geolocation information. 
˜˚
Users make privacy trade-offs frequently. They enjoy the use of a 
particular mobile application that may share their location information 
with others, often without explicit consent. If more explicit consent is 
needed for applications to share information, do users have the knowl
-edge to make this decision?
˜˚
How can alerting systems be designed up front to incorporate 
privacy and security concerns (versus trying to incorporate privacy and 
safety considerations after the system is designed, or worse, after it is 
deployed)?
˜˚
What is the likelihood that concerns about negative public relations 
or apprehensiveness regarding government regulation will discourage 
developers from incorporating geolocation information into emerging 
technologies? 
FACILITATING AND ENCOURAGING USE BY PRACTITIONERS 
Ultimately, practitioners at various levels of government decide how 
and when to send an alert. Clear guidelines may be required to encourage 
more and appropriate use of new systems. Additional questions include 
the following:
˜˚
What are possible incentives for emergency managers to experi
-ment with the use of new alerting systems and geotargeted alerts and 
warnings? What are the major constraints that limit adoption by local 
practitioners?
˜˚
What policy framework would help encourage the use of new 
technologies for alerting by practitioners?
˜˚
What are useful ways to involve more practitioners in technology 
and system design and decision-making processes?
 Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41
AWorkshop Agenda
FEBRUARY 21-22, 2013
 NATIONAL ACADEMIES KECK CENTER
 WASHINGTON, D.C.
Day 1: Public Response and Considerations 
for Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings
Past research has shown that speci˜c and clear information, includ
-ing which locations are and are not at risk, increases the likelihood that 
people take protective action. When alerts and warnings are delivered to 
broader populations than those actually affected by an event, the result 
may be that an alert or warning indicating more people than are actually 
at risk should take action. With new technological opportunities to more 
precisely target alerts and warnings come new questions about public 
response:
˜˚
What degree of geographical targeting is needed to make messages 
relevant? In what scenarios might greater precision be useful? 
˜˚
What is known about the consequences of too many messages 
(e.g., if the threshold for events which trigger alerts is set too low, if alerts 
cover too large a geographical area, if messages are repeated too often, 
or if there are too many false alarms)? Is there a threshold above which 
people will ignore messages or opt out from receiving them?
˜˚
What are potential drawbacks of better geotargeting capabilities, 
such potential for privacy protections?
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
8:30 am
 Welcome
  
Ellis Stanley, Chair, Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts 
  and Warnings
  
Dan Cotter, Geospatial Information Of˜cer, Department of 
  Homeland Security
  
Denis Gusty, Science and Technology Directorate, Department 
  of Homeland Security
9:00
 Overview of Past CSTB Alerts and Warning Work
  
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings on Mobile 
  Devices
  
Jeannette Sutton, Chair, Committee on Public Response to 
  Alerts and Warnings on Mobile Devices
  
Public Response to Alerts and Warnings Using Social 
  Media
  
Leslie Luke, Committee on Public Response to Alerts and 
  Warnings Using Social Media
9:45
 Value of Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings 
  Moderator: Dennis Mileti
  
What Role Does Geotargeted Information Play in 
   
Effectively Communicating Risks to At-Risk and Not-
At-Risk Populations?
 Tim Sellnow, University of Kentucky
   
What Are the Various Ways that Geotargeted Information 
   
Can Be Communicated to the Public? Under What 
Circumstances Might One Method Be Preferred Over 
Another?
 Michele Wood, California State University, Fullerton 
  
For What Hazards and Protective Actions Is Geotargeting 
  Most Needed?
 Brooke Liu, University of Maryland
   
How Do Present-Day Tools Constrain Emergency 
   
Managers? Are Some Deployed Capabilities Being 
Underused? 
 Ken Rudnicki, City of Fairfax, Virginia 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 4311:45
  Geotargeting Needs and Challenges for Particular 
Hazards
 Moderator: Ellis Stanley
 Wild˜re Events
 Thomas Cova, University of Utah
  Radiological/Nuclear Incident
  
Steven M. Becker, Old Dominion University College of Health 
  Sciences
 Transportation Systems
  
Peter LaPorte, Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority
12:45 pm
 Lunch
2:00
 Data Security and Privacy
  Moderator: Ming-Hsiang Tsou
 Mobile Device Privacy and Security Concerns
 Patrick McDaniel, Pennsylvania State
 University 
 Personal Privacy
 Marc Armstrong, University of Iowa
  
Methods for Preserving Privacy While Providing 
  Geotargeted Alerting
 Darrell Ernst, Private Consultant 
 Legal Questions Surrounding Location Information
 Kevin Pomfret, Centre for Spatial Law and Policy
3:30
 Location-Enabled TechnologiesŠPart 1
  Moderator: Shashi Shekhar
 Wireless Location Determination
 Larry Dodds, TruePosition
 Indoor Position Technologies
 Ayman Naguib, Qualcomm 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
4:30
 Day 1 Summary and Discussion
  
Ellis Stanley, Chair, Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts 
  and Warnings
  
Dennis Mileti, University of Colorado, Boulder; Committee 
  Member
Day 2: Technologies and Tools for More Precise 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings
Cell phones and other mobile devices can determine their position 
using cell tower triangulation, GPS, and nearby Wi-Fi sites and offer 
ample computing power and high-resolution displays to receive, process, 
and display alerts and warnings. Similarly, other computing devices such 
as laptops, desktops, and cable set top boxes can also establish their loca
-tion and with suitable software provide targeted alerts. 
˜˚
How can already-deployed and emerging technologies be used to 
deliver improved geographical targeting capabilities?
˜˚
What would be effective strategies for introducing more precise 
geographic information as systems are modernized and enhanced?
˜˚
What technical and operational standards are needed to facilitate 
the delivery of more precise alerts/warnings?
˜˚
How can commercial off-the-shelf technology and commercial ser
-vices be leveraged to deliver alerts and warnings?
8:30 am
   
Current and Future Vision for the Integrated Public  
Alert and Warning System 
 Moderator: Art Botterell
 Mike Gerber, National Weather Service 
  
Denis Gusty, S&T Directorate, Department of Homeland 
  Security
  
Wade Witmer, IPAWS Division, Federal Emergency 
  Management Agency
9:15
  Lessons from and Opportunities for Traditional 
Technologies for Geotargeted Alerts
 Moderator: Helena Mitchell
 Telephone Alerting
 Rick Wimberly, Galain Solutions 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 45 Radio Broadcast Technologies
 John Kean, NPR Labs 
 Weather Radio Technologies
 Bruce Thomas, Midland Radios (remotely)
 Cable Television Alerting
 Ron Boyer, Boyer Broadband
10:30
 Location-Enabled TechnologiesŠPart 2
 Moderator: Mani Chandy
 Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings in Streaming Video
 Hisham Kassab, MobiLaps 
 Geotargeting with Internet Protocols
  
Richard Barnes, BBN Technologies/Raytheon, IETF Geographic 
  Location Working Group 
11:45
  Current and Future Capabilities of Location-Enabled 
Mobile Devices
 Moderator: Ramesh Rao
 Geotargeting of SMS
 George Percivall, Open Geospatial Consortium
 Carrier Capabilities
 John Davis, Sprint 
 Third-Party Application Capabilities
 J.T. Johnson, Weather Decision Technologies
 Mobile Location Determination
 Farshid Alizadeh, Skyhook Wireless (remotely)
1:00 pm
  Wrap-Up Discussion
  
Ellis Stanley, Committee on Geotargeted Disaster Alerts and 
  Warnings
 Denis Gusty, Department of Homeland Security
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46
BBiosketches of Workshop Speakers
Farshid Alizadeh-Shabdiz, chief scientist for Skyhook, is responsible 
for the research and development of Skyhook™s positioning technology. 
Dr. Alizadeh-Shabdiz has almost 20 years of industrial experience in the 
design and implementation of satellite and wireless networks. Before join
-ing Skyhook, he was the head of the communications section of Advanced 
Solutions Group (part of Cross Country Automotive Services). There, 
he was responsible for the management, design, and implementation of 
an application server and media gateway. Dr. Alizadeh-Shabdiz was a 
member of the design and implementation team of the ˜rst three satel
-lite-based mobile networks at Hughes Network Systems: ICO, Thuraya, 
and Inmarsat high-speed data network. He proposed the ˜rst complete 
analytical model to carry out an analysis of single-hop and multihop 
ad hoc networks and 802.11 based on WLANs. Dr. Alizadeh-Shabdiz is 
on the faculty of Boston University and received his Ph.D. from George 
Washington University and his M.Sc. from Tehran University.
Marc P. Armstrong
 is a professor in the Department of Geography at Uni
-versity of Iowa. During the 2012-2013 academic year, he served as interim 
chair of the Department of Communication Studies and as interim chair 
of the Department of Cinema and Comparative Literature. Dr. Armstrong 
also holds a courtesy appointment in the Graduate Program in Applied 
Mathematical and Computational Sciences. He was named a College of 
Liberal Arts and Sciences (CLAS) collegiate fellow in 2005 and he served 
as interim associate dean for research in CLAS in 2006, as interim direc
-Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 47tor of Iowa™s School of Journalism and Mass Communication in 2007 
and 2008, and as interim director of the Division of World Languages, 
Literatures, and Culture in 2010-2011. Dr. Armstrong™s Ph.D. is from the 
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. A primary focus of his research 
is on the use of cyberinfrastructure to improve the performance of spa
-tial analysis methods. Other active areas of interest focus on the use of 
geospatial technologies by groups and geographic aspects of privacy. 
Dr. Armstrong has served as North American editor of the 
International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, served on the editorial boards of 
six journals, and has published more than 100 academic papers, including 
articles in a wide variety of peer-reviewed journals such as 
Annals of the 
Association of American Geographers, Photogrammetic Engineering and Remote Sensing, Geographical Analysis, Statistics and Medicine, Mathematical Geology, 
Computers and Geosciences, International Journal of Geographical Information 
Science, Parallel Computing, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems
, and 
Journal of the American Society for Information Science
. Richard Barnes
 is a researcher with BBN Technologies. He leads BBN™s 
Internet standards efforts in the areas of geolocation, presence, and emer
-gency services. He is chair of the IETF GEOPRIV working group, a former 
chair of the ECRIT working group, and was recently appointed to be the 
IETF area director for real-time applications and infrastructure.
Steven M. Becker
 is professor of community and environmental health 
in the College of Health Sciences at Old Dominion University. He is a 
leading international expert on community responses to unconventional 
disasters, public health preparedness and response, and risk communica
-tion and emergency messaging for chemical, biological, radiological, and 
nuclear issues. Dr. Becker served as a principal investigator (PI) in the 
Centers for Disease Control and PreventionŒAssociation of Schools of 
Public Health Pre-Event Message Development Project, one of the most 
extensive peer-reviewed studies ever conducted of people™s concerns 
and communication needs in situations involving unconventional health 
threats. More recently, he has served as PI for a multiyear Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) study of the communication and information 
challenges posed by radiological threats and incidents. In addition to his 
scholarly research, Dr. Becker has extensive ˜eld experience at the sites 
of major incidents around the world, including such cases as a major 
drinking-water contamination incident in Great Britain; the 1999 nuclear 
criticality accident in Tokaimura, Japan; and the 2001 foot-and-mouth 
disease outbreak in the United Kingdom. He has also done follow-up 
work in Ukraine and Belarus on the community impacts of the Chernobyl 
disaster. In 2011, Dr. Becker was a member of a three-person radiological 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
emergency assistance team invited to Japan in response to the earthquake-
tsunami disaster and the accident at Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear plant. 
While on the ground, the team carried out a rapid site assessment in 
affected areas, exchanged information with Japanese disaster response 
organizations, and provided training to more than 1,100 Japanese physi
-cians, nurses, and other healthcare providers and emergency responders. 
In 2005, Dr. Becker was elected to serve on the National Council on Radia
-tion Protection and Measurements, and his work on emergency manage
-ment and risk communication has been recognized by such scienti˜c 
organizations as the Health Physics Society and Oak Ridge Associated 
Universities. He has also been a visiting fellow at the Japan Emergency 
Medicine Foundation and National Hospital Tokyo Disaster Medical 
Center. For more than a decade, Dr. Becker has been an invited faculty 
member for Harvard School of Public Health™s course on radiological 
emergency planning. Early in 2012, he was named to the Thought Leader 
Advisory Council of the National Public Health Information Coalition. In 
September 2012, Dr. Becker was appointed by President Barack Obama to 
the U.S. Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board.
Ron Boyer
 serves the cable telecommunications industry, having spent 
more than 35 years as an engineer, working in both the manufactur
-ing and operations sides. He has experience in virtually all engineering 
aspects that the industry has to offer. Prior to starting his consulting ˜rm 
Boyer Broadband in 2011, Mr. Boyer worked for Time Warner Cable, 
the second-largest cable operator in the United States. He held various 
positions in their corporate management. At ˜rst as a senior staff engi
-neer, then as senior network engineer, and ˜nally more than 7 years as 
senior regulatory engineer in the legal department. This experience pro
-vided him a solid working understanding of both the technology utilized 
and regulatory environments involved in the day-to-day operations of 
a cable system. Before joining Time Warner Cable in 1997, Mr. Thomas 
also worked for ADC Broadband and Scienti˜c Atlanta (now a division 
of Cisco) for more than 11 years. This experience proved invaluable when 
working for Time Warner Cable; it provided a ˜rm understanding of 
how important the communications between the manufacturer and the 
user are when deploying advanced technologies. He has maintained an 
association with a diverse range of organizations, including the Society of 
Cable Telecommunications Engineers, California Public Utilities Commis
-sion, IEEE National Electrical Safety Code and National Electrical Code 
committees, and Communications Security, Reliability and Interoperabil
-ity Council (CSRIC). He has participated as a member or held various 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 49lead positions in the different working groups. Recent activities included 
participating in two CSRIC III Working Groups (2 and 9).
Dan Cotter
 is the director of the Information Applications Division of the 
First Responder Group (FRG) in the Science and Technology Directorate, 
DHS. Mr. Cotter is also the DHS geospatial information of˜cer and senior 
agency of˜cial for geospatial information. FRG identi˜es, validates, and 
facilitates the ful˜llment of ˜rst responder capability gaps through the 
use of existing and emerging technologies, knowledge products, and the 
acceleration of standards. FRG engages ˜rst responder working groups, 
teams, and other stakeholders to better understand the needs and require
-ments of the ˜rst responder communities. Prior to joining the FRG, Mr. 
Cotter served as the DHS chief technology of˜cer (CTO). As the DHS 
CTO, his responsibilities included overseeing programs for information 
sharing, enterprise architecture, enterprise data management, geospatial 
technologies, identity, credentialing and access management, as well as the 
Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN) and the DHS Common 
Operational Picture investments. Mr. Cotter served as the DHS geospa
-tial management of˜cer from 2005 to 2007. In fall 2005 he was deployed 
to the Katrina-Rita Joint Field Of˜ce, Baton Rouge, Louisiana, to serve 
as the Geospatial Intelligence Unit manager. Mr. Cotter™s private sector 
experience includes acting as the geospatial information technologies 
manger for a large engineering ˜rm, as the president of an airborne light 
detection and ranging (lidar) company, and as vice president of a ˚ood 
zone determination ˜rm. His prior public sector experience includes 12 
years with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) applying 
geospatial and remote sensing technology to natural hazard mitigation 
programs, including the National Flood Insurance Program, and disaster 
response, including Hurricane Andrew, the Northridge Earthquake, and 
the 1993 Midwest Floods. Mr. Cotter was elected as a fellow of the Ameri
-can Association for the Advancement of Science in 2005. He has received 
numerous awards, including the FEMA Director™s Distinguished Service 
Award, the National States Geographic Information Council Outstanding 
Service Award, the Transamerica Pyramid Award for Business Reengi
-neering, and the NASA National Resources Award for lidar commercial
-ization. Mr. Cotter holds an M.B.A. from Texas A&M University, an M.S. 
in geographic and cartographic sciences from George Mason University, 
a B.S. in hydrology from the University of Arizona, an A.A.S. in computer 
information systems from Northern Virginia Community College, and a 
Federal Chief Information Of˜cer Graduate Certi˜cate from the Univer
-sity of Maryland, University College.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
Thomas Cova
 is professor of geography and director of the Center for 
Natural and Technological Hazards at the University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City. He has a B.S. in computer science from the University of Oregon 
and an M.A. and Ph.D. in geography from the University of California, 
Santa Barbara. His research and teaching interests are environmental haz
-ards, transportation, and geographic information science with a particular 
focus on wild˜re evacuation modeling, analysis, and planning. He has 
published on a variety of topics in many leading hazards, transportation, 
and geographic information system (GIS) science journals and is most 
known for work on evacuation vulnerability and routing in ˜re-prone 
communities of the western United States. He has served as chair of the 
GIS Specialty Group of the Association of American Geographers (AAG) 
and as program chair for the International Conference of Geographic 
Information Science (GIScience ‚08) and currently chairs the AAG Haz
-ards, Risks, and Disasters Specialty Group. He teaches courses on hazards 
geography, emergency management, and GIS.
John Davis is the lead network design and development engineer at 
Sprint responsible for implementation of the Commercial Mobile Alert 
Service (CMAS) platform within the Carrier network. Sprint was an early 
adopter of CMAS, and Mr. Davis led the ˜rst large-scale test at the Carrier 
level with the County of San Diego. He has been with Sprint for 12 years 
helping to develop the wireless Internet since its genesis in addition to 
leading all CMAS initiatives. He is currently Sprint™s representative on the 
CSRIC III Working Group 2 committee.
Larry Dodds
 is currently the vice president of product line management 
and business development at TruePosition. In his current role, Mr. Dodds 
is responsible for all of TruePosition™s location solutions and forging new 
partner relationships. He has more than 20 year of experience in location, 
including star-based navigation for the U.S. Navy™s sea-launched ballistic 
missiles, the initial test program for the U.S. Air Force GPS receivers, and 
now various forms of location techniques for mobile devices. He has a 
bachelor™s degree in electrical engineering from Drexel University and a 
master™s degree in computer science from Northeastern University. 
Darrell Ernst
 is an advisor to the of˜ce in the Pentagon responsible for 
the development of the instrumentation systems used on U.S. test ranges 
for the testing of weapon systems. He advises the deputy director of the 
of˜ce on technical and regulatory issues on radio spectrum used at the 
test ranges. He advises on the implementation of C-band for telemetry 
and range spectrum encroachment. He led planning for investment in 
research and development of technologies for more ef˜cient use of the 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 51radio spectrum. He was a member of the U.S. delegation to the 2007 and 
2012 World Radiocommunication Conferences. He began his career in 
1961 as a telemetry technician in tracking aircraft operating on the Air 
Force Eastern Test Range. Mr. Ernst was involved in the test programs 
for Atlas, Titan, Polaris, Poseidon, Projects Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, the 
space shuttle, the Global Positioning System (GPS) user segment, and 
many other space programs. In 1998 his employer, the MITRE Corpora
-tion, asked him to work with the emergency management community to 
explore the possibility of using the technology he and others had invented 
for public warning. Working with various leaders in the emergency man
-agement community, he came up with the idea of convening a workshop 
to identify the requirements for a modern emergency warning system. 
He was at the 2001 annual meeting of the National Emergency Manage
-ment Association meeting in Montana on September 11 to announce the 
workshop, which was scheduled for that November. As a consequence 
of the events of that day, the workshop became a national referendum 
that resulted in the creation of the Partnership for Public Warning (PPW). 
MITRE assigned him to manage the PPW. One of the achievements of 
PPW was its sponsorship of Art Botterell™s Common Alerting Protocol 
(CAP) standard project that included an important national workshop on 
CAP at the National Emergency Training Center in Emmitsburg, Mary
-land. Mr. Ernst graduated from Auburn University with a bachelor of 
science degree in mathematics and graduated from Rensselaer Polytech
-nic Institute with a master™s degree in operations research and statistics. 
He retired from the U.S. Air Force in 1982. Mr. Ernst is a co-inventor of a 
concept for message distribution using spatial coordinates for addressing, 
thereby obviating the need to know the address or location of message 
recipients. The concept has been embodied in various prototypes such as 
the Tactical Automated Situation Receiver for the U.S. Army and a cell-
phone-based alerting system for a major telecommunications company. 
He is listed as an inventor on three patents issued to MITRE. 
Mike Gerber
 is the emerging dissemination technologies lead for the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration™s (NOAA™s) National 
Weather Service (NWS) in Silver Spring, Maryland. He joined the NWS in 
1992. Mr. Gerber is leading efforts to bring about the integration of NWS 
alert information across the widest possible range of warning systems 
and consumer electronic devices to better save lives, protect property, and 
enhance the national economy. Mr. Gerber brings a visionary perspective 
as the NWS representative on several cross-organizational teams working 
to improve the Wireless Emergency Alert (WEA) system. He also leads 
efforts within the NWS to improve mobile alerting through enhance
-ments to NWS alert generation tools and CAP. Mr. Gerber is a senior 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
fellow of the Council for Excellence in Government. He made signi˜cant 
contributions to the land and ˜re management community as a former 
˜re weather and incident meteorologist at the NWS Forecast Of˜ce in 
Boise, Idaho. Mr. Gerber spearheaded development of weather forecast 
guidance for hundreds of weather observation stations that improved 
prescribed ˜re planning and wild˜re prediction throughout the western 
United States. While working as a meteorologist at the NWS Forecast 
Of˜ce in Sterling, Virginia, Mr. Gerber co-anchored the PBS television 
show, 
AM Weather
. Mr. Gerber earned a bachelor™s degree in atmospheric 
science from the University of Arizona.
Denis Gusty
 serves as the program manager for the FRG™s Commercial 
Mobile Alert Service (CMAS) Research, Development, Testing, and Evalu
-ation (RDT&E) Program. CMAS RDT&E is responsible for improving 
CMAS™s capabilities, including geotargeting and how the public responds 
to wireless emergency alerts. In addition, Mr. Gusty leads FRG™s Emer
-gency Data Exchange Language Program, which focuses on improving 
messaging standards that help emergency responders manage incidents 
and exchange information in real time. Mr. Gusty came to DHS Science 
and Technology Directorate from the U.S. General Services Administra
-tion (GSA), where he served as director of GSA™s Of˜ce of Intergovern
-mental Solutions. Prior to joining GSA, Mr. Gusty served as a program 
manager at the U.S. Department of Labor. In this role, he was responsible 
for helping to implement the President™s Management Agenda by manag
-ing the e-government initiative, GovBene˜ts.gov. Mr. Gusty has 15 years 
of experience in developing intergovernmental partnerships and informa
-tion technology policy and practices. 
J.T. Johnson 
co-founded Weather Decision Technologies, a global weather 
information company helping businesses and individuals make decisions 
related to weather, in 2000 where he currently serves as the chief technol
-ogy of˜cer. Before joining Weather Decision Technologies, Mr. Johnson 
was a team leader at NOAA™s National Severe Storms Laboratory and 
a science and operations of˜cer at the Olympic Weather Support Of˜ce. 
He completed his B.S. and M.S. degrees in meteorology at the University 
of Oklahoma. 
Hisham Kassab
 is the founder and president of MobiLaps, LLC, a high-
tech company developing innovative technologies to power/enable/enhance next-generation alert dissemination channels, with a current 
emphasis on broadband alerts (including streaming media), CMAS/
WEA/Personal Localized Alerting Network, and social media alerting. 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 53Dr. Kassab has 20 years of experience in the information and commu
-nications technology (ICT) industry, with the last 5 focused on next-
generation alerting. He has been an active member of an advisory group 
to the Federal Communications Commission on next-generation alerting 
(CSRIC III-Working Group 2). Prior to MobiLaps, Dr. Kassab worked as a 
strategy and technology consultant with Booz Allen Hamilton (now Booz 
and Co.) focusing exclusively on ICT clients. He earned his B.S., M.S., 
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). He also holds an M.S. 
in operations research from MIT. His doctoral dissertation was in the area 
of wireless data networks.
John Kean, a senior technologist for NPR Labs, develops and super-vises the technical projects of NPR Labs, the only not-for-pro˜t broad
-cast engineering laboratory in the United States, which is involved in 
the development and evaluation of new technologies, procedures, and 
standards on behalf of public radio. Mr. Kean was a senior engineer at 
NPR from 1980 to 1986, where he supported new broadcast technologies 
and pioneered expansion of FM subcarrier services. He left NPR to join 
Jules Cohen and Associates and get his start in consulting engineering. 
From 1987 to 2000 he was a director of engineering for Moffet Larson and 
Johnson, Inc., consulting in the ˜elds of broadband wireless networks, 
TV and radio facilities, FCC regulations, and microwave and satellite 
systems. Before returning to NPR in 2004, Mr. Kean was director of wire
-less architecture for XO Communications, a broadband telecommunica
-tions company having extensive broadband wireless holdings. He is a 
member of IEEE and past president of the IEEE Broadcast Symposium, 
contributing author to The NAB Engineering Handbook,
 Editions 7, 8, and 9, 
and presenter of numerous papers in the ˜eld of radio systems engineer
-ing to the National Association of Broadcasters™ Engineering Conference, 
International Engineering Consortium, Wireless Communications Asso
-ciation, and has served as a delegate to the International Telecommunica
-tion Union plenary meetings in Geneva on behalf of the North American 
Broadcasters Association. He is past president of the Audio Engineering 
Society (Washington DC Section), co-chair of the National Radio Systems 
Committee™s AM Study Task Group, a recent member of the Consumer 
Electronics Association™s Audio Division Board, and has a patent pending 
for the prediction of coverage for U.S. in-band on-channel digital audio 
broadcasting. His recent work has focused on digital audio broadcasting, 
including digital audio codec performance, HD Radio® multicast devel
-opments, overall broadcast system performance, and the prediction of 
broadcast signal transmission and reception.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
Peter LaPorte
 currently serves as the director of the Of˜ce of Emer
-gency Management (OEM) of the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit 
Authority (WMATA). WMATA established its OEM within the Metro 
Transit Police Department in 2009 to institute an emergency management 
mindset and culture, and the OEM team has seen emergency management 
awareness and practices become more common at WMATA in the past 
3 years from the development of an emergency operations plan (EOP), 
continuity of operations plans, a terrorism incident annex to the EOP, rail 
station emergency response plans, and more.
Brooke Liu
 is an associate of communication at the University of Mary
-land and a research af˜liate with the National Consortium for the Study 
of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism (START). Dr. Liu™s research 
primarily examines how governments manage communication during 
crisis and noncrisis situations. Her research has been published in outlets 
such the 
Handbook of Crisis Communication
, 
Journal of Applied Communi
-cation Research
, Journal of Communication Management, Journal of Public 
Relations Research, 
and 
Natural Hazards Review
. She received her Ph.D. in 
mass communication from the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 
(2006), and M.A. in journalism from the University of Missouri, Columbia 
(2003). In recent years, Dr. Liu has served as a public affairs volunteer for 
the American Red Cross for the Arlington, Virginia, and Chicago, Illinois, 
chapters as well as a research consultant for national headquarters. As 
part of her work at START, she currently leads four DHS-funded projects 
focusing on effective risk communication and messaging. She also contin
-ues to provide research support as an independent consultant primarily to 
government agencies, most recently focusing on evaluating social media 
campaigns.
Leslie Luke
 is the group program manager for the County of San Diego™s 
Of˜ce of Emergency Services, where he oversees the Planning Branch, 
Info/Intel Branch, Recovery Branch, and Support Services. Mr. Luke is the 
recovery coordinator for the County of San Diego and has been the recov
-ery operational area lead for ˜ve federally declared disasters and numer
-ous state-declared disasters. He coordinates the Continuity of Community 
Programs and is a liaison with schools, including child care resource 
centers, the business sector (leads the ReadySanDiego Business Alliance), 
and faith-based initiatives. He oversees the of˜ce™s public awareness/
public education initiatives, special projects, and the student worker/
internship/volunteer program. Mr. Luke has worked for the County of 
San Diego for 22 years, in the Of˜ce of Emergency Services since 2004. 
Prior to that, he worked in the Public Safety Group, a division of the 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 55County™s Chief Administrative Of˜ce, and was an investigator for the 
County Medical Examiner™s Of˜ce.
Patrick McDaniel
 is a professor in the Computer Science and Engineering 
Department at the Pennsylvania State University and co-director of the 
Systems and Internet Infrastructure Security Laboratory. Dr. McDaniel™s 
research efforts centrally focus on network, telecommunications, and sys
-tems security, language-based security, and technical public policy. He is 
the editor-in-chief of the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) 
journal
 Transactions on Internet Technology
 and serves as associate editor 
of 
Transactions on Information and System Security
 and 
IEEE Transactions on 
Computers
, and he stepped down as associate editor of 
IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering
 in 2012. Dr. McDaniel was awarded the National 
Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award and has chaired several top 
conferences in security including, among others, the 2007 and 2008 Insti
-tute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Symposium on Security 
and Privacy and the 2005 USENIX Security Symposium. Prior to pursuing 
his Ph.D. in 1996 at the University of Michigan, he was a software archi
-tect and project manager in the telecommunications industry.
Ayman Naguib 
received a B.Sc. degree (with honors) and a M.S.EE degree 
in electrical engineering from Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, in 1987 and 
1990, respectively, and an M.S. degree in statistics and Ph.D. degree in 
electrical engineering from Stanford University in 1993 and 1996, respec
-tively. From 1996 to 2000, Dr. Naguib was a principal member of techni
-cal staff at AT&T Shannon Labs, where he, along with his colleagues at 
AT&T Labs, pioneered the ˜eld space-time coding. From September 2000 
to August 2002, he was with Morphics Technology, Inc. In October 2002, 
Dr. Naguib joined Qualcomm, Inc., where he is now a director of engi
-neering with Qualcomm Research, Silicon Valley, where he is currently 
leading indoor positioning and navigation research activities. His 1998 
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 
paper on space-time cod
-ing was selected by the IEEE Communication Society as one of the 50 fun-damental papers ever published by the society. His 2003 
IEEE JSAC paper 
won the best paper award. He has 40 U.S. patents, more than 90 pending 
patent applications, and more than 50 book chapter, conference, and 
journal publications. Dr. Naguib served as an associate editor for 
IEEE 
Transactions on Communications
 from 2002 to 2007 and as a guest editor to 
a number of IEEE transactions journals. In 2006, Dr. Naguib was named 
an IEEE fellow for his contributions to space-time coding and signal pro
-cessing and wireless communications. His current research interests are 
statistical learning, location determination, and indoor positioning.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
George Percivall
 is an accomplished leader in geospatial information 
systems and standards. As chief engineer of the Open Geospatial Con
-sortium (OGC), he is responsible for the OGC Interoperability Program 
and the OGC Compliance Program. His roles include articulating OGC 
standards as a coherent architecture, as well as addressing implications of 
technology and market trends on the OGC baseline. Prior to joining OGC, 
Mr. Percivall was chief engineer with Hughes Aircraft for NASA™s Earth 
Observing System Data and Information SystemŠLandsat/Terra release; 
principal engineer for NASA™s Digital Earth Of˜ce; and he represented 
NASA in OGC, International Organization for Standardization, and Com
-mittee on Earth Observation Satellites. He was director of the Global 
Science and Technology™s Geospatial Interoperability Group. Previously, 
he led developments in intelligent transportation systems with the U.S. 
Automated Highway Consortium and General Motors Systems Engineer-ing, including the EV1 program. He began his career with Hughes as a 
control system engineer on GOES/GMS satellites. He holds a B.S. in engi
-neering physics and an M.S. in electrical engineering from the University 
of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.
Kevin Pomfret
 is the executive director of the Centre for Spatial Law 
and Policy and the founder of GeoLaw, P.C. He is well known within the 
spatial technology community for his efforts to increase the dialogue on 
the legal and policy issues associated with spatial data. Mr. Pomfret has 
worked with and around spatial technology for more than 20 years. Prior 
to attending law school, Mr. Pomfret served as a satellite imagery analyst 
with the U.S. government. In that capacity, he developed an imagery col
-lection strategy to monitor critical arms control agreements and worked 
on requirements for future collection systems. In addition, he served 
as the special assistant to the U.S. government of˜cial responsible for 
developing the intelligence community™s satellite imagery collection and 
exploitation requirements. Upon entering private practice, Mr. Pomfret 
recognized that there were a number of unique legal issues associated 
with spatial data, including intellectual property rights, licensing, liabil
-ity, privacy, and national security. He regularly advises a variety of spa
-tial technology companies on such matters as licensing and distribution 
agreements, privacy policies, and spatial data audits. He also works as 
a consultant on developing a legal and policy framework for national 
spatial data infrastructures.
Ken Rudnicki
 has more than 35 years of experience in emergency man
-agement. Mr. Rudnicki began his career in emergency management in 
1977 while a member of the U.S. Air Force. After completing the Air Force 
Disaster Preparedness School, he was stationed in Fort Walton Beach, 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 57Florida, at Hurlburt Field where his of˜ce was awarded Best Disaster 
Preparedness Program in Tactical Air Command. Throughout his Air 
Force career he was stationed across the globe and has responded to a 
wide variety of disasters, including earthquakes in California, typhoons 
in the far east, and volcanoes in the Philippines. He was awarded two 
Humanitarian Service Medals, ˜ve Air Force Commendation Medals, 
and a Meritorious Service Medal during his 24-year career in disaster 
preparedness. Following his retirement from the Air Force, Mr. Rudnicki 
joined the Florida Division of Emergency Management where he worked 
as a planner for 4 years and the area coordinator for the Tampa Bay 
region for 6 years. During this time, he was involved in more than 20 
federal disaster declarations. While working for Florida, he was awarded 
three Distinguished Service Awards. As a member of the Florida Emer
-gency Preparedness Association, he helped develop regional response 
team procedures bringing local emergency managers to the assistance of 
impacted counties and the state. Mr. Rudnicki then moved into the private 
sector as a consultant working in Reston, Virginia, where he developed 
numerous domestic security exercises, developed state and local plans, 
and was selected by the Secretary of DHS to be part of the Nationwide 
Plan Review ordered by the President following Hurricane Katrina. In 
2006, Mr. Rudnicki accepted a job with the City of Fairfax, Virginia, as the 
emergency coordinator and has remained in this position to date. He has 
served on numerous committees throughout his career and now serves 
as the president of the Virginia Emergency Managers Association, and he 
is the International Association of Emergency Managers (IAEM) USA-
Region III secretary and treasurer. Mr. Rudnicki is a certi˜ed professional 
emergency manager with the states of Florida and Virginia and a certi˜ed 
emergency manager through the IAEM. 
Timothy L. Sellnow 
is a professor of communication at the University 
of Kentucky, where he teaches courses in risk and crisis communication. 
Dr. Sellnow™s research focuses on bioterrorism, pre-crisis planning, and 
communication strategies for crisis management and mitigation. He has 
conducted funded research for DHS, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. He has published 
numerous refereed journal articles on risk and crisis communication and 
has co-authored four books on risk and crisis communication. His most 
recent book is 
Risk Communication: A Message-Centered Approach.
 He is also past editor of the National Communication Association™s 
Journal of Applied 
Communication Research.
 Dr. Sellnow received his Ph.D. from Wayne State 
University in 1987.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
Jeannette Sutton
 is a senior research scientist in the Trauma Health and 
Hazards Center at the University of Colorado, Colorado Springs, where 
she specializes in disaster sociology with a primary focus on online 
informal communications in disaster, public alerts and warnings, and 
community resiliency. Much of her research investigates the evolving 
role of information and community technology, including social media 
and mobile devices, for disaster preparedness, response, and recovery. 
Dr. Sutton is the principal investigator (PI) on two NSF-funded projects, 
one on the use of Twitter for disaster communications and a second on the 
role of information access in relation to perceptions of collective ef˜cacy. 
She is also a co-investigator on the DHS-sponsored project Comprehen
-sive Testing of Imminent Threat Public Messages for Mobile Devices. 
Dr. Sutton holds a Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Colorado, 
Boulder, and completed her postdoctoral training at the Natural Hazards 
Center. She is also a special term appointee with the Center for Integrated 
Emergency Preparedness at Argonne National Laboratory. 
Bruce Thomas
 has served as chief meteorologist and national spokesper
-son for Midland Radio Corporation, Kansas City, Missouri, since 2004. 
Mr. Thomas has been recognized by the Department of Commerce with 
the Mark Trail Award for outstanding service promoting 
All Hazards 
NOAA Weather Radio
 across America. Prior to his work with Midland 
Radio, Mr. Thomas spent nearly two decades as a broadcast meteorologist 
in Tornado Alley, working with network af˜liate television stations in Col
-lege Station, Waco, Dallas/Fort Worth, and Kansas City. He is currently 
serving as president of the National Weather Association. He is also an 
active member of the American Meteorological Society where he holds the 
designation Certi˜ed Broadcast Meteorologist.  
Rick Wimberly
 is president of Galain Solutions, Inc., an independent 
consultancy with expertise in alerts and warnings, which serves clients at 
local, state, and federal levels as well as private industry. Galain™s clients 
include the FEMA Integrated Public Alert and Warning System (IPAWS) 
program. Mr. Wimberly has been involved in the alert and warning indus
-try for 15 years and in the public safety industry for nearly 25 years. He 
writes extensively on topics related to alerts and warnings, including a 
widely followed blog for Emergency Management
 magazine. A recent cover 
story article Mr. Wimberly wrote for 
Emergency Management
 magazine, 
ﬁDo Alert Noti˜cations Fail to Live Up to Expectations,ﬂ addressed com
-mon shortcomings of telephone-based alerting systems, including chal
-lenges with geotargeted messages.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 59Wade Witmer
 has been with the FEMA IPAWS Division since January 
2009. The IPAWS program is tasked with implementing the vision of 
Executive Order 13407 for the United States to have ﬁan effective, reli
-able, integrated, ˚exible, and comprehensive system to alert and warn 
the American people.ﬂ The IPAWS brings together the Emergency Alert 
System, the new CMAS, a feed for publishing alerts to Internet services, 
and integration with NWS™s All-Hazards Radio network. Using industry 
standard protocols, authorized public safety of˜cials can use IPAWS to 
send emergency alerts to citizens in their local area. Prior to joining the 
IPAWS Division at FEMA, Mr. Witmer was employed with the Defense 
Information Systems Agency for 9 years, serving across various pro
-grams as a communications systems engineer, program manager, and 
portfolio manager for Mobile Communications in the Presidential Com
-munications Upgrade Program. Just prior to joining FEMA, he served as 
the White House Communications Agency deputy director of enterprise 
architecture, strategic planning, and systems engineering. Mr. Witmer has 
more than 20 years of experience in government systems engineering and 
program acquisition management. He has a bachelor of science degree in 
electrical engineering from the Pennsylvania State University. 
Michele Wood 
is an assistant professor in the Health Science Department 
at the California State University, Fullerton, where she teaches courses 
in statistics and program design and evaluation. Dr. Wood has 20 years 
of experience designing, implementing, and evaluating interventions. 
Through her af˜liation with the Southern California Injury Prevention 
Center in the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) School of 
Public Health, she managed a national household preparedness survey 
conducted as part of the National Center for the START program through 
the University of Maryland™s Center of Excellence, as well as a Califor
-nia household telephone survey of earthquake preparedness. Dr. Wood
 received her Ph.D. in public health from the Department of Community 
Health Sciences at UCLA, and she also holds a master™s degree in com
-munity psychology.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60
CBiosketches of Committee Members
Ellis M. Stanley, Sr.
, 
Chair,
 is the former vice president, emergency man
-agement, disaster and mitigation at Dewberry, LLC, and has more than 32 
years of work experience in emergency management beginning as direc
-tor of emergency management for Brunswick County, North Carolina, 
in 1975. Mr. Stanley was selected as the ˜rst ˜re marshal for Brunswick 
County and served as ˜re and rescue commissioner and was very involved 
with hurricane planning and response as well as having developed one 
of the ˜rst ˜xed nuclear facility plans in the United States following 
Three Mile Island. Mr. Stanley was appointed in 1982 as the director of 
the Durham-Durham County Emergency Management Agency where he 
worked very closely with the world™s largest research park in the North 
Carolina Triangle area and was heavily involved with hazardous materi
-als planning. In 1987 Mr. Stanley was appointed by the Governor of Geor
-gia as the director of the Atlanta-Fulton County Emergency Management 
Agency. While in Atlanta, Mr. Stanley had extensive experience in major 
event planning (1988 Democratic National Convention (DNC), 1995 Man
-dela visit, and the 2006 International Olympic Games). He was appointed 
in 1997 as assistant city administrative of˜cer for the City of Los Angeles 
and then in 2000 as general manager of the Emergency Preparedness 
Department for the City of Los Angeles until his retirement in 2007.  Mr. 
Stanley joined Dewberry, LLC, in November 2007 as director of Western 
Emergency Management Services. In March 2008, he was selected to be 
the director of DNC planning for the City and County of Denver, Colo
-Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 61rado. He received his B.S. in political science from the University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill.
Art Botterell 
is a research scientist at Carnegie Mellon University™s Sili
-con Valley campus. His experience in emergency public information and 
public warning spans more than four decades, including service with 
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the California Emergency 
Management Agency, and local public safety and emergency manage
-ment agencies. Mr. Botterell has served as a consultant to the Depart
-ment of Homeland Security and other federal agencies, as well as in 
North America, Europe, Australia, and Asia, and with the United Nations 
Development Programme. He served as a member of the Federal Com
-munications Commission™s (FCC™s) Commercial Mobile Alerting Advi
-sory Committee and a variety of other government and scienti˜c panels, 
including an National Research Council committee. Mr. Botterell was a 
founding trustee of the nonpro˜t Partnership for Public Warning. He has 
also worked as a broadcast engineer, a journalist, and an online content 
producer. He originated and guided the development of the Common 
Alerting Protocol standard. 
K. Mani Chandy
 (NAE) is the Simon Ramo Professor at the California 
Institute of Technology (Caltech). Dr. Chandy has worked for Honeywell 
and IBM. From 1970 to 1989, he was in the Computer Science Depart
-ment of the University of Texas, Austin, serving as chair in 1978-1979 
and 1983-1985. He has served as a consultant to a number of companies, 
including IBM and AT&T Bell Labs. He has been at Caltech since 1987, 2 
years as a Sherman Fairchild Fellow and then as a professor in computer 
science. Dr. Chandy is a member of the National Academy of Engineer
-ing. He received the IEEE Koji Kobayashi Award for Computers and 
Communication in 1987, the A.A. Michelson Award from the Computer 
Measurement Group in 1985, and has numerous other awards. Software 
developed by Dr. Chandy and colleagues in the area of computer per
-formance modeling was marketed by Boole and Babbage, Inc. He was 
a co-founder of iSpheres in the area of event-driven architecture; that 
software is now marketed by Avaya. Dr. Chandy does research on sense-
and-respond systems. He has published three books and more than 100 
papers on distributed computing, veri˜cation of concurrent programs, 
parallel programming languages, and performance models of comput
-ing and communication systems. Dr. Chandy received his Ph.D. from 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in electrical engineering at 
the Operations Research Center in 1969. He received a master™s from the 
Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn, and a bachelor™s from the Indian Insti
-tute of Technology, Madras, in 1965.
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
Dennis S. Mileti
 is a recently retired professor and former chair of the 
Department of Sociology at the University of Colorado, Boulder, and 
director emeritus of the Natural Hazards Center. Dr. Mileti is author of 
more than 100 publications, most of which focus on the societal aspects of 
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery for hazards and disas
-ters. His book 
Disasters by Design
 (1999) involved more than 130 experts 
to assess knowledge, research, and policy needs for hazards in the United 
States. He has served on a variety of advisory boards and was co-founder 
and co-editor-in-chief of 
Natural Hazards Review,
 an interdisciplinary all-
hazards journal devoted to bringing together the natural and social sci
-ences, engineering, and the policy communities. Dr. Mileti received his 
Ph.D. in sociology from the University of Colorado, Boulder.
Helena Mitchell
 is the executive director of the Center for Advanced 
Communications Policy and principal research scientist at the Georgia 
Institute of Technology. In tandem, she is also the principal investiga
-tor (PI) for the Rehabilitation Engineering Research Center for Wireless 
Technologies, funded by the U.S. Department of Education since 2001 to 
promote equitable access to wireless technologies by people with disabili
-ties and the adoption of universal design in wireless devices. Dr. Mitchell 
was recruited to Georgia through the Georgia Research Alliance Eminent 
Scholar program that spans educational, community, and business envi
-ronments. Her areas of specialty include broadband and wireless com
-munications, educational technologies, regulatory and legislative policy, 
emergency/public safety communications, and universal service to vul
-nerable, rural, and inner-city populations. Dr. Mitchell has held positions 
in academia, business, and government, which contribute to her unique 
ability to see multiple perspectives. This expertise has enabled her to cre
-ate innovative interdisciplinary technology and educational programs, as 
well as utilize her unique skill for navigating new waters. Dr. Mitchell has 
held executive posts in Washington, D.C., with the federal government. At 
the FCC, she served as the associate chief, strategic communications, for 
the Of˜ce of Engineering and Technology to increase commission dialog 
with advanced technology companies. Earlier, as the chief of the Emer
-gency Broadcast System (EBS), her work resulted in major rulemakings 
that expanded EBS to include cable, satellite, and advanced communica
-tions systems and the adoption of the Emergency Alert System. As a result, 
her team was selected as the FCC Organization of the Year. Dr. Mitchell 
previously headed the telecommunications development programs for 
the National Telecommunications and Information Administration of the 
U.S. Department of Commerce, where she spearheaded executive branch 
policy initiatives to increase educational, broadcast, and nonbroadcast 
telecommunications ownership opportunities; advanced joint venture 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 63projects between the education and business sectors; worked on interna
-tional privatization activities; and was responsible for earmarking more 
than $50 million dollars in domestic and international grants and loans. 
In recognition of the success of her policy initiatives in telecommunica
-tions, she received the prestigious U.S. Department of Commerce Silver 
Medal. Dr. Mitchell received her Ph.D. in telecommunications policy from 
Syracuse University.
Ramesh R. Rao
 is the director of the University of California, San Diego 
(UCSD), division of the California Institute for Telecommunications and 
Information Technology (Calit2). In 2004, he was appointed the ˜rst 
holder of the Qualcomm Endowed Chair in Telecommunications and 
Information Technologies in the Department of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering of the Jacobs School of Engineering at UCSD, where he has 
been a faculty member since 1984. Prior to becoming the Calit2 UCSD 
division director in 2001, he served as the director of UCSD™s Center 
for Wireless Communications. In addition to directing Calit2, Dr. Rao 
is involved on a day-to-day basis with a wide variety of interdisciplin
-ary and collaborative research initiatives, leading several major projects 
at Calit2. He has been a lead investigator on dozens of major federal-, 
state-, foundation-, defense-, and industry-funded grants, including the 
National Institutes of Health-funded Wireless Internet Information Sys
-tem for Medical Response in Disasters Self-Scaling Systems for Mass 
Casualty Management, the Multimedia Telemedical Diagnostic System, 
the National Science Foundation (NSF)-funded Responding to Crises and 
Unexpected Events and ResponSphere projects, and multiple projects 
involving cognitive networking, as well as leading several international 
collaborations. He has authored more than 230 peer-reviewed technical 
papers on a wide range of research topics in wireless communications, 
including architectures, protocols, performance analysis of computer and 
communication networks, adaptive systems, energy-ef˜cient communi
-cations, disaster management applications, and health-related applica
-tions, among others. He is currently engaged in numerous projects to 
bridge emerging technologies with medicine and healthcare and investi
-gating the power of utilizing information technologies to enhance, even 
transform, healthcare resources, knowledge bases, and outcomes. Dr. Rao 
received his Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Maryland, 
College Park.
Shashi Shekhar
 is a McKnight Distinguished University Professor at the 
University of Minnesota (computer science faculty). For contributions to 
geographic information systems (GIS), spatial databases, and spatial data 
mining, he received the IEEE-Computer Society (CS) Technical Achieve
-Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64 GEOTARGETED ALERTS AND WARNINGS
ment Award and was elected an IEEE fellow as well as an American Asso
-ciation for the Advancement of Science fellow. He was also named a key 
difference-maker for the ˜eld of GIS by the most popular GIS textbook. He 
has a distinguished academic record that includes more than 260 refereed 
papers, a popular textbook 
Spatial Databases
 (2003), and an authoritative 
Encyclopedia of GIS
 (2008). Dr. Shekhar is serving as a member of the Com
-puting Community Consortium Council (2012-2015), a co-editor-in-chief 
of Geo-Informatica: An International Journal on Advances in Computer Sciences 
for GIS, a series editor for the Springer-Briefs on GIS, and as a program co-
chair for the International Conference on Geographic Information Science 
(2012). Earlier, Dr. Shekhar served on multiple National Research Coun
-cil committees, including Future Workforce for Geospatial Intelligence 
(2011), Mapping Sciences (2004-2009), and Priorities for GEOINT Research 
(2004-2005). He also served as a general co-chair for the Internaional Sym
-posium on Spatial and Temporal Databases (2011) and the Association for 
Computing Machinery Geographic Information Systems (1996). He also 
served on the board of directors of University Consortium on GIS (2003-
2004) and was on the editorial board of 
IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering
 and the IEEE-CS Computer Science and Engineer
-ing Practice Board. In early 1990s, Dr. Shekhar™s research developed core 
technologies behind in-vehicle navigation devices as well as web-based 
routing services, which revolutionized outdoor navigation in urban envi
-ronments in the last decade. His recent research results played a critical 
role in evacuation route planning for homeland security and received 
multiple recognitions including the Center for Transportation Studies 
Research Partnership Award for signi˜cant impact on transportation. He 
pioneered the research area of spatial data mining via pattern families 
(e.g., collocation, mixed-drove co-occurrence, cascade), keynote speeches, 
survey papers, and workshop organization. Dr. Shekhar received a Ph.D. 
degree in computer science from the University of California, Berkeley.
Ming-Hsiang (Ming) Tsou
 is a professor in the Department of Geogra
-phy, San Diego State University. He received a B.S. from National Taiwan 
University in 1991, an M.A. from the State University of New York at 
Buffalo in 1996, and a Ph.D. from the University of Colorado, Boulder, in 
2001, all in geography. His research interests are in mapping cyberspace 
and social media, Internet mapping, Web GIS applications, mobile GIS 
and wireless communication, and cyberinfrastructure with grid and cloud 
computing technology. He has applied his research interests in wild˜re 
mapping, environmental monitoring and management, habitat conserva
-tion, K-12 education, and homeland border security. He is co-author of 
the book 
Internet GIS
 and has served on the editorial boards of 
Annals 
of GIS
 (since 2008) and 
The Professional Geographer
 (since 2011). Dr. Tsou 
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 65was the chair of the Cartographic Specialty Group (2007-2008) and the 
chair of Cyberinfrastructure Specialty Group (2012-2013) in the Associa
-tion of American Geographers. Dr. Tsou served on the 2006 committee 
on ﬁResearch Priorities for the USGS Center of Excellence for Geospatial 
Information Science.ﬂ In 2007, he created and maintained an interactive 
Web-based mapping services for San Diego Wild˜res 2007. In 2010, Dr. 
Tsou served as the PI of a NSF-CDI-funded project, ﬁMapping ideas from 
Cyberspace to Realspace.ﬂ
Geotargeted Alerts and Warnings: Report of a Workshop on Current Knowledge and Research GapsCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.