DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18446Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?:Criteria for Decision-Making66 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38691-3 | DOI 10.17226/18446Committee on Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce: Criteriafor Future Decision-Making; Computer Science and Telecommunications Board;Division on Engineering and Physical Sciences; National Research CouncilProfessionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Committee on Professionalizing the Nation™s Cybersecurity Workforce: 
 Criteria for Future Decision-MakingComputer Science and Telecommunications Board
Division on Engineering and Physical SciencesProfessionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS
 500 Fifth Street, NW Washington, DC 20001
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the 
Govern
 
ing Board of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn 
from the councils of the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy 
of Engineering, and the Institute of Medicine. The members of the committee 
responsible for the report were chosen for their special competences and with 
regard for appropriate balance.
This project was supported by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security under 
Contract No. HSHQDC-11-D-00009, Task Order No. HSHQDC-12-J-00157. Any 
opinions, ˜ndings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this publication 
are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily re˚ect the view of the organiza
-tions or agencies that provided support for this project.
International Standard Book Number-13:
 978-0-309-29104-0
International Standard Book Number-10:
 0-309-29104-6
Additional copies of this workshop summary are available for sale from the 
 
National Academies Press, 500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; 
(800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313; 
http://www.nap.edu
. Copyright 2013 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonpro˜t, self-perpetuating 
society of distinguished scholars engaged in scienti˜c and engineering research, 
dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the 
general welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress 
in 1863, the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal govern
-ment on scienti˜c and technical matters. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone is president of the 
National Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the  charter of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstand
-ing engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its 
members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for 
advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also 
sponsors engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages 
education and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. 
Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The 
Institute of Medicine
 was established in 1970 by the National Academy of 
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions 
in the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The 
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences 
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon 
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. 
Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sci
-ences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with the 
Academy™s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal govern-ment. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Acad
-emy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National 
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing ser
-vices to the government, the public, and the scienti˜c and engineering communi-ties. The 
 
Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of 
Medicine. Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone and Dr. C. D. Mote, Jr., are chair and vice chair, 
respectively, of the National Research Council.
www.national-academies.org
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vCOMMITTEE ON PROFESSIONALIZING THE 
NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE: 
CRITERIA FOR FUTURE DECISION-MAKING
DIANA L. BURLEY, George Washington University, 
Co-Chair
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology, 
Co-Chair
MATT BISHOP, University of California, Davis
MISCHEL L. KWON, Mischel Kwon and Associates, LLC
KEVIN R. MURPHY, Colorado State University
PHILIP M. NECHES, Foundation Ventures, LLC.
CHARLES ﬁCASEYﬂ O™BRIEN, National CyberWatch Center, 
 Prince George™s Community College
RONALD P. SANDERS, Booz Allen Hamilton
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director, Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board 
ENITA A. WILLIAMS, Associate Program Of˜cer (through April 2013)
SHENAE BRADLEY
, Senior Program Assistant
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vi
COMPUTER SCIENCE AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS BOARD
ROBERT F. SPROULL, Oracle (retired), 
Chair 
LUIZ ANDRÉ BARROSO, Google, Inc.
ROBERT BRAMMER, Brammer Technology, LLC
EDWARD FRANK, Apple, Inc.
JACK L. GOLDSMITH III, Harvard Law School
SEYMOUR E. GOODMAN, Georgia Institute of Technology 
LAURA M. HAAS, IBM Amalden Research Laboratory
ROBERT HOROWITZ, Stanford University
MICHAEL KEARNS, University of Pennsylvania
ROBERT KRAUT, Carnegie Mellon University 
SUSAN LANDAU, Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study 
PETER LEE, Microsoft Corporation
DAVID E. LIDDLE, U.S. Venture Partners 
BARBARA LISKOV, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
JOHN STANKOVIC, University of Virginia
JOHN A. SWAINSON, Dell, Inc.
PETER SZOLOVITS, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
ERNEST J. WILSON, University of Southern California
KATHERINE YELICK, University of California, Berkeley
Staff
JON EISENBERG, Director 
VIRGINIA BACON TALATI, Program Of˜cer
SHENAE BRADLEY, Senior Program Assistant
RENEE HAWKINS, Financial and Administrative Manager 
HERBERT S. LIN, Chief Scientist
LYNETTE I. MILLETT, Associate Director 
ERIC WHITAKER, Senior Program Assistant
For more information on CSTB, see its website at 
 http://www.cstb.org; write to CSTB, National Research Council, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20001; call (202) 334-2605; or 
e-mail CSTB at 
cstb@nas.edu
.Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii
The federal National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) 
aims to ﬁenhance the overall cybersecurity posture of the United States by 
accelerating the availability of educational and training resources designed 
to improve the cyber behavior, skills, and knowledge of every segment of 
the population.ﬂ
1 One of the issues being considered as part of NICE is 
the role of professionalization in enhancing the cybersecurity workforce. 
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), one of the agencies 
carrying out activities under NICE, lists three questions regarding the role 
of professionalization on the National Initiative for Cyber
 
security Careers 
and Studies webpage on cybersecurity professionalization:































2That page goes on to describe the present study, sponsored by DHS, 
on professionalization. Box P.1 provides the full statement of task. To carry 
out the study, the Committee on Professionalizing the Nation™s Cyber
-1  U.S. Department of Homeland Security, National Initiative for Cybersecurity Careers 
and Studies (NICCS), About the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, available 
at http://niccs.us-cert.gov/footer/about-nice.
2  U.S. Department of Homeland Security, National Initiative for Cybersecurity 
 Careers and 
Studies, Professionalization, available at http://niccs.us-cert.gov/careers/professionalization.
Preface
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii PREFACE
security Workforce: Criteria for Future Decision-Making was convened 
under the auspices of the Computer Science and Telecommunications 
Board of the National Research Council (Appendix A).
The statement of task speaks broadly about a range of matters to 
be considered or examined. With one exception noted below, the com
-mittee did explore all of these points. Consistent with discussions with 
DHS before and during the study as well as with the time and resources 
available for the study, the committee took as its central task to do what 
is called for in the ˜nal sentence of the statement of taskŠto prepare a 
report that would
Characterize the current landscape for cybersecurity workforce develop
-ment and set forth criteria that the federal agencies participating in the 
National Initiative for Cybersecurity EducationŠas well as organiza
-tions that employ cybersecurity workersŠcould use to identify which 
specialty areas may require professionalization and to evaluate different 
approaches and tools for professionalization. 
BOX P.1 
 Statement of Task
An ad hoc committee will conduct a study that would consider approaches 
to increasing the professionalization of the nation™s cybersecurity workforce. It 
would examine workforce requirements for cybersecurity and the segments and 
job functions in which professionalization is most needed; the role of assess-
ment tools, certi˜cation, licensing, and other means for assessing and enhanc-
ing professionalization; and emerging approaches, such as performance
-based measures. It would also examine requirements for the federal (military and 
civilian) workforce, the private sector, and state and local government.
Three public workshops would be held in the course of the study as the 
principal data-gathering events to obtain input on the foregoing issues from 
education and training institutions and public and private sector employers 
of cybersecurity workers. The committee will develop the respective agendas, 
select and invite speakers and discussants, and moderate the discussions. Sub
-sequently, the committee will prepare a report, drawing on the workshops. The 
report would characterize the current landscape for cybersecurity workforce 
development and set forth criteria that the federal agencies participating in the 
National Initiative for Cybersecurity EducationŠas well as organizations that 
employ cybersecurity workersŠcould use to identify which specialty areas may 
require professionalization and to evaluate different approaches and tools for 
professionalization.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.PREFACE
 ixIn developing this report, the committee identi˜ed three essential 
elementsŠ(1) understanding the context for cybersecurity workforce 
development; (2) considering the relative advantages, disadvantages, 
and approaches to professionalizing the nation™s cybersecurity work
-force; and (3) setting forth criteria that can be used to identify which, if 
any, specialty areas may require professionalizationŠand set forth crite
-ria for evaluating different approaches and tools for professionalization. 
As called for in the statement of task, the committee considered these in 
the context of the national cybersecurity workforceŠand, in particular, 
not just with respect to the federal government workforce. One issue 
that is listed in the statement of task but is not addressed in this report 
is the question of approaches to performance assessment. The reason for 
this omission is simple: the committee did not hear about this point at 
the workshops it convened. The committee believes that this issue will 
merit more attention in the future as professionalization measures are 
implemented and re˜ned. 
The principal input to this study came from a series of three work
-shops convened by the study committee and held in Washington, D.C., 
San Francisco, California (coinciding with and partly co-located with the 
RSA Conference), and San Antonio, Texas. An additional data-gathering 
meeting with approximately 25 attendees was held at the Cybercorps 
Scholarship for Service principal investigators™ meeting on January 10, 
2013, in Arlington, Virginia. Agendas for the three workshops organized 
by the committee are provided in Appendix B. Speakers at the workshops 
came from organizations associated with the education and development 
of cybersecurity workers (community colleges, colleges, and universities; 
organizations that provide certi˜cates and certi˜cations, and professional 
associations); organizations that employ cybersecurity workers (federal, 
state, and local government and a wide array of private sector ˜rms). 
Speakers also included students and a diverse set of people who hold 
cybersecurity jobs or whose positions signi˜cantly involve cybersecurity. 
Within the federal government, speakers came from civilian, law enforce
-ment, defense, and intelligence agencies. Speakers from private ˜rms 
included individuals from the information technology, cybersecurity, 
entertainment, banking and ˜nance, and manufacturing sectors. Lists of 
speakers and participants in the three workshops are provided in Appen
-dix C. A principal focus of the workshops and other interactions was to 
understand how organizations think about cybersecurity jobs and the role 
of professionalization. In the course of these presentations and discus
-sions, the committee heard almost every imaginable point of view, and 
many points were both corroborated and contradicted by other speakers. 
During the course of the study, the committee also reviewed reports 
related to the cybersecurity workforce in general and to its profession
-Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x PREFACE
alization in particular. These reports provide a variety of perspectives 
on the need, demand, and supply for cybersecurity workers, the sorts 
of skills required, and ways of improving the capacity and capability of 
the workforce. Some of these reports focused on the federal government 
workforce, while others looked at the workforce more broadly. Some are 
independent analysis, and others were prepared by groups with a par
-ticular interest in some aspect of workforce issues. 
Chapters 1 and 2 provide context regarding the cybersecurity chal
-lenge, the role of the cybersecurity workforce in addressing this challenge, 
and the role that professionalization might play. Chapter 3 provides the 
committee™s analysis and its conclusions and recommendation. 
We would like to thank the Department of Homeland Security for 
sponsoring this study and acknowledge in particular the assistance of 
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, branch chief, Cybersecurity Education and 
Awareness, U.S. Department of Homeland Security. We would also like 
to acknowledge the contributions made by the speakers and participants 
at the three workshops organized by the committee. 
Diana Burley and Seymour Goodman, 
Co-Chairs
Committee on Professionalizing the 
 Nation™s Cybersecurity Workforce: 
 Criteria for Future Decision-Making
 Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen 
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise, in accordance with 
procedures approved by the National Research Council™s Report Review 
Committee. The purpose of this independent review is to provide candid 
and critical comments that will assist the institution in making its pub
-lished report as sound as possible and to ensure that the report meets 
institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and responsiveness to 
the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript remain 
con˜dential to protect the integrity of the deliberative process. We wish 
to thank the following individuals for their review of this report:
Byron Collie, Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.,
Stephen Cooper, Stanford University,
Paul E. Gray, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cynthia Irvine, Naval Postgraduate School,
John D. Johnson, Deere & Company,
Anita Jones, University of Virginia,
Susan Landau, privacyink.org,
Fred Oswald, Rice University,
Michael Papay, Northrup Grumman Corporation,
Franklin S. Reeder, Reeder Group, Inc., and
Eugene Spafford, Purdue University.
Acknowledgment of Reviewers
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xii ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF REVIEWERSAlthough the reviewers listed above have provided many construc
-tive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the con
-clusions or recommendations, nor did they see the ˜nal draft of the report 
before its release. The review of this report was overseen by R. Stephen 
Berry, University of Chicago (emeritus). Appointed by the National 
Research Council, he was responsible for making certain that an inde
-pendent examination of this report was carried out in accordance with 
institutional procedures and that all review comments were carefully 
considered. Responsibility for the ˜nal content of this report rests entirely 
with the authoring committee and the institution.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 11  
CYBERSECURITY, THE CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE, 
 5 AND ITS DEVELOPMENT AND PROFESSIONALIZATION
 Cybersecurity, 5
 Need, Demand, and Supply, 7
 Roles, Responsibilities, and Contexts for Cybersecurity Work, 9
 Factors Affecting Future Cybersecurity Workforce Needs, 12
2 APPROACHES TO PROFESSIONALIZATION
 14
 Profession, 14
 Professionalization, 15
 Goals for Professionalization, 16
  
Speci˜c Mechanisms for Professionalization and How They 
 Affect Workforce Capacity and Capability, 17
 Timescales for Professionalization, 20
 Trade-offs Associated with Professionalization, 20
3  
CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATION, AND CRITERIA 
 23
 FOR PROFESSIONALIZATION OF CYBERSECURITY
 Capacity and Capability of the Cybersecurity Workforce, 23
 Cybersecurity Work and the Cybersecurity Workforce, 24
 Professionalization, 26
 Criteria, 28
Contents
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv CONTENTSAPPENDIXES
A Biographies of Committee Members
 33
B Workshop Agendas
 39
C  
Speakers and Participants at Workshops Organized by the 
 47 
Committee
 Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1The nation™s cybersecurity challenge stems from threats from a wide 
array of actors who seek to compromise the con˜dentiality, integrity, and 
availability of elements of cyberspace by exploiting ˚aws in the design, 
implementation, con˜guration, and operation of information technology 
systems. This cybersecurity threat faces individuals, organizations of all 
sizes, and government at all levels. 
The effort to establish a safer and more secure cyberspace will require 
improvements in many areas, including a cybersecurity workforce that 
has the capacity and capability to do the job; better tools and techniques 
that enhance the ef˜ciency and effectiveness of cybersecurity workers; 
better tools and approaches for risk identi˜cation and assessment; better 
systems design and development; greater incentives to encourage the 
deployment of better cybersecurity technologies and practices; improve
-ments in end-user behavior through training; and organizational, national, 
and international measures to deter bad actors. 
This report considers the role that professionalization might play 
in ensuring that the United States has a cybersecurity workforce with 
enough cybersecurity workers (capacity) with the right knowledge, skills, 
and abilities (capability). The committee understood its principal tasks to 
be (1) to consider the role that professionalization could play in enhancing 
the capacity and capability of the national cybersecurity workforce and 
(2) to identify criteria that could be used by decision-makers in govern
-ment and the private sector when considering measures to professionalize 
the cybersecurity workforce. 
Executive Summary
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
In brief, the committee found that although the occupations compris
-ing the ˜eld of cybersecurity do require specialized knowledge and some 
form of intensive advanced training, they have not yet suf˜ciently crys
-tallized into speci˜c professions. Cybersecurity is a young ˜eld, and the 
technologies, threats, and actions taken to counter the threats that charac
-terize the endeavor are changing too rapidly to risk imposing the rigidi
-ties that typically attend professional status. Some organizations may ˜nd 
that professionalization provides a useful degree of ﬁquality controlﬂ for 
those who work in the ˜eld, but professionalization also imposes barriers 
to those who wish to enter the ˜eld at a time when demand for cyber
-security workers exceeds supply. 
CAPACITY AND CAPABILITY OF THE 
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE
Conclusion 1. 
More attention to both the capacity and capability of the 
U.S. cybersecurity workforce is needed. 
Conclusion 2. 
Although the need for cybersecurity workers is likely to 
continue to be high, it is dif˜cult to forecast with certainty the number 
of workers required or the needed mix of cybersecurity knowledge and 
skills. 
CYBERSECURITY WORK AND THE 
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE
Conclusion 3. 
The cybersecurity workforce encompasses a variety of con
-texts, roles, and occupations and is too broad and diverse to be treated 
as a single occupation or profession. Whether and how to professionalize 
will vary according to role and context.
Conclusion 4. 
Because cybersecurity is not solely a technical endeavor, 
a wide range of backgrounds and skills will be needed in an effective 
national cybersecurity workforce.
PROFESSIONALIZATION
Conclusion 5. 
Professionalization has multiple goals and can occur 
through multiple mechanisms.
Conclusion 6. 
The path toward professionalization of a ˜eld can be slow 
and dif˜cult, and not all portions of a ˜eld can or should be professional
-ized at the same time. 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
 3CRITERIA FOR DECISION-MAKING 
ABOUT PROFESSIONALIZATION
Conclusion 7. 
Professionalization has associated costs and bene˜ts that 
should be weighed when making decisions to undertake professionaliza
-tion activities.
Professionalization is not a proxy for ﬁbetter,ﬂ but it may be a useful 
tool in certain circumstances. The following criteria are suggested to help 
identify cybersecurity specialties and circumstances where professional
-ization may be appropriate and to assess the potential effects of different 
professionalization mechanisms: 

Do the bene˜ts of a given professionalization measure outweigh the poten
-tial supply restrictions resulting from the additional barriers to entry? 

Does the potential to provide additional information about a candidate 
outweigh the risks of false certainty about who is actually best suited for a job?

Do the bene˜ts of establishing the standards needed for professionalization 
outweigh the risks of obsolescence (when the knowledge or skills associated with 
the standard are out-of-date by the time a standard is agreed on) and ossi˜cation 
(when the establishment of a standard inhibits further development by workers 
of their skills and knowledge)?
Recommendation. Activities by the federal government and other 
entities to professionalize a cybersecurity occupation should be 
undertaken only when that occupation has well-de˜ned and stable 
characteristics, when there are observed de˜ciencies in the occupa
-tional workforce that professionalization could help remedy, and 
when the bene˜ts outweigh the costs. 
Cybersecurity is a broad ˜eld, and professionalization is something 
that can be undertaken for speci˜c occupations within the ˜eld and not 
the ˜eld as a whole. Before professionalization activities are undertaken 
for an occupation, two high-level criteria should be met:
1.
 The occupation has well-de˜ned characteristics.
 These include stable 
knowledge and skill requirements, stable roles and responsibilities and 
occupational boundaries that distinguish the profession from others, well-
de˜ned career ladders that provide links to professionalization mecha
-nisms, and agreed-on ethical standards to which members of the profes
-sion will be held.
2.
 There is credible evidence of de˜ciencies in the occupational workforce, 
such as skill de˜ciencies, questions of legitimacy among the current set 
of practitioners, or concerns about accountability.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
The criteria in Conclusion 7 speak to the trade-offs that should be 
considered by those seeking to professionalize those who work in the 
˜eld of cybersecurityŠincluding the U.S. government, other U.S. public 
and private employers, educational institutions, certi˜cation bodies, and 
so forth. 
These trade-offs illustrate the complex set of costs and bene˜ts asso
-ciated with professionalization. Some of the uncertainties may 
 diminish 
over time, and long-term bene˜ts may ultimately outweigh short-term 
costs. It may thus be an effective strategy to encourage, rather than 
require, the use of certain professionalization mechanisms so as to avoid 
overly restricting supply in the short term while still establishing a long-
term path to enhancing quality. 
Over time, parts of the cybersecurity ˜eld will likely reach the point 
where professionalization will be warranted. The criteria set forth under 
the Recommendation can be used by decision makers to judge when that 
time has come.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51Cybersecurity, the Cybersecurity 
Workforce, and Its Development 
and Professionalization
CYBERSECURITY
Cyberspace comprises myriad interconnected computers, cyber-
 physical systems, and telecommunications networksŠincluding the 
 
Internet and the systems attached to itŠthat have become integral to our 
economy, society, and national security. These include servers, 
 routers, 
and other infrastructure; desktops, laptops, and mobile computing 
devices; and the many other devices that incorporate computing and 
networking functionality. Cybersecurity involves the articulation and 
enforcement of security 
 policies for information and communications 
systems and the implementation of associated technical solutions, mecha-nisms, and programs. These policies protect various desirable attributes 
of a systemŠfor example, con˜dentiality, possession or control, integrity, 
authenticity, availability, and 
 utility.
1 Privacy is closely associated with 
security; for example, con˜dentiality is required to protect information 
from unwanted disclosure. Cybersecurity is also required for safety when 
misuse of information and communications systems has the potential to 
cause harm.
The nation™s cybersecurity challenge stems from actions taken by 
a wide array of actorsŠincluding individuals, insiders, criminal orga
-nizations, transnational nonstate actors, and nation-statesŠto compro
-mise computing and communications systems and the organizations 
1  This particular framework comes from D.B. Parker, 
Fighting Computer Crime, 
John Wiley 
& Sons, New York, N.Y., 1998.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
that depend on these systems. Indeed, the whole ˜eld of cybersecurity 
would not exist without these adversaries.
2 This cybersecurity threat 
faces individuals, organizations of all sizes, and government at all levels. 
The overall sense is that the threat is evolving and growing.
3 Because 
attackers target organizations and individuals as well as machines and 
networks, protecting cyberspace also means ensuring that the compo
-nents are securely operated, and thus cybersecurity involves human and 
behavioral factors. 
Although many of the fundamental cybersecurity challenges have 
endured over time, the underlying information and communications tech
-nologies and their applications continue to change rapidly. For example, 
recent years have seen the rapid adoption of smart phones and tablets by 
consumers and employers and the associated phenomenon of ﬁbring your 
own device,ﬂ which has rapidly infused mobile devices into the work
-place. Both developments have provided organizations with new capa
-bilities that introduce at the same time new cybersecurity risks. Cyber
-security threats also continue to evolve as the interests of active human 
adversaries change, as their capabilities grow, and as the techniques they 
employ change. The response to the cybersecurity threat has also shifted 
from one that was entirely, or at least primarily, defensive in nature to 
one that also includes more active activities, even as defensive activities 
continue to dominate. In the national security arena, the United States has 
made public its plans to strengthen its offensive cyber operations capabili
-ties and workforce. 
Although the prevailing sense is that the state of the nation™s cyber
-security is not getting better (and indeed many argue that it is getting 
worse), it is actually dif˜cult to measure how ﬁcyber secureﬂ a system, 
organization, or nation may be.
4 Consider, for example, that the security 
of a system generally re˚ects not only how well that system was con
-structed, but also how it is con˜gured, the organizational policies and 
practices that govern its operation, the degree to which organizational 
members follow these policies, and the capabilities and interests of poten
-tial adversaries.
5 Moreover, organizations have different de˜nitions of 
security (i.e., different security policies), so a system that is ﬁsecureﬂ for 
2  Although dependability and other trustworthiness issues would remain.
3  See, e.g., National Research Council, 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace,
 The 
National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2007. The following provides a similar assess
-ment of the situation facing the federal government: see U.S. Government Accountability 
Of˜ce, 
Cybersecurity: National Strategy, Roles, and Responsibilities Need to Be Better De˜ned and 
More Effectively Implemented,
 GAO-13-187, Washington, D.C., February 2013.
4  See, e.g., National Research Council, 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace,
 2007, 
pp. 2 and 133.
5  National Research Council, 
Toward a Safer and More Secure Cyberspace,
 2007, pp. 133-135.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE™S DEVELOPMENT AND PROFESSIONALIZATION
 7one use or one organization may not be secure for other uses or organi
-zations. All of this makes it challenging to accurately assess workforce 
requirements, make workforce investment decisions, or measure the con
-tributions or performance of the cybersecurity workforce. 
The effort to establish a safer and more secure cyberspace will require 
improvements in many areas, including a cybersecurity workforce that 

has the capacity and capability to do the job; better tools and techniques 

that enhance the ef˜ciency and effectiveness of cybersecurity workers; 

better tools and approaches for risk identi˜cation and assessment; better 

systems design; better systems-development practices; greater incentives 

to encourage the deployment of better cybersecurity technologies and 

practices; better practices and techniques for dealing with the supply 

chain for components and services; improvements in end-user behav
-ior through training; and organizational, industry, national, and interna
-tional measures to deter bad actors. This report focuses on one of these 

areas: building a cybersecurity workforce with enough cybersecurity 

workers of the right types (capacity) with the right knowledge, skills, 

and abilities (capability) and the improvements that might come from 

professionalization. 
NEED, 
DEMA
ND, A
ND SUPPLY
The size of the cybersecurity workforce is dif˜cult to measure because 
it spans many job roles that often have different and overlapping titles 

in different organizations. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimated 

employment at 72,670* in 2010 for the occupation ﬁinformation security 

analysts,ﬂ
6 
a category that does not encompass all cybersecurity work
-ers. An indication of the scale of that workforce segment in the federal 

government was provided by the size of the target population for a recent 

workforce survey by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and 

the Federal Chief Information Of˜cer Council that was sent to more than 

200,000 federal civilian employees from 82 agencies.
7 Some sense of the 
total cybersecurity-related workforce, construed broadly, can be obtained 

by considering the number of organizations that must undertake some 
6*Editor™s note: Following initial publication of this report, this number was updated 
to re˚ect 2010 BLS data for the category in question. See the primary reference given in 
footnote 6.
6 
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Employment and 
Wage, May 2012:  15-1122 Information Security Analysts, available at http://www.bls.gov/

oes/current/oes151122.htm.
7  National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, Department of Homeland Security and 
Federal CIO Council, 
2012 Information Technology Workforce Assessment for Cybersecurity Sum
-mary Report,
 Washington, D.C., 2013.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?measures to protect their cybersecurity. There are, for example, roughly 
6 million businesses with a payroll (and many more without)
8 and nearly 
90,000 local governments and public school systems
9 in the United States. 
Not all necessarily have full-time cybersecurity workers, but all must have 

someone responsible for that organization™s cybersecurity, at least to make 

decisions about which information technology and cybersecurity products 

and services to acquire.
In considering the role of professionalization in building a cyber
-security workforce with suf˜cient capacity and capability, it is useful to 
distinguish need, demand, and supply. 
Need is the number (and skill mix) 

of cybersecurity workers required to provide satisfactory cyber
 security 
(a judgment that will vary according to who makes the assessment). 

Demand
 is expressed by the desired capabilities stated in job descriptions, 
the 
 number of such positions that are created and ˜lled, and the sala
-ries offered to those who have those abilities. Demand will fall short of 

national or societal need to the extent that cybersecurity is a public goodŠ
that is, organizations will invest to meet their own requirements but not 

necessarily to achieve society™s desirable overall requirements. Demand 

can also fall short of an organization™s own needs if (1) the organization 

lacks the required resources or (2) an organization underestimates the 

threats it faces and thus underinvests in meeting its own needs. 
Supply
 is 
the number of available quali˜ed
10
 workers willing to ˜ll positions and 
is a function of the visibility and attractiveness of cyber
 security occupa
-tions, the availability of appropriate training and education, and (as in 

all ˜elds) the overall labor market in which potential workers respond to 

salary and other signals about demand. 
As discussed below, professionalization mechanisms can both stimu
-late supply, by making a ˜eld more attractive, and dampen supply, by 

creating barriers to entry. They can make it easier for employers to meet 

their needs, by making it easier to identify suitable candidates, but they 

can also inhibit the ˚exibility needed as job requirements change or where 

job responsibilities are necessarily broad and ˚uid. 
It would be helpful in assessing the role and effects of professional
-ization to have a handle on the current supply of cybersecurity 
 workers. 
Unfortunately, it is notoriously dif˜cult to assess labor supply and demand 

to determine whether or not there is a shortage. For example, employers 

in a particular sector may complain that they cannot ˜nd enough quali
-8  U.S. Census Bureau, Statistics about Business Size, 2007, available at http://www.census.
gov/econ/smallbus.html.
9  U.S. Census Bureau, Local Government and Public School Systems by Type and State, 
2007, available at http://www.census.gov/govs/cog/GovOrgTab03ss.html.
10
  Without ways of assessing quality, the supply will, of course, include available but 
unquali˜ed individuals, especially if demand greatly exceeds supply.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE™S DEVELOPMENT AND PROFESSIONALIZATION
 9˜ed individuals, even as workers in that sector complain that there are 
not enough open positions. This can happen when employers seek talent 

with very particular skill requirements and balk at training or retraining 

potential hires. Rapid turnover, which is common in fast-moving high-

tech ˜elds, can also exacerbate perceived shortages, even when there are 

enough quali˜ed workers in the labor pool. Another complication in mea
-
suring supply and demand is that the job categories used in the collection 

of statistics by the Department of Labor are not always well aligned with 

the occupation of interest. For example, as noted above, the ﬁinformation 

security analystsﬂ category does not necessarily include everyone who is 

a cybersecurity worker, and there may be cybersecurity workers who do 

not neatly ˜t into a single category. 
The national origin of cybersecurity workers also affects 
 supply. Firms 
without global reach must either rely on workers within the U.S. work
-force or work within a complex system for hiring foreign 
 workers. By con-trast, ˜rms with global operations are able to seek talent 
 wherever it exists 
across the globe and move at least some cybersecurity work to where they 

˜nd it. Firms of all sizes can outsource some or all of their cybersecurity 

work, and some of this may also be performed offshore. U.S. citizenship 

is generally required for federal government cyber
 security positions, and 
security clearance requirements for national 
 security-related jobs further 
restrict the pool of candidates to U.S. citizens. 
ROLE
S, RE
SPONSIBILITIE
S, A
ND CO
NTEXT
S FOR CYBE
RSECURITY WO
RKThe cybersecurity workforce is quite diverse, encompassing a wide 
variety of roles and responsibilities, each involving an array of different 

skills and abilities. It includes workers in the private and nonpro˜t sector, 

military, and civilian government. 
The diverse mix of skills in the cybersecurity workforce re˚ects the 
complex nature of cybersecurity. Some of the cybersecurity problem is 

technical (i.e., drawing on computer science techniques and skills), but 

given that cybersecurity is inherently concerned with human adversaries 

and the behaviors of those in the organizations that they target, behavioral 

and management aspects are also critical. 
Effective response to an attack involves understanding and anticipat
-ing the actions of an attacker. As a result, in some jobs, an adversarial 

mindset and approach may be as important as the aggregation of particu
-lar technical skills in roles that involve detecting, tracking, or respond
-ing to an attack. Workshop participants noted that some of the most 

talented individuals in this context today are people who lack formal 

education, training, or certi˜cationŠand that these individuals may be 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?unwilling to pursue any of these to meet a hiring requirement. Indeed, it 
was clear from presentations and discussion at the workshops that such 

ﬁself-taughtﬂ experts play key roles in some organizations.
Moreover, security capabilities are hard for end users, administrators, 
and developers to understand, making it all too easy to use, operate, or 

construct systems that are inadvertently insecure. Insights on how to 

address usability often come from the disciplines of human-computer 

interaction and psychology.
11 Behavioral expertise is relevant in efforts 
to detect and deter potential insider threats. Because failures to adopt, 

deploy, or use adequate cybersecurity measures often stem from insuf˜
-cient incentives, the disciplines of economics, anthropology, and psychol
-ogy are also relevant for cybersecurity.
12
Given that many aspects of cybersecurity involve highly technical 
matters, it is often not appreciated that ﬁsoft skillsﬂ are also important, 

much as they are in other technical ˜elds. These skills include the abil
-ity to work in teams and facility with oral and written communication. 

Response to an incident may require coordinating activities across multi
-ple organizational elements or job functions and may involve interactions 

with vendors, security consultants, law enforcement, or other outside 

actors. Given the dynamic nature of the information technology substrate 

and threat environment, the ability to continue to learn is also impor
-tant. All of these traits are at a particular premium in the often 
 complex 
response to ﬁadvanced persistent threats,ﬂ where adversaries possess 

sophisticated levels of expertise and signi˜cant resources that allow them 

to pursue their objectives through multiple attack vectors. Organizations 

confronting cybersecurity threats increasingly ˜nd themselves conducting 

what has been dubbed ﬁcyber intelligenceﬂ in addition to more traditional 

cybersecurity activities.
13
The organizational context in which the cybersecurity workforce is 
employed is also diverse. For example, the cybersecurity capabilities of 

employers vary considerably and include the following:

Employers with large, specialized cybersecurity operations
 that have 
built up a cadre of highly skilled, extensively trained specialists who work 

together on the most complex cybersecurity problems. Such organizations 
11  National Research Council, 
Toward Better Usability, Security, and Privacy of Information 
Technology: Report of a Workshop,
 The National Academies Press, Washington, D.C., 2010.
12
  Ross Anderson and Tyler Moore, Information security: Where computer science, eco
-nomics and psychology meet, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, 
Physical and Engineering Sciences
 367(1898):2717-2727, 2009; ibid.
13
  Troy Townsend et al. 
Emerging Technology Center Report: Cyber Intelligence Tradecraft 
Project Summary of Key Findings,
 Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 

Pittsburgh, Pa., 2013.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE™S DEVELOPMENT AND PROFESSIONALIZATION
 11are characterized by willingness and ability to make the necessary invest
-ments and by having management with suf˜cient savvy to identify and 
recruit high-caliber talent.

Employers with mixed cybersecurity groups
 that employ more than 
one security specialist, typically led by a manager who is knowledgeable 

but not necessarily expert in the ˜eld.

Employers with
 distributed cybersecurity functions
, in which cyber
-security is the responsibility of a general information technology (IT) 

worker or manager as part of a broader IT job, typically performed in con
-
texts where managers have little specialized knowledge or understanding 

of cybersecurity. 
In the ˜rst case, organizations with global reach may send work 
offshore to wherever expertise can be found within the enterprise. In the 

second two cases, organizations will rely, at least in part, on outsourced 

work to obtain the necessary expertise, and some of this work may be 

offshored by the ˜rm providing the security services.
As is true in many ˜elds, there are varying approaches to how work is 
divided between the cybersecurity workforce and the broader workforce, 

because the lines between cybersecurity and other roles are blurry, re˚ect
-
ing overlaps in both expertise and responsibility. For example, when a 

change is made to address a cybersecurity problem, someone designated 

as having cybersecurity responsibilities may recommend a con˜gura
-
tion change that is, in turn, implemented by a network engineer who is 

not designated as a cybersecurity employee. Also, high-level decisions 

about investment in cybersecurity may be made by individuals who have 

risk management responsibilities that extend well beyond cybersecurity. 

Another example is privacy, where issues, technical approaches, and job 

responsibilities often overlap with cybersecurity. 
Because attacks can cross international borders, cybersecurity work 
sometimes has an international dimension. Cybersecurity work may 

involve coordinating activities in multiple countries and thus require 

the ability to work with international counterparts from both the private 

sector and other governments and the knowledge and skills to properly 
 comply with rules and policies that can differ by jurisdiction. For exam
-ple, cybersecurity work sometimes involves use of sensitive information 

about vulnerabilities and responses.
 In short, cybersecurity work encompasses a wide range of roles and 
contexts, and there are many different ways to classify cyber
 security work. Some workshop participants commented that agreement on a com
-
mon framework would be helpful in understanding and developing the 

cybersecurity workforce, and this view prompted the commissioning of 

such a framework under the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Educa
-Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?tion (NICE). Issued by the National Institute for Standards and Technol
-ogy, the recently released NICE framework divides cybersecurity roles 
into high-level areas of specialization, each of which contains multiple 

subspecialties.14 Today, this framework is being referenced as part of 
workforce development efforts in parts of the federal government and, to 

a lesser extent, in the private sector. Some workshop participants cited the 

framework as a helpful or much needed development; others observed 

that it did not seem relevant, given how they currently thought about the 

structure of their organization™s workforce. 
FACTORS AFFE
CTING FUTU
RE CYBE
RSECURITY WO
RKFO
RCE NEED
SIt is even more dif˜cult to assess future need, demand, and sup
-ply for cybersecurity (or information technology more broadly). There 

are many indications today that demand will continue to be high. For 

example, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates a faster-than-average 

growth rate in employment for the decade 2010 to 2020 of ﬁinformation 

security analysts,ﬂ a labor category that represents a signi˜cant subset of 

the cybersecurity workforce.
15
 In a 2012 survey of information security 
professionals, more than half reported that their organizations had too 

few information security workers.
16
There are a number of factors that could increase or decrease the 
needed capacity in particular areas or affect the needed workforce capa
-bilities, including the following:

How the cybersecurity challenge will evolve as new technologies and 
threats emerge and old threats evolve, and what the resulting workforce require
-ments will be. 
At least historically, new technologies have been deployed 

without suf˜cient attention to the security implications, and bad actors 

have found ways to exploit the resulting vulnerabilities. Familiar exam
-ples include the introduction of networked personal computers into the 

workplace and widespread adoption of the Internet for mission-critical 

activities. 

What the key skills and best practices will be in cybersecurity, and what 
the content of curricula should be, 
because the ability to build more secure 
14  National Institute for Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
 National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework,
 Washington, D.C., 2013.
15
  National Center for O*NET Development, Bureau of Labor Statistics, O*Net Online 
Summary Report for 15-1122.00ŠInformation Security Analysts, 2013, available at http://
www.onetonline.org/link/summary/15-1122.00.
16
  Michael Suby, 
The 2013 (ISC)
2 Global Information Security Workforce Study,
 Frost and 
 Sullivan, Mountain View, Calif., 2013.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE™S DEVELOPMENT AND PROFESSIONALIZATION
 13systems lags what is needed, and knowledge about how to protect, 
defend, and repair computer systems continues to grow. 

How advances on various fronts might affect the mix of needed capacity 
and capability. 
For example, better software design and development from 

a security perspective would result in fewer vulnerabilities to be exploited 

(and thus potentially require fewer people to detect, patch, and respond), 

better tools and techniques for cybersecurity might reduce the number of 

workers needed in certain roles and change the skills needed for others, 

more robust law enforcement action might reduce the incidence of certain 

forms of cybercrime, better training and understanding of security among 

system administrators would enable them to better ﬁhardenﬂ systems, 

and better training of the workers that operate systems would help them 

avoid actions that undermine security. In the case of better tools and tech
-niques that enhance productivity, it is possible that demand for workers 

might shift to higher-end positions, because fewer workers would be 

needed to carry out functions that are partly or fully automated. Emerg
-ing technologies like cloud services could enhance security by reducing 

the burden on individual organizations, but it could also introduce new 

risks by changing the boundary of an organization™s information systems. 

How the policy environment for cybersecurity will change. 
For example, 
if new cybersecurity or privacy regulations were introduced, organiza
-tions would need to increase their workforce to comply with the new 

requirements and document and report on compliance. 

How cybersecurity will be provided in the future, especially in smaller 
organizations. 
Already, many organizations turn to vendors to supply 
various cybersecurity tools and services, and there are models in which 

cybersecurity work can be outsourced to service providers. For example, 

Internet service providers increasingly offer a range of security services 

for their customers. In the increasingly popular software-as-a-service 

model, vendors generally take responsibility for con˜guration, monitor
-ing, and response. Such shifts of duties may reduce the number or change 

the mix of cybersecurity workers needed by organizations. On the other 

hand, every organization that uses IT will need people who can take 

responsibility for the organization™s cybersecurity, at a minimum being 

able to select vendors that can provide the required levels of assurance. 

Future trends in offshoring security work will also affect the demand for 

U.S. cybersecurity workers. 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.14
PROFESSION
Profession
 has multiple interpretations, ranging from the common use 
of the word to more formal de˜nitions that spell out the various elements 
generally associated with the establishment of a profession. The common 
meaning of profession is ﬁa paid occupation, especially one that involves 
prolonged training and a formal quali˜cation.ﬂ
1A useful, more comprehensive de˜nition can be derived from sugges
-tions by several speakers at the workshops convened by this committee. 
That de˜nition identi˜es the following characteristics of a professional: 
(1) passing a knowledge and/or performance test, (2) superior completion 
of study of intellectual basis of the profession, (3) a sustained period of 
mentored experience/apprenticeship, (4) continuing education, (5) licens
-ing by a formal authority, and (6) ethical standards of behavior with 
enforcement, including removal from profession.
2 A ˜eld that possesses 
1  New Oxford American Dictionary, 
third edition, Oxford University Press, 2010.
2  Many similar de˜nitions or subsets of this de˜nition appear in the literature. For 
example, white papers prepared for the National Initiative on Cybersecurity Education use 
a de˜nition with three elements (a body of knowledge, ethical guidelines, and professional 
organization that publishes papers and establishes best practices) (Department of Homeland 
Security, National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education, ﬁThe Path toward Cybersecurity 
Professionalization: Insights from Other Occupations: White Paper,ﬂ 2012, available at 
http://niccs.us-cert.gov/careers/professionalization). The de˜nition used in this report 
was presented by Franklin Reeder in his remarks at the committee™s December 13, 2012, 
workshop.
2Approaches to Professionalization
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPROACHES TO PROFESSIONALIZATION
 15all of these characteristics will almost certainly be recognized as a profes
-sion, but not all are required for a ˜eld to be recognized as a profession. 
This broader de˜nition illustrates the different mechanisms for profes
-sionalization that might be applied to cybersecurity work.
PROFESSIONALIZATION
Professionalization
 describes (1) education, training, and other activi
-ties that transform a worker into a professional and (2) social processes 
by which an occupation becomes a profession. Although cyber
 
security 
concerns have existed from the earliest days of shared and networked 
computers, and there have long been workers responsible for various 
aspects of computer and network security, it has taken some time for the 
view of cybersecurity as a distinct occupational ˜eld, replete with many 
subspecialties, to emerge.
Today, a growing number of workers think of themselves as cyber
-security professionals based on their job roles, experience, and expertise, 
and an array of government and private sector entities are pursuing 
activities related to professionalization. Professional societies in com
-puter science, computer engineering, and cybersecurity have worked to 
develop bodies of knowledge and instituted codes of ethics.3 Multiple fed-eral agencies, notably the Department of Defense and the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), the National Security Agency (NSA), and the 
Of˜ce of Personnel Management, have workforce development activities 
under way. A growing number of educational institutions offer degrees 
or specializations in cybersecurity, and a National Centers of Academic 
Excellence program, sponsored by NSA and DHS, certi˜es education, 
training, and research programs of 2- and 4-year academic institutions 
against standards established jointly by those two federal agencies. 
A suf˜ciently large number of certi˜cates and certi˜cations in vari
-ous cybersecurity skills and specializations have emerged that DHS has 
developed a searchable online catalog to guide workers and employers.
4 These include general certi˜cations like the Certi˜ed Information Systems 
Security Professional (CISSP) as well as many specialized certi˜cations. A 
variety of organizations within and outside the government either require 
or encourage certi˜cation for certain job roles. For example, Department 
3  These include the Association for Computing Machinery™s ﬁCode of Ethics and 
Professional Conduct,ﬂ the IEEE Computer Society™s ﬁSoftware Engineering Code of Ethics 
and Professional Practice,ﬂ and the International Information Systems Security Certi˜cation 
Consortium™s ﬁCode of Ethics.ﬂ
4  U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Professional Certi˜cations, available at 
http://niccs.us-cert.gov/training/professional-certi˜cations.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?of Defense Directive 8570
5 requires CISSP certi˜cation of department 
personnel who perform information assurance functions.
6Professionalization can be a bottom-up process driven by those in the 
occupation, a top-down process driven by employers or the government 
(as an employer or as a policy maker), or some combination of the two. 

For an employer, professionalization might mean encouraging or requir
-ing a particular course of academic study, degree, certi˜cate, certi˜ca
-tion, or professional society membership as a condition of initial and/or 

continuing employment. For a professional association, professionaliza
-tion might mean establishing a code of conduct or creating (or recogniz
-ing) certi˜cations, training programs, or educational standards. For the 

government, professionalization might mean encouraging or requiring 

a particular educational achievement or certi˜cations for its own work
-force, supporting the development of curricula, establishing standards 

for education programs, encouraging the use of certi˜cation as a means 

of regulating the workers whose jobs affect the health and safety or prop
-erty of others, or requiring (at either the federal or state level) licensure 

for particular occupations. 
GOALS FOR PROFESSIONALIZATION
Historically, professionalization has had one or more of the following 
goals: (1) to establish standards that enhance the quality of the workforce; 

(2) to regulate workers whose jobs can affect the health, safety, or property 

of others; (3) to enhance public trust and con˜dence; (4) to enable compli
-ance with regulatory or legal requirements; (5) to enhance the status of an 

occupation; (6) to establish a monopoly or otherwise regulate the supply 

of labor to advance the interests of its members; (7) to guide the behavior 

of practitioners in the ˜eld, especially when it comes to morally or ethi
-cally ambiguous activities; or (8) to establish and standardize roles (and 

the associated knowledge, skills, and abilities) and pathways so as to 

better align supply and demand, increase awareness of career paths, and 

facilitate recruitment and retention by employers.
7 An additional, often unstated but important, goal is to establish a 
shared set of values, culture, ethos, and mindset for a profession. These 
5  Department of Defense, DOD 8570.01-M: Information Assurance Workforce Improvement, Washington, D.C., 2012.
6  As of this writing, the Department of Defense is reevaluating certi˜cation requirements. 
Zachary Fryer-Biggs, Experts say DoD workers undertrained, 
Federal Times, February 16, 2013.
7  This set of goals draws on observations offered by workshop participants and 
includes elements commonly found in the literature on professionalization. See, for example, 
W.J. Orlikowski, and J.J. Baroudi, The information systems profession: Myth or reality?, 

Information Technology and People
 4(1):13-30, 1988.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPROACHES TO PROFESSIONALIZATION
 17commonalities can contribute to people™s ability to work together effectively, 
particularly across roles within an organization and across organizations. 
SPECIFIC MECHANISMS FOR PROFESSIONALIZATION AND 
HOW THEY AFFECT WORKFORCE CAPACITY AND CAPABILITY 
Codes of Conduct or Ethics
Codes of conduct or ethics fall into two types: (1) enforceable codes 
whose breach can lead to revocation of a certi˜cation, or even removal 
from the profession, and (2) nonenforceable codes that are generally asso
-ciated with membership in a professional society. Although workshop 
participants did not cite examples of where ethical violations had been 
an issue, more than one participant observed that some cybersecurity 
 
workers are placed in positions that involve signi˜cant responsibility and 
trust. A possible concern with such codes is how they affect the recruit
-ment of ﬁblack hatsﬂ (i.e., those who have violated computer security laws 
or rules in the past) into ﬁwhite hatﬂ jobs. This issue is likely to recede 
over time as the supply of quali˜ed workers grows, reducing the need 
to hire those with criminal or otherwise less trustworthy backgrounds. 
Another issue is that some specialized cybersecurity jobs that involve 
offensive operations or active defense might run afoul of codes that do 
not take such work into account, a tension that other ˜elds have had to 
consider in developing their ethical standards.
Education 
Education
 for cybersecurity is provided at the undergraduate level 
by both 2- and 4-year institutions, which offer a wide range of courses, 
programs, and degrees focused on cybersecurity and as a component of 
computer science and engineering, management information system, and 
other information technology (IT)-related courses, programs, and degrees. 
Cybersecurity education can also be provided in non-IT contexts, such as 
in business or public policy programs.
Certi˜cates and Certi˜cations
Certi˜cates are generally associated with training or education courses 
and verify through examination that particular content was learned in 
courses or curricula. They are generally ﬁgood for lifeﬂ and cannot be 
revoked, although a certi˜cate™s relevance to an employer will diminish 
over time, especially in a fast-moving ˜eld like cybersecurity. They serve 
as an indication of knowledge at a particular point in time. 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
Certi˜cation is a formal procedure by an authorized or accredited 
body.
8 It is based on a study of the factors that predict success in a job 
and relies on examinations that meet testing standards. Certi˜cations 
are time limited and require periodic recerti˜cation, and there are proce
-dures in place to remove certi˜cation for ethical breaches or knowledge 
de˜ciencies. Certi˜cation
 can also be applied to the content of education 
and training programs as well as individuals. The Centers for Academic 
Excellence programs described above certi˜es that the education, training, 
and research programs meet an external standard. 
A challenge associated with developing or updating a certi˜cation is 
that it takes time to reach consensus on the knowledge and skills to be 
assessed. This creates challenges in an area like cybersecurity where the 
underlying technologies, threats, and context are fast moving. One risk 
is obsolescenceŠthe knowledge or skills tested for are out-of-date by 
the time the certi˜cation is issued. Another risk is ossi˜cationŠwhen the 
establishment of a standard inhibits evolution of skills and knowledge 
because those certi˜ed may not be incentivized to learn beyond what 
was included in the last certi˜cation test. Organizations that offer certi
-˜cations can address these challenges by focusing assessments as much 
as possible on fundamental concepts, by adopting nimble processes for 
updating content, and by requiring periodic recerti˜cation. Continuing 
education is especially important, both in the context of certi˜cations 
and more broadly for the workforce, given the rapid rate of change in 
cybersecurity knowledge. 
Certi˜cates and certi˜cations are especially helpful to employers who 
may ˜nd it otherwise dif˜cult to evaluate the skills and knowledge of job 
applicants, especially small organizations that do not have a hiring man
-ager with deep cybersecurity expertise.
9 Even in these cases, certi˜cates 
and certi˜cations may not be dispositive but may be given greater weight. 
In addition to providing evidence of competence, certi˜cates and certi
-˜cations may be useful indicators of interest and commitment to work 
in a ˜eld and provide a useful complement or supplement to academic 
degrees in establishing knowledge and commitment. 
A number of workshop participants observed that some certi˜cations 
play a useful role in helping employers determine that an applicant has 
been exposed to a minimum level of knowledge. CISSP certi˜cation is 
8  The distinction between certi˜cates and certi˜cations is re˚ected in American National 
Standards Institute, ﬁAssessment Based Certi˜cate Programs,ﬂ ANSI/NOCA Standard 1100, 
2009. The de˜nitions used here are drawn from a presentation at the March 28, 2013, 
workshop, by Roy Swift, American National Standards Institute.
9  As observed above, another possibility for such organizations is to outsource 
cybersecurity work (e.g., consultants) or outsource some of the responsibility (e.g., via 
software as a service).
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPROACHES TO PROFESSIONALIZATION
 19a canonical example. Others observed that many quali˜ed and, indeed, 
very highly quali˜ed applicants can be found who do not have a CISSP or 
other certi˜cation, and so requiring such certi˜cation would undesirably 
restrict the candidate pool.
Views expressed by workshop participants with respect to the value 
of certi˜cates and certi˜cations in the context of their own careers or 
workplaces varied. Some indicated that certi˜cates and certi˜cations had 
helped advance their careers and/or were perceived as valuable creden
-tials within their organizations. Other participants observed that certi˜
-cates and certi˜cations were not viewed so positively in some 
 contextsŠ
that other factors, such as experience, demonstrated ability, or educational 
achievement, were seen as better measures. A few said that they some
-times omitted listing them on their resumes for this reason. 
Certi˜cates and certi˜cations also play a role in establishing the quali
-˜cations and credibility of those who testify in court, and thus it is no 
surprise that several certi˜cations in digital forensics are now offered. 
Interestingly, at the committee™s December 2012 workshop, participants 
from two federal government organizations described entirely different 
approaches to certi˜cation of forensic experts. One sought to have all of 
the organization™s experts certi˜ed to enhance the experts™ credibility 
in court, while the other discouraged certi˜cation out of concern that a 
capable expert might for some reason not pass a particular certi˜cation 
exam and that this fact could be used to question the expert™s court testi
-mony irrespective of the expert™s actual knowledge and skills.
Licensure
Licensure involves a government restriction on practice without a 
license, generally involving public safety or trust. It may establish stan
-dards for legal liability in the case of negligent practice. In engineering 
˜elds, a small fraction of workers with degrees in engineering ˜elds are 
licensed as professional engineers. For example, a licensed civil engineer 
responsible for approving a bridge design is assumed to be able to state 
with some certainty that the bridge will stand under stated conditions. 
By contrast, for software and security no equivalent knowledge exists, 
which is one reason that licensure has not taken hold in the related area of 
software engineering. Also, cybersecurity is carried out in an adversarial 
environment where human behavior plays a central role. As a result, it 
likely is too early for licensure in cybersecurity, at least broadly, but the 
approach may have some utility in the future as the underlying science 
and engineering practice improves.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
TIMESCALES FOR PROFESSIONALIZATION
The path toward professionalization of an occupation is generally a 
long one, and debates about the best approach can continue for decades. 
There has, for example, been a multi-decade discussion about profession
-alization of software engineering, with no consensus as yet reached among 
workers, professional organizations, and employers. In that regard, for 
example, the Association for Computing Machinery has taken a public 
position that is unfavorable to licensing of software engineers, while the 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers has been more receptive. 
Today, only one state, Texas, recognizes professional software engineers, 
and the software industry remains largely ﬁpolicedﬂ by the marketplace. 
Even in a ˜eld as old as medicine, professionalization has contin
-ued to evolve. More than 100 years ago, the Flexner report
10
 spurred 
education reforms and greater professionalization of medical practice. 
Professionalization mechanisms in medicine have also seen signi˜cant 
evolution during this time. For example, medicine has increasingly been 
subdivided into distinct specialty roles (e.g., the emergence of board-
certi˜ed specialties and subspecialties) that have made it easier to iden
-tify speci˜c certi˜cation criteria in the face of expanding and evolving 
knowledge and skill requirements. Even today, debate about how the 
necessary skills and knowledge for medical students are best acquired 
through classroom education and hands-on practice continues, re˚ecting 
the growing body of scienti˜c knowledge, the increasing complexity of 
clinical care, and the evolving socioeconomic context in which medicine 
is practiced.
11 An important and open question is whether cybersecurity 
will endure in anything like its present form over the timescales in which 
professionalization emerged and matured in professions like medicine, 
law, and aviation.
TRADE-OFFS ASSOCIATED WITH PROFESSIONALIZATION
Chapter 1 described some of the uncertainties associated with the 
current and future supply and demand for cybersecurity workers and the 
diversity of contexts in which cybersecurity work is done. This chapter 
has outlined the range of potential professionalization measures and some 
of the associated advantages and disadvantages. Taking these together, 
10
  A. Flexner, 
Medical Education in the United States and Canada: A Report to the Carnegie 
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching,
 Merrymount Press, Boston, Mass., 1910.
11  There is a rich literature on the future of medical education and the recommendations 
of the Flexner report. See, for example, M. Cooke, D.M. Irby, W. Sullivan, and K.M. Ludmerer, 
ﬁAmerican medical education 100 years after the Flexner Report,ﬂ 
New England Journal of 
Medicine
 355(13):1339-1344, 2006.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPROACHES TO PROFESSIONALIZATION
 21the committee identi˜ed a set of trade-offs associated with actions to 
professionalize the cybersecurity workforce. These include the following:

Quality versus quantity. 
Improvements in quality that can be shown 
to result from professionalization mechanisms should be weighed against 
supply restrictions that the resulting additional barriers to entry would 
create. Professionalization can be both a funnel (restricting people from 
entering the ˜eld) and a magnet (attracting people to the ˜eld). It can also 
act as a sieve if people who moved from general IT or other positions into 
cybersecurity roles ˜nd themselves subject to new professionalization 
requirements and then move out of cybersecurity. This 
 tension comes into 
play when employers expect job candidates to already have experience 
and credentials, rather than investing in on-the-job training. The time and 
cost associated with obtaining the required education, training, experi
-ence, and credentials will discourage some from entering the ˜eld.

Standardization versus dynamism. The value of standardization asso
-ciated with development of common curricula or certi˜cations should be 
weighed against the time it takes to reach consensus on standards, given 
the rate of change in underlying technologies, the introduction of new 
technologies, and the rapid pace at which the context and threat evolve. 
In other words, the bene˜ts of standardization should be weighed against 
the risks of obsolescence (the knowledge or skills associated with the 
standard are out-of-date) and ossi˜cation (the establishment of a standard 
inhibits evolution of skills and knowledge).

Broad versus niche needs. 
Given the great diversity of roles, respon
-sibilities, and contexts, the fact that professionalization measures (e.g., 
certi˜cation) may be warranted in a particular sub˜eld and context 
(e.g., digital forensics) should not be confused with a broad need for 
professionalization. 

Better information for employers versus false certainty. 
Certi˜cates and 
certi˜cations provide some ability to vet job candidates, but overreliance 
on them may screen out some of the most talented and suitable indi
-viduals. This is particularly true in cybersecurity, in which some of the 
most pro˜cient cyber experts have developed their skill sets through 
informal methods (e.g., self-taught hackers). Organizations that do not 
already have a sophisticated cybersecurity workforce may place a greater 
value on professionalization measures, which make it easier for them 
to identify quali˜ed workers. However, at a time when few think the 
cybersecurity situation is improving, out-of-the-box thinking may be at a 
premium but may be lost with overly rigid screening.

Certainty about worker capabilities versus uncertainty about actual job 
requirements. 
Increased certainty about the capabilities of a professional 
that may result from professionalization should be weighed against the 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
uncertainty about what skills, knowledge, or abilities are actually needed 
in a particular role and uncertainty about how roles may change as the 
technological, organizational, and threat context evolves. 

Speci˜city versus ˚exibility. 
Employers and their hiring managers 
and human resource staff will seek suf˜cient speci˜city to assure that 
a candidate has the right set of skills and abilities for a position. They 
may also seek speci˜city simply to make it easier to identify candidates 
(although at the risk of overlooking candidates who may be suitable but 
lack the speci˜ed quali˜cations). At the same time, job boundaries are 
never ˜rm, and in the evolving world of cybersecurity, roles and needs 
can be especially ˚uid, which means that enough ˚exibility to select can
-didates who are more broadly suited for that range of possible roles is also 
important.

Stimulation of supply and better matching of supply to demand versus 
restriction of supply. 
Professionalization may increase supply over time 
as it helps increase awareness and desirability of a profession and thus 
increases the number of individuals who consider cybersecurity as a 
career. By helping de˜ne roles and career paths, professionalization can 
help workers identify suitable jobs and employers identify suitable work-ers. On the other hand, de˜ning the ˜eld in terms of a speci˜c set of 
exams, certi˜cates, degrees, or the like will narrow the pipeline of future 
candidates for the ˜eld and thus may constrain supply.
The committee believes that careful consideration of these trade-offs 
will help inform decision-making by employers, professional organiza
-tions, and governments about whether and how to undertake activities 
to professionalize the cybersecurity workforce. They do not represent 
ﬁeither/orﬂ choices, but trade-offs to be weighed. Conclusion 7 of this 
report presents these trade-offs as questions to pose about any given 
professionalization effort.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23
3Conclusions, Recommendation, 
and Criteria for Professionalization 
of Cybersecurity
This report considers the role that professionalization might play 
in ensuring that the United States has enough cybersecurity workers 
( capacity) and that it has a workforce with the right knowledge, skills, and 
abilities (capability). These issues arise at a critical juncture, when there 
is growing recognition that the cybersecurity threat is serious and perva
-sive. Where and how professionalization would contribute to, or possibly 
diminish, the capacity and capability of the national workforce to provide 
cybersecurity are questions that do not have a simple or single answer.
CAPACITY AND CAPABILITY OF THE 
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE
Conclusion 1. 
More attention to both the capacity and capability of the 
U.S. cybersecurity workforce is needed. 
Even large organizations with top talent and signi˜cant resources 
devoted to cybersecurity have suffered major cybersecurity compro
-mises, and organizations that do not have such levels of talent or 
resources face even greater challenges. More highly skilled workers in 
cybersecurity roles would help the nation respond more robustly to the 
cybersecurity problems it faces. All organizations need to understand 
their threat environment and the risks they face, address their cyber
-security problems, and hire the most appropriate people to do that work.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
Conclusion 2. 
Although the need for cybersecurity workers is likely to 
continue to be high, it is dif˜cult to forecast with certainty the number 
of workers required or the needed mix of cybersecurity knowledge and 
skills. 
There are many indications today that demand for cybersecurity 
workers will continue to be high, but it is notoriously dif˜cult to measure 
or forecast labor supply and demand for any ˜eld, especially one that is 
as dynamic and fast moving as cybersecurity. Moreover, there are several 
factors that may affect future need. These include the following:









threats evolve, and how this may alter workforce capability and capacity 
requirements. 





productive cybersecurity tools; better training of the workers that operate 
and manage IT systems; or more robust law enforcementŠmight change 
the number of workers needed in certain roles and change the skills 
needed for others.



organizations at large to more specialist information technology (IT) or 
cybersecurity ˜rms, which may reduce the number or change the mix 
of cybersecurity workers needed by organizations. 
CYBERSECURITY WORK AND THE 
CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE
Conclusion 3. 
The cybersecurity workforce encompasses a variety of con
-texts, roles, and occupations and is too broad and diverse to be treated 
as a single occupation or profession. Whether and how to professionalize 
will vary according to role and context.
Cybersecurity is a ˜eld that encompasses more than one kind of work 
and more than one occupation or profession. Some kinds of workers may 
come to be considered as professionals, but the committee believes that 
the ˜eld may also include a range of personnel and functions that are best 
not considered as professionals, much as many other ˜elds contain both 
professionals and other workers who are not formally professionalized, 
including some who are designated as paraprofessionals. For example, 
there are today large numbers of people within organizations who have 
responsibility for cybersecurity functions, such as frontline IT support 
staff, for whom there may not be any formal education or accredita
-tion requirements. The organizational context for cybersecurity work is 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATION, AND CRITERIA 
 25diverse, ranging from ˜rms that have highly pro˜cient cybersecurity 
groups to ones where cybersecurity is one of the responsibilities of gen
-eral IT groups. There are also varying approaches to how work is divided 
between the cybersecurity workforce and the broader IT workforceŠ
some cybersecurity positions are clearly hybrid in nature, blending cyber
-security roles with other roles in IT, management, or law enforcement. 
The committee heard a wide range of opinions regarding the contexts 
in which professionalization would or would not be appropriate. The 
committee noted only one case where there is a compelling and widely 
agreed-on case for professionalization today. In digital forensics, where 
the results are to be used in a legal proceeding, the work is comparatively 
narrowly de˜ned by procedures and law, the relevant domain of expertise 
appears to be suf˜ciently narrow, and the appropriate professionalization 
mechanism is clear (certi˜cation with periodic recerti˜cation re˚ecting 
advances in acceptable forensic techniques and practices). Even in this 
case, however, the committee learned that not all agencies that employ 
digital forensics examiners currently favor external certi˜cation. 
Given the great diversity of roles, responsibilities, and contexts, the 
fact that professionalization measures may be warranted in a particular 
sub˜eld and context should not be confused with a broad need for pro
-fessionalization. Those organizations that ˜nd professionalization helpful 
can certainly insist on some form of certi˜cation or other professionaliza
-tion measure for the workers they hire, and a number of organizations 
inside and outside government do so today. Other organizations, having 
given this serious thought, may ˜nd other ways to optimize and custom
-ize their hiring and cybersecurity workforce composition to best meet 
their speci˜c needs. 
Professionalizing by roles, which are the building blocks of profes
-sional categories, would be at too low a level. At the same time, it would 
be a mistake to attempt to professionalize at too high a levelŠfor exam
-ple, by identifying a single set of professional requirements for multiple, 
distinct occupations (with different knowledge requirements) within a 
broad ˜eld. 
Conclusion 4. 
Because cybersecurity is not solely a technical endeavor, 
a wide range of backgrounds and skills will be needed in an effective 
national cybersecurity workforce. 
For example:



and networks, so cybersecurity is inherently concerned with human 
adversaries and behaviors of those in the organizations they target. Pro
-Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
tecting cyberspace thus involves human, behavioral, psychological, and 
economic factors and management expertise as well as technical skills 
and knowledge. 








as well as technologies. As a result, people are needed who understand 
the organizational contextŠmission requirements, business processes, 
and organizational culture. 







across organizational boundaries. Soft skills, which include the ability 
to work in teams and facility with oral and written communication, are 
essential in many roles. 
As a result, education, training, and workforce development activi
-ties that focus too much on narrow technical knowledge and skills may 
discourage participation by people with much-needed nontechnical 
knowledge and skills, may overly concentrate attention and resources 
on building technical capability and capacity, and may discourage tech
-nically pro˜cient people from developing nontechnical skills. The result 
would fall short of delivering the workforce the nation requires. 
PROFESSIONALIZATION
Conclusion 5. 
Professionalization has multiple goals and can occur 
through multiple mechanisms.
ﬁProfessionalizationﬂ describes the social process by which an 
occupation becomes a profession. Its goals include establishing quality 
standards, enhancing public trust and con˜dence, and establishing and 
standardizing job roles and pathways. The movement toward the profes
-sionalization of an occupation has multiple goals and can occur through 
multiple mechanisms. Members of a nascent profession may seek to estab
-lish a monopoly or otherwise regulate the supply of labor to advance 
their interests. An additional and often unstated but important goal is to 
establish a shared set of values, ethos, standards of conduct, culture, and 
mindset for a profession. Another frequently unstated goal is to facilitate 
compliance with contractual or other requirements.
Professional status for an individual is generally associated with the 
following mechanisms: (1) passing a knowledge and/or performance 
test, (2) completion of a course of study on the intellectual basis of the 
profession, (3) a sustained period of mentored experience/apprenticeship, 
(4) continuing education, (5) licensing by a formal authority, and (6) ethi
-cal standards of behavior with enforcement. A ˜eld in which all of these 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATION, AND CRITERIA 
 27mechanisms are used will almost certainly be recognized as a profession, 
but not all are required for a ˜eld to be recognized as a profession. 
The committee made several observations regarding the role and 
application of several of these mechanisms:

Codes of conduct or ethics 
de˜ne the norms of behavior for a profes
-sion
. 
Although the adoption of such codes is generally a positive step 
with few drawbacks, it does raise two possible concerns in the context of 
cybersecurity. One issue is how the codes relate to actions taken in roles 
that involve offensive operations or active defensive measures (where 
legitimate activities might run afoul of overly narrowly drawn standards). 
The other is how the codes might (in the short run) affect the hiring of 
ﬁblack hatsﬂ (those who have violated computer security laws or rules in 
the past but may be a valuable source of talent in protecting computer 
security) for ﬁwhite hatﬂ jobs.
1
Certi˜cates
 and 
certi˜cation
 are ways to demonstrate not only an 
individual™s competence in a well-de˜ned area of cybersecurity, but also 
an individual™s interest and commitment. They may provide a useful com
-plement or supplement to academic degrees in establishing knowledge 
and commitment. Views of certi˜cates and certi˜cations vary with respect 
to individual careers or workplaces: some see them as valuable, while 
 
others omit them from resumes because they believe they may diminish, 
not enhance, some employers™ perception of their technical credentials. 
The content of education and training programs can also be certi˜ed to 
have met an external standard. 

Licensure
 involves a government restriction on practice without a 
license, generally for reasons involving public safety or trust. The sense of 
the committee is that it is too early for licensure in cybersecurity, at least 
broadly, because today™s engineering practices for cybersecurity fall short 
of highly reliable methodologies found in some other areas of engineering 
where licensing has been applied. Licensure may have some utility in the 
future as the underlying science and engineering practice improves.
Conclusion 6. 
The path toward professionalization of a ˜eld can be slow 
and dif˜cult, and not all portions of a ˜eld can or should be professional
-ized at the same time. 
There has, for example, been a multi-decade discussion about the pro
-fessionalization of software developers, with no consensus as yet reached 
1  There are other contexts, such as law enforcement and the military, where a careful 
distinction must be made between actions that may be duty in one context but prohibited, 
or even criminal, in another.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
among workers, professional organizations, and employers about whether 
or how to professionalize. Even 100 years after the Flexner report,
2 which 
spurred education reforms and greater professionalization of medical 
practice, the medical profession continues to debate how best to instill 
new doctors with the requisite knowledge and skills. The professional
-ization of other ˜elds, such as law and aviation, has also evolved over 
the course of many decades. Where professionalization does occur, it will 
take time, as consensus is developed, professional associations emerge 
or evolve, and professionalization mechanisms achieve recognition by 
employers and government. 
CRITERIA
Conclusion 7. 
Professionalization has associated costs and bene˜ts that 
should be weighed when making decisions to undertake professionaliza
-tion activities.
 Professionalization is not a proxy for ﬁbetter,ﬂ but it may be a useful 
tool in certain circumstances. The following criteria are suggested to help 
identify cybersecurity specialties and circumstances where professional
-ization may be appropriate and to assess the potential effects of different 
professionalization mechanisms: 

Do the bene˜ts of a given professionalization measure outweigh the poten
-tial supply restrictions resulting from the additional barriers to entry? 
Profes
-sionalization can be both a magnet (attracting people to the ˜eld) and a 
funnel (restricting people from entering the ˜eld). It can also act as a sieve 
if people who have moved from general IT occupations or other positions 
into cybersecurity roles are subjected to new professionalization require
-ments and then move out of cybersecurity. The cost and time required for 
certi˜cation or a degree may also narrow the pipeline of people entering 
the ˜eld. A corollary is that overly narrow professionalization measures 
may ˜lter out workers whose skills are needed (e.g., certi˜cations focused 
on technical skills that ˜lter out needed nontechnical skills). On the other 
hand, professionalization may increase supply over time, as it helps 
increase awareness and desirability of that profession and thus increases 
the number of individuals who consider cybersecurity as a career. By 
helping de˜ne roles and career paths, it can also help workers identify 
suitable jobs and help employers identify suitable workers. Specializa
-tion and strati˜cation may also help address supply issues, much as the 
2  A. Flexner, 
Medical Education in the United States and Canada: A Report to the Carnegie Foun
-dation for the Advancement of Teaching,
 Merrymount Press, Boston, Mass., 1910.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATION, AND CRITERIA 
 29introduction of nurse practitioners and physician assistants expanded the 
workforce providing primary medical care. 

Does the potential to provide additional information about a candidate 
outweigh the risks of false certainty about who is actually best suited for a job? 
Certi˜cates and certi˜cations may provide useful tools for vetting job 
candidates, but overreliance on them may screen out some of the most 
talented and suitable individuals. This is particularly true in cybersecurity 
today, where some of the most effective workers develop their skillsets 
through informal methods (e.g., self-taught hackers). Organizations that 
do not already have a sophisticated cybersecurity workforce may place 
a greater value on professionalization measures because they make it 
easier for them to identify quali˜ed workers. However, at a time when 
few think the cybersecurity situation is improving, and where ﬁsidewaysﬂ 
thinking may be at a premium, creativity and innovation may be lost with 
overly rigid screening. Moreover, given the ˚uid and changing nature of 
cybersecurity work, the knowledge, skills, and abilities actually needed 
in a particular job can change, and workers™ roles and responsibilities can 
also shift rapidly. 

Do the bene˜ts of establishing the standards needed for professionaliza
-tion outweigh the risks of obsolescence (when the knowledge or skills associated 
with the standard are out-of-date by the time a standard is agreed on) and ossi
-˜cation (when the establishment of a standard inhibits further development by 
workers of their skills and knowledge)? 
It takes time to reach consensus on 
the standards needed to establish a curriculum or certi˜cation, and it can 
be dif˜cult to reach convergence, given the rate of change in underlying 
technologies and the rapid pace at which the context and threat evolve. 
Following receipt of a degree or certi˜cation, workers may stop devel
-oping their skills and knowledge. Strategies for addressing these chal
-lenges include focusing assessments as much as possible on fundamental 
concepts, segmenting a ˜eld (where possible) into suf˜ciently narrow 
specialty roles, adopting more nimble processes for updating content, 
and requiring continuing education and periodic recerti˜cation to refresh 
requirements. 
Recommendation. Activities by the federal government and other 
entities to professionalize a cybersecurity occupation should be 
undertaken only when that occupation has well-de˜ned and stable 
characteristics, when there are observed de˜ciencies in the occupa
-tional workforce that professionalization could help remedy, and 
when the bene˜ts outweigh the costs. 
Cybersecurity is a broad ˜eld, and professionalization is something 
that can be undertaken for speci˜c occupations within the ˜eld and not 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
the ˜eld as a whole. Before professionalization activities are undertaken 
for an occupation, two high-level criteria should be met:
1.
 The occupation has well-de˜ned characteristics. These include the 
following:


have a stable (but not necessarily static) common body of knowledge on 
which members of the profession can be judged to a generally agreed-
upon standard. This does not imply, however, that the occupation is static; 
even within a rapidly evolving profession, core knowledge elements that 
remain stable can be identi˜ed. 







that distinguish the profession from others. 








-ization mechanisms.



-sion will be held.
Not all of these characteristics or standards must be met, but the level 
of readiness for professionalization is higher when more of them are met.
2.
 There is credible evidence of de˜ciencies in the occupational workforce.
 These might include skill de˜ciencies, questions of legitimacy among 
the current set of practitioners, or concerns about accountability. Each 
de˜ciency should be separately identi˜ed. There should be a compel
-ling argument that professionalization (and the speci˜c proposed mech
-anisms) will remedy each observed de˜ciency. Finally, the bene˜ts of 
 
professionalization to remedy the targeted de˜ciencies should outweigh 
the potential costs. 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Appendixes
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33
Appendix A
Biographies of Committee Members
Diana L. Burley
, 
Co-Chair
, is associate professor in the Graduate School 
of Education and Human Development at George Washington University 
(GW). Dr. Burley joined GW in 2007 and has served as the inaugural chair 
of the Human and Organizational Learning Department and as director 
of the Executive Leadership Doctoral Program. Prior to joining the GW 
faculty, she served as a program of˜cer in the Directorate for Education 
and Human Resources at the National Science Foundation (NSF), where 
she managed multimillion-dollar grant programs designed to increase the 
capacity of the U.S. higher education enterprise to produce scientists. At 
NSF she served as the lead program of˜cer of the Federal Cyber Service 
Scholarship (Cyber Corps) program, and based on her work, Dr. Burley 
was honored by the Federal Chief Information Of˜cers Council and the 
Colloquium on Information Systems Security Education for outstanding 
efforts toward the development of the federal cybersecurity workforce. 
She is a frequent contributor to the national cybersecurity forums, such as 
the National Initiative on Cyber Security Education (NICE) Workshop, the 
Federal Information Systems Security Educators™ Association Conference, 
and the Department of Homeland Security™s (DHS™s) Software Assurance 
Forum. Most recently, Dr. Burley was appointed to the 2012 Common
-wealth of Virginia Joint Commission on Technology and Science Cyber 
Security Committee. In addition, she serves as the co-principal investiga
-tor (co-PI) for Curriculum and Research of National CyberWatch, an NSF-
funded cybersecurity research and education center. She is one of two GW 
representatives to the Institute for Information Infrastructure Protection 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
(I3P)Ša consortium of leading institutions dedicated to strengthening 
the cyber infrastructure of the United States; a research scholar in the 
GW Institute for Public Policy; and a senior research scientist in the GW 
Cyber Security Research and Policy Institute. She holds an M.S. in public 
management and policy, an M.S. in organization science, and a Ph.D. in 
organization science and information technology from Carnegie Mellon 
University, where she studied as a Woodrow Wilson Foundation fellow 
in public policy.
Seymour (Sy) E. Goodman
, 
Co-Chair
, is professor of international affairs 
and computing, jointly at the Sam Nunn School of International Affairs and 
the College of Computing at the Georgia Institute of Technology (
 
Georgia 
Tech). He serves as co-director of both the Georgia Tech Information Secu
-rity Center and the Center for International Strategy, Technology and Policy. 
Dr. Goodman™s research interests include international developments in the 
information technologies (IT), technology diffusion, IT and national secu
-rity, and related public policy issues. Areas of geographic interest include 
the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, Latin America, the Middle 
East, South and Southeast Asia, and parts of Africa. Earlier research had 
been in areas of statistical and continuum physics, combinatorial algo
-rithms, and software engineering. Current work includes research on the 
global diffusion of the Internet and the protection of large IT-based infra
-structures. Immediately before coming to Georgia Tech, he was director 
of the Consortium for Research on Information Security and Policy at 
the 
 Center for International Security and Cooperation, with an appoint
-ment in the Department of Engineering Economic Systems and Operations 
Research, both at Stanford University; and professor of management infor
-mation systems and a member of the Center for Middle Eastern Studies at 
the University of Arizona. Earlier tenured and visiting appointments have 
been at the University of Virginia (applied mathematics, computer science, 
and Soviet and East European studies), Princeton University (mathe
 
matics 
and the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs), and 
the University of Chicago (economics). Dr. Goodman is contributing edi
-tor for international perspectives for the 
Communications of the ACM
 and 
has served with many government, academic, professional society, and 
industry advisory and study groups. His research pursuits have taken 
him to all seven continents and about 100 countries and have included 
testimony before legislative bodies and ministerial-level brie˜ngs. He is 
currently PI on two large grants from NSF and the MacArthur Founda
-tion. Dr. 
 Goodman was an undergraduate at Columbia University, where 
he started as an aspiring English major, and obtained his Ph.D. from the 
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), where he worked on problems 
of applied mathematics and mathematical physics.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 35Matt Bishop
 is a professor of computer science at the University of Cali
-fornia, Davis. He was a research scientist at the Research Institute of 
Advanced Computer Science and was on the faculty at Dartmouth College 
before joining the Department of Computer Science at the University of 
California, Davis. His main research area is the analysis of vulnerabilities 
in computer systems, including modeling vulnerabilities, building tools 
to detect them, and ameliorating or eliminating them. This work includes 
detecting and handling all types of malicious logic. Dr. Bishop is active 
in the areas of network security, the study of denial of service attacks and 
defenses, policy modeling, software assurance testing, and formal model
-ing of access control. He has also become interested in electronic voting 
and was one of the two PIs of the California Top-to-Bottom Review, which 
performed a technical review of all electronic voting systems certi˜ed in 
the state of California. He is active in information assurance education. 
His textbook, 
Computer Security: Art and Science,
 was published in 2002. 
He also teaches software engineering, machine architecture, operating 
systems, programming, and computer security. He received his Ph.D. in 
computer science in 1984 from Purdue University, where he specialized 
in computer security.
Mischel L. Kwon
 is the president of Mischel Kwon and Associates, LLC, 
a security consulting ˜rm specializing in technical defensive security, 
security operations and information assurance. She is an IT executive with 
more than 29 years of experience ranging from application design and 
development, network architecture and deployment, information assur
-ance policy, audit and management, technical defensive security, and large 
wireless system security, to building organizational and national-level 
computer emergency/incident response/readiness teams. Most recently, 
as vice president of public sector security for RSA Security, Ms. Kwon was 
responsible for leading RSA in assisting public sector security solutions, 
strategies, technologies and policy. In June 2008, she was named the direc
-tor for the U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT), where 
she spearheaded the organization responsible for analyzing and reduc
-ing cyber threats and vulnerabilities in federal networks, disseminating 
cyber threat warning information, and coordinating national incident 
response activities. Ms. Kwon brings a unique blend of hands-on expe
-rience, academic research and training, and a seasoned understanding 
of how to build operational organizations from inception. Among her 
successes at the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ), where she was deputy 
director for IT Security Staff, she built and deployed the Justice Secu
-rity Operations Center to monitor and defend the DOJ network against 
cyber threats. In addition, she serves as an adjunct professor at George 
 
Washington University, where she also runs the George 
 Washington Uni
-Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
versity Cyber Defense Lab. Ms. Kwon holds an M.S. in computer science 
from 
 Marymount University and a graduate certi˜cate in computer secu
-rity and information assurance.
Kevin R. Murphy
 is a consulting expert at Lamorinda Consulting, LLC 
and an af˜liate faculty member in the Department of Psychology at 
 
Colorado State University. He was a Fulbright scholar at the University 
of Stockholm and is a fellow of the American Psychological Associa
-tion, the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology, and the 
American Psychological Society. He is the recipient of the Society for 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology™s 2004 Distinguished Scienti˜c 
Contribution Award. He served as president of the Society for Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology (1997-1998) and as associate editor and 
then editor of the 
Journal of Applied Psychology
 (1991-2002), as well as edi
-tor of 
Industrial and Organizational Psychology: Perspectives on Science and 
Practice 
(2012-present). He is a member of the editorial boards of 
Human 
Performance, Personnel Psychology,
 Human Resource Management Review,
 International Journal of Management Reviews,
 Journal of Industrial Psychol
-ogy,
 and 
International Journal of Selection and Assessment
. He served as a 
member and chair of the Department of Defense Advisory Committee on 
Military Personnel Testing and has also served on four National Academy 
of Sciences committees, most recently the Committee to Review the Sci
-enti˜c Evidence on the Polygraph. He has served as an expert witness in 
more than 20 cases involving age, race, and sex discrimination. He is the 
author of more than 150 articles and book chapters and author or editor 
of 11 books, in areas ranging from psychometrics and statistical analysis 
to individual differences, performance assessment, gender, and honesty 
in the workplace. Dr. Murphy™s main areas of research include person
-nel selection and placement, performance appraisal, and psychological 
measurement. His current work focuses on understanding the valida
-tion process. He earned his Ph.D. from Pennsylvania State University in 
1979; served on the faculties of Rice University, New York University, 
and 
 Colorado State University; and has had visiting appointments at the 
University of California, Berkeley, and the University of Limerick.
Philip M. Neches
 is the chairman of Foundation Ventures, LLC. He is 
also an independent consultant working with early-stage companies in 
the information technology and communications service industries on their technical, market, and business strategies as an advisor, board mem
-ber, and investor. A world-renowned authority on databases, he was the 
founder and chief scientist of Teradata Corporation, a leading database 
technology vendor. He began his career as the manager for the Systems 
Evaluation Group at Transaction Technology, Inc. (a Citicorp subsidiary), 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX A 37where he led analysis of consumer banking networks, including the ˜rst 
large-scale deployment of automated teller machines (ATMs) in the United 
States. Later at Teradata, he pioneered the application of parallel process
-ing to commercial applications. As senior vice president and chief scientist 
for NCR Corporation, he led both the repositioning of NCR™s computer 
product family and the product plan for a merger with AT&T. Dr. Neches 
served as vice president and chief technical of˜cer of Multimedia Prod
-ucts and Services Group at AT&T Corporation. He has served on the 
board of directors of ExpandBeyond, Inc., and on the advisory boards of 
EarthLink, Tacoda Systems, Luxtera, and the Technology Group of Merrill 
Lynch. Other prior directorships include MCC, Semitech, Dayton Public 
Radio, DemoGraFx, MediaMap, PeopleLink, and VendQuest. He serves 
on the Caltech board of trustees and sits on its technology transfer com
-mittee and chairs the student experience committee. Dr. Neches holds B.S., 
M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from Caltech.
Charles ﬁCaseyﬂ O™Brien
 is director of the National CyberWatch 
 Center, 
an NSF Advanced Technological Education-funded cyber
 security con-sortium headquartered at Prince George™s Community College in Largo, 
 
Maryland. His major teaching and research interests include cyber exer
-cise design and delivery, scalable and cost-effective information secu
-rity laboratories, and information security curriculum development. 
Mr. O™Brien also teaches internationally and is a frequently invited 
speaker at 
 various conferences. He has coordinated the Mid-Atlantic Col
-legiate Cyber Defense Competition since 2005 and is a co-founder of the 
National Cyber League, which was founded in 2011 with the sole purpose 
of providing a training ground for students to develop cybersecurity 
skills through combined individual and team exercises via virtual ﬁCyber 
 
Stadiums.ﬂ Mr. O™Brien earned a B.A. in psychology from the University 
of St. Thomas and an M.A. in psychology from Duquesne University, and 
he holds various industry-recognized certi˜cations.
Ronald P. Sanders
 is a senior executive advisor for Booz Allen 
 Hamilton 
and the ˜rm™s ˜rst Booz Allen Hamilton fellow. Dr. Sanders supports 
federal and other clients in the areas of human capital, learning, and orga
-nizational transformation. He joined the ˜rm after completing 37 years 
of federal service; 20 of those years were in senior executive positions. 
Before coming to Booz Allen, Dr. Sanders served as the U.S. intelligence 
community™s (IC™s) associate director of national intelligence and ˜rst 
chief human capital of˜cer, where he played a key role in the establish
-ment of the Of˜ce of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) and the 
integration of the IC. He also served as the Of˜ce of Personnel Manage
-ment™s (OPM™s) ˜rst associate director for human resource policy, with 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
responsibility for all civil service policies and programs for millions of 
federal employees and retirees. Among his achievements at OPM, he 
led the creation of the Senior Executive Service™s revolutionary pay-for-
performance system. Prior to his OPM appointment, Dr. Sanders served 
as the ˜rst chief human resources of˜cer for the Internal Revenue Service, 
where he was honored for his leadership role in the service™s landmark 
restructuring. Other executive positions include director of civilian per
-sonnel for the Department of Defense (where he received the ˜rst of 
his three Presidential Rank awards), founding director of the Defense 
Civilian Personnel Service, and deputy director of civilian personnel for 
the Department of the Air Force. In that latter capacity, he earned the 
Air Force™s prestigious General Robert J. Dixon Leadership AwardŠ
the ˜rst and only civilian to be so honored. A ˜nalist for the Service to 
America Career Achievement Medal, Dr. Sanders is also the recipient of 
the National Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal, three Presidential 
Rank Awards from three different agencies, two OPM Theodore 
 Roosevelt 
Awards for Distinguished Public Service, and the American Society for 
Public Administration Award for Outstanding Career Service. He and 
his ODNI team also earned a coveted Harvard University Innovations 
in American Government award. In addition, Dr. Sanders taught and 
directed research centers at George Washington University and 
 Syracuse 
University™s Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs. He is an 
adjunct faculty member with the Brookings Institution Center for Public 
Policy Education, chairs its Executive Education Advisory Board, and sits 
on the board of the American Society for Training and Development. He 
attended MIT™s Sloan School of Management Senior Executive Program 
and completed a congressional fellowship with the U.S. Senate Govern
-mental Affairs Committee. A fellow of the National Academy of Public 
Administration, Dr. Sanders earned his doctorate in public administra
-tion from George Washington University. He also holds an M.S. degree 
in human resource management from the University of Utah and a B.A. 
degree in business management from the University of South Florida.
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39
Appendix B
Workshop Agendas
WORKSHOP 1: DECEMBER 12-13, 2012
 NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES
 WASHINGTON, D.C.
December 12. 2012
8:15 a.m.
 Welcome
 Angela Curry, Director, National Cybersecurity Workforce Struc
-ture Strategy, Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
8:30
 Overview
Diana Burley, George Washington University, Committee 
Co-Chair
Seymour Goodman, Georgia Institute of Technology, Committee 
Co-Chair
8:45
 Panel 1ŠFederal Civilian Workforce 
Steven Moxley, Senior Security Engineer, Of˜ce of the Chief 
Administrator, U.S. House of Representatives
Sharon James, Director, Cybersecurity Architecture and Implemen
-tation, Internal Revenue Service 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
Patrick Kelly, Senior Of˜cial for Privacy, Department of Health 
and Human Services
 Moderator: 
Mischel Kwon, Committee Member
10:30
  
Panel 2ŠFederal National Security and Intelligence 
Workforce
Leonard T. Reinsfelder, Deputy Associate Director of Education 
and Training, NSA/CSS 
Chris Kelsall, Branch Head, Cyberspace/Information Technology 
(IT) Workforce, Of˜ce of the Department of the Navy Chief 
Information Of˜cer, U.S. Navy 
Brian Andrzejewski, Outreach Team Lead, Futures Exploration, 
Defense Cyber Crime Center, Department of Defense
Moderator: 
Ron Sanders, Committee Member
12:30 p.m.
 National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity 
 
Education and Awareness Of˜ce, DHS 
1:15 
 Panel 3ŠFederal Law Enforcement Workforce
Ed Cabrera, Assistant Special Agent in Charge (ATSAIC)-
 Criminal Investigative Division, U.S. Secret Service (USSS)
Trent Teyema, ATSAIC-Cyber, Washington Field Of˜ce, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation 
Matthew Swenson, Section Chief, Computer Forensics, Cyber 
Crimes Center, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
 Moderator:
 Diana Burley, Committee Co-Chair
2:45 
 Panel 4ŠState and Local Government
Cameron Kilberg, Assistant Secretary of Technology, Common
-wealth of Virginia
Maribeth Luftglass, Chief Information Of˜cer (CIO), Fairfax 
County Public Schools 
Michael Aliperti, Senior Director of Programs, MS-ISAC (by 
phone)
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 41Moderator:
 Charles ﬁCaseyﬂ O™Brien, Committee Member
4:00 
 Public Comments and Questions
 Moderator: 
Diana Burley, Committee Co-Chair
December 13, 2012
8:30 a.m.
 Welcome and Housekeeping
Diana Burley, Committee Co-Chair
Seymour Goodman, Committee Co-Chair
8:35
 Panel 5ŠIndustry and Critical Infrastructure
Lee Holcomb, Vice President Strategic Initiatives, Lockheed Martin 
Information Systems and Global Solutions 
Stephanie Derdouri, Senior Advisor for Federal System Authoriza
-tion and Compliance, A.I. Solutions
Byron Collie, Director, Financial Services Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center
Vanessa Pollock, Network Security Business Manager, Motorola 
Peter Rothschild, Security Analyst and Project Manager, SRA 
International
Christopher Day, Chief Security Architect, Terremark 
Joe Albaugh, Associate CIO and Chief Information Security Of˜cer 
(CISO), U.S. Department of Transportation
Michelle Monsees, Independent Consultant 
 Moderator: 
Philip Neches, Committee Member
    
11:30
  Panel 6ŠAssessment and Certi˜cation: Existing and Emerg
-ing Tools 
Marc Noble, Vice Chair, Cybersecurity Certi˜cation Collaborative 
(C3) and International Information Systems, Security Certi˜ca
-tion Consortium, Inc., (ISC)²
Franklin Reeder, Chairman, NBISE 
Rosey Greer, Rosey Greer Consulting 
Alan Paller, Director of Research, SANS Institute
Moderator:
 Seymour Goodman, Committee Co-Chair
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
WORKSHOP 2: FEBRUARY 25-26, 2013
 SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA
February 25, 2013 
8:45 a.m.
 Welcome
 Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity 
 
Education and Awareness Of˜ce, DHS
Ron Sanders, Committee Member
9:00 
 Panel 1ŠEducation, Training, and Pipeline
James Jones, Executive Director, Mid-Paci˜c Information and 
 Communication Technologies
Telle Whitney, Chief Executive Of˜cer (CEO) and President, Anita 
Borg Institute 
Dan Manson, Professor of Computer Information Systems at 
 
California State Polytechnic University, Pomona, National 
Cyber League, and Cyberwatch West
Jaishri Mehta, Cyberwatch West, Mt. San 
 
Antonio College 
Moderator:
 Charles ﬁCaseyﬂ O™Brien, Committee Member
10:15 
 Panel 2ŠIndustry (Part 1)
Steve Lipner, Partner Director of Program Management, 
 
Trust
 
worthy Computing Security, Microsoft Corporation
John Munoz, Technical Program Manager, Google, Inc. 
Sean Mason, Director for CIRT, General Electric 
Mike McConnell, Booz Allen Hamilton
Moderator:
 Ron Sanders, Committee Member
11:40 
 Panel 3ŠState Government 
Doug Robinson, Executive Director, National Association of State 
Chief Information Of˜cers 
Theresa A. Masse, State CISO, Oregon
Michele Robinson, State CISO, California 
Robert Ono, CISO, University of California, Davis
Moderator: 
Kevin Murphy, Committee Member 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 432:00 
 Panel 4ŠIndustry (Part 2)
John Stewart, Senior Vice President and Chief Security Of˜cer, 
Cisco 
John D. Johnson, Global Security Strategist, Deere and Company
Dickie George, Senior Advisor for Cyber Security, Applied Physics 
Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
Moderator:
 Mischel Kwon, Committee Member
3:00 
 Panel 5ŠFederal Government 
Matthew Scholl, Deputy Division Chief, Computer Security 
 
Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Matthew A. Parrella, Assistant United States Attorney, Chief, 
Computer Hacking/Intellectual Property Unit, United States 
Attorney™s Of˜ce, Northern District of California 
Brian Busony, ATSAIC-ECTF/Asset Forfeiture/Admin, U.S. Secret 
Service, San Francisco Field Of˜ce
Moderator:
 Philip Neches, Committee Member
4:00 
 NICE Initiative Update 
Peggy Maxson, Director, National Cybersecurity Education 
 Strategy, DHS
4:30 
 Open Discussion/ Question and Answer Session 
Moderator:
 Seymour Goodman, Committee Co-Chair
February 26, 2013
8:00 a.m.
 Welcome
 Seymour Goodman, Committee Co-Chair
8:15 
 (ISC)
2 2013 Global Information Security Workforce Study
Julie Peeler, Director, (ISC)²
 Foundation 
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
8:45 
  
Panel 6ŠInformation Technology and Cybersecurity 
 Professional Organizations
Jeff Frisk, Director, Certi˜cation Program, GIAC
Hord Tipton, Executive Director, (ISC)²
 Eric Hibbard, CTO Security and Privacy for Hitachi Data Systems
Taylor Pellegrini, Marketing Executive, EC-Council 
Eugene H. Spafford, Professor of Computer Science, Purdue 
 
University, and Chair, U.S. Public Policy Council of ACM
Terry Erdle, Executive VP for Skills Certi˜cation, CompTIA 
Christopher Buse, CISO, State of Minnesota, and Member, Board 
of Directors, Minnesota Chapter of the Information Systems 
Audit and Control Association
Moderator: 
Seymour Goodman, Committee Co-Chair
WORKSHOP 3: MARCH 27, 2013
 TEXAS A&M AT SAN ANTONIO
8:30 a.m.
 Welcome
 Diana Burley, Committee Co-Chair
John Dickson, Principal, Denim Group, Ltd.
Carolyn Wilson Green, Director, Center of Information Technology 
and Cyber Security, Texas A&M University, San Antonio
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity 
 
Education and Awareness Of˜ce, DHS
9:00 
 NICE Initiative Update 
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity 
Workforce, DHS
9:30 
 Panel 1ŠState and Local Government
Bert Jarreau, Chief Innovation Of˜cer, National Association of 
Counties
Brian Engle, CISO, Department of Information Resources, State of 
Texas 
Greg White, Associate Professor, University of Texas, San Antonio, 
and Director, Center for Infrastructure Assurance and Security
Moderator:
 Kevin Murphy, Committee Member
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX B 4510:40 
 Panel 2ŠCybersecurity Education, Training, and Pipeline
Carolyn Wilson Green, Director of the Center for Information 
Technology and Cyber Security, Texas A&M University, 
San Antonio 
Art Conklin, Associate Professor and Director of the Center for 
Information Security Research and Education, University of 
Houston 
Troy Touchette, Chair, Computer Information Systems Department, 
San Antonio College 
Adrian Collett, Career and Technical Education Specialist, State of 
Texas Education Service Center, Region 20
Scott ﬁSkipﬂ Runyan, Technical Advisor to the Commander, 
 39th Information Operations Squadron, U.S. Air Force 
 (via teleconference)
Moderator:
 Diana Burley, Committee Co-Chair
1:00 p.m. 
 Panel 3ŠCerti˜cation and Licensing 
Roy Swift, Senior Director, Personnel Credentialing Accreditation, 
ANSI (by teleconference)
Lance Kinney, Executive Director, Texas Board of Professional 
Engineers
Jeff Pike, Senior Technical Director, GIAC
Moderator:
 Seymour Goodman, Committee Co-Chair
2:00 
  
Panel 4ŠHuman Resources, Recruiting, and Talent 
Development
Chris Prosise, Engineer, Pandesta
Harvinder Singh, CEO, Bestica 
3:10
 Panel 5ŠNational Security and Critical Infrastructure
Arthur ﬁWallyﬂ Wachdorf, Senior Advisor for Intelligence and 
Cyber Operations, 24th Air Force 
Guy Walsh, Technical Advisor to the Deputy Commander, U.S. 
Cyber Command (via teleconference)
Frank Grace, Lead Specialist, Tesoro 
Moderator:
 Philip Neches, Committee Member
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
4:15 
 Panel 6ŠIndustry
Rocky Destefano, Founder and CEO, VisibleRisk
Janie Gonzalez, CEO, Webhead
Sergio C. Muniz, President, CYFOR Technologies, LLC
Moderator: 
Philip Neches, Committee Member
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47
Appendix C
Speakers and Participants at Workshops 
Organized by the Committee
DECEMBER 12-13, 2012, WORKSHOP SPEAKERS
Joe Albaugh, Associate Chief Information Of˜cer and Chief Information 
Security Of˜cer, U.S. Department of Transportation
Michael Aliperti, Senior Director of Programs, Multi-State Information 
Sharing and Analysis Center (by telephone)
Brian Andrzejewski, Outreach Team Lead, Futures Exploration, Defense 
Cyber Crime Center, Department of Defense
Ed Cabrera, Assistant Special Agent in Charge (ATSAIC)-Criminal 
Investigative Division, U.S. Secret Service (USSS)
Byron Collie, Director, Financial Services Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center
Angela Curry, Director, National Cybersecurity Workforce Structure 
Strategy, Department of Homeland Security
Christopher Day, Chief Security Architect, Terremark
Stephanie Derdouri, Senior Advisor for Federal System Authorization 
and Compliance, A.I. Solutions
Rosey Greer, Rosey Greer Consulting
Lee Holcomb, Vice President Strategic Initiatives, Lockheed Martin 
Information Systems and Global Solutions
Sharon James, Director, Cybersecurity Architecture and Implementation, 
Internal Revenue Service
Patrick Kelly, Senior Of˜cial for Privacy, Department of Health and 
Human Services
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
Chris Kelsall, Branch Head, Cyberspace/Information Technology (IT) 
Workforce, Of˜ce of the Department of the Navy Chief Information 
Of˜cer, U.S. Navy
Cameron Kilberg, Assistant Secretary of Technology, Commonwealth of 
Virginia
Maribeth Luftglass, Chief Information Of˜cer, Fairfax County Public 
Schools
Michelle Monsees, Independent Consultant
Steven Moxley, Senior Security Engineer, Of˜ce of the Chief 
Administrator, U.S. House of Representatives
Marc Noble, Vice Chair, Cybersecurity Certi˜cation Collaborative 
and International Information Systems, Security Certi˜cation 
Consortium, Inc.
Alan Paller, Director of Research, SANS Institute
Vanessa Pollock, Network Security Business Manager, Motorola
Franklin Reeder, Chairman, National Board of Information Security 
Examiners
Leonard T. Reinsfelder, Deputy Associate Director of Education and 
Training, NSA/CSS
Peter Rothschild, Security Analyst and Project Manager, SRA International
Matthew Swenson, Section Chief, Computer Forensics, Cyber Crimes 
Center, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Trent Teyema, Assistant Special Agent in Charge-Cyber, Washington 
Field Of˜ce, Federal Bureau of Investigation
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity Education 
and Awareness Of˜ce, Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
FEBRUARY 25-26, 2013, WORKSHOP 
SPEAKERS AND PARTICIPANTS
Mike Avina, Healthnet
Sarah Bohne, Senior Manager of Communications, (ISC)²
Christopher Buse, Chief Information Security Of˜cer, State of 
Minnesota, and Member, Board of Directors, Minnesota Chapter of 
the Information Systems Audit and Control Association
Brian Busony, USSS, San Francisco Field Of˜ce
Scott Cassity, Global Information Assurance Certi˜cation
Terry Erdle, Executive Vice President for Skills Certi˜cation, CompTIA
Jeff Frisk, Director, Certi˜cation Program, GIAC
Richard M. (Dickie) George, Senior Advisor for Cyber Security, Applied 
Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University
Eric Hibbard, Chief Technology Of˜cer, Security and Privacy, Hitachi 
Data Systems
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 49Hillary Homan, Booz Allen Hamilton
Jayson Jenkins, Booz Allen Hamilton
John D. Johnson, Global Security Strategist, Deere & Company
James Jones, Executive Director, Mid-Paci˜c Information and 
Communication Technologies
Steven LaFountain, Distinguished Academic Chair for Information 
Assurance and Cyber, National Security Agency
Brian LaMacchia, Microsoft Research
Steve Lipner, Partner Director of Program Management, Trustworthy 
Computing Security, Microsoft Corporation
Daniel Lohrmann, Chief Security Of˜cer, State of Michigan
Dan Manson, Professor of Computer Information Systems at California 
State Polytechnic University, Pomona, National Cyber League, and 
Cyberwatch West
Sean Mason, Director, Critical Incident Response Team, General Electric
Theresa A. Masse, State Chief Information Security Of˜cer, State of 
Oregon
Peggy Maxson, Director, National Cybersecurity Education Strategy, DHS
Jaishri Mehta, Cyberwatch West, Mt. San Antonio College
VADM John M. (Mike) McConnell (USN, ret.), Booz Allen Hamilton
John Munoz, Technical Program Manager, Google, Inc.
Robert Ono, Chief Information Security Of˜cer, University of California, 
Davis
Randi Parker, Director, Public Advocacy, CompTIA
Matthew A. Parrella, Assistant United States Attorney, U.S. Attorney™s 
Of˜ce for the Northern District of California
Sebron Partridge, Chief Information Security Of˜cer, Riverside County, 
California
Julie Peeler, Director, (ISC)² Foundation
Taylor Pellegrini, Marketing Executive, EC-Council
James Richards, Director of IT Security, West Virginia Of˜ce of Technology
Doug Robinson, Executive Director, National Association of State Chief 
Information Of˜cers
Michele Robinson, State Chief Information Security Of˜cer, State of 
California
Matthew Scholl, Deputy Division Chief, Computer Security Division, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology
John Sjoberg
Eugene H. Spafford, Professor of Computer Science, Purdue University, 
and Chair, U.S. Public Policy Council of ACM
John Stewart, Senior Vice President and Chief Security Of˜cer, Cisco
Hord Tipton, Executive Director, (ISC)²
Jodi Traversaro, Department of Human Resources, State of California
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.50 PROFESSIONALIZING THE NATION™S CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE?
Telle Whitney, CEO and President, Anita Borg Institute
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity Education 
and Awareness Of˜ce, DHS
Noel Wray, Booz Allen Hamilton
MARCH 27-28, 2013, WORKSHOP 
 SPEAKERS AND PARTICIPANTS
Daniel Aguallo, In˜nity Advisory Group
Roger Burr
John Carrera, Holmes High School, San Antonio, Texas
Brian Carron, Carron and Associates, LLC
Arthur Celestin, Southwest High School, San Antonio, Texas
Adrian Collett, Career and Technical Education Specialist, State of Texas 
Education Service Center, Region 20
Ron Comeau, General Dynamics
Art Conklin, Associate Professor and Director, Center for Information 
Security Research and Education, University of Houston
Chris Cook, Bexar Metro 9-1-1 Network District
Rocky Cortez, U.S. Air Force
Ramanamurthy Dantu, University of North Texas
Rocky Destefano, Founder and Chief Executive Of˜cer, VisibleRisk
John Dickson, Principal, Denim Group, Ltd.
Glenn Dietrick, University of Texas, San Antonio
Brian Engle, Chief Information Security Of˜cer, Department of 
Information Resources, State of Texas
Gus Gonzales III, TekFriends
Al Gonzalez, U.S. Air Force
Janie Gonzalez, Chief Executive Of˜cer, Webhead
Matthew D. Gonzalez, University of the Incarnate Word
Mark Gottsberger, Hallmark College, San Antonio, Texas
Frank Grace, Lead Specialist, Tesoro
Carolyn Wilson Green, Director, Center for Information Technology and 
Cyber Security, Texas A&M University, San Antonio
Ryan Gurr, Booz Allen Hamilton
Barbara Hewitt, Texas A&M University, San Antonio
Nolen Hick, Express News, San Antonio, Texas
Mark Huson, Texas A&M University, San Antonio
Bert Jarreau, Chief Innovation Of˜cer, National Association of Counties
Robert Kaufman, U.S. Air Force
Lance Kinney, Executive Director, Texas Board of Professional Engineers
Taryn Mandrell, Security Researcher, Alert Logic
Jason Matthews, Department of the Air Force
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.APPENDIX C 51Chris Mock, Workforce Solutions, Alamo, Texas
Darryl Mosley, MacAulay-Brown, Inc.
Sergio C. Muniz, President, CYFOR Technologies, LLC
Lis O™Briant
Jeff Pike, Senior Technical Director, Global Information Assurance 
Certi˜cation
Chris Prosise, Engineer, Pandesta
Alonzo Pugh, Department of the Air Force
Rudy Ramirez, Zachary Holdings, Inc.
Scott ﬁSkipﬂ Runyan, Technical Advisor to the Commander, 
 39th Information Operations Squadron, U.S. Air Force 
 (via teleconference)
Joe Sanchez, U.S. Air Force
Terrye Schaetzel, Georgia Tech Research Institute
Harvinder Singh, Chief Executive Of˜cer, Bestica
Mika Spence, VisibleRisk
Roy Swift, Senior Director, Personnel Credentialing Accreditation, ANSI 
(via teleconference)
Troy Touchette, Chair, Computer Information Systems Department, San 
Antonio College
Arthur ﬁWallyﬂ Wachdorf, Senior Advisor for Intelligence and Cyber 
Operations, 24th Air Force
Guy Walsh, Technical Advisor to the Deputy Commander, U.S. Cyber 
Command (via teleconference)
Joules Webb, SASTEMIC
Greg White, Associate Professor, University of Texas, San Antonio, and 
Director, Center for Infrastructure Assurance and Security
Robin ﬁMontanaﬂ Williams, Director, National Cybersecurity Education 
and Awareness Of˜ce, DHS
Vern Williams, The Patria Group
Noel Wray, Booz Allen Hamilton
Nicholas Xenos, Juniper Networks
Professionalizing the Nation's Cybersecurity Workforce?: Criteria for Decision-MakingCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.