DETAILSDistribution, posting, or copying of this PDF is strictly prohibited without written permission of the National Academies Press.  (Request Permission) Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF are copyrighted by the National Academy of Sciences.Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESSVisit the National Academies Press at NAP.edu and login or register to get:Œ  
Œ  10% off the price of print titles
Œ  Special offers and discountsGET THIS BOOKFIND RELATED TITLESThis PDF is available at SHARECONTRIBUTORS
http://nap.edu/18510Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the GlobalEconomy: Lessons from Information and CommunicationsTechnology176 pages | 6 x 9 | HARDBACKISBN 978-0-309-38682-1 | DOI 10.17226/18510Keith Maskus and Stephen A. Merrill, Editors; Committee on Intellectual PropertyManagement in Standard-Setting Processes; Board on Science, Technology, andEconomic Policy; Policy and Global Affairs; National Research CouncilPatent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.CManaBoard on Sommittee o
nagement in S
Science, TecPolicy anKeith MStephen A    n Intellectua
tandar
d-Sett hnology, an nd Global Af Maskus, Ed
iA. Merrill, 
E    
      
  al Property ting Processnd Economi
cffairs 
itor Editor  es 
c Policy 
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.THE NATIONAL ACADEMIES PRESS         500 Fifth Street, NW       Washington, DC 20001 
 NOTICE: The project that is the subject of
 this report was approved by the Governing 
Board of the National Research Council, whos
e members are drawn from the councils of 
the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Insti-
tute of Medicine. The members of the comm
ittee responsible for the report were chosen 
for their special competences and with
 regard for appropriate balance. 
 This study was supported by Contract/G
rant No. 2010-140-113 between the National 
Academy of Sciences and the United States Patent and Trademark Office. Any opinions, 
findings, conclusions, or recommendations expre
ssed in this publication are those of the 
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the organizations or agencies that 
provided support for the project. 

 International Standard Book Number-13: 978-0-309-29312-9 
International Standard Book Number-10: 0-309-29312-X 
 Additional copies of this report are availabl
e for sale from the National Academies Press, 
500 Fifth Street, NW, Keck 360, Washington, DC 20001; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-
3313; Internet, http://www.nap.edu/. 
 Cover: The cover image of the Rubik™s Cube® is used by permission of Seven Towns 
Ltd. www.rubiks.com. The organi
zational logos are used by permission of the American 
National Standards Institute, European Patent Office, European Telecommunication 
Standards Institute, Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Organization for the 
Advancement of Structured Information Standards, United States Patent and Trademark 
Office and the World Wide Web Consortium 
which were among the institutions partici-
pating in the information-gathering phase of 
the study. None of these organizations has 
reviewed or endorsed this report. 
 Copyright 2013 by the National Academ
y of Sciences. All rights reserved. 
 Printed in the United States of America 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.The Nadistingufurtheraauthoritthat re
qRalph JThe NatNationaautonomNationaThe Nameetin
gachieve
EngineeThe Insto secu
rof policsponsiban advi
medica
lof MediThe Na1916 topurposeaccordathe prinal Aca
dscientif
iAcademare chai  ational Academ
uished scholars ance of science 
aty of the charte
r quires it to advi
s. Cicerone is pr
etional Academ
yal Academy of 
Smous in its ad
mal Academy of 
Sational Academ
yg national needs
ments of engin
eering. stitute of Medi
cre the services 
ocy matters perta
iility given to th
eser to the feder
l care, research, 
icine. 
tional Researc
ho associate the 
bes of furthering 
ance with gener
ancipal operating ademy of Engine
eic and enginee
rmies and the Ins
tir and vice chair
,y of Sciences
 isengaged in sci
eand technology 
granted to it by 
se the federal g
oesident of the N
ay of Engineerin
Sciences, as a p
aministration and 
iSciences the re
sy of Engineeri
n, encourages ed
ueers. D
r. C. D. 
Mcine was establi
sof eminent mem
bining to the he
ae National Aca
dal government 
aand education. 
Dh Council
 was 
obroad communit
yknowledge and 
al policies dete
ragency of both 
tering in providi
nring communitietitute of Medici
n, respectively, o
fs a private, non
pentific and engi
nand to their use 
the Congress in 
overnment on s
cational Academ
yg was establish
earallel organiza
tin the selection 
sponsibility for 
ng also sponsor
sucation and reseMote, Jr., is pre
shed in 1970 by 
tbers of appropri
alth of the publi
demy of Science
sand, upon its o
wDr. Harvey V. F
iorganized by th
ey of science an
dadvising the f
ermined by the 
Athe National Ac
ang services to t
hes. The Counci
lne. Dr. Ralph J. 
f the National R
e profit, self-
perpeneering researc
h for the general 
1863, the Acad
ecientific and tec
hy of Sciences. 
ed in 1964, und
etion of outstand
iof its member
sadvising the f
es engineering pearch, and reco
gsident of the Na
tthe National Ac
ate professions ic. The Institute 
s by its congres
swn initiative, t
oineberg is preside National Acad
ed technology w
ederal governmeAcademy, the C
oademy of Scien
che government, 
tl is administer
eCicerone and 
Desearch Counci
lwww.nat
ietuating societ
yh, dedicated to 
welfare. Upon 
emy has a man
dhnical matters. 
Der the charter of 
ing engineers. I
ts, sharing with tederal governm
eprograms aime
dgnizes the supe
rtional Academ
ycademy of Scien
cin the examinat
iacts under the 
sional charter to
o identify issues 
dent of the Instit
uemy of Science
swith the Academ
yent. Functioningouncil has beco
ces and the Nati
othe public, and 
ted jointly by b
oDr. C. D. Mote, 
l. ional-academies.
oy of 
the 
the 
date Dr. the 
t is 
the ent. d at 
rior 
y of 
ces 
ion re- be 
 of 
ute s in 
y™s g in 
me 
on-the oth 
Jr., 
org 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.v COMMITTEE ON INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY  
MANAGEMENT IN STANDARD-SETTING PROCESSES 
  Keith Maskus
, Chair, 
Professor of Economics, Un
iversity of Colorado at 
Boulder 
Rudi Bekkers
, Assistant Professor of Economics of Innovation and  
Technical Change, Eindhoven University of Technology, Netherlands 
Marc Sandy Block
, IP Law Counsel, IBM Corporation 
Jorge Contreras
, Associate Professor, Washington College of Law,  
American University 
Richard J. Gilbert
, Emeritus Professor of Economics, Professor of the 
Graduate School, University of California, Berkeley
 David J. Goodman
, Presidential Fellow and Prof
essor Emeritus, Electrical  
and Computer Engineering, Polytechnic Institute of NYU 
Amy Marasco
, General Manager for Standards, Strategy and Policy,  
Microsoft Corporation 
Timothy Simcoe, Assistant Professor of Strategy and Innovation,  
School of Management, Boston University  
Oliver Smoot
, Past President, International Standards Organization 
Richard Suttmeier
, Emeritus Professor of Political Science,  
University of Oregon 
Andrew Updegrove
, Founding Partner, Gesmer Updegrove, LLP 
  Project Staff 
 Stephen A. Merrill
, Study Director 
Aqila Coulthurst
, Program Coordinator 
Cynthia Getner
, Financial Officer 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.vii  BOARD ON SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY,  
AND ECONOMIC POLICY (STEP) 
  For the National Research Council 
(NRC), this project was overseen by 
the Board on Science, Technology and Economic Policy (STEP), a standing 
board of the NRC established by the National Academies of Sciences and Engi-

neering and the Institute of Medicine in 1991. The mandate of the STEP Board 
is to advise federal, state, and local governments and inform the public about 
economic and related public policies to pr
omote the creation, diffusion, and ap-
plication of new scientific and technical knowledge to enhance the productivity 
and competitiveness of the U.S. economy and foster economic prosperity for all 

Americans. The STEP board and its committees marshal research and the exper-
tise of scholars, industrial managers, investors, and former public officials in a 
wide range of policy areas that affect th
e speed and direction of scientific and 
technological change and thei
r contributions to the growth of the U.S. and global 
economies. Results are comm
unicated through reports, conferences, workshops, 
briefings and electronic media subject to
 the procedures of the National Acade-
mies to ensure their authoritativeness, independence, and objectivity.  
 Paul Joskow 
(Chair
), President, Alfred P. Sloan Foundation 
Ernst Berndt
, Louis E. Seley Professor in Applied Economics,  
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Jeff Bingaman
, Former Senator, New Mexico, U.S. Senate 
Ralph J. Cicerone (ex-officio)
, President, National Academy of Sciences 
Ellen Dulberger, Managing Partner, Ellen Dulberger Enterprises, LLC 
Harvey V. Fineberg (ex-officio)
, President, Institute of Medicine 
Alan Garber, Provost, Harvard University 
Ralph Gomory
, Research Professor, Stern School of Business,  
New York University 
John Hennessy
, President, Stanford University 
William H. Janeway
, Partner, Warburg Pincus 
Richard Lester
, Japan Steel Industry Professor, Department of Nuclear  
Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
David Morgenthaler
, Founding Partner, Morgenthaler Ventures 
Luis M. Proenza
, President and Chief Executive 
Officer, University of Akron 
William J. Raduchel
, Independent Director and Investor 
Kathryn L. Shaw
, Ernest C. Arbuckle Professor of Economics, Graduate 
School of Business, Stanford University  
Laura D™Andrea Tyson
, S.K. and Angela Chan Professor of Global Management, 
Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley 
Hal Varian
, Chief Economist, Google, Inc. 
Dan Mote (ex-officio)
, President, National A
cademy of Engineering 
Alan Wm. Wolff
, Senior Counsel, McKenna, Long & Aldridge LLP
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.viii 
Staff 
 Stephen A. Merrill
, Executive Director 
Charles W. Wessner
, Program Director 
Sujai Shivakumar
, Senior Program Officer 
Paul Beaton, 
Program Officer 
McAlister Clabaugh
, Program Officer 
David Dierksheide
, Program Officer 
Aqila Coulthurst
, Program Coordinator 
Cynthia Getner
, Financial Associate 
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.ix   Preface  The U.S. Patent and Trademark Offi
ce (USPTO) in 2011 asked the Na-
tional Academies™ Board on Science, T
echnology, and Economic Policy (STEP) 
to examine and report on the role of patents in standard-setting processes in an 
international context. For the STEP progr
am, this charge represented the conflu-
ence of its long-standing interests in the standards system on the one hand and 
intellectual property policy on the other hand. The Board™s very first consensus 
study, in response to a congressional mandate, resulted in the report, 
Standards, 
Conformity Assessment, and Trade 
(National Research Council, 1995). And in 
2001, STEP initiated a series of studies of the patent system whose products 
included 
Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy 
(National Research Council, 
2003), 
A Patent System for the 21
st Century 
(National Research Council, 2004), 
Reaping the Benefits of Genomic and Prot
eomic Research: Intellectual Property 
Rights, Innovation, and Public Health 
(National Research Council, 2006), and 
Managing University Intellectual Property in the Public Interest 
(National Re-
search Council, 2010). STEP Board recommendations strongly influenced the 
America Invents Act, enacted in 2011 the first major revision of U.S. patent law 

in more than half a century. 
The present project was approved by
 the Academies™ Governing Board 
Executive Committee with the following charge: 
 An ad hoc committee under the auspices of The National Academies' 

Board on Science, Technology, and Economic Policy (STEP) will exam-
ine and assess how leading national, regional, and multinational standards 
bodies address issues of intellectua
l property (IP) arising in connection 
with the development of technical standards. Through commissioned 
analysis, a public workshop in Washington and a report of the findings of 
an expert committee, the project will first document the policies and prac-

tices of different types of standard-s
etting organizations in different geo-
graphical contexts. The committee will consider policies with respect to 
such matters as requirements for the disclosure of IP essential or relevant 

to the development and implementation of standards, the terms of IP li-
censing to implementers of a standard, and whether conditions attached to 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.x                  
 Preface 
IP incorporated in standards carry over to a new holder in the event of a 
transfer of IP rights. The study w
ill assess how these policies work in 
practice and in a legal context and how variations in these policies relate 
to different types of standards activitie
s, organizations, and fields of tech-
nology. Second, the project will evaluate the effectiveness of these poli-

cies in reducing conflict between IP holders and other implementers, bal-
ancing the interests of firms of diff
erent sizes and with different business 
models, and balancing the interests of producers and consumers. 
 A committee comprised of academic ec
onomists and social scientists, le-
gal scholars, standards professionals, and technologists was appointed by the 
Academies to address the charge. The commi
ttee met four times in the course of 
preparing this report. At the first mee
ting, we received writte
n submissions from 
or heard oral presentations by individuals from government, industry, and the 
standards community. We commissioned a study of the IPR policies of a care-
fully selected sample of national and international SSOs, which was carried out 

by two members of the study committee, Rudi Bekkers, Eindhoven University 
of Technology and Andrew Updegrove, Gesmer Updegrove, L.L.P.
1 Next the 
committee planned and held a two-day symposium, 
Management of Intellectual 
Property in Standard-Setting Processes
, in Washington, D.C., on October 3-4, 
2012, with invited presentations on a variety of topics addressed in this report 
(Appendix B; presentations available at
 http://sites.nationalacademies.org/PGA/ 
step/PGA_072825). The symposium also provided an opportunity for interested 
members of the public to express their vi
ews. The committee is grateful to all of 
these contributors to its deliberations. 
Our study has been carried out in a dy
namic environment. Just in the last 
few months there have been discussions in numerous SSOs about changes to 
their IPR policies, new pronouncements
 from government competition authori-
ties on both sides of the Atlantic, hearings in both houses of Congress, court 
decisions in high-profile legal suits, and a new articulation of China™s policy 
with respect to ﬁnational standards.ﬂ For 
the most part, we have taken account of 
the most important developments through preparation of our report for external 
review in May 2013. The high profile deci
sion of the United States International 
Trade Commission in 
Apple v. Samsung
 that was subsequently overturned by the 
United States Trade Representative occu
rred as the committ
ee deliberated its 
responses to reviewer comments, and the committee could not ignore the rele-

vance of the case™s outcomes to its recommendation regarding the availability of 
injunctive relief to holders of standard-essential patents who have undertaken to 
license them on reasonable and non-discr
iminatory terms. Apart from this ex-
ception, the committee 
recognizes that both the in
tellectual property and stand-
ards landscapes are changing and will continue to change in ways that the report 
does not address. 
                                                 1See http://www.nap.edu/ca
talog.php?record_id=18510. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xi  Preface 
The committee™s recommendations repres
ent a consensus of views, but not 
every member agrees with 
every formulation. In one 
instance, majority and mi-
nority views are presented.
 As with any Academy re
port, the views expressed 
are personal and do not necessarily repres
ent the views of members™ employers. 
Despite the heterogeneity of SSOs, th
e committee™s recommendations addressed 
to standards developers are stated in 
general terms. The committee recognizes 
that each organization should and will c
onsider the appropriateness of our ad-
vice for its own circumstances and seek its own counsel.  
This report has been reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their 
diverse perspectives and t
echnical expertise, in accord
ance with procedures ap-
proved by the National Academies™ Report Review Committee. The purpose of 
this independent review is to provide candid and critical comments that will 
assist the institution
 in making its
 published report as sound as possible and to 
ensure that the report meets institutional standards for objectivity, evidence, and 
responsiveness to the study charge. The review comments and draft manuscript 
remain confidential to protect the integrity of the process.  
We wish to thank the following individuals for their review of this report: 
Alden Abbott, Research In Motion; Andrew Brown, Delphi Corporation; Gary 
Calabrese, Corning Global Research; Dieter
 Ernst, East West Center; Patricia 
Griffin, American National Standards In
stitute; Irwin Jacobs, Qualcomm;  Kon-
stantinos Karachalios, Institute of Electr
ical and Electronics Engineers Standards 
Association; Earl Nied, Intel; Joshua Sarnoff, DePaul University; Carl Shapiro, 

University of California, Berkeley; Andr
ew Torrance, University of Kansas; and 
Dirk Weiler, European Telecommunications Standards Institute. 
Although the reviewers listed above have provided many constructive 
comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the conclusions or 
recommendations, nor did they see the final draft of the report before its release. 
The review of this report was overseen 
by Samuel H. Fuller, Analog Devices, 
Inc. Appointed by the National Academies, he was responsible for making cer-
tain that an independent ex
amination of this report was carried out in accordance 
with institutional procedures and that a
ll review comments were carefully con-
sidered. Responsibility for the final content of this report rests entirely with the 
authoring committee and the institution. 

 Keith E. Maskus, 
Chair 
Committee on Intellectual Property 

Management in Standard-Setting Processes 
Stephen A. Merrill, 
Study Director 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiii 
  Contents  SUMMARY ............................................................................................................... 1 1. INTRODUCTION
 ........................................................................................... 15 1.1  Role of Standards and Patented Technology in Standards, 15 
1.2  Standards and Patents in ICT and Emerging Technologies, 18 
1.3  Background of the Study, 19 

1.4  Statement of Task and Organization of the Report, 20 

1.5  Economic Context, 23 

1.6  Standardization in the ICT Setting, 25 
1.7  Stakeholders in Standard-Setting, 28 

1.8  International and Multilateral Issues, 28 
 
2. A COMPARISON OF SSO POLICIES AND PRACTICES
 ....................... 31 2.1 SSOs Surveyed for the Study, 31 

2.2  A Note on Terminology, 34 

2.3  A Caveat on Coverage, 35 

2.4  SSO Approaches to Basic IPR Issues, 36 

2.5  Transfers of Licensing Commitments, 47 

2.6  Summary Observations, 48 
 
3. KEY ISSUES FOR SSOS IN SEP LICENSING
 ........................................... 51 3.1  Introduction, 51 
3.2  Objectives of FRAND Licensing Obligations, 52 

3.3  Interpretation of FRAND Obligations to Address Competition and  
Efficiency Concerns, 61 
3.4  Recommendations to SSOs, 69 
 
4. SEP DISCLOSURE AND INFORMATION TRANSPARENCY
 ............... 71 4.1  Disclosure as an Element of SSO IPR Policies, 71 

4.2  The Possible Roles of Information Disclosure, 72 

4.3  Levels of Disclosure, 74 

4.4  The Timing of Disclosures in Relation to Licensing  
Commitment Procedures, 79 
4.5  Recommendations to SSOs, 80 
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.xiv                  
Contents 
5. TRANSFERS OF PATENTS WITH LICENSING COMMITMENTS
 ...... 
81 5.1  Introduction, 81 5.2  Cases Regarding Continuing License Commitments, 83 
5.3  SSO Approaches to Sustaining Licensing Commitments, 88 
5.4  Recommendations for SSOs and Policymakers, 93 
 6. INJUNCTIVE RELIEF FOR SEPS SUBJECT TO FRAND
....................... 95 6.1  Introduction, 95 6.2  Views of Competition Regulators, 95 

6.3  U.S. and European Case Law, 100 

6.4  Industry Views, 109 

6.5  Recommendations to SSOs, Cour
ts, and Government Agencies, 111 
 7. PATENT OFFICE-SSO COOPERATION
 ................................................. 
113 7.1  Origins and Scope of Information Sharing, 113 
7.2  Benefits and Costs of Information Sharing, 115 

7.3  Legal Status of Standards Information, 116 

7.4  Relevance of the European Experience to the USPTO, 117 
7.5  Recommendations to the USPTO and SSOs, 119 
 8. IPR STANDARDS AND EMERGING ECONOMIES
 .............................. 
121 8.1  Introduction, 121 8.2  China, 122 
8.3  India, 133 

8.4  Brazil, 137 
8.5  Conclusions and Recommendations, 138 
 REFERENCES ...................................................................................................... 
141  APPENDIXES 
 A ACRONYMS
 .................................................................................................. 
149  B SYMPOSIUM AGENDA
 .............................................................................. 
153  
C BIOGRAPHIES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS AND STAFF
 ................ 
157  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.1   Summary  Background 
 Standards are technical specifications
 describing means of achieving certain 
beneficial features of products and services. To become ﬁstandards,ﬂ such specifi-

cations undergo some process of examination and approval, whether through regu-
latory systems, private i
ndustry bodies, or simple market acceptance by consum-
ers, that recognizes they are sufficiently effective to merit wide adoption.  
Standards are ubiquitous in today™s markets and serve multiple purposesŠ 
to assure minimum levels of safety, health, and environmental protection, to 
provide information to consumers, and to reduce transaction costs between pro-

ducers and users in the selection of inputs and products. One of the most im-
portant functions of contemporary standards, and the focus of this report, is to 
enable components and products designed and produced by different firms to 

operate and communicate with one another. Such interoperability standards are 
increasingly important for domestic and international commerce by helping to 
achieve economies of scale and scope within and across borders. 
The technologies that enter into standa
rds are often protected by patents or 
are the subject of patent applications at the time standards are developed. Incor-
porating patented or patent-pending technologies in standards is virtually inevi-

table and generally beneficial, but there is a tension between owners and users of 
a patented technology. Inventors generally seek economic returns on their R&D 
investments while users of technologies want access to them on affordable 
terms. This tension is even more pronounced in the realm of standards, which by 
their nature are intended to have widespread acceptance and use.  
To manage this tension, the wide vari
ety of entities, domestic and interna-
tional, that are dedicated to developing standards (termed ﬁstandard-setting organ-
izationsﬂ or SSOs in this report) have
 generally adopted policies regarding the 
disclosure and terms of licensing of patents essential to the standards they create 
(so-called standard-essential patents or SE
Ps). In general, SSOs encourage or re-
quire member firms to disclose SEPs and 
license them to standards implementers 
under terms commonly referred to as fa
ir, reasonable, and non-discriminatory 
(FRAND). These policies vary in content 
and specificity, are in many cases in 
flux, and often lack guidance for increasingly common occurrencesŠlitigation 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.2                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
over SEPs and changes in SEP ownership. 
In particular, SSO policies often do not 
address whether a SEPs holder that has made a FRAND commitment should be 

able to seek injunctive relief or an order excluding the allegedly infringing product 
from the United States and whether 
FRAND licensing commitments by patent 
holders in an SSO transfer with changes in patent ownership. 
At the same time that the voluntary standards development system com-
mon in most respects to the United States, Europe, and Japan is evolving, it is 
also adjusting to the rise of large de
veloping economies that are major markets 
for new technologies and show promise of becoming important sources of them. 
There is uncertainty about how standards 
policies will evolve in China, India, 
and Brazil in particular and how they will 
treat intellectual property incorporated 
in standards. In a world of rapid technological change and diffusion, proliferat-
ing patents, and frequent litigation over 
patents, the relationship of patents to 
standards obviously has enormous implications for firms, national economies, 
and global trade. 
 Study Origin, Methods, and Focus 
 In 2011, the U.S. Patent and Trad
emark Office (USPTO) asked the Na-
tional Academies to examine and report on the role of patents in standard-setting 
processes in an international context. The Academies appointed a committee 
composed of academic economists and soci
al scientists, legal scholars, standards 
professionals, and technologists and charged them with documenting and evalu-
ating the policies and practices of different types of SSOs in different geograph-

ical contexts, focusing on such matters as patent disclosures, terms of licensing, 
and provisions for the transfer of obligations when patents are traded, sold, or 
disposed in bankruptcy proceedings. 
The committee held four meetings, including a workshop with presentations 
selected by the committee as well as public commentary and commissioned origi-
nal research and analysis, including a study of a dozen SSOs operating in the in-

formation and communications technology (ICT) sector. The committee, in con-
sultation with the sponsor, chose ICT as th
e project™s focus because of its techno-
logical dynamism and heavy reliance on st
andardization, and because of the esca-
lation of patenting and salience of issues
 involving patents and standards in those 
industries. 
 SSO Approaches to IPR Issues 
 The committee™s selection of SSOs to 
examine represents a diversity of 
organization types (both formal standards organizations and consortia) and geo-
graphical foci (U.S., European, and global) and encompasses standards activity 
across the range of ICT technologiesŠc
onsumer electronics
, microelectronic 
products and their associated software and components, and communications 
networks including the Internet. These or
ganizations and their salient character-
istics are listed in Table S-1. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved. TABLE S-1 Organizations and their Salient Characteristics 
TITLE TYPE 
GEOGRAPHICAL  
FOCUS 
TECHNOLOGY  
FOCUS 
NOTABLE  
IPR POLICIES 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) formal global broad share common policy but 
permit adjustments 
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) formal global/UN Affiliated communications 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) formal global electrical, electronics-related 
technologies 
permits but does not  
require 
ex ante 
disclosure  
of the terms 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 

Standards Association (IEEE-SA) 
formal professional 
association 
global broad electronics reviews ipr policies as part  
of accreditation process 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) SSO and standards-
accreditation organization  

(not a standards developer) 
U.S. broad 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) consortium of individuals global internet preference for non-patented 
technology 
Organization for the Advancement of Structured 
Information Standards (OASIS) 
consortium global e-business and web service multi-modal ip policy 
VMEBus International Trade Association (VITA) consortium global avionics, military and  
industrial applications  
of electronics 
ex ante
 disclosure of  
licensing terms; binding 
arbitration of disputes 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) consortium global internet & web royalty free license 
High Definition Multimedia Interface  
Forum (HDMI) 
consortium global digital audio/visual  
transmission 
non-assertion 
Nearfield Communications Forum (NCF) consortium global data exchange among consumer devices 
European Telecommunications  
Standards Institute (ETSI) 
formal European-based but 
international 
ICT broadly  
3Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.4                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
All of these standard-setting organizati
ons have a diverse set of stakehold-
ers and constituents. Some participants are technology owners whose business 

models depend on sales of products or services, less so or not at all on royalties 
for SEPs, although they may want their patents to have sufficient value to offset 
the rights held by others in the same technology area. Other participants are 

technology sellers whose models are ba
sed on royalties from implementers for 
SEPs and even non-SEPs. Others are technology users seeking low or no royal-
ties for the SEPs they license from othe
rs. And still others are both technology 
users and sellers, who may assume different postures in different standards-
setting processes. SSO IPR policies are shap
ed both by the interests of existing 
members and by the need to attract new participants who may be technology 
sellers, users, or both. This divergence of interests and the difficulty of reconcil-
ing them may account for the fact that 
very few SSO articulate a clear set of 
objectives for its IPR policies, making it di
fficult to evaluate their effectiveness. 
For most SSOs, however, the minimum goal of their IPR policies is to en-
sure that all essential patent claims are 
reasonably known to the participants and 
are available for licensing under a FRA
ND or a similar framework minimizing 
the potential for 
ex post hold-up and royalty stacking. Beyond that there is wide 
variation and often considerable ambiguity in the rules regarding 
Disclosure: 
  Whose patents must be disclosed; what qualifies as an ﬁessentialﬂ pa-
tent or patent claim; when disclosures must be made in the standards 

development process; whether blanket (non-patent specific) disclosures 
suffice; to whom the disclosed information is provided; and whether 
there is a requirement to update disclosures, for example, as a standard 

evolves and as patents are issued or denied.  
 SSO policies regarding 
Licensing 
are, if anything, even more varied and in 
some instances ambiguous: 
  What specific terms or limitations
 are imposed by a commitment to 
FRAND licensing; what is meant by 
the individual terms ﬁfair,ﬂ ﬁrea-
sonable,ﬂ and ﬁnon-discriminatoryﬂ; whether a maximum royalty must 

be posted before the standard is adopted (ﬁ
ex ante
ﬂ); how FRAND ap-
plies to portfolio licenses and cro
ss-licenses; how non-royalty licensing 
terms (e.g., grant-backs, geographical or field of use limitations, etc.) 

are treated; and whether royalty-free 
licensing is encouraged or re-
quired. 
 Inasmuch as patents and patent portfolios are now more frequently traded, 
sold, or acquired through bankruptcy, it is becoming increasingly important and 
complex for SSOs to address the 
Transfer issues surrounding FRAND-
encumbered SEPs. Concerned that standard implementers could be at risk of 
hold-up by a new SEP owner, competition authorities have generally taken the 
position that SSOs should create contractual commitments that, subject to local 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.5 Summary 
law, bind successors to original FRAND
 obligations. Some SSOs have taken or 
are in the process of taking such step
s but the legal issues are complex.  
On the other hand, few SSOs have addressed the controversial question of 
whether and how a FRAND commitment should affect a SEP owner™s ability to 
seek or threaten to seek 
Injunctive Relief 
(or, in the case of an imported prod-
uct, an exclusion order by the U.S. International Trade Commission) as a reme-
dy for patent infringement. Again, competition authorities are generally agreed 
that in the case of a FRAND-encumbered SEP an injunction should be an in-

fringement remedy of last resort. But industry views are divided, as might be 
expected; and as a result, none of th
e SSO policies the committee examined im-
poses any restrictions on what legal remedies a member or third-party benefi-
ciary of a licensing commitment may purs
ue in court or in the International 
Trade Commission. 

 Recommendations for SSO and Government Policies 
 Having studied the experience of th
e dozen SSOs examined in the com-
missioned paper, the positions of government regulators, the evolving case law 
in areas of legal uncertainty and conten
tion, and economic theory, the committee 
recommends that SSOs consider a number of policies with regard to intellectual 
property, while recognizing the diversity of stakeholder interests and their varia-
tion from organization to organization. 
In some cases, the committee also rec-
ommends actions by government authorities supportive of these principles. 
 Interpretation of FRAND 
 The committee believes that a FRAN
D licensing commitment represents 
more than the patent owner offering a license on terms of its own choice. A 

FRAND commitment is also mutual in th
e sense that both the SEP holder and 
any prospective licensee are expected to negotiate in good faith towards a li-
cense on reasonable terms and conditions that reflect the economic value of the 
patented technology. 
 
Recommendation 3:1
1  The committee urges SSOs to become more explicit in their IPR policies 
regarding their understanding of an
d expectations about FRAND licensing 
commitments. SSOs should clarify the va
rious effects of a FRAND commitment 
by formulating certain statements of prin
ciple. These principl
es could include, 
among other conditions for compliance w
ith FRAND, guidance regarding royal-
                                                 1The first numeral of each recommendation indicates the chapter of the report in 
which it is discussed. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.6                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
ty demands that could be a disproportionate share of product value when many 
patents are necessary to comply with a standard and the relevant product in-

cludes multiple technologies.
  
Recommendation 3:2 

 The committee recommends 
that SSOs include statem
ents in their policies 
that implementers and the consumers of 
their products and services are the in-
tended third party beneficiaries of licensing commitments made by SSO partici-
pants. Although the enforceability in all courts of such a term may not be guar-
anteed (the law in this regard is still evolving), inclusion of such statements 
would inform courts of the intent of 
SEP owners participating in SSO working 
groups. It would also provide greater co
nfidence to potential implementers, and 
promote greater certainty in
 the event of a dispute. 
Several recommendations are aimed at improving clarity within SSOs re-
garding the bundling of licensing commitments. 
  Recommendation 3:3 
 SSOs should clarify in their policies that prospective licensees may re-
quest a license to some or all FRAND-encumbered SEPs owned or controlled by 

a patent holder. Licensors may not tie the FRAND commitment and the availa-

bility of the requested SEPs to a de
mand that a licensee accept a package or 
portfolio license that includes non-SEPs or SEPs for unrelated standards. Nor 

may the licensors tie the FRAND commitment and SEPs availability to a re-

quirement that the licensee agree to licen
se back unrelated SEPs or non-SEPs. 
 
Recommendation 3:4 

 SSOs should clarify in their policies that a holder of FRAND-encumbered 
SEPs may require a licensee to grant a li
cense in return under FRAND terms to the 
SEPs it owns or controls (and those of its affiliates as specified in the SSO™s poli-

cy) covering the same standard or, as specified by the SSO, related standards. 

 Recommendation 3:5 
 It should be understood that SSOs™ IPR policies do not affect the freedom 
of parties to voluntarily enter portfolio or cross licenses beyond the scope of the 

standard. This includes situations wher
e prospective licensors offer to license 
SEPs in a package, such as a fixed pool. 
 Patent Disclosures 
 The committee recognizes that many aspects of transparency are subject to 
tradeoffs, not only for SSOs but also fo
r member companies. On the one hand, 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.7 Summary 
more transparency can redu
ce uncertainty and legal exposure and can be benefi-
cial in cases of conflict. On the other 
hand, achieving transparency through dis-
closures can involve sign
ificant effort and complia
nce costs. The committee 
nevertheless recommends that SSOs cons
ider the following steps to increase 
transparency of SEP ownership and licensing. 

 Recommendation 4:1 
 SSOs that do not have a policy 
requiring FRAND licensing commitments 
from all participants should have a disclosure element as part of their IPR policy.  
 Recommendation 4:2 
 SSOs with disclosure policies should articulate their objectives and con-
sider whether they sufficiently serve thes
e objectives. In particular, such SSOs 
may consider separating patent disclosure from licensing commitments and bet-

ter define their preferred timing and specificity of disclosures. 
 Recommendation 4:3 

 SSOs should make disclosed information available to the public.  
 
Recommendation 4:4
  SSOs should consid
er measures to increase 
the quality and accuracy of 
disclosure data. Such measures might include updating requirements or greater 
coordination with patent offices.  
 Transfer of Patents with Licensing 
Commitments and Transparency of 
Patent Ownership 
 Transfers of standard-essential patents are an increasingly important fea-
ture of the high-technology marketplace, 
as a result both of firms seeking to 
realize their economic value through sales of assets being disposed in bankrupt-
cy proceedings. Such transfers raise co
mplex issues regarding the obligations 
and rights of transferors, transferees, 
and existing and potential licensees along 
what may be an extended chain of trans
actions. Statutes and judicial rulings so 
far provide at best partial guidance, and 
there are significant 
differences in law 
across countries. Major competition authorities, on the other hand, see clear val-
ue in binding transferees to original commitments. 
The committee agrees with these authorities that a FRAND commitment 
should travel with the patent when it is 
transferred, although there are different 
means and modalities by which that could occur. Satisfactory resolution of the 
complex issues of patent transfers may require government action and possibly 

legislation. First, U.S. law does not require recordation of ownership changes or 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.8                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
the identity of real parties of interest w
ith the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 
In the committee™s judgment, 
lack of transparency is 
no longer acceptable in an 
era of vibrant markets in intellectual pr
operty and frequent 
bankruptcy proceed-
ings in which patents are a principal asset. Registration of SEP ownership 
changes with SSOs would represent only a partial solution and could become 

burdensome to some of these organizations.  
The committee makes the following suggestions for SSO policies and pub-
lic policies to advance that proposition and minimize uncertainty and additional 

transaction costs for licensees. 
 Recommendation 5:1 
 Where they have not already done so, SSOs should develop meaningful 
policies by which successors in interest are bound to whatever licensing com-
mitment (e.g., FRAND) the SEP owner made to the SSO in question under that 
organization™s IPR policy. This requirement should apply whether SEPs are in-

dividually disclosed or are covered by a blanket disclosure. These obligations 
should cascade through succeeding transfers. 
 
Recommendation 5:2 
 Legislation, case law, or other legal mechanisms should tie licensing 
commitments to FRAN
D-encumbered patents needed to implement SSO stand-
ards. This should be done in ways that ensure the commitment automatically 
runs with the patents. 
  Recommendation 5:3 
 It may be difficult to identify patent 
transfers, because under current U.S. 
law they need not be recorded. Accordingly, public recordation with the patent 
office of transfers of all patents should be required by legislation or regulation. 
The committee believes that this approach 
of recording all patent transfers is a 
practical and effective way of enabling 
transparency for transfers of SEPs, 
which may not always be identified as such. The record should identify the real 
party in interest. 
  
Recommendation 5:4 
 Bankruptcy concerns are especially 
complex and raise uncertainty about 
consistency of licensing commitments. SSOs should develop guidelines to en-
sure that the licensing assurances made to them remain with the patent in bank-
ruptcy proceedings and support legislatio
n, if necessary, to the same end.  
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.9 Summary 
Recommendation 5:5 
 Competition authorities and international policy negotiators should, 
through legislation or regulation, find means to reduce inconsistencies across 
national legal jurisdictions in patent-transfer issues, including in bankruptcy 

processes. 
  Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
 The committee believes that a FRAN
D commitment limits a licensor™s 
ability to seek injunctive relief, including exclusion orders, and recommends the 
following steps to help avoid or resolve disputes, prevent anti-competitive con-
duct, and ensure reasonable compensation to SEP holders whose patents are 

infringed. 
 Recommendation 6:1 

 SSOs active in
industries where patent holdup is a concern should clarify 
their policies regarding the availability of injunctions for FRAND-encumbered 
SEPs to reflect the following principles: 
  Injunctive relief conflicts with a commitment to license SEPs on 
FRAND terms and injuctions should be rare in these cases; 
 Injunctive relief may be appropriate 
when a prospective licensee refus-
es to participate in or comply with the outcome of an independent adju-
dication of FRAND licensing terms and conditions; and 
 Injunctive relief may be appropriate when a SEP holder has no other 
recourse to obtain compensation. 
 
The committee could not reach unanimous agreement on appropriate venues for 
adjudicating FRAND disputes. However, 
a majority of the committee members 
endorse the following: 

 Majority Recommendation 6:2 
 SSOs should clarify that disputes over proposed FRAND terms and condi-
tions should be adjudicated at a court, agency, arbitration or other tribunal that 

can assess the economic value of SEPs
 and award monetary compensation.
2                                                  2A minority of committee members endorse th
is alternative recommendation: Courts, 
agencies, arbitration bodies or other tribunals 
(including the USITC) that consider patent 
essentiality, FRAND determinati
on, or public interest factor
s should be presented with 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.10                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
The committee also could not reach 
unanimous agreement on the scope of 
any limitations that a FRAND commitmen
t might place on SEP holders™ rights 
to seek injunctive relief. However, a majority of the committee members en-
dorse the following recommendation in that regard:  
 
Majority Recommendation 6:3 
 SSOs should clarify that, before a SEP holder can seek injunctive relief, dis-
putes over proposed FRAND terms and conditions should be adjudicated at a court, 
agency, arbitration, or other tribunal that
 allows either party to raise any related 
claims and defenses (s
uch as validity, enforceability and non-infringement).
3  SSO-Patent Office Information Sharing 
 As the interplay between standards and patents has increased, so has 
recognition that the functioning and integrity of the two systems are interde-

pendent. Up-to-date information on claims 
in issued patents and on the status of 
patent applications can be very useful to standards development working groups. 
Likewise, the submissions of participants to standards bodies as well as finalized 

standards documents represent a potentially
 valuable collection of prior art for 
consideration by patent examiners. All pa
rties have a stake in the quality of is-
sued patents. 
The European Patent Office has agreem
ents with three SSOs to share such 
information in standardized format. The agreements with the International Tele-
communications Union (ITU), European Telecommunications Standards Insti-

tute (ETSI), and Institute of Electrical 
and Electronics Engineers-Standards As-
sociation (IEEE-SA) have these common el
ements: exchange of information and 
documentation; collaboration on documentation format and dissemination poli-

cies to align them with EPO prior art se
arch needs; standards-education of EPO 
personnel; and self-funding of the expenses
 involved. Participants in these ar-
rangements agree that their value extends beyond generating patents of higher 
quality. Improved transparency in the linkages between IPR and standards is 
seen as a benefit by both SS
O members and EPO examiners. 
The committee finds that arrangements
 along the lines of the EPO-SSO 
memoranda could benefit both the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office examina-
                                                                                                             the facts and render injunctive relief decisi
ons based on existing law, such as the 
eBay
 decision and/or ITC Section 337. 
3A minority of committee me
mbers endorse this altern
ative recommendation: SSOs 
should clarify that a SEP owner that has made an offer and offered to negotiate, with a 
prospective licensee, a license that will embody FRAND terms should be allowed to include 
injunctive relief in its pleadings when a FRA
ND dispute is brought to a court, agency, 
arbitration, or other tribunal that can cons
ider equities, party conduct, reciprocity, and 
FRAND factors (including FRAND rates and terms). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.11 
Summary 
tion process and SSO functioning at relatively modest cost. That would likely 
entail agreements separate from the EPO™
s with ITU, ETSI, and IEEE-SA. The 
committee did not fully explore two legal issues raised in its discussions: 1) how 
in the wake of the America Invents Act the legal definition of prior art varies 
across jurisdictions and between the EPO 
and the USPTO in particular; and 2) 
whether the form of the USPTO™s cooperation with individual SSOs could rep-
resent a conflict of interest for the agency. The committee recommends that the 
USPTO take the following steps: 

 Recommendation 7:1 
 In the wake of the passage and implementation of the America Invents Act, 
the USPTO should 

  Clarify how the legal definition of pr
ior art varies across jurisdictions, 
particularly as between the EPO an
d USPTO. Specifically, when is art 
ﬁpublicly availableﬂ in
 a standards context?
  Explore with leading SSOs, includi
ng possibly ETSI, IEEE-SA and ITU, 
information-sharing arrangements similar to those concluded by the 

EPO;  Work with other patent offices to establish uniform fields and templates 
for standards-based prior art documents
, such as early drafts of specifi-
cations, published minutes, and the lik
e and deliberate with other offic-
es on the definition of sharable information in this context;
  Improve standards technology education for U.S. patent examiners. For 
example, when standards developers convene in Washington, D.C., 
they could be asked to instruct and update USPTO examiners about 

standards processes and recent developments; and  
  Develop joint education programs with SSOs on the pros and cons of 
standards-based prior art,
 especially early drafts, and the benefits from 
including it in patent office search databases.
  Standards Processes and Policies 
in China, India, and Brazil 
 Although a larger number of countrie
s are significant players in global 
ICT marketsŠamong them Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and SingaporeŠthe 

USPTO asked the committee to focus its st
udy on three emerging players for the 
following reasons. China, India, and Brazi
l represent three very large, rapidly 
growing economies that, until recently, ha
ve been reliant on imported technolo-
gies subject to the standards developed in the institutions described above which 
are dominated by the United States, Euro
pe, and Japan. But in all three cases 
national governments are making signifi
cant new industrial policy commitments 
intended to foster national innovation capabilities and push their economies into 
higher value-added, more knowledge intensive production. Their approaches to 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.12                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
standards development and IPR should be seen in the context of these broader 
industrial policy goals. But they are also conditioned by membership in the 

World Trade Organization (WTO) and adherence to the Agreement on Tech-
nical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and Agreem
ent on Trade-Related Aspects of Intel-
lectual Property Rights (TRIPS), which compel a degree of harmonization with 

international norms. In all three countrie
s, policies and institutions are in transi-
tion or development and could take a more nationalistic turn. Given the size of 
these economies, how these policies develop will have important implications 

for the norms and institutions by which international standardization and IPR 
affairs evolve. 
 China 
 Chinese approaches to standardization, including policies for essential pa-
tents in standards, have evolved in ways that show sensitivity to international 
norms and the interests of international stakeholders, including multinational 

corporations, in some circumstances, alth
ough in other cases have excluded for-
eign companies™ participation. At the same time, the government is strongly 
committed to building a standards regime to serve Chinese national interests, 

including reducing dependence on imported technology and the associated li-
censing fees and building domestic innovation capacity. This is evident in ef-
forts over the past decade by the Standards Administration of China (SAC) to 

formulate national policy guidelines, most
 recently the ﬁRegulatory Measures on 
National Standards Involving Patents (Interim).ﬂ These guidelines endorse dis-
closure and FRAND licensing norms but leave a number of definitional and 

procedural ambiguities that suggest a bias 
against the interests of rights holders. 
Meanwhile, China is experiencing a huge increase in patent litigation, some of it 
involving SEPs-related cases. 
 India  In contrast to China, India has shown less of a strategic orientation to 
standards development and intellectual property and more inclination to follow 

the policies for IPRs in standards of the established international standards bod-
ies. However, there are signs of a growing appetite for government-supported 
indigenous Indian standards development efforts incorporating Indian intellectu-

al property. In particular, the 2012 National Telecom Policy calls for numerical 
targets for the growth and self-sufficiency
 of the industry and the creation of ﬁ– 
a roadmap to align technology, demand, standards, and regulations for enhanc-

ing competitiveness of domestic manufacturing–ﬂ through establishment of 
ﬁstandards to meet national requirements, generate IPRs, and participate in in-
ternational standardization bodies– making India a leading nation in the area of 

international telecom standardization.ﬂ  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.13 
Summary 
Brazil 
 Like India, Brazil has shown less of a strategic orientation towards stand-
ards and IPR development and its standards institutions, lacking well-developed 
policies for dealing with IPR in standards, are only beginning to come to grips 

with the complex issues involved. 
In all three countries reviewed, the 
development of a modern technical 
standards regime is still a work in progress. This is true even for China, where its 

learning curve is notably steep and it has shown a far more robust approach to 
building a national standardization system than has India or Brazil. While there are 
limits to how much the U.S. government can contribute to the development of 
these standards regimes, the 
fact that they are all in varying stages of formation 
suggests that there are possibilities for mutu
ally beneficial interactions, especially 
with regard to education, training, and raising awareness on the importance of 
developing IPR policies in the early stages of building SSO capabilities.  
 
Recommendation 8:1 
 The U.S. government should explore 
ways to promote awareness of the 
importance of developing IPR policies at an early stage of the development of 
SSOs in these and other emerging economies, and should, in conjunction with 
non-governmental standards entities, explore ways to offer training programs for 

those working to develop their organizations and policies needed for successful 
national standardization.  
 
Recommendation 8:2 
 In the meantime, the relevant agenci
es of the United States government, 
such as the United States Patent and Tr
ademark Office, the Office of the United 
States Trade Representative, and the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology, should closely monitor and report on continuing developments in these 
countries and other major emerging economies regarding standard-setting and 
the management of intellectual property.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.15 
1. Introduction  1.1 The Role of Standards and Patented Technology in Standards 
 This report addresses the complex relationships among the development of 
technical standards, their ownership, in pa
rt as intellectual property (primarily in 
the form of patents), and their diffusion into competition. For reasons described 
below, the report focuses on the information and communications technology 
(ICT) industry where issues involving these relationships especially rise to the 

fore because of the importance of licen
sing essential patented technologies 
across multiple uses.  
Standards are technical specifications that aid the development of certain 
beneficial features of products and services. To become ﬁstandards,ﬂ such specifi-
cations undergo some process of examination and approval, whether through regu-
latory systems, private i
ndustry bodies, or simple market acceptance by consum-
ers, that recognizes they are sufficiently effective to merit wide adoption. 
Standards are ubiquitous throughout markets and are adopted for multiple purpos-
es. For example, they exist 
in agriculture, foodstuffs, and medicines to assure min-
imum safety and health levels. Emissions standards apply to electricity generation 
and automobiles to improve air quality, while banks are subject to fiduciary re-
quirements to safeguard financial stabilit
y. Standards determine minimum levels 
of information that must be provided to the public by government agencies and 
commercial enterprises. Standards also play a useful signaling function, for their 
adoption signifies compliance with sp
ecified performance characteristics.  
Standards are developed to resolve various market shortcomings in unreg-
ulated markets. These problems may arise from externality costs, such as pollu-

tion of air and water, lack of informati
on about the health and safety characteris-
tics of goods and services, and network vulnerabilities in the electrical grid and 
financial markets. They also reduce tr
ansaction costs between technology pro-
ducers and users in the selection of inputs and products. Without question, the 
development and adoption of appropriate standards to address such issues help 
create markets, support the functioning of efficient competition, and raise con-

sumer welfare.  
Standards have taken on increasing importance for international com-
merce. For example, empirical evidence po
ints to the important role standardiza-
tion plays in supporting international tr
ade by raising consumer confidence in 
traded goods (Moenius 2004; Clougherty and Grajek 2012). They also support 
increasing global investment by facilitating information sharing and data trans-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.16                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
fers among affiliates within multinationa
l firms and among participants in inter-
national research networks. In turn, the use of standardized technologies helps 

achieve economies of scale and scope, 
both within and across borders. Innova-
tion and growth are increasingly dependent on the development and use of ap-
propriate standards. 
Many standards, including those of greatest relevance for this report, ena-
ble products designed and produced by different companies to operate and 
communicate with one another. Such ﬁinteroperabilityﬂ standards, when imple-

mented broadly across markets, give rise to beneficial network effects and effi-
ciencies. Interoperability standards are important in many industries but particu-
larly characterize the information technology, mobile telephone, and consumer 
electronics sectors. Indeed
, standards can effectively create new markets in such 
sectors. The positive implications for market efficiency and consumer welfare 

are clear: the world would be more fragme
nted and unproductive if software and 
telecommunication technologies could not operate across multiple platforms and 
devices. 
Technology developers often rely on patents to commercialize their inven-
tions and, ultimately, to support investments in research and development. These 
investments often produce technologies th
at are incorporated into standards. 
Indeed, in many fields of ICT, a substantial share of relevant technology is pa-
tented or the subject of patent applications at the time a standard is developed. 
Thus, the incorporation of patented technologies into ICT technical specifica-

tions is virtually inevitable and, by facilitating the benefits of standardization, is 
ultimately in the public interest. Incorporating these patented inventions can 
result in a standard with better performan
ce, improved cost effectiveness, or a 
better match with other design requirements. It is increasingly the case in ICT 
that some design requirements cannot be met at all without including patented 
technology. Moreover, the 
potential to receive roya
lties for access to patented 
technology creates incentives for partic
ipation in standard-setting and attracts 
parties that contribute valuable kn
owledge and technical insights.  
There is an inherent tension between the interests of inventors, who seek 
economic returns on their R&D investments, and users of new technology, who 
want access on affordable terms. This te
nsion is even stronger in the area of 
standards, which, by their nature, must
 find widespread acceptance and, if pa-
tented, may give rise to two problems for market competition. The first is lock-
in, where patented technology that is not readily replaceable must be imple-

mented for products to work. The second is potential hold-up, where patent 
holders seek royalties substantially in excess of the value a technology had prior 
to its incorporation into a standard.
1 In this context, policies and guidelines gov-
erning how widely and the terms under which such technologies are licensed are 
critical for supporting markets in downstream products. 
                                                           
1See Chapter 3 for extensive discussion. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.17 
Introduction 
Striking a sensible and efficient balance regarding the management and li-
censing of intellectual property, primarily standard-essential patents (SEPs), in 

ICT standards is a central problem for standard-setting organizations (SSOs), 
their members, and government authorities. The importance of balance is espe-
cially pronounced where there is a critical need for seamless interoperability 

among software, components and other technologies embedded in microelec-
tronic devices, such as cellular telephones, and other technically sophisticated 
products, and where there are a large number of patents on the relevant inputs. 

Owners of patents on tech
nologies to which access is required for making these 
products work certainly have incentives to license their use to implementers of 
various complementary technologies and products. However, the licensing terms 
and conditions they set may limit the 
access of some potential licensees who 
could otherwise bring successful products to market or may impose costs that 

impede technology utilization.  
It should be noted that there are significant amounts of innovation, includ-
ing of technologies that enter standards, from open-source approaches. Open-

source innovation is common in software and certain segments of microelectron-
ics and biotechnological re
search. Such approaches pr
eclude the assertion of 
patent rights on new technologies, though there may be other restrictions on 

licensed use. Open-source is an increas
ingly relevant source of knowledge for 
standardization. However, it does not rais
e the same questions that this report 
addresses, namely the management of intellectual property rights in the stand-

ardization process. 
Standard-setting organizations (SSOs) 
play several critical roles in tech-
nology and market development. The ultimate objective is to enable competition 

among rival but interoperable products 
and services without permitting some 
participants to block others by inefficiently asserting patents. Thus, their first 
important task is to ensure the interoperability of technology products and to 

facilitate the necessary exchange of da
ta through the development of industry 
standards. Second, these organizations real
ized long ago that to foster competi-
tion they needed to place controls on 
how member firms manage their SEPs. 
Thus, they developed intellectual property rights (IPR) policies intended to en-
sure reasonable access to patented t
echnology necessary to implement their 
standards.  
How SSOs operate varies 
widely across technologies and regions, as this 
report will demonstrate. In general, howe
ver, they seek to encourage or require 
member firms to both disclose and license SEPs, whether to fellow SSO mem-
bers or non-member companies, under terms generally referred to as reasonable 
and non-discriminatory (RAND) or fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory 

(FRAND).
2 The purpose of the FRAND framework is to facilitate the licensing 
                                                           
2What these terms might actually mean is a subject of considerable discussion and 
controversy, as will be discussed later in the 
report. It is generally agreed that the terms 
may be used interchangeably. FRAND is used in
 this report because 
it is genera
lly used 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.18                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
of critical patented technologies to designers and implementers of components 
and final goods. Where multiple technologi
es may be needed to ensure interop-
erability and functionality but are not available, competition, innovation, and the 
growth of markets may be stunted. For this reason, how firms and SSOs ap-
proach licensing of SEPs and other patent
s recently has attracted the attention of 
competition authorities in major jurisdictions.  
Many complex questions arise in this 
arena. For example, what are the IP 
disclosure expectations of SSOs and are they mandatory rules or voluntary 

guidelines? Do SSOs define various licensi
ng practices and re
quirements and do 
such practices vary between member an
d non-member users and implementers? 
Is there a common understanding of th
e effects of a FRAND licensing commit-
ment? Are there limitations regarding the role of SSOs in defining or enforcing 
licensing obligations? How do such procedures and policies vary across geo-

graphic regions, including in major emerging economies? Finally, although the 
committee does not address this question directly, how does the recent mush-
rooming growth of patents in key industries affect the ability of SSO members 

to manage and license their intellectual property to facilitate technology use? 
 1.2 Standards and Patents in ICT and Emerging Technologies 
 This report focuses on such questions in the ICT sector because interoper-
ability needs and network economies are critical in this area. Moreover, patent-

ing has become more prevalent in this sector in multiple countries, and those 
patents protect many of the technologies written into standards. Firms seeking to 
implement standards or develop improved technologies would necessarily in-

fringe the patents embodied in those st
andards unless they have legal access 
through licensing. The associ
ated questions of selection and disclosure of essen-
tial patents included in standards and the 
terms for licensing th
em are especially 
salient in ICT. 
Despite this focus, the committee invited presentations at its workshop on 
several emerging technologies, including bioinformatics, synthetic biology, nano-
technology, and sustainable (green) building materials.
3 The presenters described 
some parallels with ICT in these fields but reported that, to date, the complex pa-

tent issues raised in the ICT field have yet to attract a significant attention in these 
other fields. For example, the field of bioinformatics has evolved largely within 
academic and governmental research centers
. Numerous standards have been de-
veloped for data structures 
and exchange, primarily in small, academically focused 
groups. Patent issues have 
not received much, if any, attention and it does not ap-
                                                                                                                               
   
internationally. Of course, FRAND is not 
the only licensing framework entertained by 
SSOs, as noted in the next chapter. 
3See, respectively, invited presentations from Contreras (2012), Torrance and Kahl 
(2012), Jillavenkatesa,et al (2012), and Contre
ras and McManis (2012). http://sites.national 
academies.org/PGA/step/IPManagement/index.htm. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.19 
Introduction 
pear that patenting has yet occurred with
 any frequency in this field, although the 
potential for filings in some subfields such as genetic data structures could in-

crease in the future.  
Synthetic biology, which also originated in the academic research envi-
ronment, has attracted the interest of pr
ivate sector players, who have been ac-
tive in patenting synthetic biology inventions. Although the potential need 
seems substantial, few standards have been developed in the field. The most 
prominent standardization effort to-date, 
the ﬁbio-bricksﬂ proj
ect that has devel-
oped a large and growing catalog of standa
rdized molecular ﬁparts,ﬂ has sought 
to discourage patenting of these fund
amental molecular elements. Nanotechnol-
ogy is a more mature field and has numer
ous private sector players. To the ex-
tent that standards are being developed, this activity is occurring at large, estab-
lished SSOs such as American Societ
y for Testing and Materials (ASTM) 
International and ISO, which ha
ve patent policies in place.  
Finally, sustainable building materials represent a large commercial mar-
ket with numerous sophisticated players. 
A large number of standards have been 
developed at a range of SSOs, from small, industry-specific trade groups to large 
SSOs such as Underwriters Laboratories. In
 this field, trademarks and certifica-
tion marks (so-called ﬁecolabelsﬂ) have played a far greater role than patents, 

and present their own challenges to par
ticipants, regulators and consumers.  
Despite the relatively low salience of patent issues to date, they have the 
potential to assume greater importance in 
each of the fields in the coming years. 
Accordingly, the committee believes that its findings and recommendations with 
respect to ICT may have some value to participants seeking to anticipate issues 
that may be problematic in the future. 
There are many long-established SSOs, many with IPR policies operating 
in relatively mature sector
s of the economy such as automobiles and aerospace 
(e.g., Society of Automotive Engineers)
, electrical machinery (e.g., National 
Electrical Manufacturers Association), and other manufacturing industry groups 
(e.g., Society of Manufactur
ing Engineers). These are not considered in this re-
port and there should not be any infe
rence that the committee™s findings and 
recommendations apply equally to such industries and organizations. 
 1.3 Background of the Study 
 In 2011, the United States Patent 
and Trademark Office (USPTO) com-
missioned the Board on Science, Technology and Economic Policy (STEP) of 
the National Academy of Sciences to empanel a committee of experts to study 
and prepare a report analyzing such ques
tions, with an emphasis on an interna-
tional comparison. The committee began its work in November 2011, with an 
initial meeting at which stakeholders and ot
her interested parties were invited to 
make statements on the issues. Subsequently, the committee asked a number of 

experts to prepare presentations addressing specific aspects of SSOs, licensing 
and related issues. The presentations were made at a public symposium in Octo-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.20                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
ber 2012. In addition, members of the committee engaged in extensive discus-
sions over the period to prepare for the drafting of this report. 
A principal motivation of the USPTO request is the increasing importance 
of standardization and IPR use for global trade and investment. In one dimen-
sion, this reflects the growing preval
ence of cross-border activities of SSOs, 
raising the question of how they manage their IPR policies in an international 
context. In another context, major emer
ging economies, esp
ecially China, now 
place greater emphasis on thei
r own standardization bodies and associated poli-
cies. Thus, the committee was asked to asce
rtain the status of standardization in 
high-technology areas in such economies. 
 Another important context of the study is the growing concern that in 
some high-technology sectors the system
 faces increasing difficulties in effec-
tively disseminating the use of patented technologies in key standards. The con-

cern derives in part from the proliferation of high-stakes patent lawsuits involv-
ing SEPs in many countries and requests for injunctions to exclude alleged 
patent infringers from various national ma
rkets. Such episodes
 raise the question 
of whether the current system strikes an appropriate balance among the various 
stakeholders in standards and IPR.  
There are many indications of the cu
rrent prominence of these issues. All 
three branches of the United States government and the European Union have 
taken an active interest in the relationship between standards and patents. Since 
our committee began its work there have been hearings in the House of Repre-

sentatives and the Senate, appellate and district court and International Trade 
Commission decisions, interventions by the Federal Trade Commission and two 
Statements of Objections by the Directorate General for Competition in the Eu-

ropean Commission, as well as policy stat
ements issued by the Department of 
Justice, the Federal Trade Commission, and the USPTO, all involving disputes 
over SEPs and the effect of a FRAND commi
tment. In this context, one impetus 
for the study was a desire for an independent, expert view on how public agen-
cies might contribute better to the evolving standards environment to promote 
competition and growth. 
 1.4 Statement of Task and Organization of the Report 
 The Statement of Task agreed to 
by the USPTO and the National Acade-
mies directed the committee to: 

 –examine and assess how leading national, regional, and multinational 
standards bodies address issues of intellectual property (IP) arising in con-

nection with the development of technical standards. Through commis-
sioned analysis, a public workshop in Washington and a report of the find-
ings of an expert committee, the pr
oject will first document the policies 
and practices of different types of standard-setting organizations in differ-
ent geographical contexts. The committ
ee will consider policies with re-
spect to such matters as: requirements 
for disclosure of IP essential or rel-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.21 
Introduction 
evant to the development and implementation of standards, the terms of IP 
licensing to implementers of a standa
rd, and whether conditions attached 
to IP incorporated in standards carry ov
er to a new holder in the event of a 
transfer of IP rights. The study w
ill assess how these policies work in 
practice and in a legal context and how variations in these policies relate 

to different types of standards activitie
s, organizations, and fields of tech-
nology. Second, the project will evaluate the effectiveness of these poli-
cies in reducing conflict between IP holders and other implementers, bal-

ancing the interests of firms of diff
erent sizes and with different business 
models, and balancing the interests of producers and consumers.   
 With this statement in mind, the committee set the following objectives for its 
report:  

  Identify and survey a representativ
e selection of major SSOs, with 
operations in different major countries or with members from multiple 

regions, in order to describe and document their relevant objectives, 
policies and practices. The results of
 this survey are summarized in 
Chapter 2 of the report. 
 Develop economic and legal analysis of critical issues surrounding 
management of intellectual property in SSOs, including the use and 
meaning of FRAND licensing. This 
discussion is in Chapter 3. 
 Consider how the policies of SSOs relate to obligations or expecta-
tions regarding the disclosure of essential IPR and commitments to li-
cense them. This is the subject of Chapter 4. 
 Review the implications when FR
AND-encumbered SEPs are trans-
ferred. Issues analyzed include ho
w the FRAND assurance made by a 
SEP owner is addressed after the tran
sfer, how parties™ rights are af-
fected by the exchange, and how SSO policy can help avoid problems 
associated with patent assignments
. Legal cases clarifying the poten-
tial issues are reviewed as well, with an emphasis on the United 
States. This discussion is in Chapter 5. 
 Comment on the complex issues regarding the issuance of injunctive 
relief for FRAND-encumbered licensing arrangements of essential 
IPR. This area has become increas
ingly contentious, as discussed in 
Chapter 6. 
 Relate the activities of SSOs to their interactions with government 
policy, such as cooperation with prio
r art searches in patent applica-
tions and disclosure and procurement policies. These issues are de-
scribed in Chapter 7. 
 Describe practices and draw lessons from the operations of SSOs in 
China, India and Brazil to understand the landscape and priorities of 
key emerging countries. This analysis is presented in Chapter 8. 
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.22                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
The committee carefully deliberated whether to address issues surrounding 
injunctions, including exclusion orders issued by trade authorities such as the 

U.S. International Trade Co
mmission, because they are 
not explicit in the state-
ment of task. Members found it necessary 
to do so because of
 the inevitable and 
close relationships among determination and disclosure of SEPs, licensing con-

ditions, and avenues for relief against infringement. A key question facing SSOs 
and regulators is determining under 
what circumstances a FRAND licensing 
commitment is incompatible with injunctive relief. The committee believed that 

failing to address this question would not fulfill the terms of its task. 
Similarly, the committee decided early 
in its deliberations to discuss the 
question of whether and how national patent offices could fruitfully collaborate 
with SSOs in issues of prior art, aff
ecting patent quality, and the recordation of 
patent transfers to enhance transparency in licensing SEPs. While this issue was 

not mentioned in the statement of task, the committee thought it an important 
element to discuss in the context of licen
sing transactions and one that could not 
be separated from the patent transfer question in any case. 
The committee acknowledges that the issues involving patents in standard-
setting play out in a broader context of national and international policy regard-
ing intellectual property rights. These po
licies are in flux. For example, some 
member countries of the European Union are working toward a unified patent-
ing regime and a single patent court. 
China, India, and Brazil have recently 
adopted significant changes in their laws th
at affect the scope of patents and, at 
least indirectly, the general conditions of licensing. In the United States, the pa-
tent system is changing in response to a variety of perceived problems Œ low 
patent quality, long delays in patent examination, excessive litigation and abu-

sive tactics on the part of some patent holders. 
The America Invents Act (AIA), passed and signed in 2011, ushered in the 
most significant changes in 60 years including enhanced post-grant opposition 

procedures, new opportunities for third pa
rty-submission of prior art, more re-
sources for the U.S. Patent and Tradem
ark Office, and adoption of the interna-
tional norm for patent priority, first-in
ventor-to-file. At the same time, U.S. 
courts have limited the reach of exclusive patent rights in a variety of ways in-
cluding ending nearly automatic acce
ss to injunctions against infringers,
4 raising 
the standard of non-obviousness,
5 and restricting patent eligible subject matter.
6 Notwithstanding that these changes are still being implemented and their 
effects are uncertain, there continue to be calls for reforming U.S. patent law, 

notably to curb the opportunistic practi
ces of so-called patent assertion entities 
(PAEs) or patent ﬁtrolls.ﬂ These firms generally do not practice their patents and 
                                                           
4eBay v. MercExchange
, L.L.C. 547 U.S. 388 (2006). This
 case is discussed further 
below. 5KSR International. Co. v. Teleflex
, Inc.
 550 U.S. 398 (2007). 
6Association for Molecular Pathology et 
al. v. Myriad Genetics, Inc. et al.
 (Supreme 
Court no. 12-398, 2013). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.23 
Introduction 
often are not responsible for the inventions that lead to patents. Rather, they ac-
quire patents for the purpose of threatening large and small practicing compa-

nies, which may or may not be infringing, with lawsuits in order to obtain royal-
ties from licenses or monetary settlements or damage awards. According to a 
recent study by the Obama Ad
ministration, lawsuits brought by PAEs have tri-
pled in the last two years and now constitu
te the majority of patent infringement 
suits (Executive Office of the President,
 2013). Claiming that PAE activity dis-
proportionately hurts small businesses and deters technological innovation in 

some sectors, the Administration supports legislation favored by a number of 
large operating companies to discourage such activity by permitting the courts to 
impose attorney fees on entities that bring unwarranted lawsuits. The Admin-
istration would also force patent owners and applicants to disclose the ﬁreal par-
ty in interestﬂ to shed light on who benefits from PAE activity. 
It is quite possible that such reform
s, adopted and proposed, will or would 
reduce some of the pressures underlying the issues addressed in this report. For 
example, if an outcome of the America Invents Act and recent court decisions is 

to raise the quality of issued patentsŠi.e., increase the likelihood that they are 
truly novel and inventiveŠthen litigation associated with the validity of claimed 
SEPs could be reduced. Transparency of patent ownership, especially in the case 

of patent transfers, would enhance th
e transparency of FRAND licensing com-
mitments, as we discuss later in this 
report. However, while the committee rec-
ognizes the importance of a well-functioning patent system, proposing further 

fundamental reforms was not part of our
 charge from the U.S. Patent and 
Trademark Office or the National Research
 Council. In any case, it would re-
quire a committee with a quite diff
erent composition of expertise. 
 1.5 Economic Context
  Issues of standardization and the as
sociated management of intellectual 
property in technical standards have taken on ever greater importance in recent 
decades because of three major and interr
elated factors. First is the rapid ad-
vance of globalization reflected in the growth of global production and innova-
tion networks, both within and across enterprises (Ernst 2006, Maskus 2012). 

Second is the increasing in
tegration of major emerging 
economies, such as Chi-
na, India, Brazil, and Mexico, into world markets for goods, services, and tech-
nology. Third is rapid and even acceleratin
g technological change in key sectors 
of competition where standardization and interoperability are critical elements 
of success, notably in the ICT sector. As 
a result, standards and policies need to 
evolve and adjust over time to reflect the changing technological environment. 
All of these factors are transforming 
and deepening the challenges of ef-
fectively managing the development and use of SEPs in an environment of in-
tensifying technological competition. Global enterprises increasingly see control 

over intellectual property, especially in essential architectural and interface 
standards, as the major determinant of 
competitive success. Indeed, control over 
IP offers one primary means of earning 
returns on increasingly costly research 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.24                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
and development (R&D) investments. At the same time, it is important that im-
plementers around the world have access 
to these standards to promote product-
level competition and procure consumer be
nefits. Yet they may be developed by 
SSOs with different rules or implemented in countries subject to varying IPR 
and competition policies. These pressures explain the need for increasingly so-

phisticated approaches to managing SEPs in standardization. 
Innovation is at the core of both national and enterprise-level strategies for 
competing in global markets in order to encourage growth and job creation 

(OECD, 2012). Intensive investments in research and development (R&D) were, 
until recently, largely confined to institut
ions and firms headqua
rtered in a small 
number of advanced economies. Today, 
however, R&D expenditures exceed 1.5 
percent of GDP (a previously high benchmark) in dozens of nations, including 
China, Korea, and Singapore, where the gr
owth of such investments has been par-
ticularly rapid.
7 At the firm level, these increases have emerged both within na-
tional enterprises and through international investments in R&D performed by 
affiliates of multinational 
companies. The latter trend 
in particular demonstrates 
the globalization of innovation efforts through research networks (OECD, 2008). 
Distributing R&D among affiliates can reap
 several competitive advantages, in-
cluding reduced personnel costs,
 enhanced intellectual di
versity, greater access to 
local fiscal subsidies and markets, and higher sales of products and technologies 
developed for local or regional markets (Ernst, 2006).  
Investments in R&D aim to produce new process technologies and higher-
quality varieties of goods and services. A central component of this research is 
the development of technical standards, which exist and are often updated in 
virtually all industries. Standards often build on scientific knowledge from re-

search in biology, informatics, mathemat
ics, physics, and other basic sciences, 
explaining why universities and public research laboratories™ such as the Na-
tional Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in the United States, inter-

act with standards organizations. Many technologies, such as those in software 
and electronic communications, emerge from
 research in engineering work at 
both grant-supported laboratories and private firms, requiring cooperation and 
collaboration among these institutions 
to achieve standardization.  
In this context, two types of R&D investments are fundamental for the 
commercialization of technologies in several industries. First is the development 
of a new process technology or product itself, which is largely a private affair 
though it may be based on the outcomes of knowledge generated via publicly 

supported basic science. Second is the sp
ecification of standards that these tech-
nologies and products must meet in 
order to enter the marketplace.  
Standards are developed by a complex mixture of private and public inter-
ests. They may be the result of individual firms discovering and promoting a 
workable specification that achieves cu
stomer acceptance. Indeed, standards 
                                                           
7Data are from World Bank, 
World Development Indicators
. See http://data.worldbank. 
org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.25 
Introduction 
development has become an important field of corporate strategy in some indus-
tries. Standards are also developed by SSOs, which consist of representatives of 

private and, often, quasi-public entities. They may also be set by government 
agencies, whether to address a clear market failure or to promote local industri-
al-development objectives. Governments may regard the standard-setting pro-

cess as an integral part of national competitiveness and innovation strategies. 
More broadly, public authorities may be involved in standards development and 
diffusion because of the recognized benefi
ts they entail. For 
example, early in 
2013 the European Union put in place a 
new regulation addressing the benefits 
of standards under recognized rules.
8  Within this complex framework firms and SSOs act collaboratively to en-
hance efficient standardiza
tion. Indeed, standards selection often involves diffi-
cult engineering decisions to achieve co
mpatible specifications across a variety 
of complex technologies, while ensuring that any promulgated norms are com-
patible with user needs. Thus, especially
 in industries with multiple competing 
technologies it is necessary to have ex
tensive upfront technical and management 
consultations to arrive at the most appropriate standards, the fundamental pur-
pose of SSOs. Often the technologies entering standards are patented. Thus, 
central to this management of standards is the specification of guidelines and 

rules for the licensing of standard-essential patented technologies. 
At the same time, there may be numerous opportunities for firms to en-
gage in exclusionary practices or exploit market power. These problems are like-

ly to be most significant where technologi
es entering a standard are patented and 
essential for use, innovation is cumulative, and there are important network ef-
fects and interoperability needs. The main competitive concerns of this type, 

arising from the combination of standardization and the assertion and enforce-
ment of patents, are addressed in detail 
in this report. Through their IPR policies 
regarding disclosure, licensing, and transfers of patents, SSOs could, in princi-

ple, effectively diminish such problems
. Where these policies are inadequate for 
this purpose, however, competition authorities and the courts play an important 
role. Thus, in this report the committee offers guidance for both SSOs and pub-
lic agencies.  1.6 Standardization in the ICT Setting 
 For the past two decades the information and communications technology 
(ICT) sector has represented one of the most dynamic commercial markets and 
most active arenas for standards developm
ent. In particular, 
the convergence of 
products and services in the Internet and cellular communications sector has 

transformed the daily lives much of th
e world™s population and spawned indus-
tries in every part of the world with 
aggregate economic activity approaching $2 
                                                           
8See http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/Lex
UriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2012:316:0012:0033: 
EN.pdf. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.26                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
trillion per year.
9 The Internet and cellular communications industries had sepa-
rate origins and until recently followed se
parate development paths. However, 
they have converged rapidly in the past five years and it is likely that by now, 
the majority of devices accessing the Internet use wireless communications. 
Computers, tablets, phones, and televi
sions increasingly share these capabilities. 
With the ability to connect devices anywhere in the world to one another, the 
Internet and cellular networks rely heavily on interoperability standards devel-
oped by SSOs. These standards almost inevitably incorporate patented technolo-

gies. 
The technologies embodied in today™s complex microelectronic products, 
such as a smartphone, are governed by hundreds of standards, developed by 
many SSOs, each with its own culture, 
governing principles, and specific pro-
cesses. Indeed, the heterogeneity of practices across SSOs is striking. The fol-

lowing paragraphs describe briefly four multinational SSOs with diverse charac-
teristics.    The Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) formulates standards 
for cellular communications. It is a consortium of six national and re-
gional standards organizations, referred to as ﬁorganizational partners,ﬂ 

in Europe, the United States, Japan,
 Korea, and China. Individual 
members, which are companies associat
ed with one or more of the or-
ganizational partners of 3GPP, contribute to producing the standards. 

Partner SSO policies govern.
10  The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Standards Associ-
ation (IEEE-SA) publishes standards in many categories. Several de-

vices implementing IEEE standards 
for wireless local area networks 
(Wi-Fi) and Bluetooth communications are critical components of 
complex computers and smartphones. IEEE-SA has individual and cor-
porate members and is part of the IE
EE, a transnational professional as-
sociation.  An important source of standards governing Internet communications is 
the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). Its goal is ﬁ– to make the 
Internet work better by producing high quality, relevant technical doc-
uments that influence the way people design, use, and manage the In-
ternet.ﬂ Reflecting the organic, bottom-up evolution of the Internet, 
IETF activities are open to anyone and there is no formal membership 
or membership fee.  
                                                           
9Chetan Sharma estimated worldwide mobile service revenues to reach $1.5T in 2012 
and iSuppli projected 2012 factory revenues fo
r mobile communications equipment to 
reach $376 billion. 
10Because there is no independent 3GPP IPR policy, this organization was not includ-
ed in the survey described in Chapter 2. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.27 
Introduction 
 The International Telecommunication 
Standardization Sector (ITU-T) 
of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), another source of 
communications-based standards, is
 the United Nations specialized 
agency for standardization in information and communication technol-
ogies. The ITU currently has a member
ship of 193 countries and over 
700 private-sector entities and academ
ic institutions. Currently, one of 
the most prominent ITU-T standards, called ﬁRecommendations,ﬂ is the 
H.264 standard for video compression. 
 The rapid evolution of ICT technologies and the growth of ICT markets 
are fueled by intense activity
 in these and other SSOs described in this report 
and hundreds more. The work of each SSO is generally conducted by technical 
committees within the organization that are responsible for individual standards. 
For example, 3GPP has four Technical Specification Groups, further subdivided 
into 17 working groups. The IETF's standards development work is organized 
into eight areas, subdivided into more than 100 working groups.  
Each SSO has a unique background, technical scope, and rules regarding 
membership and participation. Similarly, each SSO has its own set of proce-
dures for introducing, adjusting, approving, publishing and revising candidate 
standards.
11 This diversity is also reflected in the way the SSOs treat intellectual 
property related to candidate standards and adopted standards. Each SSO (in the 
case of 3GPP, each of its organizational 
partners) has its own policy regarding 
disclosure of essential patents, licensing commitments, and in some cases, trans-
fer of essential patents.  
Although standards creation and revision is in large part an engineering 
discipline, the outcomes of the engineering efforts are strongly influenced, and 
in some cases mandated by laws, regulatory practices, and judicial systems of 
the jurisdictions of the SS
Os and places where the standards are implemented. 
Until recently, the sources of standards and the markets for products and ser-
vices that implement the standards have been concentrated in regions with high-
ly developed economies. However, ICT markets in these regions are beginning 
to saturate and most of the near-term growth is likely to come from emerging 
markets, most prominently, China, India,
 and Brazil. Although they differ from 
one place to another, the laws, regulatory
 practices, and judicial approaches to 
standards are relatively well-established in economically developed countries. 
By contrast, these practices are still ev
olving in emerging markets, including 
those studied by the committeeŠChina, 
India, and Brazil. 
Among these three 
countries, China has implemented the most extensive set of institutions and pro-
cedures and Brazil the least. 
                                                            
11As noted in Chapter 2, however, the large majority of standards bodies accredited by 
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) simply adopt the ANSI IPR policy as 
their own, with little variation. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.28                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
1.7 Stakeholders in Standard-Setting
  There are a variety of interested actors involved in setting standards and 
managing and licensing intellectual property in ICT and other sectors, raising 
questions about finding the appropriate balance among them. The most obvious 

stakeholders are members of SSOs, includ
ing for the most part companies that 
manufacture products or market services th
at use the standards, companies that 
operate networks that practice the standards, firms that develop or acquire tech-

nologies purely for licensing, and in so
me cases academic institutions and gov-
ernment agencies. Many SSO members own pa
tents they consider to be essential 
to implementation of the standards. Patent owners may have diverse motivations 
and strategies for utilizing their intellectual property. Some use these assets pri-
marily for defensive purposes, such as to establish a form of détente or enable 

voluntary cross-licensing of patents among companies, supporting their ﬁfree-
dom to operateﬂ in the marketplace. Others 
use their patents to generate a stream 
of royalty revenues; acquire patents to exercise the right to exclude others from 

using their technologies, as authorized by patent laws; or view patents as assets 
that help enable financing or entry into new markets where competitors have 
patent portfolios as well. Many firms ha
ve acquired patents for several, or per-
haps all, of these and other reasons, following different business models. 
There are also many entities that are 
not members of SSOs but are strong-
ly influenced by the intellectual property policies of those organizations, includ-

ing owners of essential patents, implementers of standards, and end users. These 
categories encompass individuals, companies, universities, and governments. 
For example, in the United States federa
l agencies are required to adopt private-
sector standards under the National Technology Transfer Advancement Act, 
signed in 1996 (104 P.L. 113; 110 Stat. 775), and Circular A-119 of the Office 
of Management and Budget (OMB), revised in 1998 (OMB 63 FR 8546, 1998), 

whenever possible.  
Further, it is becoming increasingly common for enterprises to acquire 
large portfolios of patents, many of which may be SEPs, to gain their implicit 
economic value. A few recent examples of
 companies that have obtained large 
bundles of patents from their original owners are Google, owner of patents ac-

quired by purchasing Motorola Mobility, IPCom, purchaser of patents from 
Bosch, and the Rockstar Consortium, composed of Apple, Microsoft, EMC, 
Ericsson, BlackBerry, and Sony, that purchased Nortel™s patents during that 

company™s bankruptcy proceedings. Such
 acquisitions raise questions about the 
transferability of prior licensing commitments. 
 1.8 International and Multilateral Issues 
 The committee was asked to address geographical variations in practices 
and policies, with a view toward identif
ying their effectiveness in reducing con-
flict among stakeholders in this area. In this regard the report focuses on three 
salient features of the global system. First, as described in Chapter 2, there is 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.29 
Introduction 
considerable heterogeneity in practices 
across SSOs that are located in different 
major economies. Keep in mind, however, that the most prominent SSOs in ICT 

are trans-boundary institutio
ns, with membership from multiple locations and 
uniform rules applied to those members. Th
is sets up an interesting hierarchy of 
organizations among those that arguably are more national in scope and the ma-

jor international SSOs, creating opportunities for both collaboration and discord. 
Second, a meaningful distinction exists between the government policies 
of the established industrialized economies and those of many emerging coun-

tries. The mature industrialized count
riesŠthe United States, members of the 
European Union, Japan, and to a large extent South KoreaŠgenerally share a 
common policy environment that relies on private sector organizations to devel-
op and implement technologi
es through decentralized 
market competition, alt-
hough university and government research laboratories are important as well.  
The situation in key emerging economie
s is different. Chinese authorities, 
for example, tend to view standards setting as a centralized, top-down process 
that may achieve a variety of objectives, including domestic industrial policy 

and inbound technology transfer. Thus, although Chinese representatives are 
active in many international SSOs, the government also emphasizes and guides 
the development of domestic standards in key technologies. In short, China ap-

proaches domestic standards-setting more
 as an element of
 public policy and 
management than the province of the country™s enterprises. For their part, India 
and Brazil are only beginning to develop their standards policies in ICT and it is 

too soon to know which approach they may follow.  
Third, the committee asked whether th
ere are significant differences in 
laws and court opinions across jurisdictions regarding key elements of IP man-

agement in SSOs and firms. Such differe
nces could arise, for example, in the 
areas of understanding the meaning of FRAND commitments, injunctive relief, 
transferability of licensing commitments, 
and public recording of patent trans-
fers. In this context, the committee belie
ves there is scope for greater communi-
cation and collaboration among SSOs and the patent offices of major economies, 
and among courts to reduce legal dissonance.  
To the extent that differences in la
ws and public policies regarding SSOs 
pose significant difficulties for cross-border trade one might support efforts at 

international policy or law harmonization. This might be achieved through re-
formulating the Agreement on Technical 
Barriers to Trade (TBT) or the Agree-
ment on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) at the 

World Trade Organization (WTO) or through additional undertakings on IP 
standards at the World Intellectual Pr
operty Organization (WIPO). The commit-
tee chose not to pursue this line of inquir
y, believing that it is unclear that there 
are sufficient problems with
 the current international system to justify recom-
mending multilateral negotiations that are difficult to initiate and conclude in 
either venue, and in any case would involve broader issues of trade policy out-

side the committee™s statement of task (Maskus, 2012). Thus, in the near term 
we see little role for the WTO or WIPO in this context, though further study of 
the potential for such involvement in the longer term is warranted. In all likeli-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.30                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
hood, greater societal benefits are availa
ble from simply restricting or eliminat-
ing nationalistic policies and practices that unduly reduce competition and inno-

vation, a role for national authorities.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.31 
2. A Comparison of SSO  Policies and Practices  2.1 SSOs Surveyed for the Study 
 This chapter reviews and compares th
e primary approaches to policies re-
garding intellectual property rights management and licensing rules across 12 

major standard-setting organizations operating in the information and communi-
cation technology space. This material 
is abstracted and 
summarized from a 
background paper written by two members of the committee available online 

(Bekkers and Updegrove, 2012).
1 In consultation with the full committee, the 
authors selected these organizations of various types of SSOs, including the 
ﬁbusiness modelsﬂ they and their member
s tend to follow, inclusive of several 
geographic membership models (national, regional and global), and comprehen-
sive in sectoral breadth within ICT. Given available time and resources it was 
not possible to survey more than a selection of the many hundreds of relevant 

SSOs in ICT, an aggregation that seem
ingly grows larger each week. The infor-
mation gathered from documentation, questionnaires and telephone inquiries 
was current through 2012. The committee 
is aware that several organizations, 
including ETSI, ITU, W3C and IETF, are considering changes to their IPR poli-
cies. The SSOs survey
ed are listed below. 
 International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (IEEE-SA) 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) 
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information  
Standards (OASIS) 
VMEBus International Trade Association (VITA) 

World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 
High Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) Forum Nearfield  
Communications (NFC) Forum
                                                   1See http://www.nap.edu/ca
talog.php?record_id=18510. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.32                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
The first three SSOs are the International Organization for Standardization 
(ISO), International Electrotechnical Co
mmission (IEC), and International Tele-
communication Union (ITU), which is a United Nations treaty organization. 
These are large, formally 
recognized SSOs with glob
al membership consisting 
of nationally designated private or public-sector representatives, although indi-

viduals and firms participate as well. These groups develop standards through 
extensive collaboration with national standards bodies. Notably, in 2007 they 
adopted a common patent policy and set of guidelines. While this decision re-

sulted in a largely harmonized set of IPR rules, each of the three SSOs retains 
some flexibility for implementing specific requirements. 
Next is the IEEE (originally the Institute of Electrical and Electronics En-
gineers), a professional association with over 300,000 individuals around the 
world as members and the publisher of numerous technical journals. Standards 

development occurs in the IEEE-Standa
rds Association (IEEE-SA), which is 
responsible for several critical specifica
tions, including Ethernet, Wi-Fi, and 
Firewire.  
The fifth SSO is the European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
(ETSI), a body focused on information and telecommunications technologies, 
including fixed, mobile radio, converged broadcast and Internet technologies. 

Although founded as a regional group, some of its standards have become 
adopted around the world. For example, ETSI developed GSM, a highly suc-
cessful standard for mobile telephony, and participated in construction of its 

successor, the 3G UMTS/W-CDMA specifications. ETSI has an extensive IPR 
policy, which evolves over time, sometimes under the influence of the European 
Commission. Since 2003, it has collaborated with the European Patent Office to 

expand the latter™s database to include thousands of technical contributions 
made to ETSI as part of the standard process. These documents can now be 
searched for prior art. 
The sixth entity is the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), 
which is not a standards-setting organization. Rather, it is a national, non-
governmental organization that supports standards development in the United 
States and the standards-relate
d interests of America abroad.
2 As part of this 
role, ANSI accredits SSOsŠapproximately 200 in allŠwith respect to their 

standards development activities. If th
ese SSOs fulfill certain criteria, called 
ﬁessential requirementsﬂ, they can create
 standards that ANSI will approve as 
ﬁAmerican National Standards,ﬂ of which 
there are now over 
10,500. ANSI in-
cludes adherence to its IPR policy among these criteria, defining a baseline set 
of rules that accredited organizations must meet, though these groups have lee-
way in setting their own procedures so long as they are not in conflict with the 

essential requirements. For purposes of this report, we will refer whenever pos-
sible to the ANSI™s IPR requirements fo
r accredited SSOs as if they were those 
of an actual SSO. In fact, a large ma
jority of its accredited SSOs follow the 
ANSI IPR policy without variation. 
                                                 2Many international companies with U.S. business operations are members of ANSI. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.33 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
Next is the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), a group of academic, 
industrial, and government engineers working to improve the technologies driv-

ing the internet. Among its other functions, IETF develops Internet standards, 
the most famous of which is the TCP/IP protocol suite of programs. There is no 
membership in IETF per se and standards are adopted on the basis of a ﬁrough 

consensus.ﬂ Regarding patents, IETF pref
ers to adopt standa
rds not encumbered 
by known IPR claims, unless protected t
echnologies offer considerable technical 
superiority to available alternatives. Patents and patent applications covering 

technologies under consideration by IETF are required to be disclosed as early 
as possible in developing technical standards. 
The eighth group is the Organization 
for the Advancement of Structured 
Information Standards (OASIS), which focuses on e-business and web service 
standards. OASIS is often referred to as a consortium for it operates outside the 

typical infrastructure of traditional SSOs. Through a series of revisions of its 
IPR policy, OASIS has developed a new and more flexible approach to assign-
ing obligations relating to essential claims in patents. In particular, in 2005 it 

adopted a ﬁmulti-modeﬂ IPR regime permitting a working group to operate un-
der a set of guidelines that either would or would not allow participants to re-
quire payment of licensing fees unde
r a FRAND arrangement. This approach 
has now expanded to four modes, including one based on a non-assertion of 
patents. 
The ninth organization is VITA (originally VMEBus International Trade 
Association), which works on standardiza
tion in a variety of electronics areas, 
such as avionics and other military and industrial applications. This SSO is the 
only one in this set that requires members to make 
ex ante disclosure of the most 
restrictive licensing terms, including economic terms that the SEP owner re-
serves the right to demand. VITA is also unusual in that it declares its intention 
to enforce all disclosure terms and conditions on essential claims, take action 

against frivolous assertion of SEPs, and require members to submit to binding 
arbitration when co
nflicts arise.  
The next SSO is the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), which devel-
ops standards used in connection with the Web and other technologies. Con-
sistent with the development culture of the Web, the W3C in 2003 adopted a 

license-fee-intolerant patent policy. Its members see the Web as basic global 
infrastructure that needs the widest possible distribution of its technologies and 
standards. Thus, it pursues a FRAND royalty-free policy.  
Our eleventh SSO is the High Defi
nition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) 
Forum, a consortium which focuses on st
andards for a compact interface among 
compliant devices to share uncompressed digital audio/visual data. Implement-

ers of the proprietary HDMI technology 
must pay royalties to developers of pa-
tented technologies in the standard, including the original seven founding com-
panies. Further developments of the standard from its initial form are subject to 

agreements under which patent owners ag
ree not to assert any essential claims 
against implementers. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.34                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Finally, the Nearfield Communications (NFC) Forum is a consortium 
founded in 2003 to develop and market its short-range wireless interaction 

standard enabling data exchanges among consumer devices, for example, to 
facilitate payment transactions. All members must respond to requests for dis-
closure and licensing of SEPs to reduce the possibility that such claims will be 

asserted later to the detriment of an implementer. 
To summarize, four of the organizatio
ns considered here are formal SSOs, 
one is a standards accreditation group, and the remainder are consortia of com-

panies and/or individuals. All have global membership, though ETSI is largely 
European-based and IEEE-SA and ANSI 
are largely U.S.-based, and the stand-
ards activities and IPR rules of all the 
SSOs have international reach. Some 
work in broad areas of technology, while
 others focus on sp
ecific technical spec-ifications. In the aggregate they span
 the ICT space, including consumer elec-
tronics, telecommunications, the Internet and Web, and related areas.  
For purposes of developing the materials summarized below, the authors 
of the background paper collected ava
ilable documents from each SSO that are 
relevant to organizational IPR policies. These policies were analyzed in a stand-
ard format drawn largely from the Amer
ican Bar Association™s Standard Devel-
opment Patent Policy Manual (2007). The authors further developed a series of 

questions posed to SSO representatives, along with an invitation to comment on 
the accuracy of their analysis. Consistent
 with the basic ch
arge to our commit-
tee, the findings in the background paper, and those summarized in this chapter, 

are descriptive in nature rather than assessments of effectiveness, which in any 
event would depend on a large set of economic, technological and social factors 
for each SSO. Later chapters of this repo
rt offer deeper assessments of some key 
standards-related IPR policy questions.  
 2.2 A Note on Terminology  Readers of this report who are alread
y familiar with standards and intellec-
tual property management know that ther
e are many intricacies and complexities 
in how policies are conceptualized and put
 into operation in licensing markets. 
This means, among other things, that there may be multiple names for closely 

related concepts that, while they may vary importantly in legal contexts, can be 
captured with a single overarching title. Doing so permits us to discuss princi-
ples without having to cover all possible outcomes, except where we need to be 

precise to avoid confusion. This approach should clarify our analysis through-
out.  
In that context, we will use the following blanket terms, recognizing there 
are differences among elements covered. 
  Standards
 is our word referring to numerous similar terms, including 
standards, specifications, and recommendations.  
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.35 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
 Standards-setting organization (SSO)
 incorporates all variants of 
groups that develop standards, including Special Interest Groups 
(SIGs), standards-development organizations (SDOs), consortia, and 
other entities. The acronym SSO is often used interchangeably with 
SDO but, in principle, the former term covers the activities of both 

setting and managing standards, including associated intellectual 
property issues. Hence, we opt here for SSO.  
 Fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory (FRAND)
 is used to cov-
er both RAND and FRAND comm
itments, whether royalty-free or 
otherwise. FRAND is more commonly used in Europe and RAND in 

the United States but the words are 
sometimes used interchangeably. 
Our choice of the acronym FRAND is meant to cover both terms. 
 Standard-essential patent (SEP)
 refers to both patents that are es-
sential to the use of a standard a
nd the essential claims of such pa-
tents. Some IPR policies focus on essential patent claims rather than 
SEPs and, indeed, a properly crafted rule rarely imposes licensing ob-

ligations to claims other than the essential ones. However, the analyti-
cal concepts involved are largely common to both terms and SEP ap-
pears to be in wider use in the literature. Note also that the word 

ﬁnecessaryﬂ is sometimes used
 in place of ﬁessential.ﬂ  
 Licensing commitments
 and 
licensing obligations
 are used inter-
changeably to cover a wide set of activities, including letters of assur-
ance, declarations of licensing positions, licensing statements, licens-
ing undertakings, and similar pledges. 
 Disclosure refers to the various processes within which a firm or in-
dividual informs an SSO and other entities that it owns or is aware of 
a patent, or patent application, that may be relevant for a standard. 

This usage is different from the concept of disclosure at a patent of-
fice, which refers to the information an applicant must provide to sat-
isfy certain requirements for obtaining a patent. 
 2.3 A Caveat on Coverage 
 We note at the outset that the forms of intellectual property to which we re-
fer in this report are limited to patents, 
whether essential to a standard or other-
wise. Other IPRs certainly arise in this 
area. For example, SSOs or other entities 
may own copyrights in a written technical st
andard or manual, but typically this is 
relevant only to the reproduction and distribution of those materials and not to the 
implementation of standards. More relevant is computer software that must be 

deployed as a necessary component of a technical standard, making it a form of 
ﬁessential copyright.ﬂ In most cases, such 
software is used for such purposes as 
defining required outputs, as opposed to being used by an implementer in its prod-
uct.  As the background paper notes, such
 essential copyrights are only addressed 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.36                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
by a small number of SSOs.
3 Copyrights are an area in some flux regarding ICT 
standards and are likely to become more important over time.  
Firms employing or developing standards may own trademarks and simi-
lar distinguishing characteristics, which 
may implicate some licensing consider-
ations in the marketplace. The ITU-T ha
s a set of guidelines in this area and 
ANSI also provides related guidance. Some SSOs in the ICT area pay relatively 
little attention to trademark issues. For 
example, the NFC Forum clarifies that 
contributions of rights to trademarks 
are not required under its policy. Nor are 
trademarks included in the IETF defin
ition of essential IPR. ANSI generally 
discourages the required use of trademarks in developed standards. Neverthe-
less, trademarks and certification marks play
 an important role in certifying that 
different products are compliant with 
specific standards. Compliance certifica-
tion and trademark usage are no
t addressed in this report. 
Other forms of intellectual property that are sometimes mentioned include 
utility models, inventor™s certificates, and 
database rights. It seems that IPR oth-
er than patents rarely have been disclosed under terms of SSO policies.
4  While 
not directly relevant to ICT, plant patents and plant variety rights may take on 
increasing importance in standardization in
 other fields, such as biotechnology 
and life sciences. Finally, many SSOs do 
not expect members to disclose trade 
secrets because their disclosure likely w
ould cause the trade secrets to lose con-
fidentiality. In general, where trade secret
s are revealed as part of a license the 
parties must arrange contractual terms to sustain secrecy.  
In the committee™s view, therefore, IP
R elements other than patents are 
secondary to the issue of essentiality 
when it comes to the licensing and access 
procedures that are the subject of this report.  

 2.4 SSO Approaches to Basic IPR Issues 
 Given the considerable complexities involved in the interplay between 
standards development and IPR licensing, both in themselves highly complicat-
ed subjects, it is impossible to review all of the variations in SSO policies in this 
overview section. Rather, we take a high-l
evel view of the essential principles 
involved in order to set the foundation for later discussion in the report. Still, we 

are keenly aware that deta
ils matter and that any su
mmary of this kind may 
leave open as many questions as it answer
s. Further, we are aware that SSO pol-
icies may be changed at any time. Thus, we encourage readers interested in spe-
                                                 3Of the 12 SSOs surveyed, the IPR policies of six include essential copyrights and 
those of the others do not. IETF includes them
 in essential IPR and treats them in the 
same manner as patents. Bekkers 
and Updegrove, op. cit., p. 36. 
4Design patents that cover ne
w and ornamental designs (a
s opposed to utility patents 
that cover useful inventions put to practical
 applications) are typically not involved in 
standards because alternative designs may be
 employed to make patented versions non-
essential. However, the rapid increase in design patents to protect computer-generated 
imagery, such as graphical interfaces, likely will lead to their growing role in standards. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.37 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
cific policies of particular SSOs to consult the background paper, from which 
this summary is drawn.  
With respect to prior literature, to the committee™s knowledge no one has 
made a comprehensive investigation of SSO patent policy formulation. Lemley 
(2002) took a first step by documenting substantial heterogeneity in IPR policies 

across SSOs. This chapter complements his study by taking a more detailed look 
at the policies of a smaller number of organizations. We find substantial varia-
tion in aspects of IPR policies that were
 not examined by Le
mley, such as the 
definition of essentiality, rules for disclo
sure of third party patents, the mecha-
nisms for establishing licensing commitments, and the scope and revocability of 
those commitments.  
As we note below, SSOs rarely state 
their objectives. Thus, it is hard to 
determine what motivates differences in IPR rules, or to evaluate how SSOs 

perform in relation to stated goals. Lerner
 and Tirole (2007) assume that policies 
are chosen to benefit members (modeled as a single technology sponsor), subject 
to the constraint that later adopters must find the SSOs' "certification" sufficient-

ly credible. In our view, the Lerner and 
Tirole approach captures some important 
features of the policy-formulation process. However, it would be equally valid 
to model SSO policy formulation as an open-ended negotiation among prospec-

tive members with varied interests, often building on an existing set of rules and 
policies that forms an important referen
ce point in such negotiations. Farrell and 
Simcoe (2012) discuss the role of inter-SSO competition in this process, observ-

ing that such competition may take different forms with correspondingly differ-
ent effects for competition and consumer welfare.   
Ultimately, the committee did not find sufficient systematic evidence to 
take a strong stand on how the SSO policy formulation process works, or might 
be made to work better. However, there was a consensus among committee 
members that encouraging SSOs to be more explicit about their policy goals 

might help those who wish to build the empirical foundations for a better under-
standing of the rule-setting process. Despite this lack of clarity regarding pro-
cesses within SSOs, the committee was able
 to arrive at consensus recommenda-
tions regarding a number of specific policies. 
 
Articulating policy goals 
 It may be surprising that few SSOs 
state explicit goals for their IPR poli-
cies, despite their evident importance. 
There are many objectives that SSOs 
could pursue, even if unstated, ranging from promoting widespread adoption of 
their standards with minimum restraints
 on access arising from IPR and ensuring 
that each essential IPR is available on 
reasonable and non-discriminatory terms, 
to ensuring fair compensation for SEP owners and providing enough structure 
that good-faith licensors and licensees understand their rights and obligations. 

The general absence of stated objectives
 presumably reflects the difficulty of 
reaching agreement on organizational ai
ms among SSO members with disparate  
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.38                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
interests. Companies with large patent portfolios that are active in multiple SSOs 
may see different opportunities and burdens in specific policies than do smaller 

participants with few patents. Further, SSOs with broad coverage across tech-
nology classes may find it difficult to determine a set of objectives that make 
sense throughout their activities. Organi
zations focused on very specific tech-
nologies, such as W3C, HDMI Forum an
d NFC Forum, may find it easier to 
articulate their underlying goals. 
One potential concern about the general absence of articulated objectives 
is that SSOs may find it hard to evaluate their IPR policies. For example, while 
some SSOs generally posit the importance of essential IPR disclosure for select-
ing and disseminating their standards, it may not be that the actual disclosure 
processes are effective for that purpose. A related concern is that organizations 
rarely attempt to define critical concepts and steps, such as FRAND terms and 

conditions or disclosure timing. 
 Defining essentiality of patents and claims 

 In general, a SEP is a patent protecting an invention required to practice a 
given industry standard, so that infringing essential patent claims is unavoidable 

when implementing the standard. Defining essentiality is important both for 
disclosure and licensing obligations within SSOs. 
In their IPR policies, all 12 SSOs addr
ess the need to declare possibly es-
sential patents or the possible ownership of SEPs. However, just six include 
copyrights essential to implementation of a standard within their definitions. In 
these cases the essential copyrights are treated under the same language as SEPs, 

which may be problematic in light of key legal differences between patents and 
copyrights. However, ETSI has a separate IPR policy for copyrights including 
an explicit software license. IETF requir
es that any software source code (essen-
tial or non-essential) included in a standard must be available under an open-
source license. While some SSOs define essentiality to mean there are no technological 
alternatives, others also mention the 
concept of ﬁcommercial essentiality,ﬂ 
meaning that non-infringing alternatives may exist but are too expensive or 

cumbersome to be worth bringing to the market. This situation is particularly 
likely in ICT because once a standard is
 widely adopted it may become econom-
ically infeasible to deploy an alternative workable technology due to network 

economies. In fact, just two SSOs (IEEE
 and VITA) include commercially es-
sential patents within their IPR policies regarding disclosure and licensing 
commitments and one (ETSI) explicitly ru
les the concept out. To be sure, 
whether a technology is commercially essential is often a subjective issue, which 
may explain why some SSOs do not consider that notion in their IPR policies.  
A further distinction of note is that within a SEP some claims may be con-
sidered mandatory for successful implementation of a standard. Others, howev-
er, may read on optional portions of the standard but could be quite important if 
the implementer chooses to conform to that optional set of requirements and are 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.39 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
therefore referenced in the standard.
5 Licensees may wish 
to incorporate both 
within a transaction, while some licenso
rs may prefer to withhold the optional 
portions or negotiate separate arrangements with terms and conditions that may 
not meet FRAND guidelines. In this case the implementer may find it difficult to 
avoid infringement when it sees the need to use the optional claims or patents. 

This situation raises the question of whether such optional claims should be in-
cluded within the ambit of SSO IPR policies. Our inquiry revealed that the poli-
cies of the three large, global SSOsŠIT
U, ISO, and IECŠrestrict their defini-
tions to technically mandatory claims, which may or may not include required 
patents that read on the optional portio
ns of the standard in question. Two 
groupsŠIETF and VITAŠdo not define optional claims, suggesting they are 
subject to licensing rules.
 ANSI rules leave it up to the SSO to decide whether 
optional claims are or are not subject to licensing obligation. The other six SSOs 

formally include optional components of SEPs in their IPR regimes. 
We mention one other important element on which the surveyed SSOs 
have widespread consensus. Ten of the twelve clarify that essentiality is defined 

with respect to patents necessary for implementing the final standard. Several 
technologies may be disclosed as essential during development of the standard 
but not all of them may turn out to be 
necessary for the fina
l specification. Only 
those that are ultimately necessary retain essentiality for purposes of the licens-
ing obligations in 10 cases.  
Despite the attention of SSOs to the essentiality issue at the broad level, 
Bekkers and Updegrove find a surprisingly wide variation as well as imprecision 
regarding how this extremely important el
ement should be defined. In a number 
of cases there is a neglect to address im
portant concepts or there was a decision 
to use vague language. We note that this outcome may result from the negotia-
tions leading to formation of the SSO or adoption of its IPR policy.  
 
Disclosure of SEPs 
 Most SSO IPR policies have two core elements: (1) rules regarding disclo-
sure of patents that may have essential claims and (2) rules regarding licensing 
commitments or statements of non-commitment. While conceptually distinct, 

disclosure and licensing commitments are often intertwined. For example, pa-
tents are often disclosed in the same declaration form that includes licensing 
commitments. These relationships vary in complex ways across organizations. 

For example, in some SSOs a respondent who fills out a licensing statement 
signals that it believes it owns patents that will likely become SEPs, which must 
be disclosed. In others, participants may reserve the right to seek a paid license 

but are allowed to submit blanket disclosures that do list specific patents that 
may not be essential.  
                                                 5These may be distinguished from non-essentia
l claims within a patent. The policies 
of 11 SSOs exclude non-essential claims from the definition of essentiality and, therefore, 
from associated IPR rules. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.40                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
This lack of a disclosure obligation generally arises in broader and more 
comprehensive cross-sectoral SSOs beca
use its members may be large enter-
prises with very large patent portfolios. Determining which patents may be es-
sential can be costly and burdensome. Making a FRAND commitment for any 
SEPs that the patent holder ends up holding regarding the final standard ensures 

that it will not use any of its SEPs to block implementation of the standard. It 
also reserves the right to license for a fee, which keeps the patent owner™s op-
tions open while avoiding the need to scrutinize its patents. Indeed, most IPR 

policies do not mandate patent searches because of the cost implications. Thus, 
the scope of disclosure obligations refl
ects a balance between the benefits of 
providing substantial information and the burdens of providing it. This balance 
means that disclosure is effectively less than it might be with complete infor-
mation revelation. 
Most of the policies of the surveyed 
SSOs seek formal disclosure at some 
point in the standardization process and it is typically tied to an expectation that 
the member concurrently state its intentions regarding whether it will license its 

SEPs under terms of the organization™s IPR policies.
6 This obligation is intended 
to result in a legally binding commitment with respect to SEPs. However, since 
it may be made late in the standard development process, the need to avoid in-

fringement of a SEP that is eventually 
not made available for licensing can re-
sult in a significant loss of time before a standard can be adopted. 
To be more precise, all of the surv
eyed SSOs except the HDMI Forum, 
which has no formal disclosure mechan
ism, obligate those who submit a tech-
nology they wish to include in the standard either to disclose the specific patents 
they own and believe would be essential, or at least to indicate that they likely 

hold SEPs. ANSI leaves this matter up to the SSOs it accredits. Some require the 
submission to be on a royalty-free basis while others permit the submitter to 
reserve the right to charge a fee. Submitters are sometimes not permitted to re-

fuse to license any SEPs in their own 
submissions, but they can choose to not 
license SEPs where they did not contribut
e their technology to the SSO in ques-
tion. Similar options face participants 
in standards working groups, which are 
obligated to disclose relevant essential IPR. Two SSOs, ETSI and IETF, further 
obligate members who are non-participants in working groups to disclose SEPs, 

while this is encouraged but voluntary
 in ITU, ISO, IEC, IEEE, ANSI, and 
OASIS. The umbrella organizations ISO and IEC go further to obligate disclo-
sure by those who receive a draft standard
 and have patents that may be essential 
for its use.
7 IETF and W3C impose a similar requirement and OASIS requests 
such disclosure, presumably because n
on-members may participate in drafting 
sessions.                                                   6An earlier and informal process is the patent call, by which participants in a technical 
discussion are expected to reveal patents of which they are aware that may contain essen-
tial claims with respect to the ultimate standard. 
7Receipt of a draft standard may occur, fo
r example, through involvement in the pro-
cess through a national standards body. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.41 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
Finally, all of the SSOs have rules covering participants™ disclosure to 
members of known or suspected SEPs owned by members, participants, or unre-

lated groups. Such disclosure is mandatory for working group participants in 
ITU, ISO, IEC, ETSI, OASIS, and W3C, 
while again ANSI leaves the matter to 
its accredited SSOs. It is encouraged by
 IEEE and IETF, while VITA requires 
disclosure if the member or participant is a licensee of a third-party patent that 
may be essential to the standard. VITA, 
W3C, and VITA waive this requirement 
if disclosure, even to the SSO™s member
s, would violate a promise of confiden-
tiality.  
Note that these organizations vary co
nsiderably in terms of what consti-
tutes knowledge of potentially essential IPR, subject to disclosure, on the part of 
members and participants. It could be undefined or extend to personal 
knowledge (IEEE and IETF), elements that
 could be discovered by reasonable 
efforts (ETSI), or even patents that could be found by a ﬁgood faith and reason-
able inquiryﬂ (VITA). Still, none of thes
e SSOs requires patent searches, so the 
obligation to disclose typically has some limitations. 
A risk of the emphasis on disclosure of specific patents that potentially 
could be essential to a standardŠa policy aimed at minimizing the chances of 
missing relevant SEPsŠis over-disclosure of IP by participants who reveal more 

SEPs and other patents than ultimately necessary to implement the final version 
of the standard.  
Such problems could be reduced, and the list of clearly essential patents 
clarified, by combining formal patent s
earches with efforts to assess essentiality 
after the standard is defined. However, it is important to note that none of the 
surveyed SSOs requir
es a member to engage in a patent search for purposes of 
disclosure or has a formal process for adjudicating the essentiality of patents.  
This reflects concerns expressed by memb
ers, especially large companies with 
multiple technologies, that a formal s
earch across their large portfolios of pa-
tents would be expensive and may not even be definitive in terms of unearthing 
relevant SEPs. For those patent holders who do not proactively seek FRAND 
licenses from implementers this cost is not defrayed by licensing revenues.  
Among our sample, ETSI has the broadest disclosure obligation, because 
it applies to all members and all standards activities and prohibits the use of 

blanket disclosures. While the scope of the disclosure rule depends on the 
knowledge of individuals and the companies they work for, which may be lim-
ited if they are not working on the draft 
standard, the obligation in ETSI is nev-
ertheless the widest of any organization in this study.  
A contrasting case is W3C, which has a limited disclosure obligation. The 
reason is that members of this SSO commit to license SEPs on a royalty-free 

(RF) basis if they are participating in the development of the relevant standard, 
making disclosure necessary only when a member seeks to exclude a patent 
from the default RF commitment. This RF ﬁdefault modeﬂ is thought to encour-

age implementation of W3C™s standards and is consistent with the organiza-
tion™s preference for access to technologies. 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.42                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Timing of disclosure 
 SSOs must decide whether their IPR 
policies recommend formal disclo-
sure early or late in the standardization process, which is a difficult tradeoff to 
be managed. For technical committees undertaking this approach, early disclo-

sures of potential SEPs and patent applications offer the advantage of develop-
ing standards that choose among and combine these technologies, while bypass-
ing less promising ones. However, it is quite
 difficult at the immature stage of a 
standard for members to determine which patents may be essential, reducing 
disclosure quality. Further, this risks selecting technologies that are outdated by 
the time the standard is released, while patent applications may be denied or 
have their claims significantly limited. In short, there is a high likelihood of in-
adequate information with early disclosure. Late disclosures help address this 

problem but raise the risk that a draft standard will have developed so far that it 
may be difficult to work around an as-yet undisclosed SEP. This could pose a 
significant access problem for implementers if the late discloser chooses not to 

make a FRAND licensing commitment. 
This is a hard problem and its best resolution probably varies with indi-
vidual standards and technology areas. In this context, it is not surprising that 

SSOs have widely varying, and at times vague, policies. The common 
ITU/ISO/IEC policy calls for disclosure as early as possible but this seems to 
mean at a stage where the standard is su
fficiently mature that possible essentiali-
ty may reasonably be determined. ETSI requires disclosure in a timely fashion 
and has the ability to sanction members that engage in intentional delays. ANSI 
encourages early disclosure but does not spell out what this might entail. W3C™s 

approach is similar. VITA 
goes furthest, with a policy specifying precisely when 
a disclosure must be made and extensive guidelines on timing of disclosure.  
It is noteworthy that the majority of SSOs do not specify any procedure 
for updating information about essential IPR, such as the denial of a patent ap-
plication or the expiration or legal cancellation of a patent, although the SSOs 
with data-sharing arrangements with the European Patent Office (EPO) are able 
to track developments in a patent application and in patent families. 
 
Blanket or specific disclosures 
 A second dimension is the precision with which SEPs must be disclosed. 
The basic issue is whether disclosures should identify the specific patents be-
lieved to be essential or blanket statements that a company believes it owns like-
ly essential patents without specifically identifying them. The former policy 

obviously provides more complete information to standards developers and po-
tential implementers than does the latter a
nd for that reason is preferable in prin-
ciple. However, identification of specific patents may not always provide suffi-

cient value to justify the cost of doin
g so. Sometimes there may be a preference 
for a company to make a FRAND commitment for any SEPs it has that end up 
being essential to the final version of the standard, as opposed to only making a 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.43 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
commitment that runs to specific patents.
 This approach may be sufficient for 
effective implementation of the standard
, especially where the patent holder 
largely uses its SEPs for defensive purposes. 
Some SSOsŠETSI, OASIS, and VITAŠrequire specific patent disclo-
sures and do not permit blanket declaration, though the disclosures are often 

based on a trigger, such as the personal knowledge of the individual participat-
ing in a standard™s development. The policies of IEEE and ITU/ISO/IEC allow 
parties to file blanket disclosures, though
 the ITU requires disclosure of specific 
patents if the owner is not willing to license them on a FRAND or FRAND-RF 
basis. At IETF, blanket disclosures are 
permitted only if the owner commits to 
license its patents on a FRAND-RF basis. 
 Disclosing patent families 

 A particular technology may be the subject of patent applications or grants 
in more than one country and the aggreg
ation of these patents may be called a 
family. Many standards, especially in 
the ITC area, are implemented in numer-
ous countries. Thus, it is important for firms to disclose all the jurisdictions in 
which it seeks or has protection for its SEPs, preferably as a family rather than 

as individual patents. The common policy 
of ITU/ISO/IEC stat
es an expectation 
that families will be disclosed and AN
SI recommends this. ETSI™s policy speci-
fies that its disclosure requirements are 
satisfied if at least one member of a pa-
tent family is disclosed, information about potentially related patents is generat-
ed by linkage to the EPO database. In practice, many ETSI members disclose 
more than one patent per family. The publicly available ETSI database now con-

tains information on patent families due to a recent program of cooperation be-
tween ETSI and the EPO.
8   
Common disclosure templates and public release 
 The increasing prevalence of SEPs, especi
ally in ITC standards, has raised 
the importance of precisely stated disc
losure requirements and licensing com-
mitments that share considerable co
mmonality. As a result, SSOs increasingly 
require the use of standard forms to ensure that disclosed information is com-
plete, clear, uniform, and easy to consu
lt once published. In most cases, these 
forms are used both to make disclosures and to choose among available licens-

ing options. Bekkers and Updegrove revealed that the majority of SSOs now use 
disclosure and licensing templates. 
Nearly all the SSOs publish their formal disclosure documents, usually on 
websites. Again, ETSI is notable because its cooperation program with the EPO 
to develop the Database Restructuring (DARE) project matched disclosed pa-
                                                 8We note that the patent holder is not the 
entity providing this family information, 
which may raise questions about its accuracy 
in some instances. See Chapter 7 of this 
report for a review of this program. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.44                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
tents with the EPO™s patent database. Patents in the ETSI database are now con-
siderably easier to access and compare across countries.  
A related element of transparency is the extent to which the minutes and 
reports of working group meetings are made public, which might be of particu-
lar importance to patent examiners in de
termining prior art and to licensors and 
potentially courts seeking to determine whether alternatives to patented technol-
ogy were available at the time of standardization. Most of the broader and longer 
established SSOs, including ITU/ISO/IEC, ETSI, and IETF, do release such 

documents and invite non-members to technical meetings where sensible. Nar-
rower and more recent SSOs, primarily 
consortia such as VITA, the HDMI Fo-
rum, and the NFC Forum, maintain the confidentiality of their documents. 
 Licensing commitments
9  In general, SSOs aim to ensure that 
licenses for SEPs are available to all 
implementers, or that owners will not assert their essential IPR against firms that 

develop standards-compliant products. The minimum objective for virtually all 
SSOs is to ensure that all known SE
Ps are available under FRAND licensing 
terms (10 of the SSOs), with some favoring or requiring royalty-free FRAND 

terms (six SSOs). If an SSO discovers that an essential patent is not available it 
will typically attempt to obtain such a commitment or ‚design around™ that pa-
tent. This section reviews the primar
y processes for promoting licensing. 
There are at least four basic mechan
isms for establishing licensing com-
mitments. First, several SSOsŠITU/I
EC, ETSI, VITA, and NFC ForumŠset 
out a general obligation for its members to submit a licensing declaration, often 

triggered at the time of disclosure. Participants in this arrangement have the op-
tion of not licensing on FRAND terms. 
Second, ITU/ISO/IEC, and IEEE solicit 
declarations from members regarding patents they believe might be essential. 

These declarations are made at the time of
 receipt of such requests or promptly 
after; again one option is not to license on FRAND terms. Members may also 
take the initiative and disclose their own patents by submitting a declaration 
without waiting for such a request. Third, OASIS, W3C, and the HDMI Forum 
follow a ﬁdefault modelﬂ in which the obligation to offer licenses arises from 

membership or participation, meaning th
at a licensing commitm
ent is agreed to 
upfront. Even here however, there generally are certain opt-out provisions for 
firms unwilling to meet required licensing conditions, especially if they did not 

contribute the implicated SEPs to the process. Finally, at IETF, which has no 
formal licensing requirement, many participants voluntarily submit licensing 
declarations with their patent disclosure
s. A large percentage of these declara-
tions indicate that patent holders are willing to license such patents on a royalty-
free basis.                                                   9For analysis of additional issues, such 
as package licensing and grant-backs of non-
SEPs, see Chapters 3 and 5. The IPR polic
ies of SSOs generally do not address these 
issues.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.45 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
The IPR policies of several SSOs, including ETSI, ITU and ANSI, en-
courage patent holders voluntarily to make an early (i.e., well before the stand-

ard is finalized) statement indicating that 
they may own patent claims that could 
prove to be essential and clarifying whether they would be willing to license 
these claims under FRAND terms. Once SEPs are actually identified later in the 

process a separate formal de
claration, whether specific or blanket, may need to 
be issued in some SSOs. The intent of su
ch early assurances is to avoid a situa-
tion in which a SEP owner ultimately decides not to license and to make parties 

to the standard more comfortable about including those SEPs with declared 
commitments. Other SSOs policies do not mention this possibility.  
 Scope and revocability of commitments 
 In 11 of the 12 SSOs, a commitment to
 license under whatever terms ap-
plies to any and all implementers, underlining the basic interest of SSOs in dis-
seminating their standards into wide use. One exception is the HDMI Forum, 

where the commitment extends only to the members of this SSO or those who 
have signed a licensing agreement with it. It is important to note that all SSOs 
state that licensing commitments extend 
only to use necessary to implement a 
particular standard and produce compliant goods. Other uses would not comply 
and therefore would not receive the protection of SSO-facilitated license com-
mitments. 
As to geographical scope, 10 SSOs 
specify that licensing commitments 
hold on a worldwide basis, while the other two (ANSI and IETF) do not mention 
a geographic context. Global commitments
 are presumably consistent with the 
non-discriminatory element of FRAND and assist in spreading standards. How-
ever, members of our committee are aware 
of cases where patent owners refused 
to license in certain locations on the ground that the policies of the relevant SSO 

did not apply there.  
What does a licensing commitment actua
lly cover? In five of the SSOs a 
commitment must include any SEPs that 
read on the final version of specific 
standard in question, regardless of whether these patents were actually disclosed 
by their owner. In two policies the commitment covers only patents actually 

disclosed. The ITU/ISO/ICU and IEEE policies permit submitters to choose 
between these models. OASIS makes a distinction between licensing commit-
ments of participants, which must apply to all patents with essential claims un-

der the standard, and non-participating co
ntributors, where the commitment ap-
plies only to SEPs under their contributions. 
The great majority of SSOs in the 
sample specify that licensing commit-
ments are irrevocable, although a few of them permit ﬁupgradesﬂ under which 
terms may be replaced later by conditions th
at are objectively more favorable to 
licensees. Some organizations, includin
g ITU/ISO/IEC, ETSI, OASIS, VITA, 
W3C, and NFC Forum, specify that specifi
c licensing agreements are also irrev-
ocable before expiration in order to prevent their cancellation against the will of 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.46                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
good-faith licensees 
for other than cause.
10 They also permit exceptions in cases 
where the licensor is sued for infringement by its licensee on the latter™s patents.  
Virtually all SSOs make licensing commitments public. Consistent with its 
policy on disclosure, VITA informs its members of such commitments, which 
are also made available to implementers on request.  

 Reciprocity conditions 
 IPR holders that commit themselves to FRAND or other licensing condi-
tions may be concerned that 
they could face a situation 
where they are obliged to 
grant a license to a firm that refuses to
 license its own essential IPR on the same 
standard or group of standards back under similar conditions. To prevent this, 
SSO policies allow firms generally to include a condition of reciprocity in the 

licenses they grant. There are two relevant
 forms of reciprocity. First, bilateral 
reciprocity means that the licensee must 
offer its own essential claims under the 
same standard on the same conditions (e.g. FRAND or FRAND-RF) to the li-

censor, but not necessarily to other members or implementers.
11 Second, univer-
sal reciprocity means that the licensee must also offers its essential IPR for the 
same standard on the same conditions to all implementers. 
Again, there are differences in ap
proach across SSOs. The policies of 
ITU/ISO/IEC, ETSI, and VITA allow bilateral reciprocity. This form is auto-
matically the basis of licensing agreements under the HDMI Forum and the NFC 
Forum. OASIS and W3C permit universal reciprocity. Under the NFC Forum 
and ITU/ISO/IEC, licensors who have
 otherwise committed to royalty-free 
FRAND licensing can charge royalties to licensees who seek payment from 

them for SEPs in the same standard, a situ
ation that is not considered a violation 
of non-discrimination. Finally, nothing is specified by IEEE and ANSI but its 
members often seek reciprocity of some kind.  

 Ex ante
 most restrictive terms 
 A patent owner, at an early stage in the standards development process, 
may make binding commitments regarding the maximum royalty fee or other 

licensing terms it will seek in licensing contracts. In principle, such information 
can help inform SSO decisions on whether 
to include the patented technology in 
the standard. It may also create an incen
tive for IPR holders to limit their royalty 
demands, knowing that a lower price could increase the likelihood that their 
technology will be included in the standard. Another benefit is that it may help 
implementers in their licensing negotiations, as an upper bound is known. 

Whether these effects in fact are common among members of SSOs is unclear, 
                                                 10Interestingly, OASIS, VITA, and W3C require
 licenses to be perpetual, a stipulation 
that makes sense for W3C, where licenses are royalty-free. 
11U.S. regulators are currently urging SSOs to clarify the specific types of reciprocity 
they regard as consistent
 with a FRAND commitment.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.47 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
while the net benefits of such disclosure
 are much debated. Just one (VITA) of 
the SSOs in our inquiry specifies a requirement for 
ex ante disclosure of licens-
ing terms. It is voluntary under IEEE, IETF, and ETSI. Moreover, ETSI has a 
repository for its 
ex ante declarations although none has yet been made. In any 
event, patent owners are free to make 
statements about licensing terms outside 
the SSO setting.  
 Injunctive relief 

 None of the policies of the surveyed
 SSOs imposes any restrictions on 
what legal remedies a member or thir
d-party beneficiary of a licensing commit-
ment may pursue in court. We mention it here because such remedies have re-
cently become a matter of considerable concern in courts and among regula-

tors.
12 Some analysts argue that when 
a FRAND commitment exists only the 
economic terms of a license remain the subject for a legal dispute. This is signif-
icant because under the laws of some juri
sdictions an injunction against the sale 
of goods will be limited or not granted by
 a court if the party alleging infringe-
ment can be adequately compensated by a monetary award. Others argue, how-
ever, that injunctive relief is a key remedy an IPR owner should be entitled to 

seek if its patents are infringed.  
 2.5 Transfers of Licensing Commitments 
 An important subject for our committee is
 the transfer of patents with es-
sential claims subject to licensing or non-assertion obligations. This has become 

an increasingly key issue with the proliferation of sales of patent portfolios and 
legal variations across countries about the treatment of such commitments in the 
event a patent owner goes bankrupt. The basic question is whether licensing 

obligations travel along when SEPs change ownership: is the new owner bound 
to the same commitments? Further, how far do the commitments travel in the 
event of successive ownership changes? Another question is the extent to which 
an original patent owner may incur any liability to someone sued by the trans-
feree for infringement, if that owner had not informed the recipient of an en-

cumbered licensing commitment. 
In this section we review the appr
oaches taken by our surveyed SSOs.
13 In 
summary terms, five SSO policiesŠITU/ISO/IEC, ETSI, IEEE, VITA, and 

HDMI ForumŠstate that obligations must be transferred with patent ownership, 
thereby requiring that the patent holder
 bind its successor-in-interest. OASIS 
mentions the issue only in the context of bankruptcy. ANSI and IETF do not 

specify a policy. 
More specifically, the ITU/ISO/IEC 
common policy has a strong section 
on patent transfer, defining obligations fo
r the original patent holder. Essential-
                                                 12The committee considers this question in detail in Chapter 6. 
13This transfer issue is discussed more fully in Chapter 5. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.48                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
ly, a patent holder that has entered into 
a licensing commitment
 must ensure that 
the transferee also is bound to the sa
me commitment. The clear intention of 
ITU/ISO/IEC is to have a strong set of ru
les on transfer of obligations, but there 
remain some ambiguities. For one thing, it is not clear if this policy applies only 
to participants in the drafting of a standa
rd or also to all parties that submit a 
licensing declaration, although the latte
r are likely included. Next, when a new 
owner acquires a full portfolio of patents from a party that originally filed a 
blanket disclosure, it can remain unclear 
which of these patents is encumbered 
by licensing obligations. In this case,
 the ITU/ISO/IEC po
licy speaks of ﬁrea-
sonable efforts.ﬂ  
In VITA, the general licensing obligation explicitly provides that transfer-
ees of patents are to be bound. However, the IPR policy does not provide details 
on how this obligation is to be satisfied by a member making a transfer. In W3C 

there are no specific provisions on patent
 transfers as such. There is, however, a 
statement that in the case of the acquisition of an entity that is subject to licens-
ing obligations, the obligations will continue to exist. In support of this state-

ment, the document refers to a clause in
 the W3C policy th
at specifies that 
commitments are made ﬁfor 
the life of the patents in question.ﬂ The policy does 
not provide details on how this obligation is to be satisfied by a member making 

a transfer. 
The HDMI Forum, which has a recent IP
R policy, includes
 a short clause 
on patent transfer. When transferring patent claims encumbered by a covenant 

not to assert (the mode provided for under the HDMI documentation), the owner 
must ensure that the new owner is al
so bound to the same licensing commit-
ment. It is not clear whether the commitment will apply across cascading owner-

ship transfers, because the new owne
r might not be an HDMI Forum member. 
For their part, IETF and NFC Forum have no provisions concerning patent 
transfer at all. An ANSI 
IPR policy task force is currently considering whether 
the ANSI patent policy or related guidelin
es should address th
e transfer question 
and, if so, how. 
Finally, none of the SSO policies specifies that the organization or other 
parties need to be notified of ownership changes. Although such changes may 
become visible to other stakeholders if the new owner submits a licensing decla-

ration, this will not always be the case. 
In many countries, some but not all own-
ership changes must be reported to the patent office. Still, patent offices often do 
not provide mechanisms to make patent ownership changes visible. Moreover, 

patent transfer recordation practices va
ry widely across different offices with 
regard to both what can and must be recorded and how the records may be ac-
cessed. 
 2.6 Summary Observations 
 Standards-setting organizations have gr
eatly improved the clarity and pro-
cedural coverage of their IPR policies fr
om their rudimentary state prior to the 
late 1990s. In some degree this was forced by legal conflicts, including the 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.49 
A Comparison of SSO Policies and Practices 
Rambus case, which exposed problems associated with SSOs having unclear 
IPR policies.
14 Competition among SSOs has also pushed reforms. However, 
there remain a number of areas of ambigu
ity and some issues, such as the trans-
fer of licensing obligations when patents are sold, that are only now being ad-
dressed. Indeed, there are many other ar
eas that could be an
alyzed here. Howev-
er, we focus on three issues. 
First, SSOs generally do not define what is meant by FRAND and its 
component terms: ﬁfair, reasonable, and non-discriminatory.ﬂ This ambiguity 

invites increasing litigation in which cour
ts must decide between different par-
ties™ widely divergent interpretations of
 FRAND. Some consortia agree up front 
on the terms and conditions for a license to essential patents, and it seems that 
SSO participants could also gain from greater specificity in the context of pro-
moting adoption and implementation of standards.  Nevertheless, agreement on 

a definition of FRAND would be very difficult to achieve in many SSOs for 
reasons discussed in Chapter 3. 
Second, IPR policies still leave a consid
erable degree of 
non-transparency 
regarding how patent information is to be disclosed and used and to whom it is 
to be made available. Particular elements of policy that could be made more 
transparent include patent-information updates, the lack of information associat-

ed with blanket disclosures, and the failure to make disclosures and licensing 
commitments public. Publicly available 
SSO patent disclosure databasesŠand 
possibly licensing commitment databasesŠcould help implementers, licensors, 

and many other stakeholders become more
 confident about how to secure rights, 
evaluate claims of essentiality, establis
h royalty fees if any, and understand 
competition and antitrust concerns. That sa
id, there are valid reasons why blan-
ket disclosures may be a prudent option, and it is not always clear how and why 
disclosed information is actually used.  
Third, IPR policies of most SSOs do not adequately deal with issues of pa-
tent transfers and licensing obligations 
in today™s increasingly dynamic market-
place for patents as assets. The language
 and mechanisms dealing with this 
question vary considerably across SSOs
. Many policies still appear ambiguous 
and may not be legally effective in some of the situations they should address, 
such as those involving licensors and licensees acting in bad faith or in bank-

ruptcy proceedings. 
                                                 14Rambus Inc. v. Infineon Tech. AG.
, 318 F. 3d. 1081, 1097 (Fed. Cir. 2003). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.51 
3. Key Issues for SSOs  in SEP Licensing  3.1 Introduction 
 The policies of standard-setting organizations (SSOs) described in the 
previous chapter address situations in which the SSO develops standards whose 

use necessarily infringes known intellectual property rights and specify the 
commitments that participating IPR hol
ders must accept regarding such stand-
ards. While the specific language may di
ffer, most SSOs ask rights holders to 
consent to license their rights on terms that are fair, reasonable and non-
discriminatory (FRAND), with or without a royalty payment. For example, the 
ANSI patent policy requires assurance th
at either: a) a license will be made 
available, without compensation, to the applicants desiring to utilize the license 
for the purpose of implementing the standa
rd; or b) a license will be made avail-
able to applicants under reasonable term
s and conditions that are demonstrably 
free of any unfair discrimination. Otherwise, the standard cannot be approved as 
an American National Standa
rd (ANSI, rev. 2008).  
Neither ANSI nor most other SSOs define ﬁreasonable terms and condi-
tionsﬂ or the requirements for a license to be ﬁfree of any unfair discrimina-
tion.ﬂ
1 Some SSO policies encourage rights holders who have made assurances 
to reach bilateral agreements with poten
tial licensees. Disputes may be resolved 
in court or through arbitration or, in some instances, may involve regulatory 
agencies if there is an allegation of anticompetitive behavior. Despite a relative-
ly small number of cases in which courts
 have considered the requirements of 
FRAND licensing terms, there is as yet no broad consensus on this topic.  
 
In this chapter we take a step back and ask the following basic questions: 
  What plausible objectives motivat
e the adoption of FRAND licensing 
obligations by members of standard setting organizations? 
 Do the objectives of members of SS
Os differ from societal and compe-
tition law concerns? 
 How do differences in private and so
cial objectives inform interpreta-
tions of FRAND obligations? 
                                                   1Special Interest Groups (SIGs) some
times list explicit
 licensing terms. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.52                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
3.2 Objectives of FRAND Licensing Obligations 
 For virtually all SSOs, the minimum goal regarding IPR is to ensure that 
all known essential claims in patents ar
e available under FRAND license terms. 
Some SSOs, or discrete working groups within an SSO, may adopt a more strin-

gent set of rules to seek to have all 
essential claims made available on a FRAND 
royalty-free basis. FRAND obligations gene
rally provide assura
nce that licenses 
are available for technical solutions involving essential IPR. Participants in 

SSOs generally do not oppose the development of such standards. For example, 
the 2008 ANSI Patent Policy states ﬁThere is no objection in principle to draft-
ing a proposed American National Standard in terms that include the use of a 
patented item, if it is considered that 
technical reasons justify this approach.ﬂ 
The FRAND obligations adopted by ANSI
 and others place limits on the exer-
cise of these patent rights.
2   
As noted earlier, standards-setting organizations have a diverse set of con-
stituents. Some SSO participants are t
echnology owners and users whose busi-
ness models are based on the sales of products that implement standards and 
employ patented technologies. Some of th
ese technology users are not interested 
in asserting standard-essential patents (SEPs) of their own and desire low Œ or 

no Œ royalties for the SEPs they license from others. While these technology 
users may not proactively seek compensation from implementers for their own 
FRAND-encumbered patents, they may want their patent rights to have value in 

terms of offsetting SEPs held by others in the same standards technology area.  
Other SSO participants are technology sellers whose business models are based 
on earning royalties from licensing their SEPs to implementers. These enterpris-

es want high royalties and in some cases may want to use their SEPs to demand 
that implementers accept a license that
 includes non-SEPs. Still other partici-
pants are both technology users and sellers. There are many other business mod-

els that impact the views of the various stakeholders. 
Technology owners may also adopt different postures depending upon the 
individual SSOs in which they participate and their particular strategies and 
goals as they relate to the standard in
 question. For example, in cases where 
promoting rapid adoption of a standard enabling a new technology is important 

to a patent owner and the patent owner can monetize its technology through the 
sale of products that implement the standard, it may choose to make its SEPs 
available for free. A patent owner who believes that his SEP is of particular im-

portance to a standard, or one whose t
echnology may meet the needs of a small-
volume product, might seek royalties.  At a basic level, many SEPs exist for 
which no license is sought through negotiations unless a third party seeking roy-

alties approaches their owners and implementers. SSOs inevitably shape their 
                                                 2We limit the ensuing discussion to patent 
rights, to which the concept of FRAND ob-
ligations uniquely relates. As 
noted in Chapter 2, IPR policies do typically address copy-
rights and trademarks as well, but apply a different set of rules that are of limited rele-
vance to this chapter. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.53 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
IPR policies over time to address the conc
erns of their existing members and to 
attract new participants who may be technology users, sellers, or both. 
Prevailing practices can also vary from
 industry to industry, with partici-
pants in a number of SSOs in some areas,
 such as the Internet, preferring to 
avoid royalty-bearing standards, while those in others, such as consumer elec-

tronics, often seek royalties. However, 
with the convergence of the consumer 
electronics, information technology, and telecommunications sectors it is be-
coming more difficult to make distinctions based on the technology area and the 

impacted industry sectors.  
The diversity of actual and potential members of SSOs helps to explain 
why few of them have developed policies that include detailed definitions of 
FRAND. Rather, most SSOs rely on general FRAND licensing commitments 
and certain clarifications with regard to
 the effect of such commitments as the 
need arises. SSOs have to govern their IPR policies in an environment of con-
flicting interests.  
To better understand the extent of the limitations imposed by FRAND 
commitments, it is useful to consider 
the likely reasons wh
y the members of 
SSOs arrived at the specific descriptions of their current patent policies. Several 
concerns are evident. 

 Ensuring access to pa
tented technologies 
 Absent a FRAND or other commitment, the owner of a patent has no obli-
gation under the policy to license others to use the patent on any terms. On its 
face, a FRAND commitment is
 intended to constrain the freedom that a right 
holder otherwise has to refuse to license its technology and subsequently enforce 
its rights. It is understandable that members of a SSO would insist that the or-
ganization seek obligations to license patents that are essential to make or use 

products that comply with a standard. The purpose of an interoperability stand-
ard is to coordinate industry activity and take advantage of the economic bene-
fits of scale economies and network eff
ects. These benefits cannot be achieved 
without widespread licensing of the patented technology that is essential to prac-
tice a standard.  

 Promoting non-discrimination 
 In the absence of FRAND licensing obligations, there is a risk that imple-
menters will accede to demands to accept di
scriminatory licensing terms in or-
der to adopt fundamental ICT standards embodying essential patents that cannot 

be worked around. The owner of a SEP may choose to license the proprietary 
right with terms that are less favorable to some licensees. For example, without 
FRAND, a patent owner might license its own customers and partners under 

terms that differ from those offered to a si
gnificant rival, either within or outside 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.54                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
the bounds of antitrust law and other legal constraints.
3 Thus, an objective of a 
FRAND licensing commitment is to avoid discriminatory licensing terms that 

disadvantage some licensees by imposing on them substantially larger royalties 
or more restrictive conditions in comparison with others. Indeed, this assurance 
of non-discrimination is fundamental to the weighing of benefits and costs that 

an industry participant makes when deciding whether to participate in an SSO or 
adopt a standard.  
 
Avoiding ex post hold-up 
 The economic alternatives available to 
licensees often differ before and af-
ter the adoption of a standard. In the process of developing a standard, several 
alternative technological solutions may be
 available that have similar cost and 
performance characteristics. ﬁ
Ex post
,ﬂ after firms and consumers make invest-
ments that are specific to the standard, 
the economic choices are far more lim-
ited if adopting an alternative technology for the standard would impose sub-

stantial additional costs and delays. Furthermore, in markets with large network 
externalities it may not be feasible to co
ordinate the actions necessary to switch 
the market to a different standard. 
Ex post
 hold-up can occur if the owner of a 
SEP chooses royalty terms that reflect the high cost of switching to an alterna-
tive technology after firms and consumers have made specific investments, ra-
ther than the value of the claimed invention.  
Ex post
 patent hold-up imposes costs on licensees and consumers. It also 
rewards the patent holder via windfall profits reflecting the costs of switching to 
an alternative technology rather than th
e economic merit of the selected stand-
ard. Because such hold-up is potentially
 costly to members of SSOs, it is rea-
sonable for their IPR policies to seek to guard against it by requiring FRAND 
commitments. This concern is greatest in 
ICT sectors where standards aspire to 
global adoption, switching to alternative standards can be costly, and patent fil-
ings have proliferated in many countries.  
Competition authorities in both the EU and the United States see the po-
tential for costly hold-up, as noted in the following joint statement by officials of 
the Department of Justice Antitrust Di
vision, Federal Trade Commission, and 
Competition Directorate General 
of the European Commission: 
 SSOs constrain the license terms for SE
Ps because of the substantial mar-
ket power necessarily enjoyed by th
e owner of an SEP in a successful 
standard. Moreover, this market power is achieved through the joint action 
of entitiesŠthe SSO membersŠthat might be in competition with each 

other outside the SSO (Kühn, et al., 2013).
                                                   3Georgia-Pacific Corp v. Un
ited States Plywood Corp., 
318 F. Supp.1116 (S.D.N.Y. 
1970). The well-known 
Georgia-Pacific case, in fact, recognizes the relationship between 
the patent owner and the infringer as a factor 
to consider in assessing ﬁreasonablenessﬂ in 
a patent damages case.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.55 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
Managing royalty allocation and stacking 
 Interoperability standards often have numerous patents declared essential 
to their use. Economic valuation of a particular patent becomes difficult and 
even arbitrary in this circ
umstance. If several patents are essential to make or 
use a product that complies with a standa
rd, then each patent has a claim on the 
value of the product. There is a concern that, acting independently, the individu-
al holders of patents essential to a standard will demand royalties that, in the 

aggregate, are so high as to impede the adoption and use of products that im-
plement the standard. Such high aggregate royalties can be detrimental to rights 
holders as well as to the consumers of 
products that implemen
t the standard and 
can be a drag on future innovation. Economists use the term ﬁroyalty stackingﬂ 
(Lemley and Shapiro, 2007) to describe outcomes in which the cumulative ef-

fects of individually rational royalty demands result in aggregate royalties that 
harm consumers, rights holders and innovators. 
Royalty stacking is different from sta
ndard-related hold-u
p. When a stand-
ard-using product requires numerous SE
Ps, a single patentee can demand a dis-
proportionate share of product value even if licensees do not incur costs to 
switch to a different product
. Because all the SEPs are necessary, licensees and 
customers would switch to a different product only if the total royalty is exces-
sive, which leaves room for individual patent holders to demand a dispropor-
tionate share of total royalties.  
Several important ICT standards illustrate the potential for royalty stack-
ing. GSM is a second-generation standard for mobile telecommunications and 
W-CDMA (also called UMTS) is a third-generation standard for networks based 

on the GSM standard. One study identifie
d more than 50 entities that each dis-
closed patents or patent applications as essential to the GSM or W-CDMA 
standards.
4 Together these entities disclosed over 23,500 patents, belonging to at 
least 1729 patent families.
5 Other mobile telephony technologies have similar 
characteristics. Numerous firms in total declared more than 750 unique patent 
families as essential to the second-generation GSM standard and 500 unique 
patent families as essential to the fourth-generation LTE standard.
6  A U.S. district court concluded that 
92 companies identified patents as es-
sential to the 802.11 (ﬁWifiﬂ) wireless 
local access network fa
mily of standards 
and 59 companies filed blanket declarati
ons without identifying specific patents. 
The court accepted testimony that there are possibly thousands of patents de-

clared essential to the 802.11 family of standards.
7 The same court concluded 
that approximately 33 U.S. 
companies declared patents essential to the H.264 
                                                 4See Bekkers and Martinelli (2012), Table 6,
 p. 1205. (The table includes GSM as 
well as W-CDMA patent disclosures). 
5Bekkers and Martinelli (2012), pp. 1203-1205. 
6See Blind et al. (2011), Table 3-3, p. 36. 
7Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc
., Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, 2013 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60233 at paragra
ph 335 (W.D. Wash., Apr. 25, 2013). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.56                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
advanced video coding standard and 19 additional companies provided blanket 
declarations to the ITU (one of the developers of the standard) without identify-

ing specific patents.
8  These figures could both overstate and understate the potential for royalty 
stacking in different respects. The numb
ers could overstate the potential for roy-
alty stacking because patent 
owners that participate in
 SSOs have incentives to 
declare, as essential, patents that may not in fact be valid or infringed by a prod-
uct that implements the standard. Evaluating the scope and validity of every 

patent is a costly exercise and patent 
holders may prefer to
 declare patents as 
essential without subjecting them to caref
ul scrutiny. Further, SEP owners may 
err on the side of disclosing patents that
 are not essential to the standard because 
failure to disclose a SEP for which royalties are demanded, where it is required 
by an SSO, may expose the owner to future litigation. Finally, ownership of a 

large stock of patents that are declared es
sential to a standard can be a valuable 
asset for a firm that seeks licensing royalties or cross-licenses at favorable terms. 
A larger quantity of essential patents is also more valuable if the patents are con-

tributed to a patent pool that seeks roya
lty income and allocat
es that income in 
proportion to the number of patents in the pool.  
Estimates of essential patents and the number of SEP owners could under-
state the potential for royalty stacking in other respects. Multiple SSOs partici-
pate in the development of some standards and not all SSOs maintain easily ac-
cessible databases of patent declarations. Some participants in SSOs make 

blanket disclosures and commit to license patents deemed essential to a standard 
at FRAND terms without identifying the specific patents in advance. Also, some 
firms might hold essential IPR without having an obligation to disclose these 

patents, for instance because they are not
 participating in the Working Group in 
question or because the participating individuals were not aware of those pa-
tents. Non-participant firms are not required to disclose the existence of these 

patents and would not appear in a review of licensing commitments at the rele-
vant standard-setting organizations. 
Regardless of whether observed statistics overstate or understate the num-
ber of owners of essential patents, it is certain that numerous distinct entities 
own patents that are essential to make or use products that implement many 

common ICT standards. Given the large number of SEP owners, efforts to ob-
tain royalty income for these patents can result in heavy monetary burdens for 
those who make or use products that implement the standard. In theory, the total 

royalty stack can be so large that it would suppress the adoption or use of stand-
ardized technologies and impose excessive 
costs on all segments of the industry 
that implement a standard.  
Despite this concern, the committee has found no empirical evidence 
showing that royalty stacking currently suppresses the adoption or use of stand-
ard-compliant products. Firms can mitigate the burden from aggregate royalties 
                                                 8Ibid. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.57 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
in several ways.
9 Some rights holders enter into cross-licensing arrangements 
with zero royalties or with royalties equa
l to the difference between the fees 
charged by each party. Patent pools ex
ist for some standards, which reduce 
transaction costs and mitigate royalty stacking by setting a single fee for a port-
folio license. Firms that own patents and sell products covered by those patents 

have incentives to charge low or zero royalties to promote the commercializa-
tion of their products. In addition, firms have strategic incentives to refrain from 
charging high royalties. Indeed, product prices have been dropping for devices 

such as mobile phones and laptop computers that support multiple standards for 
which there are thousands of declared SE
Ps owned by hundreds of entities. Fur-
thermore, not all standards, even in th
e ICT area, invoke large numbers of pa-
tents with widely distributed ownership.  
Nonetheless, the committ
ee cautions that the cost
s from royalty stacking 
could increase in the future if more patent owners choose to monetize their pa-
tent rights. At some point the cumulative burden of making multiple royalty 
payments to distinct entities could become so large that adoption or utilization of 

standard-compliant products would be suppressed and the resulting higher costs 
of developing and producing these products may become a drag on future inno-
vative efforts. 
Courts play a crucial role in this area 
since judicial decisions both directly 
set norms for FRAND terms and settle disputes over whether royalty offers 
comply with FRAND commitments. Thus, co
urts can contain the risk of royalty 
stacking and hold-up by ensuring that awards for patent infringement are rea-
sonable, taking into account the contribution of the patented inventions and the 
costs of obtaining all other intellectual a
nd physical inputs that are necessary to 
make or sell the infringing product.
10 For patents that are essential to a standard 
and allegedly infringed by an implementing product, this requires allocation of 
the value contributed by the standard as opposed to the contributions of others, 

including patents that are essential to other standards. 
An allocation of the value of a standard to its essential patents based on 
simple numeric proportionality, under whic
h a patent owner™s share of value is 
equal to its share of patents that are esse
ntial to make or use the products at is-
sue, has the virtue of simplicity and ease of administration. However, it also 

raises the potential for imprecision and strategic manipulation. Some patents are 
more valuable than others in terms of their contributions to the standard, either 
because their validity has been firmly 
established through 
litigation or because 
                                                 9See Damien Geradin, Anne 
Layne-Farrar, and A. Jorge Padilla, The Complements 
Problem Within Standard Setting: Assessing The Evidence On Royalty Stacking, 
B.U. J. 
Sci. & Tech. L
., Vol. 14:144-176. 
10Additional claims on the value of the pr
oduct could come from patents covering 
other standards implemented in the product a
nd patents on proprietary technologies that 
contribute to the overall value of the product.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.58                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
they are more central 
to implementing products.
11 Furthermore, a numeric pro-
portionality rule encourages patent owners
 to file separate patents for essential 
claims instead of including multiple claims in a single patent. Nevertheless, the 
fact that many owners of SEPs participate in patent pools that allocate royalties 
based on numeric proportionality suggests 
that such rules, however imperfect, 
are a plausible starting point for the valuation of individual SEPs.  
On April 25, 2013, Judge James L. Robart in the Western District of 
Washington issued a detailed decision calculating FRAND royalty rates for 

products that involve multiple standard-essential patent rights.
12 The decision 
relied on the factors laid out in the earlier 
Georgia-Pacific
 case
13 but modified 
them to account for the FRAND context. In particular, Judge Robart noted that 
in considering a hypothetical negotiation to
 arrive at a reasonable royalty ﬁthe 
hypothetical negotiation al
most certainly will not take place in a vacuum: the 
implementer of a standard will understand 
that it must take a license from many 
SEP owners, not just one, before it will be in compliance with its licensing obli-
gations and able to fully implement the standard.ﬂ
14 In particular, Judge Robart 
concluded that ﬁa proper methodology for determining a [F]RAND royalty 
should address the risk of royalty stacking by considering the aggregate royalties 
that would apply if other SEP holders made royalty demands of the implement-

er.ﬂ15 At issue in the case was the value of
 Motorola™s patents for Microsoft 
products that implemented the ITU H.264 standard for video processing and the 

IEEE 802.11 family of standards for wi
reless communications. In constructing a 
reasonable royalty, Judge Robart focused on royalties that Motorola would have 
earned for its patents if they had been contributed to existing patent pools relat-

ing to those standards. Although the judge listed a number of reasons why pool 
rates should not be determinative of the FRAND rates for all SEPs for a stand-
ard, he found them to be useful indicators based on the facts of the case.  
Judge Robart™s approach provides less quantitative utility to assess rea-
sonable royalties for multiple standard-essential patents where there are no exist-
ing patent pools of SEPs related to the standard in question. Nonetheless, his 
efforts to distinguish comparable royalty negotiations, identify the risks of royal-
ty stacking, and take into account the potential aggregate burden of licensing 
                                                 11For illustrations of royalty allocations unde
r different assumptions, see Layne-Farrar 
et al. (2007) and Salant (2007). Although seve
ral techniques are available to allocate 
value to SEPs or to patents that are comple
mentary to the value of products that imple-
ment a standard, they require 
more information about technol
ogy characteristics than is 
typically available. 
12Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc
., Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law, 2013 
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 60233 (W.D. Wash., Apr. 25, 2013) [hereinafter 
Microsoft v. Motorola 
FFCL].  
13Georgia-Pacific Corp. v. United States Plywood Corp
. (318 F. Supp. 1116 
[S.D.N.Y. 1970]). 
14Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola
 FFCL, op. cit. at 11.  
15Ibid. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.59 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
demands from many patent owners provide guidance that may be useful to as-
sess lower and upper bounds for FRAND royalties when many patents are es-

sential to make or use products that comply with a standard. 
In general, determining whether a given licensor is making excessive de-
mands that contribute to either royalty stacking or standard-related hold-up can 

be very challenging. If a standard requires the patented contributions of many 
different licensors, each of which is essen
tial to implement the standard none of 
which have close substitutes 
ex ante or 
ex post
, then the division of royalties 
among patented contributions is essentially arbitrary. In other instances of 
standard setting, some features of a standard may be more important than others 
and some features (and the technologies 
that implement them) may have feasible 
substitutes prior to the standard being adopted. In these substitutions some licen-
sors may argue, with some justification, that their technology is worth more than 

others. Further, in the presence of switchi
ng costs it can be difficult or even im-
possible to distinguish excessive demands from hold-up. A large royalty demand 
could reflect the effort of a patent owne
r to appropriate a share of the switching 
costs that lead to 
ex post hold-up. But it also could be an effort by a particular 
patent owner to capture a disproportionate share of an 
ex ante reasonable aggre-
gate royalty.  
There is little evidence that the existing IPR polices of most large SSOs 
effectively limit the ability of individual patent owners to negotiate for a dispro-
portionate share of product value in their royalty demands. Still, some SSOs, 

including various consortia, IEEE, Wi-Fi,
 and ETSI, have ex
plored the idea of 
using various licensing disclosure arrangements to attempt to avoid royalty 
stacking, although the effort and expense of putting such arrangements together 

is justified only in some circumstances. 
One approach that may address conc
erns about royalty stacking is for 
SSOs to require patent owners that intend to assert their patents to post a maxi-

mum royalty before the standard is adopted. The posting of royalties would al-
low potential licensees to detect potential 
ex ante hold-up and possible royalty 
stacking by considering the implications of individual posted maximum royal-
ties for the aggregate royalties required to make or use products that comply 
with the standard. SSOs might also esta
blish mechanisms for effectively avoid-
ing or resolving disputes, such as alternative dispute resolution (ADR).  
That said, policies requiring 
ex ante disclosure of licensing terms have 
been suggested and rejected at several 
SSOs. Such policies are unpopular with 
patent holders that prefer to negotiate 
royalty rates with potential licensees and 
not to be pressed into royalty rates and te
rms before the standard is finalized and 
relevant SEPs can be determined. 
Another objection to 
ex ante
 licensing disclosure policies is that they 
could lead to anticompetitive conduct by licensees if royalty rates were jointly 
negotiatedŠa scenario referred to as olig
opsony or a buyers™ cartel. Given this 
concern, both VITA and IEEE obtained written assurance from competition au-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.60                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
thorities before adopting 
ex ante licensing disclosure policies.
16 Opponents of 
ex ante
 disclosure of licensing terms also point to practical difficulties, such as fix-
ing the timing of disclosures and designing policies that would accommodate 
blanket disclosures and avoid the need for costly patent searches.
17 The latter 
concern is especially relevant for companies that generally do not proactively 

seek licenses from implementers, but rath
er use their SEPs largely for defensive 
purposes. In addition, many SEPs arise 
not because a patent holder contributed 
the technology to the SSO, but rather as a result of the collective drafting exer-

cise. Mandatory 
ex ante disclosure could also disrupt technical committee work, 
if participants were asked to review all possible SEPs and related licensing 
terms, particularly for ICT standards that can reach hundreds of pages in length 
and implicate dozens or hundreds of patents.  
Because few SSOs have adopted policies with regard to 
ex ante
 disclosure 
of licensing terms, empirical evidence on these questions remains quite limited. 
However, one study found that the 
ex ante disclosure policies adopted by VITA, 
where disclosure is mandatory, and IEEE, where disclosure is optional and sel-

dom used, had no measureable impact on their standard-setting processes (Con-
treras, 2013). 
Another proposal to address royalty
 stacking involves an SSO™s estab-
lishment of an aggregate cap on royalties that can be charged with respect to 
patents essential to a particular standa
rd. This approach was proposed within 
ETSI as early as 2005, but its considera
tion was terminated after an unfavorable 
reaction by the European Commission™s Competition Directorate-General.
18 Yet 
another possible approach would be for SSOs or courts to make an effort to con-
sider the landscape of patents that are 
essential for use of a standard. That 
recognition would help avoid some of the most egregious errors (such as 5% 
royalty per patent). Equal apportionment of values, though sometimes flawed, 
could be a starting point from which to argue that some patents are worth more 

than others, while still recognizing that 
one or a few patents may not account for 
all or most of the product value when there are many other essential patents. 
                                                   16 See U.S. Department of Justice, Busine
ss Review Letter to VMEbus International 
Trade Association (Oct. 20, 2006), U.S. Departme
nt of Justice, Business Review Letter to 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi
neers (Apr. 30, 2007), and Deborah Platt Ma-
joras, Recognizing the Procom
petitive Potential of Royalty
 Discussions in Standard-
Setting Remarks prepared for ﬁStandardiza
tion and the Law: Developing the Golden 
Mean for Global Trade,ﬂ Stanford Law School (Sept. 23, 2005). 
17 These difficulties apply genera
lly to SSO policies regarding 
ex ante disclosure of 
SEPs, not just to licensing terms, as discussed in Section 4. 
18Claudia Tapia, Industrial Property Rights, 
Technical Standards and Licensing Practices 
(Frand) in the Telecommunications Industry 165-66 (2010). A modified form of this pro-
posal has recently been made by Contreras, who analogizes the aggregate royalty on SEPs 
covering a particular standard to the collective royalty charged by a patent pool. See Jorge 
L. Contreras, Fixing FRAND: A Pseudo-Pool 
Approach to Standards-Based Patent Licens-
ing, 79 Antitrust L.J. (2013). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.61 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
3.3 Interpretation of FRAND Obligations to  
Address Competition and Efficiency Concerns 
 Competition agencies in the United St
ates and the European Union have 
proposed interpretations of FRAND licensing obligations in an attempt to ﬁfill in 

the gapﬂ created by the lack of clarity in SSO IPR policies.  
 Incremental value 

 Competition authorities and a number of scholars have endorsed the prin-
ciple that a ﬁfair and reasonableﬂ royalty
 should reflect its incremental value 
relative to the next-best alternative assessed before firms and consumers make 
investments specific to the technology
. For example, the Federal Trade Com-
mission concludes that ﬁCourts should cap 
the royalty at the incremental value 
of the patented technology over alternativ
es available at the time the standard 
was chosen.ﬂ (U.S. Federal Trade Commissi
on, 2011) Guidelines issued by the 
European Commission state that ﬁwhether 
fees imposed for patents in the stand-
ard-setting context are unfair or unreason
able will be based on whether the fees 
bear a reasonable relationship to the economic value of the patents.ﬂ In making 

this assessment, the Commission notes that ﬁit may be possible to compare the 
licensing fees charged by the undertaking in question for the relevant patents in 
a competitive environment before the industry has been locked into the standard 

(ex ante) with those charged after the industry has been locked in (
ex post).ﬂ 
(European Commission, 2010)  
Many SSOs emphasize that it is desirable to have early disclosure of rele-
vant patents and some have provided for 
ex ante commitments to specific licens-
ing terms and conditions. However, absent
 further clarification of the meaning 
of FRAND, it is not clear whether members of SSOs intend that FRAND royalty 

commitments should reflect incremental values or some other notion of fair and 
reasonable pricing. This topic is currently under discussion at some prominent 
SSOs. If the term does not reflect increm
ental value one might question whether 
norms such as economic effi
ciency should determine the interpretation of fair 
and reasonable license terms.  
Incremental value provides
 a means to assess the 
ex ante contribution of a 
patent that covers a discrete technology whose value can be assessed inde-
pendently from the contributions of other technologies. For example, a patent on 

a technology to increase the signal-to-noise ratio of transmissions using a wire-
less communications standard can be assessed independently from the contribu-
tions of other patents that are essential to the standard. Farrell et al. (2007) pro-

vide a formula for the incremental value of a technology. Swanson and Baumol 
(2005) suggest that SSOs should conduct 
an auction to determine the incremen-
tal value of the best technology. These 
approaches may provide feasible means 
to estimate the value of a patent that is essential to a standard that involves a 
single patented technology and if alte
rnative technologies can be compared 
based on a single attribute such as cost
. However, the technologies incremental 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.62                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
approach is not sufficient to determine 
the appropriate royalty for a particular 
patent when there are many SEPs, as is typically the case for interoperability 

standards.  
When multiple patents are essential to make or use products that comply 
with a standard, neither incremental value nor auction approaches provide a 

practical means to allocate the economic 
value of the technology to different 
necessary patents within the standard. When patented technologies in a standard 
have different attributes, valuation requir
es aggregation of the attributes into a 
metric that can be used to rank alte
rnatives. This is a complex problem and 
technology users are likely 
to disagree about the ap
propriate weights for the 
different attributes.
19  Practically speaking, in assessing ﬁr
easonableness,ﬂ courts have resorted 
to measures other than incremental valu
e. Recently, a long-time rule of thumb 
gauging royalties at 25% of the infringer™s profits was rejected by the U.S. Court 
of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
20 In accordance with a statement by the Eu-
ropean Commission, the royalties a patent has realized in the past before a 

standard is approved can shed light on value.
21 What royalties the patent has 
realized in the past in other license ne
gotiations after or (in accordance with the 
European Commission statement) before a standard is approved, can shed light 

on value. Royalties for comparable patents or licenses that are encumbered by 
FRAND commitments may also inform the evaluation of reasonable royalties, 
although recent cases have raised th
e bar on validating the circumstances and 
expert testimony on which cases are comparable.
22  At the most basic level, a commitment to license at RAND terms should not 
permit a patent holder to obtain a royalty that reflects standardization effects rather 
                                                 19Patent pools have developed ﬁrough and read
yﬂ approaches to this apportionment 
problem, such as allocating royalties in proportion to each firm™s count of essential pa-
tents. However, each approach bears its own problems, especially where attributes must 
be weighted.  
20Uniloc USA Inc. v. Microsoft Corp
. 10 1035 (U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal 
Circuit, 2011).  
21See 
Communication from the Commission: Guide
lines on the applicability of Article 
101 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union to horizontal cooperation 
agreements
, at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2011:011: 
0001:0072:EN:PDF. As an economic matter, it is
 questionable whether ex post royalties 
should inform FRAND royalties. 
22As noted by Judge Robart in 
Microsoft Corp. v. Moto
rola, Inc., No. C10-1823JLR
 (U.S. District Court, 2013), not all royalties 
are comparable or based on similar consider-
ations. For example, ﬁ[t]he court concludes 
that where multiple 
technologies (including 
both standard essential and non-essential patent
s) are licensed within the same agreement, 
it is necessary to apportion the value of [the
 SEPs at issue] from the other licensed prop-
erties. Such apportionmen
t would be difficult.ﬂ 
(Order 137-138). See also 
Uniloc USA, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp
., 632 F. 3d 1292, 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2011) (ﬁThe meaning of these 
cases is clear: there must be a basis in fact to associate the royalty rates used in prior li-
censes to the particular hypothetical negotiation at issue in the case.ﬂ). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.63 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
than the value of the claimed invention; nor should a patent holder automatically 
realize less than the rate based on the 
ex ante contribution of the invention merely 
because s/he participates 
in a standards effort. In 
Microsoft v. Motorola
, Judge Robart articulates two high-
level principles for determ
ining FRAND rates. First, 
the value of the SEPs should be assessed 
separately from their inclusion in the 
standard. Second, a FRAND rate should be based on the importance of the patents 
to the standard and the importance of the 
standard and the patents to the products 
at issue. As noted above, one corollary of this second principle, the ruling sug-

gests, is that when there 
are multiple holders of FR
AND-encumbered SEPs for the 
same standard, it would be necessary to
 consider cumulative royalty rates. 
U.S. courts frequently cite 
the 15 factors enumerated in 
Georgia-Pacific 
Corp. v. United States Plywood Corp.
23 that are relevant to a hypothetical nego-
tiation between a patentee and a licensee 
to assess monetary compensation for 
patent infringement. A key issue now is
 whether these factors are informative 
for assessing FRAND royalties for standard
-essential patents. Judge Robart con-
cluded that they are informative, albeit with important qualifications. He noted 

that the hypothetical negotiation under a FRAND obligation differs from the 
typical Georgia-Pacific
 analysis conducted by courts in a patent infringement 
action because, among other reasons, the ow
ner of a SEP is under the obligation 
to license its patents on FRAND terms. 
For example, the first 
Georgia-Pacific
 factor is ﬁThe royalties received by 
the patentee for the licensing of the patent in suit, proving or tending to prove an 

established royaltyﬂ and the second factor 
is ﬁThe rates paid by the licensee for 
the use of other patents comparable to the patent in suit.ﬂ Judge Robart conclud-
ed that to be comparable, past royalty rates for a litigated SEP or another similar 

patent must be negotiated under a clearly understood FRAND obligation. 
Several 
Georgia-Pacific
 factors address the technical characteristics of the 
patented technology and its value to the 
licensee. Factors 6 and 8 relate to the 
value of the patent in promoting sales of the licensee™s products and factor 9 is 
ﬁThe utility and advantages of the patent property over the old modes or devices, 
if any, that had been used for working out similar results.ﬂ Factor 10 is ﬁThe 
portion of the realizable profit that should be credited to the invention as distin-
guished from non-patented elements, the manufacturing process, business risks, 

or significant features or improvements added by the infringer.ﬂ In interpreting 
the implications of these 
factors for a hypothetical FRAND royalty negotiation, 
Judge Robart concluded that a reasonab
le royalty for a SEP should reflect the 
contribution of the patent to the standard and to the value of the implementer™s 
products, but should not take into account the value to the licensee created by 
the standard itself.  
Factor 15 is ﬁThe amount that a licensor, such as the patentee, and a licen-
see (such as the infringer), would have 
agreed upon at the ti
me the infringement 
began if both had been reasonably and voluntarily trying to reach an agreement 

...ﬂ In evaluating the implications of th
is summary factor, Judge Robart noted 
                                                 23318 FSupp 1116, 6 USPQ 235 (SD NY 1970). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.64                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
that ﬁthe SEP owner would have been obligated to license its SEPs on RAND 
terms which necessarily must abide by the purpose of the RAND commitment of 

widespread adoption of the standard through avoidance of holdup and stacking.ﬂ 
It remains to be seen whether other courts will adopt the FRAND frame-
work described by Judge Robart in 
Microsoft v. Motorola
. Nonetheless, the 
court™s application of the 
Georgia-Pacific
 factors to a hypothetical negotiation 
over royalties for a FRAND-encumbered pate
nt emphasizes certain points that are 
widely discussed in the literature and 
have achieved some consensus within the 
standards community and among antitrust au
thorities. Specifically, the court de-
termined that the participants in a ﬁhypothetical negotiation would set [F]RAND 
royalty rates by looking at the importance of the SEPs to the standard and the im-
portance of the standard and the SEPs to the products at issue.ﬂ
24 It is reasonable 
to apply the 
Georgia-Pacific
 factors to help determine FRAND licensing rates, 
with appropriate modifications to reflect the commitments made by SEP owners 
and the characteristics of industries within which SEP owners and implementers 
operate. 

 Non-discrimination 
 Some notion of non-discrimination must be central to any meaningful 
FRAND concept.  
In his review of the 
Georgia-Pacific
 factors to assess FRAND royalties, 
Judge Robart noted that the fifth fact
orŠﬂThe commercial relationship between 
the licensor and licensee, such as, whether they are competitors in the same ter-
ritory in the same line of business; or whether they are inventor and promot-

erﬂŠdoes not apply in the FRAND contex
t. This is because having committed 
to license on FRAND terms, the patentee is obligated to license all implementers 
on reasonable terms and may not discriminate against its competitors in terms of 

licensing agreements. 
Although the non-discrimination requirement of the FRAND commitment 
is clear, it is much less clear what that 
implies in practice. A patentee can struc-
ture royalties in different ways. One might imagine a licensor asking for a uni-
tary fixed charge independent of the licensee™s sales volume, a given fee per unit 

of sales, or a mixed royalty. Each of these may be considered non-
discriminatory on its face but generate wi
de variations in effective licensing 
terms across licensees. For exam
ple, a royalty rate that is a fixed percentage of a 
using product™s market value implies a much higher per-unit dollar royalty on 
higher value goods than on less expensive goods, even though the same technol-
ogy is in play.  
In general, neither a single fixed fee nor a single per-unit fee is likely to 
promote the most efficient utilization of a technology. Economic output may 
increase if licensees are free to choose among different fee schedules. For ex-

ample, a licensee may choose a royalty schedule that has a low initial fee and a 
                                                 24Ibid., p. 4. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.65 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
high per-unit fee or a different royalty schedule that has a higher initial fee and a 
lower per-unit-fee.  
One interpretation of the non-discrimination requirement is that patent 
owners should offer licensees the same choices of royalty schedules. Under this 
interpretation, the alternatives of a high initial fee/low per-unit fee or a low ini-

tial fee/high per-unit fee generally would not be discriminatory if these choices 
are available to all licensees
. It is not clear, however, whether this interpretation 
is consistent with the non-discrimination requirement of FRAND or whether 

non-discrimination requires such menus. 
Moreover, there are circumstances in 
which such choices likely should be considered discriminatory. For example, the 
choices could be structured so that only very large users of a technology could 
profitably accept a license.  
 
Portfolio licensing and cross-licensing 
 The ability to determine whether the price and other terms relating to a 
given SEP or essential claim are reasonable and have been applied on a con-
sistent basis is further compli
cated by the fact that those claims may be part of a 
bundle of other claims. The latter may not be essential to the implementation of 

the standard but could be needed in 
connection with the manufacture of any 
product incorporating the feature that complies with the standard. Typically, if 
both parties agree, all of these claims will be included under a single license that 

includes a single set of terms applicable to all of the referenced patents or 
claims. Because the owner of these claims
 is under no obligation to license the 
non-essential, but desirable, claims included in the bundle subject to FRAND 

terms, it will be difficult to determine whether a FRAND obligation has in fact 
been met.  
For many companies the objective of taki
ng a license is to obtain the free-
dom to operate in a techno
logy space. These companies ma
y not be interested in 
a license to a single patent if their activities may infringe other patents owned by 
the licensor. Instead, they may want acce
ss to the portfolio of patents owned by 
the licensor, including future patents. Th
is can be achieved with an appropriately 
structured portfolio license. Similarly, the licensor often may want the freedom 

to operate without the risk of liability for infringing the licensees™ current or 
future patents. This freedom can be obta
ined with an approp
riately structured cross-license between the two companies. 
Portfolio licenses and cross-license
s raise challenges for evaluating 
whether a particular patent license is consistent with a FRAND obligation. The 
royalty paid for a patent portfolio covers many patent licenses, and it can be 

difficult, or even impossible, to allocate the portfolio royalty to individual pa-
tents in a meaningful way. Cross-licen
ses add a further complication because 
parties to the arrangements often net out the payments for patents they entail. 

Parties to a cross-license may not pay any royalties if they agree that their re-
spective portfolios have equal values. But that does not mean that the portfoli-
osŠor the individual patents in the portfoliosŠhave no values. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.66                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Portfolio licenses and cross-licenses rais
e issues of transparency for patent 
royalties. It is difficult to know what the royalty may be for a single patent in a 

portfolio license or a cross-license. If the SEP owner insists that the SEP be li-
censed as a component of a portfolio that includes other, non-essential patents, 
the result can be a demand for a royalty in excess of the FRAND rate for the 

SEP. A similar outcome may ensue if th
e licensor insists on a cross-license to 
patents that have a total value in excess of the FRAND royalty on the SEP. Of 
course, licensees may not agree 
to such demands in practice. 
Mutually agreed cross-license arrang
ements are certain
ly acceptable under 
SSO policies. However, one-sided demands by SEP owners that the licensee 
accept patents other than the SEPs in the 
standard, as a condition of access to the 
SEPs, would violate the terms of many IPR policies. These expressly limit 
cross-license terms, typically under a ﬁr
eciprocityﬂ provision, to other claims 
that are essential to the implementation of the same standard.
 An owner of SEPs 
in this situation would not be permitted to demand a broader cross license with-
out violating its FRAND obligation. Even absent such an explicit rule, trade 

usage might indicate that the party demanding the broad cross-license would be 
found in court to have violated its FRAND commitment. The competition au-
thorities have suggested that it likely would be anti-competitive for a holder of 

FRAND-encumbered SEPs to demand a cr
oss-license to non-SEPs unless both 
parties voluntarily agree to a broader cross-license deal.  
The Department of Justice has suggested that SSOs should prohibit the 
mandatory cross-licensing of patents that are not essential to the standard or a 
related family of standards, while permitting voluntary cross-licensing of all 
patents. Further, in its Decision Rega
rding Google™s Acquisition of Motorola 
Mobility DG Competition of the European Commission wrote that ﬁAnother 
concern would be that the SEP holder may force a holder of non-SEPs to cross-
license those non-SEPs to it in return for a license of the SEPs.ﬂ
25  The problems of low transparency and potential discrimination in licens-
ing terms could be addressed by requiring owners of patents with FRAND obli-
gations to provide to an implementer, upon request, a royalty or royalty schedule 
at which they are willing to licen
se their patents (Gilbert, 2011).
26 Portfolio li-
censing and cross-licensing would remain permissible choices. However, parties 

to a portfolio or cross-license would ha
ve the alternative of accepting a license 
for a single patent at the posted rate.
27   
Other licensing terms 
 Licenses typically include many terms negotiated between parties. In addi-
tion to fixed and per unit royalties, the license may have a royalty cap, payments 
                                                 25See European Commission (2012). 
26The committee cautions that there is little systematic evidence of how such a re-
quirement would affect incentiv
es of inventors to contribute 
IP to a developing standard. 
27See for example, American Bar Association (2007). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.67 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
that are conditioned on the licensees™ sales, and discounts for prompt payment. 
The royalties comprise only one component of licensing terms. The license may 

be worldwide or restricted 
to a country or region. The license may be for a par-
ticular field of use or for any economic 
activity by the licensee. Royalty terms 
may differ depending on the products made using the licensed technology. 
In addition, license agreements may s
eek to include gran
t-back provisions 
in which the licensee agrees 
to provide the licensor with
 a license to certain fu-
ture patents issued to the licensee. In 
fact, most SSOs™ IPR policies are silent on 
the topic of grant-backs, which may or may not be within the FRAND frame-
work. Where it exists, the relevant IPR policy may limit the scope of the grant-
back to patents that are essential to the same standard and may address whether 
the grant-back is exclusiv
e or non-exclusive and whet
her it has a royalty obliga-
tion.
28 The grant-back license may require 
that the licensee agree either to li-
cense its SEPs under FRAND terms or not to assert its own SEPs under the 
same standard against the licensor or 
against other licensees implementing the 
same standard.  
This complexity of licensing terms greatly complicates the determination 
of ﬁfair and reasonableﬂ royalty terms a
nd any assessment of unfair discrimina-
tion.
29 A license with a given per-unit royalty that is limited to production in 
Europe and requires a royalty-free grant-back of future patents is not compara-
ble to an unrestricted worldwide license with the same per-unit royalty. While 
the IPR policies of SSOs could theoretically define a standard set of licensing 

terms to facilitate compliance with FRAND licensing obligations, this option 
has rarely been pursued. One reason is 
that SSO members prefer to sell technol-
ogy under their own licenses.  
The most common exception arises wher
e the founders of the standardiza-
tion effort seek to develop only one or a few closely related standards. In this 
case, the founders will often enter into 
a cross-license among each other, com-
monly referred to as a ﬁPromoters™ Agreement,ﬂ under which the SEPs of all 
promoters are pooled on a FRAND or FRAND-RF basis. Under some Promot-
ers™ Agreements, each promoter
 in turn may be free to 
license the pool of claims 
to third parties for purposes of implementing the standard in question. These 
rights are contained in ﬁAdopter Agreements,ﬂ which may include royalty-free 

grant-back terms similar to those in pl
ace between the Promoters. Under such an 
arrangement, extraneous licensing terms are effectively excluded. 
As Judge Robart concluded, FRAND obligations may be informed when a 
formal patent pool is formed, under which implementers pay a single fee refer-
enced in a common fee schedule and sign vi
rtually the same license as all other 
pool licensees. Because such pools are di
fficult and expensive to create and of 
                                                 28Grant-backs are generally non-exclusive 
since competition questions could arise 
where the licensor precludes its licensee from transacting with other firms. 
29This statement should be qualified by noti
ng that the patent holder™s commitment to 
license on fair and reasonable terms does not
 prohibit it from entering voluntarily into 
more complex but mutually bene
ficial licensing arrangements. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.68                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
limited value if they do not attract very wide participation either by SEP holders 
or interested implementers, they are rare
ly created. But they 
can serve a valuable 
purpose in setting FRAND rates, providing guidance in structuring FRAND 
licenses, and potentially addressing patent-stacking issues.
30  
Summary 
 There are many respects in which th
e private concerns of members of 
standards-setting organizations are cong
ruent with the objective of creating 
standards that enhance economic welfare. SSO members want to develop stand-
ards that are effective technical solutions
. They want to avoid capture of a stand-
ard by one or a few entities, and they want a fair opportunity to participate in 
setting the standard. These are all consiste
nt with enhancing economic welfare.  
However, SSO members do not necessarily internalize all of the relevant 
effects of their standards choices and 
IPR policies on economic welfare. SSO 
members who are implementers may not decisively oppose high royalty pay-

ments, even for patents of questionable t
echnical value in the standard, if they 
can pass these costs onto consumers. More
over, they may face 
the threat of the 
SEP holder obtaining injunctive relief if
 they do not accede to the latter™s licens-
ing demands.
31 High royalties can reduce output and raise product prices, which 
harm consumers. To be sure, these costs 
should be set against the dynamic bene-
fits of royalty income. Patents are an important means of realizing returns on 

R&D investment. Royalties are often used to fund further research that develops 
better and more efficient products and improved methods of achieving interop-
erability. 
Despite the lack of clear guidance to date in SSO IPR policies, we should 
not understate the importance of a FRAND commitment and its ability to deal 
with potential strategic concerns. SSOs are 
largely effective by virtue of the credi-
bility of the voluntary consensus-based st
andards process in delivering high quali-
ty standards that can be implemented 
while avoiding serious IPR-related conse-
quences. SSOs remain important and the fact that more are created all the time 
suggests that market participants know th
ey have much to gain by expending re-
sources in helping develop and implement 
standards. Indeed, alleged abuses of 
FRAND commitments have been relatively in
frequent in the past relative to the 
large number of standards and the much larger number of SEPs that standards 
incorporate. This suggests that most rights holders have not pushed the limits of a 

FRAND interpretation through the strategic enforcement of their patents. 
Within the past few years, however, there have been an increasing number 
of lawsuits alleging that SEP holders have demanded non-FRAND terms from 

implementers and used the threat of injunctive relief to try to force these imple-
menters to accept such terms or risk havi
ng their product sales halted. This may 
                                                 30These points were addressed also in Judge R
obart™s opinion, cited above at footnote 
37. 31See the related discussion in Chapter 6 on injunctions. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.69 
Key Issues for SSOs in SEP Licensing 
signal that attempts at patent hold-up are increasing, or it may be that in the past 
implementers have chosen to accede to 
unreasonable terms 
instead of challeng-
ing them in courts.
32 The current debates at a number of SSOs about whether to 
further clarify the effect of a FRAN
D licensing commitment in their IPR poli-
cies suggest that industry players have
 diverse views as to what FRAND means 
and what constraints it actuall
y places on the SEP holder. 
Because of the strategic concerns listed earlier, competition authorities and 
a number of companies now recommend that
 SSOs clarify the various effects of 
a FRAND commitment by form
ulating certain principles. These principles may 
include, among other conditions for compliance with FRAND, guidance related 
to royalty demands that could be a disproportionate share of product value when 
many patents are necessary to comply with a standard. 
 3.4 Recommendati
ons to SSOs
  The issues discussed in this chapter are highly complex, leaving relatively 
little room for broadly applicable recommendations. However, there are areas in 
which the committee sees the potential for improvement relating to SSO policy 
regarding licensing commitments. Underlying these recommendations is a fun-

damental principle: The committee be
lieves that a FRAND licensing commit-
ment represents more than the patent owner offering a license on its own terms. 
A FRAND commitment is also mutual in 
the sense that both the SEP holder and 
any prospective licensee are expected to negotiate in good faith towards a li-
cense on reasonable terms and conditions that reflect the economic value of the 
patented technology. 

 Recommendation 3:1 
 The committee urges SSOs to become more explicit in their IPR policies 
regarding their understanding of an
d expectations about FRAND licensing 
commitments. SSOs should clarify the va
rious effects of a FRAND commitment 
by formulating certain statements of prin
ciple. These principl
es could include, 
among other conditions for compliance w
ith FRAND, guidance regarding royal-
ty demands that could be a disproportionate share of product value when many 
patents are necessary to comply with a standard and the relevant product in-
cludes multiple technologies. 

 Recommendation 3:2 
 The committee recommends 
that SSOs include in their policies statements 
that implementers and the consumers of 
their products and services are the in-
                                                 32A further factor in mobile communications
 may be that a number of large partici-
pants contribute relatively little to standards 
development and may not want to pay for the 
cost of the innovation underlying those standards.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.70                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
tended third party beneficiaries of licensing commitments made by SSO partici-
pants. Although the enforceability in all courts of such a term may not be guar-

anteed as the law in this regard is still evolving, inclusion of such statements 
would inform courts of the intent of 
SEP owners participating in SSO working 
groups. It would also provide greater co
nfidence to potential implementers and 
promote greater certainty in
 the event of a dispute. 
Several recommendations are aimed at improving clarity within SSOs re-
garding the bundling of licensing commitments.  
 Recommendation 3:3 
 SSOs should clarify in their policies that prospective licensees may re-
quest a license to some or all FRAND-encumbered SEPs owned or controlled by 

a patent holder. Licensors may not tie the FRAND commitment and the availa-
bility of the requested SEPs to a de
mand that a licensee accept a package or 
portfolio license that includes non-SEPs or SEPs for unrelated standards. Nor 
may the licensors tie the FRAND commitment and SEPs availability to a re-
quirement that the licensee agree to licen
se back unrelated SEPs or non-SEPs. 
 Recommendation 3:4 
 SSOs should clarify in their policies that a holder of FRAND-encumbered 
SEPs may require a licensee to grant a license in return under FRAND terms to 

the SEPs it owns or controls (and those of its affiliates as specified in the SSO™s 
policy) covering the same standard or, 
as specified by the SSO, related stand-
ards. 
 Recommendation 3:5 

 It should be understood that SSOs™ IPR policies do not affect the freedom 
of parties to voluntarily enter portfolio or cross licenses beyond the scope of the 
standard. This includes situations wher
e prospective licensors offer to license 
SEPs in a package, such as a fixed pool.   
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.71 
4. SEP Disclosure and  Information Transparency  4.1 Disclosure as an El
ement of SSO IPR Policies 
 Patent disclosure is one of the main elements of many IPR policies, with the 
objective of increasing the degree of knowledge and transparency relating to pa-

tents in the course of the standards development process, and for subsequent li-
censing. Information on disclosed patents and, often, associated licensing com-
mitments is usually made public in 
databases published by standard-setting 
organizations (SSOs). In this chapter, we discuss disclosure rules across a set of 
SSOs, the roles disclosure can play, and the current level of available information 
on disclosed patents. This chapter is limited to the disclosure of patents and does 

not address the disclosure of licensing terms (Bekkers and Updegrove, 2012). 
Many SSO IPR policies have disclosure rules as central elements. In fact, 
such obligations often represent a very significant part of the overall text of 

these policies. However, there are also SSO IPR policies that do not include 
disclosure obligations at all. For exam
ple, ANSI does not require its accredited 
standards developers to include such requirements, although it encourages them 

to do so. There also are many SSOs that ha
ve no overall disclosure requirement. 
Rather, commitments are triggered by
 participation in the process.  
Generally, disclosure rules specify when and how members or participants 
should inform the SSO that they believe they own patents that might be essential 
to the standard when it is finalized. Ho
wever, the exact rules show a great de-
gree of variety. Some important dimensions in this regard include the following: 
What triggers a disclosure obligation?
 Often, it is triggered when partici-
pants or members are reasonably aware that
 they or the companies they work for 
likely own patents with essential claims based on the then-current drafts of the 
standard. Such essentiality cannot be definitively known until the standard is 
finalized. Disclosure obligations are frequently linked to participation in specific 

working groups or the submission of technical proposals.  Although the policies 
of all surveyed SSOs and of the SSOs of
 which the committee Is aware, explicit-
ly state that patent searches are not re
quired some state that participants and 
companies must act in good faith. For instance, a company is not acting in good 
faith if it purposely (i.e., with the inte
ntion of circumventing IPR policy rules) 
sends delegates who are not personally aware of certain relevant patents to par-

ticipate at standards-setting meetings. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.72                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Whose patents must be disclosed?
 Almost invariably this obligation relates 
to all relevant SEPs owned by the individual and the company that person works 

for. The large majority of policies also require that SEPs owned by affiliate 
companies (e.g., direct and indirect subsidiaries and sometimes parent and sib-
ling companies) are included. In addition,
 quite a few policies encourage or re-
quire disclosure of known essential patents owned by third parties. 
What information must be disclosed?
 Some SSOs require that disclosures 
identify all the specific patents or patent 
applications that are believed to include 
potentially essential claims. Many, however, allow for blanket disclosures, which 
are statements that the company believes it owns patents that may end up being 
SEPs but not listing them.  
How is essentiality defined?
 There are many different
 attributes that such 
definitions may incorporate and SSO policies display great variety in the details. 

However, most SSOs™ policies refer just 
to SEPs that are technologically re-
quired in order to comply with the standard. The assessment of essentiality is 
somewhat subjective and actual determination can only be made by a court. 
When must disclosures be made?
 One common approach is for the policy 
to allow disclosures at any time during the standards development process. Here, 
policies typically require timely disclosures, triggered when the representative of 

a company becomes aware that it may have an essential patent. Few SSOs, how-
ever, have exact rules on this. Several SS
Os stress that there is a tradeoff be-
tween the timeliness and the quality of disclosures. In fact, it can be difficult for 

companies to project what might end up being essential until the text of the 
standard is almost finalized. Another common approach is to expect disclosure 
at particular points in the process, such 
as 30 to 60 days from the date when a 
draft is posted. This is usually imposed in addition to the ongoing duty to dis-
close.  To whom is disclosed information made available (and which information)?
 Many SSOs make disclosure information available to the general public, but some 
do not. There is great diversity in the completeness and accessibility of the infor-
mation that is made public. Rules relating to the recording and availability of dis-
closure statements made orally during meetings may be unclear. Often such dis-
closures at a meeting are incomplete and the individual™s employer must 

determine whether a formal statement 
needs to be submitted to the SSO.  
It is important to recognize that b
ecause disclosure obligations can create 
significant costs and burdens for participating patent holders, many SSOs are 

willing to accept broad licensing commitmen
ts in lieu of detailed disclosures. 
 4.2 The Possible Roles of Information Disclosure 
 Few IPR policies of SSOs are explicit about what disclosure rules or 
guidelines aim to achieve. It is possible that many disclosure policies aim to 

serve multiple goals. The fact that thes
e goals may require different and some-
times conflicting policy elements (e.g., regarding the timing of disclosures) also 
contributes to the ambiguity of these rules.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.73 
SEP Disclosure and Information Transparency 
The committee™s background study of di
sclosure policies suggests that 
they may serve at least one or more of the following four distinct goals. The first 

objective is to allow working group members to make appropriate and informed 
choices concerning the inclusion of technologies, based on technical merit, im-
plementation costs, and the prospective availability of licenses. Working groups 

may also use disclosure information to choose between different technical alter-
natives or to mount efforts to design around a certain patented technology. In the 
IETF, working group members are known to have frequently considered disclo-

sure information in this respect.
1 A second goal is to record which members and 
participants are subject to licensing obligations for SEPs following directly from 
the policy. Third, disclosure serves as a trigger so that essential patent holders 
can be requested or required to make 
a related licensing commitment. Finally, 
disclosure rules inform prospective implementers about which companies they 

may want to approach to seek licenses an
d to allow them to assess the extent and 
value of the claimed patents.  
SSOs vary in terms of which goals they try to achieve, depending on the 
specific context. For a relatively narrow standard, the working group may only 
face a handful of SEPs and might thus pursue
 the first goal above. In contrast, an 
extensive and complicated standardizati
on effort might incur thousands of dis-
closures, making this much less realistic
. Often, SSOs may try to achieve multi-
ple objectives, which might require different and sometimes conflicting ele-
ments in disclosure policies, as discussed below.  
Stakeholders have diverse interests in disclosure information. The array of 
stakeholders is long (Raes, 2010). First, working group participants may need 
disclosed information in order to perform their work. Second, for planning pur-

poses, actual and prospective implementers of the standard may need to know 
which parties claim to own essential IPR, which specific patents they believe 
may contain essential claims, whether the IPR holder will require implementers 

to obtain a license, and if so, whether payment of a royalty or other fee will be 
required. Sufficiently specific disclosure 
information also allows implementers 
to review how many possible SEPs are disclosed, their nature and potential val-
ue, and whether implementers agree that the patents in question are valid and 
essential. Third, SEP owners may use disclosure to assess their claims in the 

context of those owned by others and develop a general idea of what fee levels 
might be appropriate within the bo
undaries of their 
FRAND commitments. 
Policymakers and public authorities are also interested in disclosure. Doc-
ument disclosure can expand the stock of prior art information available to pa-
tent examiners and also be an important input into post-grant opposition pro-
ceedings, long established at the EPO an
d expanded in the United States under 
                                                      
1While IETF rules allow for the inclus
ion of technologies for which FRAND com-
mitments were submitted, many working groups have a strong preference only to include 
unpatented technology or patented technolog
y available at RAND-RF conditions. Thus, 
many IETF working groups wish to receive 
disclosure and commitm
ent information as 
early as possible in order design around 
certain technologies, if desired.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.74                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
the America Invents Act. Perhaps most concerned are competition authorities, 
who may monitor standardization processes to ensure that no unnecessary harm 

is done to competition. When a case of possible anticompetitive behavior is 
brought to their attention they might consult relevant patent disclosure data-
bases. Such databases may show whether certain parties fulfilled their commit-

ments and may help authorities assess possible anticompetitive behavior. More 
generally, policy makers may have an inte
rest in SEP disclosure databases to 
understand how reliant specific industries are on SEPs.  
Courts proceedings may rely on disclosures as matters of record for estab-
lishing compliance with the rules of an IPR policy. They may provide key 
benchmarks of behavior during the standards development process and help 
determine which parties are bound to specific commitments. Moreover, several 
courts and competition authorities have 
embraced the view that FRAND fees 
should bear a reasonable relationship to
 the economic value of
 the IPR prior to 
its inclusion in the standard (Federal
 Trade Commission, 20
11; European Com-
mission, 2011). Thus, accurate disclosure 
information is an important potential 
input in court proceedings.  
 4.3 Levels of Disclosure 
 Our survey of actual disclosure information in SSOs suggests that there 
are limitations to the data and the transp
arency it provides with regard to the 
availability, quality, accuracy and compre
hensiveness of disclosed SEPs. We 
next discuss the most important elements 
that affect the degr
ee of transparency, 
noting that the underlying choices often reflect a tradeoff among different objec-

tives or concerns. 
 Under-disclosure and over-disclosure 

 Study of SSO databases suggests that current lists of disclosed patents dis-
play a high level of both under-disclosure and over-disclosure of patents. There 
are at least two underlying reasons: (1) the incentives that drive organizations 
into setting certain levels of disclosure, such as the costs or effort of making 

them and the legal risks of not doing so; and (2) the nature of the IPR rules se-
lected by SSOs.
2  Under-disclosure refers to a situation in which some SEPs are not present 
in the IPR disclosure lists. One obvious cause is that IPR policies can only bind 
members or participants and not third par
ties. At best, identified third parties can 
only be requested to provide disclosures and possibly licensing commitments. A 

requirement that SSO participants disclose third-party patents that might be es-
sential can potentially fill this gap. Ho
wever, the level of disclosure resulting 
                                                      
2Industrial economists sometimes argue that ove
r-disclosure in particular could result 
from the strategic behavior of patent owners, 
who may attempt to suggest early that they 
deserve a claim on licensing revenues or at
tractive cross-licensing conditions. .  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.75 
SEP Disclosure and Information Transparency 
from such rules can be both erratic and of limited reliability. Such disclosures 
may also be restricted for confidentiality or other legal reasons.  
A second reason for under-disclosure is that the disclosure obligation, in 
the context of a specific standard fallin
g under a particular
 SSO™s IPR policy, 
may not be triggered at all, even if the IPR owners are members or participants. 

As noted above, disclosure obligations are often linked to actual participation in 
a working group or to the submission of a technical proposal, and to actual 
knowledge of patents or patent applications. A company that is an SSO member 

but does not participate in a particular case may not have an obligation to dis-
close its IPR. No SSOs in the surveyed 
group have an all-encompassing patent 
search requirement. A third factor is that
 disclosure rules are often subject to the 
individual knowledge of participants. While there may be additional good-faith 
requirements, it is possible that member companies will own relevant SEPs and 

yet the disclosure requirement may not be triggered due to the specific wording 
of the IPR policy.  
Over-disclosure refers to patents listed as possibly essential that end up 
not being essential in the final version of the standard. A major cause is that 
companies have strong reasons to disclose and thereby be on the safe side. Sev-
eral legal cases have held that a compan
y in certain circumstances found to have 
intentionally failed to disclose was prohibited from commercially exploiting the 
non-disclosed SEPs later on.
3 Thus, many firms may decide that it is better to 
disclose too much than too little. A second factor is that over-disclosure takes 

less time and costs less than undertaking the effort of determining whether spe-
cific patents might be essential in the draft standard, especially as its text 
evolves. Lastly, over-disclosure can be a consequence of the lack of a require-

ment to update information, as discussed below. 
Although over-disclosure may appear 
less costly than under-disclosure, 
this is not necessarily clear-cut. As a strategic matter, over-disclosure could re-

veal to competitors more than firms would like about the patents it believed to 
be potentially relevant. Under-disclosure has the corresponding strategic ad-
vantage of preserving non-public information about patent ownership. 
Both over-disclosure and under-disclosure can have market consequences 
as each may result in legal uncertainty fo
r implementers. For example, if imple-
menters believe there is a substantial degree of under-disclosure, they may de-
cide not to adopt the standard in question because of the legal and financial risks 
of not being able to assess actual SEP ownership. Similarly, substantial over-

disclosure could impede the adoption of standards if implementers are con-
cerned that there may be more patent owne
rs seeking to license more SEPs than 
there actually are.  

                                                         
3See, for example, 
Qualcomm, Inc. v. Broadcomm, Inc., 
No. 2007-1545 (Fed. Cir. Dec. 
1, 2008) and the Dell VESA case, 
in re Dell Corporation
, 121 F.T.C. 616 (1996), in which 
a consent agreement was reached. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.76                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Blanket disclosures 
 SSOs that allow blanket disclosures of patents and patent applications of-
ten let the submitter decide whether to make blanket or specific SEP disclosures. 
Sometimes blanket disclosures are only allowed when certain conditions are 

met. At IETF, for example, they are only
 permitted if the owner also commits to 
licensing its patents on FRAND-RF term
s. At ITU blanket disclosures are al-
lowed only if the related licensing declarat
ion does not contain a refusal to offer 
FRAND or FRAND-RF licenses to ultimately essential patents.  
Blanket disclosures entail both advantages and disadvantages with regard 
to licensing. One advantage for SSOs is 
that if such disclosures are accompanied 
by licensing commitments, those commitments will cover any SEP that the 
submitter has reading on the final version of the standard. In some SSOs, licens-

ing commitments associated with specific disclosures apply only to those partic-
ular patents.
4 Further, allowing blanket disclosures may increase the willingness 
of firms to be SSO members, participate in work programs, and make technical 

submissions.  
Blanket disclosures also provide advantages for SEP holders. They may 
reduce the legal risks SEP owners might 
face with under-disclosure. They per-
mit firms to avoid incurring costs associat
ed with specific disclosures. For firms 
with large patent portfolios, such costs would be both high and recurring. Some 
of these companies do not routinely seek to monetize their SEPs, so making 

specific disclosures represents an unnece
ssary cost. In contrast, companies that 
do monetize their SEPs see identifying thei
r claims as an investment. Concerns 
have been raised that forcing companies that do not seek monetization to make 

specific disclosures may cause them to s
eek licensing revenues to offset the as-
sociated costs.  
At the same time, blanket disclosures have a number of disadvantages. 
First, they make it difficult for engineers to invent around patents. Second, they 
can shift search costs onto other partie
s, such as prospective implementers, 
working group members, or other stakeholders. Third, blanket disclosures may 
create a situation in which prospective li
censees have limited information about 
the exact magnitude and content of an essential IPR portfolio. In principle, this 

situation could raise the relative bargaining power of SEP holders that proactive-
ly seek licenses and garner better contract
 terms for them, especially if their ne-
gotiation partners cannot readily determine essentiality.
5 Whether this is a prac-
                                                      
4In the IPR policies reviewed in the Bekkers-Updegrove paper, this was the case for 4 
of 10 policies. In the other six cases the 
commitment covers any 
essential claims under 
the specific standard in question, regardless of whether these patents were actually dis-
closed by their owner.  
5This situation describes a case of asymmetric information, which the theoretical liter-
ature links to an improved bargaining positi
on for the party with the greater knowledge 
(Spence,1973, Gallini and Wright, 1990).  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.77 
SEP Disclosure and Information Transparency 
tical concern in actual negotiations is unclear, for the parties can ask each other 
for detailed information.  

 No requirements to update 
 There are various reasons why patents or patent applications disclosed as 
essential at one time may later be deemed as nonessential: (1) the final version 
of the standard no longer covers the patented technology; (2) the patent applica-

tion was rejected, successfully opposed, or
 abandoned; (3) the relevant patents 
expired; (4) patents with essential claims were successfully challenged in court, 
or rescinded on reexamination by the relevant patent authority; (5) the scope of 
the issued patent was narrowed or modifi
ed and no longer contains claims that 
are essential to the standard; and (6) ne
w technical alternatives can arise. Fur-
ther, even if claims under a disclosed patent end up being essential to the final 
standard, new information that could be useful to implementers may become 
available over time.  
It should also be noted that SEP ownership often changes hands and a new 
owner may decide to require payment of a FRAND fee even though the original 
owner may not have required any fee at all.
6 Finally, there may be complex situ-
ations with regard to inventions that are patented in various countries around the 
world. It is common for the precise scope of patents in such a patent family to 
differ by country. Thus, a family member may be essential in one country but 

not in another.  
All of the factors above may affect 
the accuracy and validity of infor-
mation contained in disclosures and several IPR policies recommend that SEP 

owners update disclosure information. However, few SSO policies provide 
guidance on how and when any such updating should occur, let alone impose a 
requirement to do so. While changes resulting from some causes may be tracked 

from public sources such as patent offices, many changes may not be.  
Costs can arise where patent information is not updated. An implementer 
may find it difficult to determine from whom it should obtain licenses and which 
technologies that license should include. Also, implementers may need to recon-
struct such information multiple times across several potential licensors. These 

costs may be borne by each prospective licensee, resulting in considerable du-
plication of efforts.  
The accuracy and validity of
 information contained in disclosures is also 
related to the rules regarding their timing.
 If early disclosure is encouraged or 
required, the updating problem becomes gr
eater because it is more difficult for 
companies to project what might
 end up being essential.  
                                                      
6Transfers are discussed fully in Chapter 5. 
Note that the increasing prevalence of pa-
tent transfers provides a mixed argument for a
nd against blanket disclosures. On the one 
hand, the buyer of an undisclosed patent may 
never realize that she/he has acquired an 
essential claim and therefore might not assert 
it. On the other hand, if she/he did discover 
and assert the SEP there would be a competitive change in the marketplace.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.78                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
ETSI illustrates that stakeholders so
metimes value more accurate infor-
mation. In that case there has been a pro
cess of substantial quality updates to the 
IPR database, by linking the disclosure data to the European Patent Office data-
base and asking the original submitters to correct data believed to be in error.
7 A 
varied group of ETSI members donated 
a significant amount of money to fund 
this upgrade of the database, suggesting 
they see benefit in more transparency. 
However, some companies do not make use of the database. 
 
Limited information on third party IPRs 
 As mentioned above, SSO IPR policies are not and usually cannot be 
binding on non-members or non-participants.
8 In the absence of effective rules 
on third party disclosures, there is an incomplete IPR disclosure database.  

 Disclosures not made public  
 Although most SSOs make disclosures public, not all do. Furthermore, 
many SSOs have a ‚dual™ disclosure policy. This contains first a disclosure pro-
cess based on written declarations, often using a predefined form or template 

and often combined with a licensing co
mmitment declaration. The second arm is 
an oral disclosure requirement for partic
ipants present at meetings. Several of 
the policies reviewed in the background paper specify that the latter disclosures 

are to be recorded by the meeting chai
rperson. But the process may be unclear 
as to how often disclosures are made and to whom the entailed information is 
available. Typically, any IPR-related information disclosed at a working group 

meeting is used by the SSO to initiate contact with the implicated company to 
see if it agrees on essentiality and, if so
, whether it will submit a formal declara-
tion.  

 Discretionary disclosure policy  
 Some SSOs do not have any disclosure 
policy at all. A
lthough ANSI en-
courages accredited SSOs to include a disc
losure policy, it is not a requirement.
9 Other SSOs have a participation-based policy, in which participants agree up-
front to be bound by certain licensing commitments for any SEPs they have that 
end up being essential for the final standard, but no disclosures are required.  
We conclude this section by observing that many of the aspects affecting 
transparency are subject to
 meaningful tradeoffs. So
me of these tradeoffs are 
                                                      
7See Chapter 7 for further discussion. 
8There are complexities here, especially with regard to ISO and IEC, which have spe-
cific rules that place obligat
ions on those involved in the 
national accreditation process. 
See Bekkers and Updegrove (2012) for more details. 
9An ANSI task force is considering the disclosure issue and its revelance to its IPR 
policy. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.79 
SEP Disclosure and Information Transparency 
balanced in more conscious ways than others. Where these have been consid-
ered, not all legitimate stakeholders have always been part of that decision pro-

cess. Finally, for companies, there is an important internal tradeoff to manage 
with respect to transparency. On the 
one hand, more transparency can reduce 
their legal risks and uncertainties and can be
 beneficial in cases of conflict. On 
the other hand, achieving transparency through disclosures entails significant 
efforts and compliance costs for companies.  
 4.4 The Timing of Disclosures in Relation to  
Licensing Commitment Procedures 
 When analyzing the IPR databases of large SSOs, it becomes evident that 
many initial disclosures are submitted long 
after the final standard is adopted, 
even if the SSO policies encourage early disclosure. Obviously, such disclosures 
come too late to allow working group members to make appropriate choices 
concerning the inclusion of alternative technologies. Why do companies often 

disclose so late, even if the rules stress 
the need for ‚timely™ disclosure, and why 
do the rules of any SSO fail to require disclosure prior to final adoption of a 
standard? We believe that one important explanation lies in the IPR rules and 

associated procedures themselves. The 
disclosure rules are often intertwined 
with the licensing rules, with a single form used for both. Most IPR policies are 
not clear in whether they pr
efer early or late disclosure. The entanglement of the 
disclosure and licensing policies encourages late rather than early disclosure.  
The committee suggests that SSOs evaluate whether there is a need to ad-
dress these issues, in which case SSOs c
ould consider one of two approaches. 
First, disentangle the disclosure and 
the licensing commitm
ent processes, for 
instance by introducing ‚early general li
censing statements™ such as that recently 
introduced by ETSI. Such statements provide assurances of availability but do 

not constitute disclosures. They can be made before a company examines the 
draft specifications or knows it owns essential patents. In fact, disentangling 
could usefully distinguish between blanket disclosures and blanket licensing 
commitments, which are different promises
 and exist in different combinations. 
Suppose, for example, that a company 
only discloses a single patent, with an 
associated blanket FRAND licensing co
mmitment. The latter would also commit 
it to FRAND licensing for other essential pa
tents it might eventually be found to 
own but did not disclose.  
Alternatively, SSOs might adopt a polic
y that encourages early disclosures 
and has an updating requirement. This 
way, knowledge about essential IPR is 
ﬁcorrectﬂ at the time the sta
ndard is being developed, allowing for informed de-
cisions, as well as at the time the stan
dard is finalized. In this case, the SSO 
would have to weigh the benefits this would yield against the burdens this would 
place on patent holders.  
Although such procedures may represent advances for some SSOs, we 
note that many have evolved requirements that seem to strike a workable bal-
ance between timing and information disclosure. Many SSO policies require 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.80                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
patent calls at every meeting and participants must choose between binding li-
censing obligations or disclosing previously withheld essential claims) before 

final adoption of a standard. Disclosure of essential patents is also often required 
if the right to charge a FRAND royalty is reserved. This time-tested approach 
may represent an effective balance of interests for other SSOs to consider. 

 4.5 Recommendati
ons to SSOs 
 SSOs should consider several actions 
to increase the tran
sparency of SEP 
ownership and licensing.  
 Recommendation 4:1 
 SSOs that do not have a policy requiring FRAND licensing commitments 
from all participants should have a disclosure element as part of their IPR poli-
cy.  
 Recommendation 4:2 
 SSOs with disclosure policies should articulate their objectives and con-
sider whether they sufficiently serve thes
e objectives. In particular, such SSOs 
may consider separating patent disclosure from licensing commitments and bet-

ter define their preferred timing and specificity of disclosures. 
 Recommendation 4:3 

 SSOs should make disclosed information available to the public.  
 
Recommendation 4:4
  SSOs should to consider measures to 
increase the quality and accuracy of 
disclosure data. Such measures might include updating requirements or greater 
coordination with patent offices.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.81 
5. Transfers of Patents with  Licensing Commitments  5.1 Introduction 
 A number of technical standards ha
ve encountered instances in which 
standard-essential patents (SEPs) subject to the owner™s licensing assurance 

have been transferred to a third party. As noted earlier, patents and patent port-
folios are becoming more frequently transferred assets. In turn, it will be in-
creasingly important and complex for stan
dard-setting organizations (SSOs) and 
regulators to address tran
sfer issues in the cont
ext of FRAND-encumbered 
standard-essential patents (SEPs).  
Patents may be transferred for several reasons. The patent owner may be 
no longer active in an area 
of technology, seek to recognize monetary value for 
its R&D investment through patent sales, exchange patents or patent portfolios 
with other entities, be insolvent or in ba
nkruptcy proceedings 
leading it to sell 
assets, or may have other purposes. Buyers may acquire patents for any number 
of reasons including for defensive purposes, financial opportunities in owning 
patents, or a desire to ensure access for 
themselves and others to the patented 
technology, among others.  
As SEPs are transferred, the following 
issues arise. First, does a licensing 
commitment or assurance made by an SSO participant remain valid for imple-

menters after the SEP is transferred to
 another party? Second, would specific 
licensing terms and conditions offered by 
a prior owner apply to a successor-in-
interest? Third, will the new owner be able to enforce the SEP against imple-
menters of the standard without adheri
ng to the fair, reasonable, and non-
discriminatory (FRAND) constraints imposed by the prior owner™s licensing 

commitment? Would injunctive relief be available to the transferee and would 
an antitrust, estoppel, laches, or other defense be available against a transferee? 
We address these issues in this chapter by considering the interests of the patent 

transferor, transferee, an
d future implementers. 
Depending on the issue, considerations 
such as the firm size, market share, 
prior relation to the transferor, and natu
re of the transferee™s business may be 
involved. Uncertainty as to patent tran
sferee rights and the expectations of 
standards implementers can undermine a vibrant standards environment, a risk 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.82                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
recognized by competition regulators, a number of SSOs, and other commenta-
tors.
1 Some regulatory agencies have ﬁwor
k-in-progressﬂ proposals aimed at 
minimizing potential competition problems surrounding FRAND-encumbered 
SEP transfers. Renata Hesse, Deputy Assi
stant Attorney General of the Antitrust 
Division, outlines the following considerations in a speech, ﬁSix ‚Small™ Pro-

posals for SSOs Before Lunch,ﬂ
 at the ITU-T Patent Roundtable in Geneva, 
Switzerland in October 2012:  
 – I would like to identify for you some policy choices that standards bod-
ies could implement which we believe would promote competition among 
implementers of the standard, potentially benefiting consumers around the 
world. A standards body could:  
– Make it clear that licensing commitments made to the standards body 
are intended to bind both the current patent holder and subsequent pur-
chasers of the patents and that thes
e commitments extend to all imple-
menters of the standard, whether or no
t they are a member of the standards 
body–  
 The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) took a similar position in the 
FTC v. N-Data
 case.
2 In the wake of that case, some
 leading SSOs revised their IPR 
policies to include a provision whereby the SEP holder must take certain steps to 
bind its successor-in-interest to the former™s FRAND licensing commitment.
3  In assessing this issue it is important to balance the interests of imple-
menters, patent transferors and transferees, and other potential stakeholders. If 
the pendulum were to swing too far towards implementers, patent holders might 

be discouraged from joining an SSO, leading to more instances in which SEPs 
are not being covered by any commitment. Patent holders might also avoid in-
vesting and innovating in standards, adversely affecting the technical values of 

specifications. Moreover, there are concerns
 that overly restricting the ability to 
enforce patents can reduce the economic va
lue of SEPs and hamper their trans-
fer.  
If the pendulum swings too far in the other direction, in favor of SEPs 
holders, then firms that have invested in implementing the standard based in part 

on FRAND licensing commitments could be at risk of patent hold-up, including 
via injunctive relief, by a new SEP owner not encumbered by the existing li-
                                                           
1See EU Horizontal Cooperation Guidelin
es, Section 285, which strongly recom-
mends ﬁa requirement on all participating 
IPR holders who provide such a commitment 
to ensure that any company to which the IPR owner transfers its IPR (including the right 
to license that IPR) is bound by that commitment, for example through a contractual 
clause between buyer and seller.ﬂ   
2Decision and Order, 
In re Negotiated Data Solutions LLC
, FTC File No. 051-0094. 
3See, for example, the Guidelines for Implementation of the Common Patent Policy of 
ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/IEC and the IEEE Patent Policy, 2012. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.83 
Transfers of Patents with Licensing Commitments 
cense terms or commitment. This woul
d undermine the intended effect of 
FRAND licensing commitments. There is a further possibility that a SEP holder 

could transfer the patent to a new owner with the intentions of circumventing the 
FRAND commitment.  
Ideally, SSO policies should clarify the nature of rights and obligations 
transferred with an SEP in a manner th
at promotes widespread implementation 
of standards without creating additional tr
ansaction costs that could impede the 
otherwise efficient transfer of patent righ
ts. To achieve that balance, SSOs need 
to consider both the legal implications of their IPR policies and their practical 
effects on different stakeholders.  
The next section discusses recent legal 
cases that involve the status of li-
censing commitment after transfer and ancillary issues. The third section out-
lines approaches aimed at continuing 
FRAND undertakings 
after a committed 
SEP is transferred (Kesan and Hayes, 2012).  
 5.2 Cases Regarding Continuing License Commitments 
 In one case, National Semiconductor Corp. (NSC) participated in develop-
ing the IEEE™s fast Ethernet Standard (IEEE 802.3).
4 NSC submitted a letter to 
the IEEE outlining how it would license all interested implementers for a set fee 
of $1000 as an incentive to
 encourage selection of 
NSC™s technology for the 
standard. SEPs owned by NSC were transferred several times and a downstream 

owner, Negotiated Data Solutions, or N-Data, advised prospective licensees that 
it would license the patents on FRAND te
rms, pursuant to th
e IEEE policy. The 
N-Data terms differed from those promised by the original patent holder, result-

ing in a much higher cost to implement the standard. When the new terms were 
announced, implementers complained that they were inconsistent with the 
FRAND licensing commitment. N-Data's employees included former personnel 

of NSC who were presumably aware of
 the original licensing terms.  
The matter was considered by the FTC, which reviewed the facts and en-
tered into a consent decree with N-Data ba
sed on the specific facts of the case. 
Under the decree, N-Data was bound only to license on FRAND terms but also 
to honor the licensing conditions originally published by NSC.
5 In a 3-2 deci-
sion, the FTC majority found that N-Data™s
 efforts to charge higher rates, after 
the standard incorporating the NSC technology was widely adopted, in part out 
of reliance on the $1000 commitment, was an unfair method of competition un-

der Section 5 of the FTC Act.  
                                                             
4In re Negotiated Data Solutions LLC
, FTC File No. 051-0094. 
5No specific finding was made as to whet
her the royalty requested by N-Data was 
consistent with some definition of FRAND. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.84                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
The FTC observed in its public statement  
 The Complaint in this matter alleges that N-Data reneged on a prior licens-
ing commitment to a standard-setting body and thereby was able to in-
crease the price of an Ethernet techno
logy used by almost every American 
consumer who owns a computer– But if N-Data™s conduct became the 
accepted way of doing business, even 
the most diligent standard-setting 
organizations would not be able to rely on the good faith assurances of re-

spected companies. The possibility exists that those companies would exit 
the business, and that their patent portfolios would make their way to oth-
ers who are less interested in honoring commitments than in exploiting in-
dustry lock-in–There is little doubt th
at N-Data™s conduct constitutes an 
unfair method of competition– We also have no doubt that the type of 

behavior engaged in by N-Data harms consumers. The process of estab-
lishing a standard displaces competition;
 therefore, bad faith or deceptive 
behavior that undermines the process may also undermine competition in 

an entire industry, raise prices 
to consumers, and reduce choices. 
 The dissent of FTC Chair Majoras in the 
N-Data
 case observed that the 
subsequent patent owners had, after the standard was approved, submitted their 
own licensing statements to IEEE that 
did not reflect the $1000 licensing fee 
NSC had offered to all implementers.
 (Majoras, 2012).
6 However, IEEE had 
received and published these new licensing
 statements without any objections or 
caveats. Also, as the dissent noted, ﬁfrom the time National submitted its letter 
of assurance in 1994 and at least until 2002, some patent holders changed or 

clarified the terms of their letters of assu
rance Œ even after the relevant standard 
was approved.ﬂ
7 (Majoras, 2012). This dissent questioned whether there was 
sufficient evidence to support a requisite intent by N-Data: ﬁEven if N-Data 

were motivated by a desire to strike a 
better bargain than National made several 
years earlier, that alone should not be 
considered a competition-related offense.ﬂ 
The dissent further stated that the FTC™
s discretion in applying Section 5 should 
be ﬁbounded with limiting principles,ﬂ for example, a linkage to antitrust law, 
which is an issue that is still under debate. Majoras also observed that, while the 

transfer was pending, during the time NSC™s original licensing terms were wide-
ly available, many implementers chose to
 operate as infringer
s without taking a 
license, in all likelihood because the stated
 fee ($1000) was so low as to be less 
than the related transaction costs of executing a formal license.  
In Rembrandt v Harris, 
SEPs owned by AT&T and subject to a FRAND 
license assurance, were transferred multiple times, ending up with Rembrandt, a 
                                                           
6Order at http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/0
510094/080122do.pdf and dissent at http:// 
www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/0
510094/080122majoras.pdf. 
7Id.  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.85 
Transfers of Patents with Licensing Commitments 
patent licensing entity.
8 Although Rembrandt initially questioned whether it was 
subject to AT&T™s commitment, it later acknowledged that it was bound to 

grant FRAND licenses for patent claims e
ssential to the sta
ndard because it had 
actual or constructive knowledge of the commitment when it acquired the SEPs. 
The defendant sought a FRAND license and a determination of FRAND terms, 

although it did not concede that the patent claims were ﬁessential.ﬂ The lower 
court initially concluded that a FRAND licen
se must be offered. However, this 
decision was revoked when a multi-district litigation put the patent™s validity at 

issue and the district court expressed co
ncern over the parties™ conduct in the 
case.  The issue of whether a transferee 
is bound by the FRAND commitment 
made by a prior owner has also arisen in connection with the acquisition of pa-
tent portfolios that include FRAND-encumbered SEPs. In 2011, insolvent Cana-

dian company Nortel proposed the sale of numerous assets, including approxi-
mately 4000 patents, in the bankruptcy proceeding on a ﬁfree and clearﬂ basis. A 
number of companies, together with IEEE, filed objections to the ﬁfree and 

clearﬂ nature of the sale, noting that some of the patents being auctioned were 
subject to unspecified SS
O licensing commitments. U
ltimately, a group of com-
panies, including Apple, RIM (now BlackBerry), Microsoft, Sony, and Ericsson, 

formed an entity they called Rockstar Bidco LP to acquire the patents and 
agreed to abide by Nortel™s standards licensing commitments.
9  Not long after, Google acquired Motorola Mobility, and its sizable patent 
portfolio, including numerous FRAND-encumbered SEPs. Google similarly 
stated that it would agree to be boun
d by Motorola™s commitments. The U.S. 
Department of Justice examined both the Nortel and Motorola Mobility situa-

tions and found that the acquisitions were
 not likely to substantially lessen com-
petition, recognizing both the business importance of patent sales to transferors 
and transferees and the importance of standards licensing commitments being 

respected after FRAND-encumbered SEPs are transferred.
10                                                            
8Rembrandt Tech. LP. v. Harris Corp
., 2008 Del. Super. LEXI
S 400. Del. Super., 
2008. 9The recent bankruptcy of Kodak also 
involved SEPs. In the bankruptcy Sales 
Agreement, SSO commitments are described as encumbrances to which the sale is sub-
ject as follows: ﬁThe promises, declarations and commitments granted, made or commit-
ted, in each case, in writing by Kodak to 
standards-setting organizations (ﬁSSOsﬂ) con-
cerning any of the Assigned Patents pursuan
t to the written membership agreements, 
written by-laws or written policies of SSOs in
 which Kodak was a participant, in each 
case solely to the extent that (a) Kodak is required pursuant to such promises, declara-
tions or commitments or applicable non-bankr
uptcy law to bind the Person to whom Ko-
dak transfers the Assigned Patents to such promises, declarations or commitments, and 
(b) such promises, decl
arations or commitmen
ts constitute interests in property under 
applicable U.S. federal bankruptcy Law.ﬂ  
10As noted in a speech by then acting DOJ Assistant Attorney General Joseph Way-
land, ﬁ[t]he commitments made by Apple a
nd Microsoft substantially lessened the Anti-
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.86                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
In Europe, Robert Bosch GmbH transferred FRAND-committed patents to 
IPCOM, a patent-holding company, in 
circumstances where continuation of the 
licensing assurance made by Bosch was at issue. IPCOM had been seeking in-
junctions in various jurisdictions against Nokia, HTC, and Deutsche Telekom 
with mixed results. In the Nokia dispute, Bosch and Nokia had been negotiating 

a license for Bosch™s FRAND-encumbered SEPs from 2003 to 2007, before 
Bosch assigned its mobile patents to IPCOM (ipeg, 2011). Ultimately, under the 
influence of the European Commission™s Competition Directorate, IPCOM de-

clared a FRAND commitment in 2009, but some litigation is still pending. 
In yet another case, a major DRAM manufacturer, Qimonda, filed for in-
solvency in Germany. The Qimonda administrator sent letters to the firm™s exist-
ing cross-license counterparties termina
ting those agreements, arguing that un-
der German law the administrator is aut
horized to accept or
 reject executory 
contracts in its discretion. In addition, the administrator sought to sell U.S. pa-
tents owned by Qimonda, including patents disclosed by Qimonda to the SSO 
JEDEC with a FRAND license assurance, ﬁfree and clearﬂ of encumbrances. 

The administrator asked the U.S. court not to apply U.S. law allowing patent 
licensees to reserve their rights, but to apply comity and follow German law, 
which, it alleged, did not include a license preservation right.  
The Qimonda case questioned not only whether ongoing license assuranc-
es to SSOs were at risk but also whethe
r existing license agreements might be at 
risk in a non-U.S. bankruptcy.
11 At the time of this committee™s report, after 
District Court remand, a U.S. bankruptcy court supported maintenance of licen-
see rights, observing that allowing termination would violate U.S. public policy, 
which allows IP licensees to preserve their rights, and would not adequately 

protect the interests of the parties as required by U.S. bankruptcy law. The case 
is on appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. 
A related issue arises wh
en a transferee does not 
know that patents it ac-
quires may contain SEPs attached to particular standards, may bear FRAND 
licensing commitments, or may be restricted
 by SSO policies. In the absence of 
actual or at least constructive knowledge of prior specific license terms, as in the 
N-Data
 case, it is not clear whether a tran
sferee is bound to fulfill such terms. 
Moreover, in the absence of explicit 
price commitments or generally accepted 
principles for FRAND royalty determination, it is not clear whether a transferee 
is bound to terms and conditions that would be FRAND for the transferor, who 
may have different incentives and busi
ness interests than the transferee.  
In another situation, the owner of a portfolio of SEPs for a standard might 
sell them separately to different transf
erees, which could result in implementers 
                                                                                                                               
   
trust Division™s concerns about potential anticompetitive use of F/RAND-encumbered 
standard-essential patents. The Antitrust Division observed that Google™s commitments 
did not provide the same direct confirmati
on of its F/RAND-encumbered standard essen-
tial patent licensing policies.ﬂ 
11In re Qimonda, 470 B.R. 374 (E.D. Va., 2012).  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.87 
Transfers of Patents with Licensing Commitments 
paying more for the same collection of patents than when the single owner li-
censed them as an aggregate. These and 
other such situations may be addressed 
to some extent by an SSO™s policy a
nd the restrictions it places on its FRAND-
encumbered SEP holders. However, their resolution likely will also depend on 
specific facts. Whether an SSO sees th
ese scenarios as commercial considera-
tions for parties to address or as sufficie
ntly critical and likely topics to warrant 
SSO guidance would be up to the SSO and its members. 
A further question worth br
ief discussion is whether antitrust-related con-
cerns may impact the transfer of a FR
AND-encumbered SEP. In the competition 
area, regulators typically consider a patent
 holder™s market po
wer in determining 
whether an antitrust violation has occurred. While merely having a patent does 
not necessarily confer market power,
12 the European Commission™s Directorate-
General for Competition has held that ﬁ[i]t suffices to stress that market power 

can be conferred by a single SEPﬂ when the standard constitutes a barrier to 
entry.ﬂ 13
   
The U.S. Department of Justice concurs 
that SEPs can confer market power, 
noting that 
 In particular, the agencies found that 
when a standard incorporates patent-
ed technology owned by a participant in the standard-setting process and 
that standard becomes established, switching in some cases becomes diffi-

cult and expensive, and that the particular technology may gain market 
power (Wayland, 2012). 
 The case of 
In re Proxim
 involves the intersection of antitrust and bank-
ruptcy.
14 Bankrupt Proxim sought to insulate the purchaser in a bankruptcy sale 
of patents, including SEPs, from allegations that Proxim violated the antitrust 

laws by manipulating a standard and seeking non-FRAND royalties. The bank-
ruptcy court approved the sale, rejectin
g the FTC™s objection that ﬁthe sale 
[should] not be free and cl
ear of the Commission™s regulatory and enforcement 
powers.ﬂ
15 The Bankruptcy Court noted that the sale would not be possible un-
less the new owners would be allowed to take the patents free from any concerns 

about Proxim™s conduct in standardization activities.  
Whether a prior owner™s inaction or st
atements, such as a promise to li-
cense on specified terms or a posting that 
it will not assert SEPs, can attach to a 
                                                           
12Illinois Tool Works Inc., et al., Pe
titioners v. Independent Ink, Inc.,
 547 U.S. 126 
(2006). 13Case No COMP/M.6381 Google/Motorola 
Mobility, Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 
Merger Procedure (2012). http://ec.europa
.eu/competition/mergers/cases/decisions/m63 
81_20120213_20310_2277480_EN.pdf. 14Case No. 05-11639 (pJW) (Bankr. Ct Del 2005). 
15Case No. 05- 11639 (pJW) (Bankr. Ct Del 2005). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.88                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
SEP successor-in-interest may also be go
verned by traditional law on estoppel, 
laches, and detrimental reliance and would depend on the facts in question.
16 Likewise, whether patent exhaustion or an implied license defense in which cir-
cumstances authorize a party to use patented technology without being open to 
an infringement charge by
 the transferor, may apply 
against a SEP successor-in-
interest may be governed by the 
facts and existing case law as well.
17   5.3 SSO Approaches to Sustaining Licensing Commitments 
 Some SSOs look beyond traditional contract and competition remedies to 
continue implementer access to FRAND 
licenses after a FRAND-encumbered 
SEP is transferred and to prevent a tran
sferee from asserting SEPs free from the 
FRAND commitment against implementers. Akin to the notion of a servitude or 

covenant that ﬁruns with the land,ﬂ so
me have considered a licensing commit-
ment that ﬁruns with the patent.ﬂ For ex
ample, it has been proposed that licens-
ing commitments should be interpreted as encumbrances that bind all successors 

in interest. How that premise will be view
ed by a court, and how close the real 
property analog will be viewed with respect to patents, which are deemed under 
statute to ﬁhave the attributes of pers
onal propertyﬂ (35 U.S.C. 261) are un-
known and speculative (Kesan and Hayes, 2012).
18  Although the servitude theory is uncertain, it should be noted that a num-
ber of courts and national laws have recognized that patent assignments are sub-
                                                           
16A.C. Aukerman Company v. R.
L. Chaides Construction Co
., 960 F.3d 1020, 1032 
(Fed. Cir.1992). See also 
Radio Systems Corp. v. Lalor, No 2012
-1233 (Fed. Cir. 2013) in 
which a patent holder sent an
 alleged infringer a letter and took no action for 4 ½ years 
during which there was detrimental reliance 
Œ equitable estoppel wa
s validly raised by 
the letter recipient™s successor.  
17See 
TransCore LP v. Electronic Trans
action Consultants Corporation, 563 F3d 
1271(5th  Cir 2009) (covenant not to sue was enforced by successor) and 
Rembrandt Data 
Techs., LP v. AOL, LLC
 et al.
, Case No. 10-1002 (Fed. Cir. 
2011) (patent rights exhaust-
ed despite a maze of patent transfers), 
Pratt v. Wilcox Mfg. Co.
, 64 F. 589 (N.D. Ill. 1893) 
(finding that a corporate successor was bound by its predecessor™s agreement not to sue 
another party). See also 
Wang Laboratories Inc. v. Mits
ubishi Electronics America, Inc.
, 103 F.3d 1571 (Fed. Cir. 1997)
 (implied license where Wang had entered into an agree-
ment with Mitsubishi to manufacture and 
then sell Wang-developed SIM cards back to 
Wang, where Wang did not advise Mitsubishi 
or JEDEC SSO of Wang™s patent applica-
tions). 18Notwithstanding the novel theory put forwar
d in the Kesan-Hayes presentation, the 
weight of authority and precedent appears to be against the imposition of servitudes on 
personal property. See, e.g., Thomas W. Merrill & Henry E. Smith, 
Optimal Standardiza-
tion in the Law of Property: 
The Numerus Clausus Principle
, 110 Yale L.J. 1, 18 & n.68 
(2000) (ﬁAmerican precedent is la
rgely, if not quite exclusivel
y, in accordﬂ with the prin-
ciple that ﬁone cannot create 
servitudes in personal propertyﬂ
); and Glen O. Robinson, 
Personal Property Servitudes
, 71 U.Chi. L.Rev. 1449, 1445 (2004). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.89 
Transfers of Patents with Licensing Commitments 
ject to existing licenses, although this is not necessarily the case in all jurisdic-
tions.
19   Cascading obligation 
 A common approach, adopted by a number of SSOs, to continuing licens-
ing availability after SEP transfer involv
es a ﬁcascadingﬂ contractual obligation, 
by which a patent holder making a FRAND or other licensing commitment is 

required to bind its SEP transferee to the applicable licensing commitment. 
Some policies may be interpreted as cove
ring an unspecified number of succes-
sive transfers because the new owner ag
rees to be bound by the same commit-
ment under the terms of the relevant SSO™s IPR policy. This, in turn, imposes 
the cascading requirement on those agreeing to the commitment. IEEE provides 

that the original patent owner™s transf
eree notifies and binds its transferees, 
meaning that their policy cascades.  
 The common patent policy of ITU/ISO/IEC further provides for the pass-
ing down of the licensing commitment with a SEP transfer:
20  In the event a Patent Holder participating in the work of the Organizations 
assigns or transfers ownership or control of Patents for which the Patent 
Holder reasonably believes it has made a license undertaking to the 

ITU/ISO/IEC, the Patent Holder shall 
make reasonable efforts to notify such 
assignee or transferee of the existence 
of such license undertaking. In addi-
tion, if the Patent Holder specifically identified patents to ITU/ISO/IEC, 

then the Patent Holder shall have th
e assignee or transferee agree to be 
bound by the same licensing commitment as the Patent Holder. If the Patent 
Holder did not specifically identify the patents in question to ITU/ISO/IEC, 

then it shall use reasonable efforts (but without requiring a patent search) to 
have the assignee or transferee to agr
ee to be so bound. By complying with 
the above, the Patent Holder has discharged in full all of its obligations and 
liability with regards to the licensing 
commitments after the transfer or as-
signment. This paragraph is not intended to place any duty on the Patent 

Holder to compel compli
ance with the licensing co
mmitment by the assign-
ee or transferee after 
the transfer occurs. 
                                                            
19See, e.g., 
Spindelfabrik Suessen-Schurr Stahl
ecker & Grill v. Schubert & Salzer 
Maschinenfabrik AG
, 829 F.2d 1075 (Fed. Cir. 1987) (ﬁthe viewpoint of the law in this 
country [is that] a patent assignee under nor
mal circumstances would be bound as a mat-
ter of law by its assignor™s prior grant of a license to a third partyﬂ) (quoting court be-
low). See also German Patent Law Sec
tion 15(3) and Japane
se Patent Law.  
20Guidelines for Implementation of the Co
mmon Patent Policy for ITU-T/ITU-R/ISO/ 
IEC 23/04/02. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.90                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Arguably, under these provisions the original SEP holder who binds its 
successor-in-interest is not responsible fo
r the conduct of that new owner, but 
there is some uncertainty about this vi
ew. Statements within SSO policies that 
the original participating SEP owner obligates or ensures that future successors 
will comply with the licensing assurance or that it will provide appropriate pro-

visions to achieve that end, could mean 
that the transferor is not released from 
this responsibility. In many instances, SSOs are simply silent on whether there is 
a discharge of the original patent holder. To address any potential risks in this 

context, a SEP owner who participates in an SSO might consider, in drafting the 
SEP transfer agreement, retaining the 
right to comply with licensing commit-
ments it has made. 
Special questions related to cascading obligations may arise where SSOs 
provide for blanket license assurances a
nd where SEPs may or may not have been 
specifically disclosed to the SSO. That is, SSO members may commit to licensing, 
on a FRAND or FRAND-RF basis, all patents 
that contain essent
ial patent claims, 
whether or not they have been individually disclosed or declared to the SSO.
21  The ITU/ISO/IEC common policy
 specifically addresses unidentified SEPs. 
Briefly, for those SEPs that are identified
, the patent holder binds its transferee to 
the same licensing commitment for those sp
ecific patents that are disclosed. For 
those that are not identified, an arguably lesser duty applies and the patent holder 
must use reasonable efforts to bind the 
transferee to the comm
itment for any SEPs 
that are essential to the standard in question. The policy suggests that this is ac-

complished through a contractual provision in the transfer agreement binding the 
successor to any licensing commitment the or
iginal SEP holder has made for any 
SEPs being transferred.
22  An SSO policy featuring the cascading approach may also face the ques-
tion of how an implementer may seek a FR
AND license if there is a break in the 
chain of commitment downstream. In this
 case, an implementer should be able 
to challenge the party that is at fault on one or both of two grounds Œ first, that 
he is not complying with the obligation to license the SEP on FRAND terms, or 
second, that he is not complying with 
the requirement to bind the successor-in-
interest to the FRAND commitment. However, the party at fault may not be 
readily determined or found
. If located, it may be held
 accountable to either pro-
vide a license or compensate the injured party for provable damages. However, 
once the patent is transferred, that party may not have the right to grant licenses.  
One potential problem in locating the current owner of a SEP is that, under 
current U.S. law, patent tr
ansfers need not be record
ed and the real owner may 
                                                           
21While some SSOs allow for blanket assuran
ces, others (like ETSI) focus on declared 
SEPs.  
22The relevant provision in the 
Guidelines for the Implementation of the Common Pa-
tent Policy
 currently is under revision to clarify that the holder of a FRAND-encumbered 
SEP must bind its successor-in-interest and that this obligation will cascade to future 
owners.  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.91 
Transfers of Patents with Licensing Commitments 
be unidentified. SSOs and others in the standards community concerned with 
patent transfer should support legislative, regulatory, or other measures to re-

quire recordation of patent transfers.
23 The committee recognizes that some 
parties have raised concerns about 
mandatory patent transfer recordation. One question involves the burden and 

cost such a requirement would impose. In this regard, the USPTO provides a 
simple ﬁcheck the boxﬂ and ﬁattach the tr
ansfer documentﬂ electronic filing pro-
cess. While the fee for USPTO recording has been nominal at $40, a revision to 
the USPTO fee schedule will eliminate the 
fee totally for recording a transfer 
electronically, starting January 1, 2014.
24 Some have suggested that recording 
might be more convenient if linked to payment of periodic fees to maintain the 
patent, but that would leave several multi-year periods during which ownership 
could change hands many times without actual ownership being revealed to 

standards implementers, thereby undermining transparency.  
Others have raised concerns about how much information may be sought 
in the recordation process. At this ti
me, the committee proposes that only the 
transferees be identified. In addition, 
the committee recognizes that it would be 
helpful for transparency to identify the ﬁreal
 party in interest.ﬂ This might entail 
more in-depth questions about corporate structure, however, the committee con-

cludes that the gains in transparency w
ill benefit the standardization process. 
Hence, the committee supports legislation 
or regulation, especially in the United 

States, under which recordation of transfer
ees and real parties in interest will be 
free of charge and informative about patent ownership. Such policies would 
require recordation of all assignments to achieve transparency. Like all other 
mandates, this requirement could have unintended consequences, including en-

couragement of even more opaque ownership arrangements. To the extent pos-
sible, such consequences should be antic
ipated in drafting the regulation statute. 
Some observers have proposed that SSOs take further steps to track trans-
fers, such as establishing their own tr
ansfer registry. However, the costs and 
duplication of efforts in establishing one or more recordation programs and 
maintaining responsibility for updates 
and the added burdens placed on mem-
bers in managing and monitoring SEPs and on SSOs in securing information as 

SEPs are successively transferred would make such measures difficult to im-

plement.  
The committee notes that when SSOs publicly post a membership list it 
can assist implementers in appreciating which patents might be subject to 

FRAND commitments and what risks there may be regarding patents needed to 
implement a standard. In the current co
ntext, implementers discovering that a 
patent has been transferred to an SS
O member with a FRAND commitment can 
be helpful. 
                                                           
23This issue is discussed further in Chapter 7. 
24See 4226 Federal Register/Vol. 78, No. 13/Friday, January 18, 2013/Rules and Regu-
lations Table 4 Œ Patent Fee Changes. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.92                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
ETSI is one SSO that addresses a possible break in the chain with both a 
cascading approach, whereby each
 transferor must seek to contractually bind its 
successor-in-interest to the FRAND commitm
ent, and also a statement that it is 
intended that the commitment should run with the patent and therefore bind suc-
cessive transferees.
25 Competition authorities may ta
ke action on a case-by-case 
basis to protect implementers in this regard if anti-competitive acts are found.  
As mentioned above, a bankrupt debtor, who may or may not be a trans-
feror along the chain of ownership, ca
n endeavour to sell a SEP free and clear. 
Although existing patent licenses can be preserved under U.S. law (11 U.S.C. § 
365(n)),
26 the committee knows of no precedent
 for holding that a licensing as-
surance qualifies as a patent license. As
 in the Nortel bank
ruptcy, transferees 
may agree or be ordered to be bound by the prior licensing commitments as a 
condition of acquiring the bankrupt company™s FRAND-encumbered SEPs. 

Bankruptcy is a thorny issue. SSOs should consider how the licensing assurance 
may be framed to ﬁrun with the patent,ﬂ support legislation or cases to achieve 
that end, or both. 
The cascading approach has been endorsed by competition regulators in 
numerous speeches and papers. The 
recent joint DOJ-FTC-DG Competition 
statement encourages the following ﬁimp
rovements to current IPR policies of 
SSOs:  
 IPR policies should create 
as strong a commitment 
as possible to bind fu-
ture owners of the IPR to any FRAND commitments made to the SSO. 
Clearly a FRAND commitment that becomes weaker or more vague upon 
the sale of a patent (or undermines 
a commitment to effective dispute reso-
lution) will not to be as effective in
 protecting consumers as one in which 
all FRAND obligations must be transferred in a sale (Kühn, et al., 2013). 
 
Notification 
 A second approach to addressing SEP 
transfers involves 
a patent holder 
who has made a FRAND commitment ﬁnotif
yingﬂ its SEP transferee that there 
is or may be a licensing commitment. In this case it is not clear if and how an 

implementer might force the transferee to
 grant a FRAND licen
se. Nonetheless, 
in the 
N-Data
 case, where the transferee had 
knowledge of the circumstances 
and terms of the licensing commitment, 
the FTC held the tr
ansferee to the com-
mitment and the originally stated terms.  
                                                            
25ETSI IPR Policy at http://www.
etsi.org/images
/files/IPR/etsi-ipr- policy.pdf.  ETSI 
is taking a position with similarities to ITU/ISO/IEC and IEEE.  
26This general U.S. rule has been questi
oned by a non-U.S. bankrupt party in the 
Qimonda case. SSOs might consider supporting 
case decisions or laws that prevent the 
termination of SEP patent license
s regardless of debtor location. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.93 
Transfers of Patents with Licensing Commitments 
Non-circumvention 
 A third approach is for an SSO polic
y to require members not to circum-
vent their licensing commitments by 
the transfer of FRAND-encumbered 
SEPs.27 This approach provides some protection for implementers, but its exact 
scope and effect are not known. Although it may prove to be effective, it may be 
insufficient if interpreted as requiring a 
specific intent on the part of the trans-
feror, where most tr
ansfers are effected for multiple
 reasons, or too burdensome 
if interpreted as raising possible liability 
for the transferor if any related down-
stream issue arises.  
The foregoing approaches may not exhaust all of the possible solutions, 
but they have gained some traction among SSOs. They may be more effective 
for some SSO models than others. In short, SSOs need to consider the many 

facets of this issue, as the interests of di
fferent stakeholders vary as do the laws 
in different jurisdictions that may affect implementation of the policy. 
 5.4 Recommendations for SSOs and Policymakers
  Transfers of standard-essential IP ar
e an important feature of the high-
technology marketplace, whether because
 firms seek to realize the economic 
value of their patents through selling them or because SEPs are an asset in bank-
ruptcy proceedings. Such transfers rais
e complex issues regarding the obliga-
tions and rights of transf
erors, transferees, and exis
ting and potential licensees 
along what may be a long chain of trans
actions. Judicial rulings so far provide 
only partial guidance and there are significant differences in law across coun-

tries. Nevertheless, major competition authorities generally see value in binding 
transferees to orig
inal commitments. 
The committee agrees that a FRAND commitment should travel with the 
patent when it is transferred, although there are different means and modalities 
by which that could happen. Recognizing the complexity of this legal terrain, the 
committee makes the following recommendations for SSOs and public authori-
ties to advance the proposition that licenses and licensing commitments should 
travel with the patent to minimize uncer
tainty and additional transaction costs 
for licensees.  
 Recommendation 5:1 

 Where they have not already done so, SSOs should develop meaningful 
policies by which successors in interest are bound to whatever licensing com-
                                                           
27For example, an SSO policy may address situations where a party might seek to cir-
cumvent a FRAND commitment in anticipation of
 joining the SSO or thereafter. An SSO 
policy also may just specify generally that
 a SEP holder cannot take any action that 
would result in circumvention.    
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.94                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
mitment (e.g., FRAND) the SEP owner made to the SSO in question under that 
organization™s IPR policy. This requirement should apply whether SEPs are in-

dividually disclosed or are covered by a blanket disclosure. These obligations 
should cascade through succeeding transfers. 
 
Recommendation 5:2 
 Legislation, case law, or other legal mechanisms should tie licensing 
commitments to FRAN
D-encumbered patents needed to implement SSO stand-
ards. This should be done in ways that ensure that the commitment automatical-
ly runs with the patents. 
  Recommendation 5:3 

 It may be difficult to identify patent 
transfers, because under current U.S. 
law they need not be recorded. Accordingly, public recordation with the patent 

office of transfers of all patents, should, 
as soon as practicable, be required by 
legislation or regulation. The committee believes that this approach of recording 
all patent transfers is a practical and ef
fective way of advancing transparency for 
transfers of SEPs, which may not always
 be identified as such. The record 
should identify the real party in interest. 
  
Recommendation 5:4 
 Bankruptcy concerns are especially 
complex and raise uncertainty about 
consistency of licensing commitments. SSOs should develop guidelines to en-
sure that the licensing assurances made to them remain with the patent in bank-
ruptcy proceedings and support legislatio
n, if necessary, to the same end.  
 Recommendation 5:5 
 Competition authorities and international policy negotiators should, 
through legislation or regulation, find means to reduce inconsistencies across 

national legal jurisdictions in patent-transfer issues, including in bankruptcy 
processes. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.95 
6. Injunctive Relief for  SEPs Subject to FRAND  6.1 Introduction 
 Court-ordered injunctions, which remove infringing products from a mar-
ket, typically for a period of time, are a principal remedy for patent infringe-

ment. Indeed, injunctions are intended to deter or stop such infringement. Patent 
holders are typically granted the right to petition for injunctive relief. Injunctive 
relief includes exclusion orders awarded by the U.S. International Trade Com-

mission (ITC) as well as court-awarded injunctions. An exclusion order directs 
U.S. customs authorities to stop the importation of infringing products, thereby 
barring their entry into the domestic market. 
Pursuing, or threatening to pursue, injunctive relief for patent infringement 
becomes a contentious issue when it invo
lves a standard-essential patent encum-
bered by a FRAND licensing commitment. When a patent holder makes such a 

commitment to an SSO pursuant to its IPR policy, it typically provides an assur-
ance that it is prepared to make its SEPs available on FRAND licensing terms 
and conditions to anyone implementi
ng the standard. FR
AND commitments 
provide assurances to standards implementers, who must unavoidably use tech-
nology claimed in SEPs, that reasonable licenses to those rights will be made 
available. The question then arises as to whether a SEP owner that has stated its 

willingness to license should be permitte
d to petition for inj
unctions or exclu-
sion orders against implementers. 
 This chapter considers the current debate as to how a FRAND commit-
ment should affect a SEP owner™s ability to seek, or threaten to seek, injunctive 
relief. How does the FRAND commitment operate in conjunction with the stat-

utes and case law relating to injunctive relief generally? And how does competi-
tion law affect the analysis?  
 6.2 Views of Competition Authorities 
 The Justice Department™s Antitrust Division, the U.S. Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC), and the Competition Directorate General of the European 
Commission have not only taken a strong interest in this issue but also articulat-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.96                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
ed a common position.
1 Their views result in part from the market power con-
siderations associated with SEPs and the 
use of injunctive relief by SEP holders, 
especially when the implementer in question is willing to enter into a FRAND 
license.  Patent hold-up is more likely where 
a company uses its SEPs to exclude 
competitors from the market.
2 As FTC Commissioner Ramirez testified before 
Congress in 2012, ﬁ[a] royalty negotiation that occurs under threat of an injunc-
tion or an exclusion order may be weighted heavily in favor of the patent holder 

in a way that is in tension with the RAND commitment.ﬂ As the court in 
Apple 
v. Motorola
 observed, ﬁ–once a patent become
s essential to a standard, the pa-
tentee™s bargaining power surges becaus
e a prospective licensee has no alterna-
tive to licensing the patent; he is at the patentee™s mercy.ﬂ
3 Consumers may be 
harmed by this practice, whether through higher royalty payments passed on to 

them in the form of higher prices or fe
wer products on the market as a result of 
injunctive relief.  

 
The Commissioner for Competition of the European Commission has expressed 
similar concerns (Alumnia, 2012):  
 To build a smartphone one needs thousands of standard-essential patents. 
The holders of these patents have considerable market power and can ef-
fectively hold-up the entire industry with the threat of banning competi-

tors™ products from the market through injunctions for patent infringe-
ments. 
By threatening to use injunctions, 
these companies can also make de-
mands that their commercial partne
rs would not accept under normal cir-
cumstances.  

For example, fearing exclusion from
 the market, companies might be 
forced to share valuable patented inventions with a competitor or pay ex-
cessive royalties which are then passed on to consumers. 
 
There is a consensus among competition authorities that injunctive relief in con-
nection with a FRAND-encumbered SEP sh
ould be a remedy of last resort.
4 They have uniformly taken the position that potential licensees who are willing 
to enter into a license agreement on FRAND terms must have the opportunity to 
                                                 1It should be noted that the associated pos
ition statements are somewhat case-specific 
and the policies are works in progress. 
2The general analysis of hold-up is
 in Chapter 3 of this report. 
3Opinion and Order of Judge Richard Posner in 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc., June 22, 2012 in the District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Case No. 1:11-cv-08540. 
4See FTC Senate Testimony, 2012; DOJ Se
nate Testimony, 2012; DG Competition 
Press Release, 2012. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.97 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
have disputes between the parties resolved before any injunctive relief can be 
pursued against them.
5  On the other hand, competition authorities have not taken the position that 
injunctions on SEPs should be barred in all circumstances. Barring injunctions 
outright could incentivize some implementers of an industry standard to forgo 

negotiating a license ﬁ–if its worse-case outcome after litigation is to pay the 
same amount it would have paid earlier for a license.ﬂ (Department of Justice, 
2013; U.S. Patent and Trademark Office,
 2013). Some argue that an implement-
er who is offered a truly FRAND license 
has incentives to enter into the license 
instead of incurring litigation and other costs. Others claim that such an imple-
menter may also have interests in delaying negotiation and licensing costs and in 
having the SEP owner incur expenses in commencing an infringement action. 
The competition agencies™ position that a FRAND commitment limits, but 
does not ban, injunctive relief has led to a debate over when injunctions for a 
FRAND-encumbered patent may be sought. In this debate, implementers gener-
ally argue that the costs and uncertainties of litigation provide a strong incentive 

to accept a license on reasonable terms a
nd conditions instead of filing lawsuits 
and incurring related costs contesting those terms, especially when the SEP 
holder always can bring an action based on infringement and asking for mone-

tary relief. SEP holders counter that the benefits of delaying negotiation and 
licensing costs will often outweigh the expected costs of litigation for a prospec-
tive licensee, making the threat of injunc
tive relief a necessary tool to bring 
ﬁunwillingﬂ licensees to the bargaining table. 
By the end of 2012 there were at least four companies under investigation 
by one or more of these competition agencies regarding their efforts to seek in-

junctive relief based on a FRAND-encumb
ered SEP. The FTC has finalized one 
consent decreeŠthe 
FTC-Bosch Consent DecreeŠ
on April 24, 2013 and pro-
posed another one in 
FTC-Google Consent Decree
, 2013.
6 These consent de-
crees will restrict the SEP owner™s ability to seek injunctive relief except for 
certain specific scenarios where it can be 
demonstrated that the implementer is 
not a ﬁwilling licensee.ﬂ  
 The FTC describes the proposed consent decree in Bosch as follows: 

 The FTC alleged that, as a member 
of SAE International, SPX agreed 
to abide by SAE rules that require 
companies to license their SEPs on 
FRAND terms. However, SPX allegedly reneged on these commit-
ments and pursued injunctions blocking competitors from using the 
standardized technologies, even though the competitors were willing to 
                                                 5See DOJ and PTO, 2013; FTC Apple Brie
f, 2012; DG Competition Press Release, 
2012. 6Consent decrees represent a settlement agreement between the FTC and a targeted 
company. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.98                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
license the technology on FRAND terms. The FTC charged that this 
practice had the tendency of harming competition and undermining the 
standard setting process– 
To address the FTC™s concerns about SPX™s conduct relating to its ex-
isting portfolio of SEPs, the proposed order requires Bosch not to pur-
sue any actions for injunctive relief on these patents and to make them 
available on a royalty free basis to implementers of the relevant SAE 
standards in the ACRRR market–. Bosc
h also has agreed not to seek 
an injunction against such third parties, unless the third party refuses in 
writing to license the patent consistent with the letter of assurance, or 
the third party refuses to abide by FRAND terms as determined by a 
court or other process agreed to by the parties.
7  In November 2011, Directorate-General 
for Competition issued a public state-
ment confirming that it was investigating whether Samsung™s enforcement of 
SEPs violated EU competition laws (Rob
inson and Torello, 2011). In December 
2012, the agency sent a formal complain
t to Samsung, stating that Samsung™s 
claims for injunctive relief against a willing licensee on the basis of its SEPs 
ﬁamounts to an abuse of a dominant pos
ition prohibited by EU antitrust rulesﬂ 
(European Commission, 2012): 
 Today™s Statement of Objections sets out the Commission™s preliminary 
view that under the specific circumst
ances of this case, where a commit-
ment to license SEPs on FRAND terms has been given by Samsung, and 

where a potential licensee, in this cas
e Apple, has shown itself to be will-
ing to negotiate a FRAND license for the SEPs, then recourse to injunc-
tions harms competition. Since injunctions generally involve a prohibition 
of the product infringing the patent being sold, such recourse risks exclud-

ing products from the market without justification and may distort licens-
ing negotiations unduly in the SEP-holder™s favour. The preliminary view 
expressed in today™s Statement of Objections does not question the availa-
bility of injunctive relief for SEP holders outside the specific circumstanc-
es present in this case, for exampl
e in the case of unwilling licensees. 
 In addition, on May 6, 2013, DG Competition sent a formal complaint to 
Motorola Mobility. The complaint argues that the company™s attempt to seek 

and enforce an injunction against Apple in Germany on the basis of its mobile-
phone SEPs constitutes an abuse of a dominant position. While noting that re-
course to injunctions is a possible remedy for patent infringements, such conduct 

may be abusive where it involves SEPs and the potential licensee is willing to 
                                                 7In the Matter of Robert Bosch GmbH
, No. C-4377 (Nov. 26, 2012). It is noted that 
the Bosch matter arises in the context of a specific merger transaction. See http://www. 
ftc.gov/opa/2012/11/bosch.shtm. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.99 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
take a FRAND license. The complaint st
ates that ﬁ–the Commission considers 
at this stage that dominant SEP holders should not have recourse to injunctions, 

which generally involve a prohibition to sell the product infringing the patent, in 
order to distort licensing negotiations and impose unjustified licensing terms on 
patent licensees. Such misuse of SEPs could ultimately harm consumers.ﬂ
8  These and similar actions remain pending. The committee notes that, to 
date, there have been few factual showings of prices harming consumers in the 
smartphone industry or of the actions of
 SEP owners impacting competition or 
entry into the market.  
Although competition authorities in the United States and Europe have 
expressed concerns over seeking inju
nctions for SEPs implemented by willing 
licensees, their ability to address such problems is often limited to 
ex post ac-
tions addressing specific instances of pr
ior conduct. For this and other reasons, 
the agencies have expressed a preference 
for SSOs to provide more information 
ex ante as to the effect of a FRAND commi
tment in order to prevent disputes 
from arising later. As DOJ representative, Fiona Scott Morton observed in 2012: 

 One question that I have been asked is
, ‚What™s so special about standard-
essential patents versus other patents?™ Standard-essential patents achieve 

their status through the collective 
action at the SSOs. Harm can occur 
when companies come together and 
bestow market power on each other 
by agreeing on a common technolo
gy. FRAND commitments are designed 
to reduce occurrences of opportunistic or exploitative conduct in the im-
plementation of standards... If the 
FRAND commitments are so vague and 
ill-defined as to have little meaning, then consumers may not realize all 

the benefits of the standard– 
 As suggested by the statements quoted a
bove, an important i
ssue in these cases 
is who is a willing licensee and how that may be determined, an inquiry revolv-
ing around different facts patterns. As 
noted above, some regulatory agencies 
have taken the position that the prospective licensee has to state that it is willing 
to enter into a truly FRAND license and that the SEP holder must refrain from 
seeking injunctive relief, if there are an
y related disputes between the parties, 
until such disputes have been fully adjudicated by a court of competent jurisdic-
tion. 
                                                 8See the DG Competition press release at h
ttp://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-13-
406_en.htm. It should be note
d that Google offered license
s on terms (including a 2.25% 
royalty) to which DG Competition did not object during the merger of Motorola Mobility 
(MM) into Google, because they were the same terms offered previously by MM and 
therefore ﬁ–would not substantially alter cu
rrent market dynamicsﬂ
 (http://www.justice. 
gov/opa/pr/2012/February/12-at-210.html
). Further, Microsoft did not respond to this 
offer, instead filing a complaint in a U.S. 
District Court, which prompted the MM filing 
in Germany on which an injunction was granted.
 A U.S. District Court later issued an 
order preventing MM from enforcing that injunction. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.100                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Competition agencies are l
ooking to SSOs as a first line of defense in pre-
venting FRAND abuse. ﬁSSOs that set forth well-defined patent policy rules that 

minimize ambiguity can effectively promote competition.ﬂ The DOJ has sug-
gested that ﬁ–Standard bodies might want to explore setting guidelines for what 
constitutes a FRAND rate.ﬂ In short, ﬁ– standards bodies whose members 

choose to take steps such as these will help the market for the standardized 
product to work efficiently by lowering
 costs, increasing transparency and re-
ducing uncertaintyŠall of which benefit innovation and competitionﬂ (Scott-

Morton, 2012; Hesse, 2012).
9  Former chief economists of the DOJ™s Antitrust Division and the FTC, to-
gether with a DG Competition spokesperson (Kühn, et al., 2013), have suggested 
that SSOs clarify that 
 The FRAND commitment should include a 
process that SEP owners must 
follow before they can seek an injuncti
on or exclusion order by the licensor. 
This process would include specifying what steps must be taken by parties 

to resolve disputes over a FRAND™s rate
, validity, essentiality, or infringe-
ment before an injunction or an exclusion order may be sought against the 
licensee. Reducing the ability of licenso
rs to threaten to exclude a product 
from the market will reduce the ability 
of the licensor to extract royalties 
above the FRAND rate and other signifi
cant licensing conditions from will-
ing licensees. The essence of the FR
AND commitment is that the firm has 
voluntarily chosen to accept royalties 
rather than pursue a business model 
based on exclusion. This suggests that 
there can be no irreparable harm from 
the use of the SEP. Limits on the use of injunctions or exclusion orders are 

therefore appropriate.  
 6.3 U.S. and European Case Law 
 Although the committee has not found any statistical data on the frequen-
cy of companies seeking injunctions on SEPs, the issue has been highly publi-
cized in the past few years, primarily 
in the context of smartphones and other 
electronic devices. As mobile phones evolved from being a device for making 

telephone calls into what are actually powerful, miniature computers, the num-
ber of patented features included in smartphones increased substantially (Scott-
Morton, 2012; Yeh, 2012). At the same time, new competitors have entered the 

smartphones market, each with a different level of R&D investment directed at 
hardware and software improvements (Chia, 2012). 
Patenting, competition, and standards activity and related litigation have 
all increased in recent year
s, with cases in both federal district courts and the 
U.S. International Trade Commission. SEPs have been the subject of some of 
that litigation, either as the basis of an in
fringement claim, or as a countersuit or 
                                                 9It must be noted that the Hesse and Scott-Morton statements are ideas in progress and 
were not intended to stat
e formal DOJ positions.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.101 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
counterclaim. To some degree, infringement complaints based on SEPs may be 
easier to prove simply because companies 
build their products to comply with 
the relevant interoperability standards. In some instances, companies asserting 
FRAND-encumbered SEPs have sought inju
nctive relief as part of those claims 
(Federal Trade Commission, 2011). In this context, SEP owner plaintiffs gener-

ally allege that defendants resist accepti
ng FRAND terms or refuse to enter into 
negotiations for licenses.  
Companies defending against infringement
 actions based on SEPs have ar-
gued that seeking such relief violated th
e SEP owner™s earlier assurance to license 
implementers on FRAND terms. These cases
 have highlighted 
that the SEP hold-
ers were seeking injunctive relief at the same time that disputes regarding FRAND 
terms and conditions were being litigated 
in a different venue. In some cases, fur-
thermore, infringement is being litigated in the International Trade Commission 

where the only outcome offering relief is an exclusion order, not an award of 
monetary damages. The Commission is 
expected to assess FRAND commitments 
when SEPs are involved, as happened in the recent Samsung v. Apple
 case.
10  The issue of whether the owner of a SE
P can seek injunctive relief has aris-
en in a number of different venues, as explained below.  
 
United States District Courts 
 In district court, both injunctions and monetary damages are possible rem-
edies for patent infringement (35 U.S.C. § 283, 35 U.S.C § 284). At one time, 
district courts generally granted permanent injunctions to patent owners whose 
patents were found to be valid and infringed. However, following the Supreme 

Court™s decision in 
eBay v. MercExchange, 
injunctions for patent infringement 
are no longer virtually automatic, and district courts must apply a test based on 
four traditional criteria. A plaintiff seek
ing an injunction is required to show 
proof of irreparable harm, the inadequacy of money damages, that the remedy is 
warranted after considering the balance of hardships between the parties, and 
that the public interest would not be disserved by an injunction.
11  Following the 
eBay decision, defendants in infringement claims involving 
SEPs have argued that permanent injunctions should not be available for 

FRAND-encumbered SEPs. SEP owners al
ready have voluntarily committed to 
license their SEPs on FRAND terms as a 
quid pro quo
 for having their patented 
technology included in the standard. Further, they argue that monetary damages 
                                                 10To clarify, the ITC has not
 evaluated FRAND in the se
nse of taking a position on 
what the term means, or whether proposed 
terms in a negotiation are FRAND. Instead, it 
argued in this case that FRAND is not a 
per se
 ban on exclusion orders, and that Apple 
failed to provide an affirmat
ive defense in the form of a 
evidence that Samsung violated 
the commitment. More commentary is provided 
in a sub-section below. See also Disap-
proval of the ITC™s Ruling in Investigation Number 337-TA-794 (
Samsung v. Apple
) http://www.ustr.gov/sites/defa
ult/files/08032013%20Letter_1.pdf. 
11eBay v. MercExchange, 
L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388 (2006). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.102                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
always are adequate to address any resulting harm and therefore the 
eBay
 stand-
ard of irreparable harm cannot be satisfied. 

 Judge Richard Posner, in a recent pate
nt infringement case between Motorola 
and Apple,12 agreed with these argu
ments. Posner wrote: 
 To begin with Motorola™s injunctive claim, I don™t see how, given FRAND, 
I would be justified in enjoining Apple from infringing the ‚898 unless Ap-

ple refuses to pay a royalty that 
meets the FRAND requirement. By commit-
ting to license its patent
s on FRAND terms, Motorola committed to license 
the ‚898 to anyone willing to pay a FRAND royalty and thus implicitly 
acknowledged that a royalty is adequate compensation for a license to use 
that patent. How could it do otherwise? How could it be permitted to enjoin 

Apple from using an invention that it contends Apple 
must use if it wants to 
make a cell phone with UMTS telecommunications capabilityŠwithout 
which it would not be a cell 
phone.ﬂ13  Moreover, the court denied Motorola™s argument that because Apple refused to 
accept its initial royalty offer it was entitled 
to seek an injunction. This refusal 
did not excuse Motorola from meeting its FRAND obligation. 
Similarly, Judge James Robart, in the case between Motorola and Microsoft 
echoed these sentiments.
14 Judge Robart wrote: 
 The court is unconvinced by Motorola™s argument that it has or will suffer 
irreparable harm to it
s goodwill and re
putation because a compulsory li-
cense agreement would encourage others 
to infringe Motorola™s standard es-
sential patents. This is not the case. The court™s prior rulings have made 
clear that Microsoft, as an implementer of the H.264 Standard, must accept a 

RAND license to Motorola™s
 standard essential patents. Indeed, Microsoft, 
or any other implementer, is not free to infringe Motorola™s standard essen-
tial patents, and were that to occur, this court™s ruling with respect to injunc-
tive relief may be different. The natu
re of Motorola™s RAND commitments, 
however, obligates Motorola to grant RAND licenses to any and all imple-

menters of the H.264 Standard. As the court has explained, in the situation 
where a standard essential patent hol
der and an implementer reach an im-
passe during negotiations of a RAND li
cense, the courthouse may be the on-
ly forum to adjudicate the rights of the patentee and the third-party benefi-
ciary of the RAND commitment. Certai
nly, easily measurable litigation 
costs to enforce one™s rights ca
nnot constitute irreparable harm.
                                                   12Opinion and Order of Judge Richard Posner in 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc.
, June 22, 
2012 in the District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Case No. 1:11-cv-08540. 
13The court also held that the implementer had no duty to negotiate if the offer was 
viewed as ﬁnot FRAND.ﬂ 
14Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc.
, (LEXIS 170587, W.D. Wash, Nov. 29, 2012). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.103 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
Judge Robart™s decision barred the SEP owner from seeking an injunction 
on FRAND-encumbered SEPs in other jurisdictions, pending the court™s deter-

mination of an appropriate FRAND royalty.
15  On May 20, 2013, District Judge Whyte issued a similar decision, finding 
that the defendants breached their FRAND licensing obligations in connection 

with the IEEE 802.11 standard by failing to offer a license to Realtek, or to ne-
gotiate one, before seeking an exclusion order and injunctive relief at the ITC.
16 According to Judge Whyte™s 
decision, ﬁThis conduct is a clear attempt to gain 
leverage in future licensing negotiations and is improper.ﬂ The court also issued 
a preliminary injunction against the defendants preventing them from enforcing 
any such exclusion order or injunction until the court determines FRAND terms 
and Realtek refuses to accept such terms. Re
altek can preserve its right to appeal 
and maintain any arguments it may have relating to infringement, validity, and 

the like.  
Judge Posner™s ruling has been appealed and a number of amicus briefs 
have been filed in support of each party, including an FTC brief in support of the 

decision. Critics of the ruling argue that Judge Posner improperly creates a cate-
gorical rule prohibiting injunctive relief in the FRAND context.
17 These critics 
argue that existing law, including the 
eBay decision and Section 337 of the 1930 
Tariff Act, provides a framework for de
termining facts and weighing equities in 
order to assess whether injunctive relief is
 appropriate. Within this framework, a 
FRAND commitment is one fact that may 
weigh against a finding of ﬁirrepara-
ble harmﬂ or ﬁinadequacy of damages as a remedyﬂ and, hence, an 
eBay
 review 
would operate against an injunction. Howe
ver, in other instances, these factors 
may be weighed differently.
18  Further complex issues arise in judici
al deliberations over the appropriate-
ness of injunctions when FRAND commitments have been made. One is the 
                                                 15Similarly, as Judge Posner stated in 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc.
, 2012: ﬁTo begin 
with Motorola™s injunctive claim, I don™t s
ee how, given FRAND, I would be justified in 
enjoining Apple from infringing the ‚898 unless A
pple refuses to pay a royalty that meets 
the FRAND requirement. By committing to 
license its patent
s on FRAND terms, 
Motorola committed to license the ‚898 to 
anyone willing to pay a FRAND royalty and 
thus implicitly acknowledged that a royalty is
 adequate compensation for a license to use 
that patent. How could it do otherwise? How could it be permitted to enjoin Apple from 
using an invention that
 it contends Apple 
must use if it wants to make a cell phone with 
UMTS telecommunications capabilityŠwit
hout which it would not be a cell 
phone
.ﬂ  
16Realtek Semiconductor Corp. v. LSI Corp. and Agere Systems LLC
, Case No. C-12-
03451-RMW (N.D. CA May 20, 2013).  
17See ﬁBrief of Amicus Curiae Qualcomm In
corporated in Support of Reversalﬂ in 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola
, 2012. 
18An earlier example was 
CSIRO v. Buffalo, 492 F. Supp. 2d 600, 2007 U.S. Dist. 
LEXIS 43832 (ED Texas 2007). In this case, a non-
practicing SEP holder (an Australian 
government scientific research organization)
 was awarded an injunction by demonstrat-
ing that an existing infringement precluded its
 ability to license its patent because other 
implementers could thereby be encouraged to infringe. 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.104                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
question of what defenses should be available to an implementer when facing a 
potential injunction. Some argue that the implementation should be limited to 

asserting the existence of
 a FRAND commitment where an injunction is pend-
ing, while others argue that the implementer should be able to raise any related 
claims and defenses (such as validity, enforceability and non-infringement). 

According to the later view, these defens
es may have a direct impact on the 
FRAND determination, including what 
would constitute a reasonable royalty 
rate (as prospective licensees are not re
quired to compensate the patent holder 
for invalid, non-infringed and non-enforceable patents). Having all of the issues 
resolved in the same adjudication arguably
 is the most efficient way to resolve 
the entire dispute between the parties, as opposed to focusing solely on whether 
the SEP holder breached its commitment. 
Others, more sympathetic to SEP owners, contend that, whether in arbitra-
tion or litigation, permitting an open-ended presentation of all factors risks inju-
rious delay. Moreover, there may be con
cerns about the costs and prejudice to 
the SEP owner if every issue must be resolved before a determination can be 

made as to whether it has complied with its FRAND commitment.  
 International Trade Commission 

 The issue of the availability of injunctive relief for SEPs also has arisen at 
the ITC, an independent federal agency. 
The ITC conducts investigations into 
allegations of unfair practices in connec
tion with imports in violation of Section 
337 of the Tariff Act of 1930, including infringement of intellectual property 
rights. Under Section 337, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Agency 

stops the importation of products that infringe IPR into the United States where 
the ﬁ–effect is (i) to destroy or substantially injure an industry in the United 
States; (ii) to prevent the establishment of 
such an industry; or (iii) to restrain or 
monopolize trade and commerce in the United States–ﬂ
19 Thus, a basic criteri-
on is the effect on domestic industry. An order is granted ﬁ–unless, after con-
sidering the effect of such exclusion upon
 the public health and welfare, compet-
itive conditions in the United States economy, the production of like or directly 
competitive articles in the United States, and United States consumers, it finds 

that such articles should not be excluded from entry.ﬂ
20  A SEP owner must satisfy Section 337™s ﬁdomestic industryﬂ requirement 
in order for the ITC to adjudicate the dispute. This requirement is fulfilled if a 

patent holder can show significant investment in plant and equipment, signifi-
cant employment of labor or capital, or substantial investment in the patent™s 
exploitation, including engineering, research and development, or licensing.
21                                                   1919 U.S.C. § 337(a)(1)(A). 
2019 U.S.C. § 337(a)(3)(A)-(C). 
21Note also that in the ITC context, the identity of a party may affect remedies in 
transfer cases. The transfer of a SEP from 
a non-U.S. company to a U.S. company could 
influence whether the domestic 
industry requirement to achieve
 relief is satisfied. Also, 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.105 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
After the ITC makes a finding of patent infringement following an expe-
dited administrative hearing process, potential remedies include a cease-and-

desist order and an exclusion order. Unlike in U.S. district court, monetary dam-
ages are not available in the ITC for patent infringement. This suggests that the 
holders of a FRAND-encumbered SEP seek relief at the ITC for purposes other 

than to seek such monetary compensati
on from an implementer of a standard. 
The cease-and-desist order prohibits the 
defendant from selling or distributing 
infringing articles from existing inventory inside the United States. The exclu-

sion order bars infringing articles from entering the United States. Plaintiffs in 
several Section 337 actions have argued that they are entitled to seek an exclu-
sion order because the defendant is infrin
ging their patent(s) and the plaintiff™s 
case otherwise meets all of the ITC™s stat
ed requirements. The defendants have 
responded with arguments that an exclusion order based on a FRAND-

encumbered SEP is inconsistent with th
e public interest. Section 337 allows the 
ITC to consider a number of ﬁpublic interest factorsﬂ when determining whether 
to grant an exclusion order or a cease-and-de
sist order, such as the public health 
and welfare, competitive conditions in the United States economy, and United 
States consumers.
22   
Similar to the cases in dist
rict court, defendants have argued that a SEP owner™s 
FRAND promise forecloses its ability to seek injunctive relief.
23 The FTC has 
encouraged the ITC to adopt such a rule, but the ITC has so far not done so. The 

FTC has urged 
 RAND-encumbered SEPs present consid
erably different issues. A RAND 
commitment provides evidence that the SEP owner planned to monetize its 
IP though broad licensing on reasonable terms rather than through exclusive 
use. Consistent with the proper role of the patent system, remedies that re-

duce the chance of patent hold-up asso
ciated with RAND-encumbered SEPs 
can encourage innovation by increasing certainty for firms investing in 
standards-compliant products and complementary technologies. Such reme-
dies may also prevent th
e price increases associated with patent hold-up 
without necessarily reducing incentives to innovate.
24   This issue of injunction orders under infringed FRAND-encumbered patents 
also is on appeal to the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, an appellate 
                                                                                                             whether a transferee is or should be 
bound by a FRAND licensing commitment may be a 
significant factor that the ITC will need
 to consider under its statutory framework. 
2219 U.S.C. §§ 337(d)(1) & (f)(1). 
23Gaming & Entertainment Consoles Reco
mmended Determination, 2012; Wireless 
Communication Devices Initial
 Determination, 2012.  
24FTC 
Wireless Communication Devices
 Brief, 2012. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.106                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
court that hears appeals from ITC actions.
25 Under Section 337, the question 
may be if or how and when noncompliance with a FRAND commitment creates 

a public-interest exception, based on adverse effects on competitive conditions 
or U.S. consumer interests, that can pr
evail over ITC relief available when there 
is harm to a domestic industry caused by a patent infringement.  
The extent to which such issues are in
 flux is illustrated by the recent case 
InterDigital Communications, Inc., et al v. Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., et al, 
with relevance to both the courts and the ITC.
26 Here, a court did not accelerate 
a FRAND determination when the ITC was 
considering an exclusion order. In a 
proceeding involving InterDigital patents,
 Huawei unsuccessfully asked the ITC 
to stay its exclusion orde
r proceeding until the district
 court determined FRAND 
(Rizzolo, 2013). The Delaware district court was asked to expedite discovery on 
the FRAND issue, but refused. In the order, the court denied defendant™s mo-

tions for expedited discovery and trial on their counterclaims to determine a 
FRAND royalty for three patents. The court concluded that ﬁThe gist of the re-
quest is that each Defendant will be harmed if its products are excluded from the 

U.S. by the lTC, that the ITC cannot set a FRAND rate, and that the Plaintiff 
will not offer it a FRAND rate although 
it has an obligation to do so–.ﬂ The 
court did not consider it ﬁpracticableﬂ to
 ﬁ–race to a partial judgment here so 
that each defendant will be in a better 
position in the ITC litigation.ﬂ The judge 
denied the motion for expedited discovery and trial. 
In another case, Samsung sought an exclusion order in the ITC against 
Apple based on FRAND-encumbered SEPs
 relating to the Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications Standard (UMTS) for 3G mobile cellular systems for net-
works. The ITC ultimately issued an exclusion order that would prevent Apple 

from importing certain iPhone and iPad models into the United States, with one 
Commissioner dissenting on the ground that the infringed patent was subject to a 
FRAND licensing commitment and public interest considerations weighed 

against the exclusion of the Apple products. The Commission, among other 
grounds, found that Apple did not show that a FRAND commitment precludes 
exclusion orders under Section 337; that Apple failed to ﬁprovide a proper legal 
interpretation of the FRAND declarations at issueﬂ; and that Apple did not show 
that the claims at issue were SEPs 
and that a FRAND commitment was warrant-
ed and, if it was, that Samsung had fa
iled to comply with the commitment. On 
August 3, 2013, the Obama Administration through a letter from the U.S. Trade 
Representative Michael Froman, disapproved the exclusion order stating that 

ﬁ[t] his decision is based on my review
 of the various policy considerations
 discussed above as they re
late to the effect on comp
etitive conditions in the 
U.S. economy and
 the effect on U.S. consumers.ﬂ This is the first time an 
                                                 25Opinion and Order of Judge Richard Posner in 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc
., June 22, 
2012 in the District Court for the Northern District of Illinois, Case No. 1:11-cv-08540. 
26InterDigital Communications Inc., et. al. v.
 Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd., et. al.
, 1-13-cv-00008 (D Del March 14, 2013). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.107 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
Administration has veto an
 ITC exclusion order during the past 26 years.
27 The veto letter elaborated, 

 I would like to underscore that in a
ny future cases involving SEPs that 
are subject to voluntary
 FRAND commitments, the Commission should 
be certain to (1) to 
examine thoroughly and
 carefully on its own initia-
tive the public interest issues pr
esented both at the outset of its
 proceed-ing and when determining whether a pa
rticular remedy is in the public 
interest and (2)
 seek proactively to have th
e parties develop a compre-
hensive factual record
 related to these
 issues in the proceedings before 
the Administrative Law Judge a
nd during the formal remedy
 phase of the investigation before the Commi
ssion, including information on the 
standards essential nature of the patent 
at issue if contested by the pa-
tent holder and the presence or
 absence of patent 
hold-up or reverse 
hold-up. In addition, the Co
mmission should make explicit
 findings on 
these issues to the maximum
 extent possible. I will look for these ele-
ments in any
 future decisions involving FRAND-encumbered SEPs that 
are presented for policy review.
28  
In short, jurisprudence is developing in
 this area, as more cases addressing the 
intersection of FRAND and injunctive relief arise.  
 
European Courts 
 Similar to the United States, SEP owners have filed lawsuits seeking in-
junctions for patent infringement in various national courts in EU member 
states. As in the United States, European court outcomes have not established 
clear, uniform ju
risprudence.  
Some courts have been reluctant to grant injunctive relief in connection 
with FRAND-encumbered SEPs. For exam
ple, a 2012 judgment of the Higher 
Regional Court of Karlsruhe in Germany overturned a ruling of a lower court 
that had granted an injunction for a SEP on the basis that a request to restrict 
sales would infringe EU competition law.
29 Similar rulings involving other com-
panies were issued by courts in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands.
30 In 
                                                 27The ITC awarded Apple an exclusion orde
r against Samsung for certain of its prod-
ucts, based on non-SEP patents, shortly after 
the President disapproved the ITC order for 
Samsung against certain Apple products.  
28See http://www.ustr.gov/sites/default/files/08032013%20Letter_1.pdf
. 29Motorola v. Apple
, 2012, Higher Regional Court of 
Karlsruhe, Federal Republic of 
Germany, Case No. 6 U 136/11. 
30(IPCom v Nokia and HTC
 [2012] EWCA Civ 567); 
Samsung v. Apple 
District Court 
of The Hague, 20 June 2012, case num
bers/docket numbers 400367/HA ZA 11-2212, 
400376/HA ZA 11-2213 and 400385/HA ZA 11-2215. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.108                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
December 2012, a SEP owner withdrew app
lications for injunctions before the 
national courts in five EU national jurisdictions.
31  Nevertheless, injunctions have been granted in some SEP cases, particu-
larly by the national courts in Germany. For example, in May 2012 the Regional 
Court of Mannheim granted a SEP owner an injunction, concluding that such 

action did not violate EU antitrust law.
32 In doing so, the Mannheim court con-
sidered the application of the ﬁOrange Bookﬂ defense and determined it did not 
apply. The Orange Book defense is established by a ruling of the German Su-

preme Court which found that an owner of a FRAND-encumbered SEP abuses 
its dominant position if it refuses to grant a license or seeks injunctive relief 
when certain conditions are satisfied, including 
inter alia 
that a potential licen-
see has made an irrevocable, unconditional and binding royalty offer to the SEP 
owner to conclude a license agreement and the potential licensee pays this 

amount to the SEP owner or into escrow. 
The Mannheim court™s interpretation of the Orange Book
 test does not re-
quire that a potential licensee™s monetary offer be based on FRAND. Instead, the 

Mannheim court has taken the position that a potential licensee must offer a roy-
alty that is just short of being ﬁclearly
 excessiveﬂ before a SEP owner™s refusal 
of the offer becomes abusive. Because 
there likely is a difference between a 
ﬁreasonableﬂ royalty and a ﬁclearly ex
cessiveﬂ royalty, the Mannheim court™s 
decision arguably raises the bar for pot
ential licensees to successfully challenge 
a SEP injunction by invoking the Orange Book defense in the German courts. 
Reflecting the developing law across different EU Member States, a Dutch 
case took issue with the crite
ria for the assessment of the defense established in 
the German Orange Book decision. In 
Philips v. Kassetten (Hague), 2010,
 a 
FRAND commitment by a patent holder was found not to be a defense to patent 
enforcement, including inj
unction. In that case, involving CD and DVD tech-
nology, the Dutch court found that the Ge
rman ﬁOrange Bookﬂ 
decision is con-
trary to Dutch patent law, 
creates legal uncertainty, and is unnecessary to protect 
the interests of the defendant. Instead, the court ruled that an implementer 
should seek a license and, if it is not granted, go to court to seek an interim in-
junction to preclude suit against it, or a 
temporary license to the SEP, or damag-
es if the licensee™s proposed offer is found to be reasonable.
33 The inconsistency of the law across the European Union is further under-
scored by the 
Motorola v. Microsoft
 case. While the Germ
an court issued an 
injunction, a U.S. District Court in Washington barred Motorola from enforcing 
                                                 31ﬁSamsung Drops Injunctions Applicatio
ns Against Apple,ﬂ by Vanessa Mock, 
The 
Wall Street Journal
, December 18, 2012. (http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887 
324407504578187043081010804.html. 
32Motorola v. Microsoft,
 2012, Regional Court of Ma
nnheim, Federal Republic of 
Germany, Case No. 2 O 240/11.  
33Koninklijke Philips Electronics N.V. v. SK Kassetten GmbH & Co
. District Court 
The Hague, The Netherlands, 17 March 
2010, Joint Cases No. 316533/HA ZA 08-2522 
and 316535/HA ZA 08-2524. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.109 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
that injunction pending the court™s determination of an appropriate FRAND roy-
alty.34 The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit found that the district 
court did not abuse its discretion and upheld its ruling.
35 In considering this his-
tory it is worth noting that in most countries, as in the United States prior to the 
eBay case, injunctions are granted almost
 automatically when a valid patent is 
found to be infringed. Thus, regulatory agencies and implementers are seeking 
legal means by which the FRAND commitment limits that premise.  
Because this case involves 
one jurisdiction and one set of specific facts, it 
is unclear what practical effects this decision will have on European injunctions 
where the SEP owner has a FRAND licensing commitment or, more generally, 
on how injunctions in one country may be viewed by courts in other countries.
36 It is worth noting in this context that similar ambiguity exists regarding whether 
courts of various nations feel bound by particular IPR policies of SSOs.  
A potentially more definitive case in Europe emerges from the March 
2013 order by the Dusseldorf Regional Court referring to the Court of Justice of 
the European Union (CJEU) five fundamental questions about remedies availa-

ble to SEP holders where infringement has been found. The case, 
Huawei v. ZTE (no. 4b O 104/12) involves two Chinese 
electronics companies. The court found 
that ZTE had infringed patents Huawei ha
d declared essential to the 4G/LTE 
cellular telecommunications standard. Ho
wever, in light of the December 2012 
European Commission (DG-Competition) Statements of Objection (SO) to Sam-
sung over its attempt to get SEP-based injunctions against Apple, the court de-

cided to ask the CJEU for its determina
tion of appropriate remedies. The case is 
noteworthy in showing that European courts may differ in their views from the 
EC. In essence, the CJEU is asked to rule whether the EC™s position in its SO or 

the German view in the 
Orange Book 
case is more consistent with European 
Law. The opinion of the CJEU, when it is issued, will be binding on DG-
Competition and the courts and competition agencies of all EU member states.
37   6.4 Industry Views 
 There are divergent views among firms in the industry on the issue of in-
junctive relief in connection with FRAND-encumbered SEPs. Some companies 

have expressed the view that a FR
AND licensing commitment precludes the 
SEP holder from ever seek
ing injunctive relief. They 
argue that the commitment 
reflects an agreement by the SEP holder that reasonable compensation will al-

ways suffice and the SEP holder has other 
remedies to address recalcitrant licen-
sees, for example, by seeking monetary 
relief and/or similar remedies through 
                                                 34Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc.
, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 170587. 
35Microsoft v. Motorola, Inc.
, 696 F.3d 872 at 879 (9th Cir. 2012).  
36A recent court decision in China bears on this issue, as discussed in Chapter 8 of this 
report. 37Huawei v. ZTE
, 2013, Regional Court of Düsseldorf,
 Federal Republic of Germany, 
Case No. 4b O 104/12. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.110                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
litigation. Companies taking this position observe that an implementer would 
only resort to litigation, and the related expenses that the implementer would 

incur, if the SEP holder™s offer were 
not reasonably consistent with FRAND. 
They also argue that implementers wo
uld otherwise be unfairly pressured to 
accept non-FRAND terms to avoid the threat
 of injunctive relief or an exclusion 
order, particularly those authorized by 
tribunals that arguab
ly cannot fully adju-
dicate disputes as to whether the SE
P holder breached its FRAND commitment 
and set a FRAND royalty rate.  
Other companies have taken the somewhat weaker position that, while in-
junctive relief should never be sought against a willing licensee, it may be need-
ed in situations involving recalcitrant behavior by licensees. They have argued 
that any disputes as to whether the SE
P holder has offered terms that are con-
sistent with the FRAND obligation, as well as any open issues as to validity, 

infringement, etc., should be first and fully adjudicated by a court or through an 
agreed-upon arbitration process. Injunctive relief should only be available if the 
implementer refuses to comply with any such final decision or otherwise may 

not be able to be compelled to pay an
 adjudicated amount, for example, because 
of bankruptcy, lack of jurisdiction, and 
the like. These companies also challenge 
the notion that injunctive relief may be necessary for effective negotiations to 

occur because the SEP holder can sue fo
r reasonable damages. Thus, injunctive 
relief should only be available if the licensee refuses to accept the court™s deter-
mination. And they further argue th
at the licensor has no reason to accept 
FRAND terms if the threat of injunctions allows them arguably to seek compen-
sation in excess of that. Consistent with the views of competition regulators not-
ed above, even the threat that injunctiv
e relief may be sought makes it difficult 
to engage in licensing negotiations on a level playing field. 
Still other companies argue that injunc
tions are necessary to bring the li-
censee to the table and to 
incentivize a reasonable royalty for the SEP owner, 
especially where the willingness of the licensee is at issue. The FRAND com-
mitment may limit the availability of an injunction, so that the force of possible 
injunctive relief may be lessened in a SEP license negotiation. However, the 
possibility of injunctive relief if a licensee refuses to negotiate at all, or towards 
reasonable terms, is necessary for effec
tive negotiation to occur. If the licensee 
is comfortable that the SEP owner is only entitled to FRAND royalties and no 
injunctive relief, the licensee may have no reason to discuss terms. All a lawsuit 
will produce is additional expense for the SEP owner and perhaps the same roy-

alty the infringer would otherwise negotiate. Moreover, if competition authori-
ties may readily impose sanctions on the licensor SEP owner if its opening offer 
departs from what the FRAND model suggests, licensees may be incentivized 

not to negotiate and SEP owners will be 
pressured toward artificially depressed 
royalty terms and other conditions.  
There is also a debate as to when a SEP-holder should be permitted to seek 
an injunction. Some view any petition for that remedy prior to a full adjudication 
of FRAND as problematic for two reasons. First, seeking an injunction may 
distort any bargaining process ongoing 
between the licensor and licensee. This 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.111 
Injunctive Relief for SEPs Subject to FRAND 
may happen in part because some tribunals could issue such relief on an expe-
dited basis without fully adjudicating any related FRAND licensing disputes. 

Second, seeking such relief is not necessa
ry, even in jurisdictions where plead-
ings for injunctive relief must be made up-front in connection with a FRAND 
licensing dispute. This is because the 
court has its own enforcement powers 
should it grant the SEP holder monetary relief and the implementer fails to abide 
by that outcome.  
On the other hand, some firms argue that access to injunctive relief might 
be waived if it is not pleaded in FR
AND proceedings. This could prohibit SEP 
owners from even seeking an injunction or an exclusion order and seriously 
prejudice their economic interests.  
In this vein, it is also argued that overly constraining SEP owners may result 
in fewer innovators participating in a st
andard™s development. They may opt in-
stead to seek higher returns on their R&D investment in other non-standard tech-
nologies or avoid participation in the st
andard development process, which could 
adversely impact the benefits of standa
rds to the industry and the consumer.  
 6.5 Recommendations to SSOs, Cour
ts, and Government Agencies 
 The committee believes that a FRAND 
commitment limits a licensor™s abil-
ity to seek injunctive relief, including exclusion orders, and recommends the fol-
lowing steps to help avoid or resolve disputes, prevent anti-competitive conduct, 

and ensure reasonable compensation to SEP holders whose patents are infringed. 
 Recommendation 6:1 

 SSOs active in
industries where patent holdup is a concern should clarify 
their policies regarding the availability of injunctions for FRAND-encumbered 
SEPs to reflect the following principles: 

  Injunctive relief conflicts with a commitment to license SEPs on FRAND 
terms and conditions should be
 rare in these cases; 
 Injunctive relief may be appropriate 
when a prospective licensee refus-
es to participate in or comply with the outcome of an independent adju-
dication of FRAND licensing terms and conditions; and 
 Injunctive relief may be appropriate when a SEP holder has no other 
recourse to obtain compensation. 
 The committee could not reach unanimous agreement on appropriate venues for 
adjudicating FRAND disputes. However, 
a majority of the committee members 
endorse the following: 
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.112                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Majority Recommendation 6:2 
 SSOs should clarify that disputes over proposed FRAND terms and condi-
tions should be adjudicated at a court, agency, arbitration or other tribunal that 
can assess the economic value of SEPs
 and award monetary compensation.
38 The committee also could not reach 
unanimous agreement on the scope of 
any limitations that a FRAND commitmen
t might place on SEP holders™ rights 
to seek injunctive relief. However, a majority of the committee members en-

dorse the following recommendation in that regard: 
 Majority Recommendation 6:3 
 SSOs should clarify that, before a SEP holder can seek injunctive relief, dis-
putes over proposed FRAND terms and conditions should be adjudicated at a court, 
agency, arbitration, or other tribunal that
 allows either party to raise any related 
claims and defenses (s
uch as validity, enforceability and non-infringement).
39                                                  38A minority of committee members endorse th
is alternative recommendation: Courts, 
agencies, arbitration bodies or other tribunals (including the USITC) that consider patent 
essentiality, FRAND determination, or public inte
rest factors should be presented with the 
facts and render injunctive relief decision
s based on existing law, such as the 
eBay decision 
and/or ITC Section 337. 
39A minority of committee members endorse this alternative recommendation: SSOs 
should clarify that a SEP owner that has made 
an offer and offered to negotiate, with a pro-
spective licensee, a license that will embody 
FRAND terms should be allowed to include 
injunctive relief in its pleadings when a FRAND 
dispute is brought to a court, agency, arbi-
tration, or other tribunal that can consider 
equities, party conduct, reciprocity, and FRAND 
factors (including FRAND rates and terms). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.113 
7. Patent Office-SSO  Information Sharing1  7.1 Origins and Scope of Information Sharing 
 Until recently the standard-setting process has operated largely inde-
pendently from patent examination and grants. However, as the interplay be-
tween standards and patents has increased, along with the number of patents in 
the technologies comprising ICT, so has recognition that the two systems™ func-
tioning and integrity are interdependent. Particular technologies are often both 

vital to the standards in which they are in
corporated and protected by patents. At 
the same time, implementers who are obliged to license standard-essential pa-

tents and often pay royalties for their use ha
ve a considerable stake in the quality 
of issued patents.  
In determining whether the subject matter of a patent application is novel, 
patent office examiners rely on databases of previous patents, publications, and 

other documents, referred to as prior art.
2 The submissions by participants to 
standards bodies represent a potentially valu
able collection of prior art, consist-
ing of patents, patent applications, and technical specifications. These include 

finalized standards documents, preliminary and temporary drafts, and other dis-
closures of technical information to working groups. 
These standards-related materials are th
ought to affect 30 to 40 percent of 
patent applications in certain ICT fields.
3 Patent offices and standards bodies are 
considering ways of cooperating to incr
ease the availability to examiners of 
standards documentation that will improve the examination process. One institu-
                                                 1This chapter relies on symposium presentations by Michel Goudelis, European Patent 
Office; Dirk Weiler, IPR chairman of the European Telecommunications Standards Insti-
tute (ETSI); and George Willingmyre, GTW & Associates. The latter™s presentation was 
commissioned by the Committee and incorporated material from interviews with stake-
holders and officials in the United States, Eu
rope, and Japan. See http://sites.nationalaca 
demies.org/PGA/step/IPManagement/PGA_072825. 
2Under U.S. law, to determine if the tec
hnology is novel, the USPTO assesses the dif-
ference between the technology claimed in a 
patent application a
nd the technology avail-
able to the public through sale, use, publicatio
n, patenting, or other means of dissemina-
tion. 3Committee consulation with an ETSI representative. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.114                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
tion in particular, the European Patent Office (EPO), has concluded ground-
breaking agreements with three SS
Os to share such information.  
The EPO is the regional patent office established by the 1973 European 
Patent Convention among 38 member states. It examines patent applications 
submitted by inventors worldwide. Applications approved by the EPO may be 

granted EPO patents and also granted by the patent offices of individual member 
states.4 The EPO processes the third largest volume of patent applications in the 
world after the Chinese State Intellect
ual Property Office (SIPO) and the 
USPTO. 
In recent years the EPO concluded me
moranda of understanding with three 
standards organizations. The first agreement was the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers Standards Associ
ation (IEEE-SA), which develops global 
standards for a wide range of IT produc
ts and services. The second memorandum 
was with the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), which 
also produces globally-applicable ICT standards. Finally, the third agreement was 
with the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), the United Nations spe-

cialized agency for creating global standards in information technology and com-
munications.  
The three agreements have several common elements: 1) exchange of in-
formation and documentation of mutual interest in the field of standards for the 
benefit of prior art search; 2) collaboration on documentation format definition 
and dissemination policies to align them with the EPO prior art search needs; 3) 

contributions to education activities in the field of standards; and 4) self-funding 
of expenses associated with the agreements. 
Of the three arrangements, the 2009 ETSI-EPO memorandum of under-
standing has created the most robust relationship although the two institutions 
had previously developed a mutual 
understanding since EPO became a member 
of ETSI in 2003.
5 ETSI is a leading body for glob
ally applicable standards for 
telecommunications and home of world-cl
ass standards such as GSM, TETRA, 
and DVB. Its membership consists of 766 companies and organizations from 63 
countries. Its IPR database contains information on those patents and applica-
tions notified to ETSI as being essential 
or potentially essential to ETSI stand-
ards. The value of this database arises from both its comprehensiveness and the 

structure of relationships in its informati
on architecture, in particular its integra-
tion of patent documentation, bibliographic information, patent families, and 
patent number normalization. Under the agreement with ETSI the EPO has ac-

quired documentation on standard-essential patents from ETSI along with nec-
essary bibliographic data, incorporated the data into its internal databases, and 
                                                 4In December 2012, 25 European states agreed to pave the way for a unitary European 
patent issued by the EPO and for the creation 
of a unitary European court to handle patent 
disputes. 5EPO has joined other SSOs also to access 
prior art, often under the same conditions 
and costs as industry members who profit fro
m their membership, but membership is not 
a sine qua non of EPO information sharing wi
th SSOs. See discussion below. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.115 
Patent Office-SSO Information Sharing 
educated its examiner corps 
on how to use data in assessing prior art (Goudelis, 
2012). 
The EPO is seeking similar working relationships with other standards or-
ganizations. In 2012, the Office extended invitations to enter into similar memo-
randa of understanding (MOUs) to ISO and IEC. The EPO has also shared what 

it considers its positive experiences with 
other patent offices (Goudelis, 2012). 
 7.2 Benefits and Costs of Information Sharing 
 One measure of the utility of these standards-related information sharing 
arrangements is the number of times ETSI standards documents have been cited 
in EPO patent examinations. These cita
tions show a marked decline over the 
period of cooperation, from 2000 in 2004 to 884 in 2008. No analysis is availa-

ble of the number of patent applications 
rejected on the ground
s of prior art from 
these sources, but one can conclude that 
the data represent a significant addition 
to the knowledge base available to exam
iners in the fields covered and have 
been used to limit the scope of approved patent claims. 
The costs of participating in the information sharing arrangements are 
non-trivial. For the EPO, the costs incl
ude membership fees and for the EPO and 
SSOs, acquisition and conversion costs. Nevertheless, for the EPO, the arrange-
ments contribute to a reputation for relatively efficient search and high quality 
examination and the benefits are seen to extend beyond generating patents of 

higher quality. Improved transparency in the linkages between IPR and stand-
ards is seen as a benefit by both SS
O members and EPO examiners. Disclosure 
of SEPs, together with a commitment of FRAND licensing, is a requirement of 

many SSOs. Nevertheless, the amount and 
quality of information about declared 
patents may be less than desired by some users of their databases. Generally 
speaking, SSOs do not perform checks on the essentiality, validity, and com-

pleteness of the disclosures. Where disclosure is not compulsory, SSOs are not 
in a position to provide assurances about the completeness and timeliness of 
submissions to their databases. 
The interlinking of EPO and SSO databases benefits SSO members by 
providing updated information on patent applications and claims and generating 

automatic identification of classifications and types of patent families, all sub-
ject to the agency™s quality controls. ETSI independently modified its IPR policy 
to extend disclosure and FRAND licensi
ng commitments from a specified mem-
ber of a patent family to all existing and future essential patents of that family 
unless there is an explicit exclusion of sp
ecified patents at the time of the under-
taking.
6  ETSI also took advantage of its cooperation with EPO to launch a new in-
formation architecture in 2011, increasing transparency, functionality, and user-
                                                 6ETSI has a unique definition of patent fa
milies with respect to licensing commit-
ments. This term should not be confused with
 the more common concept of patent fami-
lies at the EPO and other patent offices.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.116                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
friendliness by such improvements as reliable reporting of query results, infor-
mation on ownership and essentiality status, and links to information on licens-

ing conditions. The estimated cost of these upgrades was 1 million Euros, or 
approximately U.S. $1.3 million. 
A possible future benefit of EPO-SSO cooperation is in tracking changes 
in patent ownership. Both participants in standardization development and 
standards implementers have a strong in
terest in the availability of accurate, 
updated information about who owns which SEPs, in which patent jurisdictions, 

and for how long. Also important is information about whether titles have been 
reassigned and to whom. The EPO™s ability to track ownership and assignments 
extends only through the time at which the patent is granted and the nine-month 
period following, during which an opposition may be filed. Beyond those times 
information on transfers resides, if at a
ll, in national patent offices. One sugges-
tion to address this challenge of tracking 
patent transfers is the creation of Inter-
net-based patent registers maintained by standardization bodies in cooperation 
with patent offices. This idea continues to be discussed in various forums.  
Establishing mechanisms to record pate
nt transfers, preferably in the pa-
tent office where the national patent was granted, would help in achieving the 
goal of identifying the ownership of SEP patents.
7 Despite practical concerns, 
such measures would enable an implementer or standards developer to search 
official records to determine who owns a 
SEP, whether it is declared or not, and 
whether it has been assigned.  
 7.3 Legal Status of Standards Information 
 Final standards are part of the availabl
e prior art, except 
in the case of pri-
vate standard consortia that do not publish them but make them available only to 
specific parties under non-disclosure agreements. Further, preparatory docu-

ments are treated like other written or oral
 disclosures, meaning that to qualify 
as prior art they must have been made available to the public prior to the patent 
filing or priority date without the disclosure being subject to a requirement of 
confidentiality. Thus, the prior art standing of a standards draft may be subject 
to the rules or norms of the SSO concer
ned and is not always clear, nor is the 
date of a document always verifiable.  
The incentives for members of SSOs to make early specifications availa-
ble as prior art are often mixed. In some
 SSOs, circulation of early drafts of 
specifications is limited to those working on it, perhaps due to a concern that 
allowing other parties to comment adve
rsely on preliminary drafts could chill 
                                                 7Japan records transfers of all patents, 
including SEPs. An article by Nahoko Ono, 
Avoiding Japanization: Lessons
 from Japanese Gridlock on th
e Patent Recordation Sys-
tem (2012) discusses problems with the Japanese
 system of recordi
ng patent documents. 
The focus of that article is on licensor and 
licensee concerns with disclosing confidential 
terms (such as exclusive license scope) and on limiting information to specific infor-
mation such as grantor, grantee,
 addresses, and patent numbers. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.117 
Patent Office-SSO Information Sharing 
innovative proposals. There may also be a concern that competing non-
members, able to read the new specification before it is formally published as a 

standard, could somehow undermine it. Such considerations are balanced, how-
ever, against an interest in early publication in order to foreclose others from 
patenting technology created during the standards development process.  
Under the three MOUs with SSOs, documents provided to the EPO, 
whether preliminary or final, are considered not to be confidential unless other-
wise specified. To date there have be
en no cases where the participating SSO 
has excluded use of shared information as 
prior art. If a patent applicant were to 
contest use of such documents as prior art, the circumstances would be assessed 
case-by-case in the course of patent examination. 
 7.4 Relevance of the European Experience to the USPTO 
 The committee considered the implicat
ions of the EPO-SSO agreements 
for the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 
which does not participate in them. In 
this regard, the Scientific and Technical
 Information Center (STIC), a central 
library facility operated by the USPTO, fr
equently receives requests from exam-
iners to provide the text of standards thought relevant to the patentability of in-

ventions under consideration. The application may reference a particular stand-
ard or include part of a standard. Further, the examiner may find mention of a 
standard in the course of the examination.  
The STIC provides access to standards documents through a variety of 
channels, including most frequently its non-
patent literature (N
PL) website and its 
subscriptions to the publicly available st
andards of some SSOs, such as IEEE-SA. 
In general, these sources are limited to
 final standards, and obtaining additional 
documents relating to them may entail a significant cost to the patent office.  
For their part, SSOs have access through pub
lic search faciliti
es to the same 
databases of granted patents and pre-grant 
applications that ar
e available to exam-
iners. However, like other members of the public, they do not have access to the 
STIC NPL Website. As for patent transfer
s, assignments, and re-assignments, the 
USPTO maintains an assignments database. Submissions of information to it are 
voluntary, although registration does convey some legal protection that would not 

otherwise exist.  
The committee finds that arrangements along the lines of the EPO-SO 
memoranda could significantly benefit both the USPTO examination process and 

SSO functioning at relatively modest cost to both parties. We note, however, two 
issues that would need to be addressed. 
First, as does Europe, the United States has its own jurisprudence on when 
documentation is ﬁpublicly availableﬂ and 
therefore eligible as prior art, and 
cooperative arrangements must take those laws into account. In a recent perti-
nent case, for example, 
SRI International v. Internet Security Systems Inc., 
a    Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.118                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
number of patents related to the Internet were alleged to be invalid in view of a 
prior technical paper. However, the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that 

there was ﬁinsufficient evidence to show
 that the paper was publicly accessible 
as a printed publication as required under U.S. patent law in 35 U.S. Code § 
102(b). The paper had been placed on a se
rver, but solely to 
facilitate peer re-
view and it could not be accesse
d by the researching public.
8 Holding that the 
paper was therefore not prior art, the co
urt vacated a summary judgment of inva-
lidity against the patents. 
A factor that may simplify and facilitate
 activity with SSOs is that U.S. 
patent law has recently changed. In switc
hing the United States from a first-to-
invent to a first-inventor-to-file priority system for patent applications filed on 
or after March 16, 2013, the America Invents Act of 2011 has ostensibly moved 
U.S. patent law in the direction of Euro
pean law and other international patent 
systems. This should make published 
standards documents in one jurisdiction 
more translatable to use in other jurisdictions than in the past. Further actions 
toward harmonizing the requirements for prior art standards publications might 

be useful, although the process of harmonizing substantive patent laws is inher-
ently difficult and often protracted.  
A second issue raised in
 discussions of prospects for USPTO-SSO cooper-
ation is whether it is appropriate for USPTO to take membership in private or-
ganizations, an element of the EPO™s relationship with the ITU and ETSI, but 
not IEEE-SA. Although a number of federal government agencies participate as 

members in organizations such as the American National Standards Institute 
(ANSI), the USPTO no longer participates, considering an arm™s-length rela-
tionship to be the appropriate way for a 
regulatory agency to support the private 
sector standards development system while avoiding potential conflicts of inter-
est. Membership may contribute to a certain level of trust in the EPO™s relation-
ships with ITU and ETSI, but it is the process of arriving at the MOUs, benefit-

ing from them, and maintaining them that fosters a belief that they are strategic 
assets.  Along this line, it should also be recognized that U.S. federal and state 
governments, like governments in other countries,
9 play a significant role as a 
purchaser of standardized products (DeNardis, 2012). Accordingly, government 

agencies have an interest in robust, 
accessible standards that
 promote interoper-
ability, cost-efficiency, innovation, transpar
ency in the inclusion of technologies 
in standards, and a diverse system in which no single company controls the 

standard or is its sole implementer.
10 Cooperation between the USPTO and 
SSOs could contribute to these objectives. 
                                                   8SRI International Inc v. Internet Security Systems Inc., 
511 F.3d 1186 (Fed. Cir. 2008). 
9See also Chapter 8 regarding India and e-government. 
10Office of Management and Budget OMB Ci
rcular A119 directs the government to 
adopt commercial standards rather than deri
ve unique government specifications unless 
there is justification.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.119 
Patent Office-SSO Information Sharing 
7.5 Recommendations to
 the USPTO and SSOs 
 The committee finds that the EPO™s 
information sharing arrangements 
with leading international SSOs have demonstrated their value to both parties of 
having broad, timely, and low-cost access 
to standards prior art with important 
potential gains in transparency and efficiency. Similar arrangements could 
achieve such gains also for the United St
ates even if U.S. law more narrowly 
circumscribes the range of standards documentation that qualifies as prior art. It 

should be possible for leading SSOs to agree on terms of cooperation with the 
USPTO that enable mutually beneficial information sharing without raising con-
cerns about conflicts of interest.  
 Recommendation 7:1
  First, in the wake of the passage 
and implementation of the America In-
vents Act, the USPTO should  

  Clarify how the legal definition of pr
ior art varies across jurisdictions, 
particularly as between the EPO an
d USPTO. Specifically, when is art 
ﬁpublicly availableﬂ in 
a standards context? 
 Explore with leading SSOs, incl
uding possibly ETSI, IEEE-SA and 
ITU, information sharing arrangements similar to those concluded by 

the EPO; 
 Work with other patent offices to establish uniform fields and templates 
for standards-based prior art documents
, such as early drafts of specifi-
cations, published minutes, and the like, and deliberate with other of-
fices on the definition of sharable information in this context; 
 Improve standards technology education for U.S. patent examiners. For 
example, when standards developers convene in Washington, they 
could be asked to instruct and 
update USPTO examiners about stand-
ards processes and recent developments; and 
 Develop joint education programs with SSOs on the pros and cons of 
standards-based prior art, especially early drafts, and benefits from in-

cluding it in patent office search databases. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.121 
8. IPR and Standards in  Emerging Economies  8.1 Introduction 
 As part of its charge, the committee was asked to consider the ways in 
which intellectual property issues affec
ting standardization are handled in coun-
tries and regions other than to the United States and Europe, the main subjects of 
this report. In further consultation with
 the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 
we were asked to focus on three major emerging economies: China, India, and 

Brazil. Presentations and discussion at the October 2012 symposium made it 
clear that questions of patents in standards are only beginning to attract attention 
in India and Brazil. In China, on the other hand, where there has been an explo-

sion of patenting and an active standards development strategy, the issue has 
received considerably more attention, a
lthough China has yet to settle on clear 
policy directions (Breznitz and Murphree,
 2012; Ramakrishna, et al., 2012; Bar-
bosa, 2012). 
In all three cases, the 
economies are growing rapidly, are very large in 
terms of absolute scale and geographic scope, and all have increasingly im-

portant roles in global production networks. Each has a large and growing tech-
nical community of scientists and engineers, and a research and development 
system of growing sophistication but only 
recently have these begun to have an 
impact on the innovation capacities of the three economies. Instead, there has 
been a heavy reliance on im
ported technologies. But in
 all three countries we 
now see national governments making significant new industrial policy com-
mitments intended to foster national innovation capabilities and push their econ-
omies up the value chain to higher value-added, more knowledge-intensive pro-

duction. This is especially true in China where growth in R&D expenditures and 
patenting activity has outstripped Indian and Brazilian initiatives (Adams, et. al, 
2013). The approaches in all three to IPR and standards development should be 

seen in the context of these broader in
dustrial policy goals, including reforms 
intended to shape the R&D systems to more fully serve technological innova-
tion. 
Unlike Japan™s industrial development and to a lesser extent South Ko-
rea™s, where standards development was seen by many observers as strictly a 
tool of industrial policy,
 the recent development experiences of China, India, 
and Brazil are conditioned by their memb
ership in the WTO and the necessary 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.122                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
commitments to the Agreem
ent on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) and the 
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). 
These obligations require them to attempt to harmonize their IPR and standards 
regimes with international norms while also opening their economies to greater 
foreign trade and investment.  
Arguably foreign investment has contributed significantly to the growth 
and modernization of these economies, but it has also brought home to them the 
importance of IPR and standards for shaping the relative and absolute gains 

from engagements with the international economy. While the
 absolute
 gains are 
readily appreciated, from a 
relative
 gains perspective, th
e greater share of the 
benefits accrues to the owners of the inte
llectual property and to those with con-
trol over standards. All th
ree countries have been cha
llenged, therefore, to build 
capabilities for intellectual property creation and standards development in order 

to alter the terms of the relative gains and capture more value from engagement 
with the global economy. This objective has inevitably led to questions about 
the respective roles of the state and industrial enterprises in building those capa-

bilities, and about the compatibilities of national technological development 
efforts with international, especially WTO obligations.  
The multilateral pressures on emerging economies to conform with inter-
national standards, or to manage domestic policy changes subject to global con-
straints, may become even stronger as countries join various bilateral and re-
gional agreements. Such agreements increasingly embody stronger requirements 

for intellectual property protection because IP owners in the United States, EU 
and other advanced nations generally see the WTO rules as inadequate (Maskus, 
2012). For example, although the contents of ongoing negotiations remain con-

fidential, indications are that the Tran
s-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a U.S.-led 
agreement among 12 Pacific Rim countries at various levels of economic devel-
opment, will contain rigorous rules constraining the ability of national govern-

ments to limit the scope of patent rights. China has not formally joined the TPP 
talks but is considering its interests in light of its potential exclusion from a ma-
jor regional trade grouping. Thus, if China joins there may be additional con-
straints on its policy freedom in the area of patent use in technical standards. In 
the discussion below, we focus first on the Chinese case, returning to the Indian 

and Brazilian experiences at the end.  
 8.2 China 
 Although China has a long history of 
standardization, it is only recently 
that standards and intellectual property have figured prominently in national 

policy.
1 This prominence derives from Ch
ina™s accession to the WTO in 2001 
                                                           
1China joined the ITU in 1920 and rejoined the ISO in 1978. China™s Standardization
 Law was promulgated in 1989 well before deve
lopments in the ICT industries changed 
the landscape for standard-setting and brought i
ssues of intellectual property to the fore. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.123 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
and the introduction of standards and IP concerns into its national technological 
development strategies. In joining the WTO, China committed itself to attempt 

to harmonize many of its standards with international standards and, in the pro-
cess of doing so, initiated reforms of its standardization bodies. Thus, the current 
institutional arrangements, in which the Standards Administration of China 

(SAC) has responsibility for national standardization within the General Admin-
istration of Quality Supervision, Inspec
tion and Quarantine (AQSIQ), dates only 
from 2001 (see Figure 8-1). 
Similarly, the national policy focus on standards and IP development as 
tools of industrial policy is also a largely post-WTO phenomenon, part of Chi-
na™s efforts to put together the pieces 
of a national strategy for technological 
innovation. Although the Chinese regime had practiced active science and in-
dustrial policies since the 1950s, these gradually began to take new forms after 

1980 as China faced expanding engageme
nt with the international economy and 
initiated a series of domestic economic reforms. By the late 1990s, China was 
attempting to create an innovation system
 suitable for a market economy and for 
engagement with globalization, a cha
llenge which became more pressing with 
WTO accession. China™s experience from th
e two decades of reform and en-
gagement with the international economy after 1980 led it to conclude that con-

trol over standards, and the intellectual property contained therein, conferred 
considerable market power, while being 
solely an IPR-poor ﬁstandards takerﬂ 
put it at a considerable economic disadvant
age especially with regard to royalty 
payments. Hence, major new initiatives were begun after 2000 to develop na-
tional standards and IP strategies (Ernst, 2011; Suttmeier and Yao, 2011). 
 
  FIGURE 8-1
 Central Government agencies for st
andardization. Source: Adapted from 
USITO, 2007. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.124                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Unlike India and Brazil China displays 
a more strategic sense of the im-
portance of standards and the incorporation of its own IPR into standards. But, 

like India and Brazil, it is a latecomer in building a national regime for standards 
and IP in high technology industries and in learning to negotiate the differentiat-
ed terrain characteristic of international standards and IPR regimes.
2 Chinese 
firms vary greatly in their degree of integration into the evolving legal frame-
work and their sophistication in managing intellectual property in a standards 
context. China thus strives to learn lessons from the international system while 

at the same time attempting to develop national industrial policies incorporating 
standards and IPR strategies as domestic policy tools.  
The Chinese government has also attempted to reconcile a strong belief 
that the government sh
ould play a leading role in 
standardization, with a recog-
nition that commercial entities responding to market forces and rapid technolog-

ical change play critical roles in shaping 
standards in the ICT industries. In striv-
ing for institutional reconciliation of markets and government, Chinese 
approaches to standards have also sought to find the proper balance among pro-

tecting the interests of private parties who have made investments in technologi-
cal development and intellectual property, establishing standards on sound tech-
nological foundations, and achieving some sort of equity in the distribution of 

the benefits of standards development. In developing its standards regime, the 
judgments reached on how to reconcile stat
e versus market roles in standardiza-
tion and achieve that balance among competing needs has not always accorded 

with the values and experience of fo
reign governments and companies, and 
have, at times, left China in an uncomfortable position 
visŒa-vis
 foreign stake-
holders in established international standardization and IPR regimes (An, 2012). 

 Key institutions 
 SAC has broad policy responsibility for na
tional standards. It is supported in 
its role by a research arm, China Nati
onal Institute for Standardization (CNIS), 
and has a close relationship with the China Association for Standardization (CAS), 
a nominally non-governmental organization for the dissemination of information 
on standards, provision of certification, a
nd training of standards officials. Never-
theless, industry-level standards are overseen
 by other entities, the most important 
                                                           
2The Chinese government has shown a preference for working through the formal in-
ternational standards development organizati
ons that involve government representation. 
It is a long-time member of ITU, having joined
 in 1920, and rejoined ISO in 1978. It has 
been less comfortable with the workings 
of non-governmental standards organizations, 
although this is beginning to change as it real
izes their importance 
and as Chinese firms 
and China™s scientists and engineers become 
more active in standards development work. 
For instance, China is a founding member of 
the 3GPP and participates in the M2M net-
work, and Chinese experts participat
e in IEEE, NEMA, and other SSOs. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.125 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
of which is the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT).
3 MIIT 
has its origins in the former Ministries of Posts and Telecommunications and Elec-

tronics, which were merged in 1998 to form the Ministry of the Information Indus-
try (MII). In a subsequent government reorganization in 2008, the Ministry™s port-
folio expanded to include other industr
ies and was renamed MIIT. Although it is 
active in standardization for other industries as well, it remains a central player in 
the development of ICT standards, the area of our concern, and the one which has 
attracted the greatest international attention. 
Two key entities under MIIT dealing with ICT standards are the China 
Electronic Standardization Institute (CESI), first established in 1963, and the 
China Communications Standards Association (CCSA), established in 2002. 
CESI, as a former research Institute under the Ministry of the Electronics Indus-
try and the more institutionalized body, ha
s its own research facilities, serves as 
the secretariat for 11 national technical
 standardization committees, and works 
with the nominally non-governmental 
China Electronic Standards Association 
(CESA). 
CCSA, also a nominally non-governmental associational entity but hosted 
by MIIT™s China Academy of Telecommunications Research (CATR), is gov-
erned by a council of leading government
, industry, and academic figures in the 
world of Chinese telecommunications. It maintains a Technical Expert Advisory 
Committee and a Technical Management Committee, both of which draw on 
expertise from industry, government, 
and universities. CCSA also operates 
through a series of technical committees, under which are working groups and 
sub-working groups. Although nominally specialized into separate communica-
tions and information technology domains, the work of CESI and CCSA at 

times overlaps and, in keeping with in
herited traditions of competition between 
the Ministries of Electronics and Telecommunications, they have been known to 
compete with one another. 
As shown in Figure 1, a number of othe
r national level bureaucratic entities 
are also involved in standardization work. These include the National Develop-
ment and Reform Commission (NDRC), Ministry of Science and Technology 
(MOST), State Council Informatization Office (SCITO), State Administration of 
News, Broadcasting, Film and Television (SANBFT) (formerly the State Admin-

istration for Radio, Film and Television, or SARFT), State Administration for 
Science, Technology and Industry for National Defense (SASTIND), and Ministry 
of Public Security. NDRC and MOST play important roles in promoting China™s 

innovation strategy through subsidies, R&D support, and other policy preferences 
for standardization and intellectual pr
operty development work. SASTIND plays 
an important role in promoting standards development in military related indus-

tries, and SCITO and the Ministry of Public Security have been important in areas 
of information security standards. SANB
FT, supported by a research arm, the 
                                                           
3China™s standards regime provides for four le
vels of standards: national, industry, re-
gional, and enterprise. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.126                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Academy of Broadcasting Science (ABS), has played a key role in the develop-
ment of broadcasting standards and has figured prominently in Chinese efforts to 

promote convergence in communications networks, often in conflict with MIIT 
and its subordinate units. Not included in Figure 1 is the State Administration for 
Industry and Commerce (SAIC), which has a role in administering China™s Anti-

Monopoly Law (AML), discussed further below. 
Not surprisingly, bureaucratic co
mpetition among these national level 
agencies has, at times, made coordinated national efforts on standardization dif-

ficult.
4 When the standards interests of Chinese and foreign companies and Chi-
nese local governments are also factored 
into the mix, it is
 clear that reaching 
common purpose on standards in China is a challenging task. 
 IPR policies for standardization work
   The importance of IPR issues in standardization began to gain prominence 
in China after 2000. In 2003, MII introduced a draft policy which attempted to 

clarify the treatment of patents in standards. The policy did not distinguish be-
tween essential and nonessential patents,
 provided for compulsory patent pool 
participation in the case of mandatory standards, and imposed on foreign com-

panies™ obligations which had the effect of privileging Chinese companies. Not 
surprisingly, it was not well received by fo
reign stakeholders operating in China, 
who were given only limited access to Ch
inese standardization working groups. 
Meanwhile, the Audio Video Coding Standard Working Group of China 
(AVS) attempted to draft a patent policy drawing on what was perceived to be 
best international practice and which involved participation by foreign compa-

nies. In doing so, it solicited input from foreign companies and recruited a leader 
of the MPEG-4 IPR subcommittee, to chair its IPR working group.
5 The AVS 
approach was recognized as a positive step
 forward by foreign stakeholders as 
well as many in the Chinese standards 
community who viewed
 it as an innova-
tive Chinese response to problems plaguing SSOs elsewhere. Its key provisions 
require members of the working group to
 sign an agreement consenting to the 
AVS IPR policy. Members are 
required to disclose known related patents and to 
                                                           
4In one widely noted case, for instance, Chin
ese efforts to develop its own audiovisual 
standard (AVS) as an alternative to the MPEG standard were set back by SARFT™s deci-
sion to adopt the latter. This decision was s
ubsequently modified in 2012 when, as a re-
sult of improved government coordination, SA
RFT adopted AVS as a broadcast and TV 
standard. 5Of the roughly 175 AVS working group memb
ers, approximately 30 are foreign 
companies (Ernst, 2011).The AVS Working Group was organized in 2002 as a response 
to what were considered to be excessive 
royalty fees paid by Chinese DVD manufactur-
ers using the MPEG-2 standard. Its formation wa
s a result of initiatives taken by the Insti-
tute for Computer Science of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the MII to bring 
together Chinese experts working on audio 
and video coding technologies to develop a 
standard suitable for Chinese conditions, es
pecially the needs of Chinese industry.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.127 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
make an 
ex ante commitment to license on FRAND or FRAND-RF terms, or 
participate in the AVS patent pool. Contributions to a standard of Chinese-held 

SEPs have only the latter two options available to them.
 Members are expected 
to participate in at least one subgroup, but may choose not to participate if they 
do not want to make a commitment to license a patent for the standard being 

developed by that subgroup. The policy also provides for a 90-day review period 
for assessing the relevance of non-contributed or disclosed patents (AVS, 2008). 
Left unaddressed in the original formul
ation were nonmember IPR, legacy pa-
tent issues, questions of compulsory licensing, and whether the ﬁreasonablenessﬂ 
component of FRAND should have a defined upper limit (Huang and Reader, 
2013). 
By 2006, guidelines for the operation of an AVS patent pool were an-
nounced, including the establishment of 
a one RMB yuan per unit fee per device 
for licenses issued in China. The guidelines also provide for the establishment 
and responsibilities of a patent pool executive council which is composed of 5 
representatives of government agencies
, 6 members drawn from participating 
patent holders, 6 members of the Working Group who are users of the standard, 
the head of the Working Group, and the director of the patent pool management 
center. The patent pool operates on a not-for-profit basis. (Li, n.d.). 
Today, AVS is supported by the Working Group, the patent pool man-
agement organization, and an AVS industrial alliance that seeks to promote the 
commercial deployment of the standard. As noted, AVS is seen by many ob-

servers as a progressive standard-setting organization that developed an IPR 
policy at an early stage of its developm
ent in an attempt to accommodate private 
interests and social benefits in an equitable fashion through open and transparent 

procedures and principles. 
The AVS policy formed the basis of CESI™s 
IT Standard Drafting Organi-
zations™ IPR Policy Template
, first drafted in 2006. The template has now gone 
through 15 revisions involving a task force which has included representatives 
from China™s AVS, RFID, and LINUX working groups, and which has also had 
the counsel of standards officers from leading multinational firms, including 
Intel, Microsoft and Sun Microsystems.
6 In an attempt to emulate international 
best practices, the template is intended to provideŠand has providedŠa frame-

work for Chinese SSOs in the development of their IPR policies, while also rec-
ognizing that different SSOs may craft 
their policies in response to distinctive 
needs. The template provides a set of suggested definitions (e.g. ﬁnecessary 

claimﬂ) for key terms in the policies, an explication of the conditions for under-
standing IPR contributions to the standardization process, guidance on disclo-
sure requirements, and suggested licensing options (FRAND-RF, patent pool, 

FRAND). 
                                                           
6CESI Standardization Development Research
 Center (n.d.), ﬁIT Standard Drafting 
Organizations™ IPR Policy Template.ﬂ 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.128                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
CCSA has also attempted to provide policy guidance through its Intellec-
tual Property Rights Policy, introduced in 2007 for trial implementation. It is a 

somewhat less specific document but al
so provides disclosure and licensing 
guidelines. Like the CESI template, 
it calls for FRAND-RF and FRAND op-
tions, but does not provide for patent pools. As a member of 3GPP, CCSA is 

somewhat constrained in developing IPR policies that deviate from those of 
3GPP. 
These initiatives at the CESI, CCSA and working group levels, should be 
seen in the context of a broader ef
fort at the SAC level to formulate 
national
 policy guidelines. In 2004, SAC published a draft proposal for a patent policy 
that raised significant concerns among international stakeholders, and led SAC 
to reconsider its terms. In November 2
009, in the face of a growing concern that 
there was little policy consistency in the SSO approaches to IPR matters, in spite 

of the CESI and CCSA initiatives, a revi
sed ﬁProposed Regulations for the Ad-
ministration of the Formulation and Revision of Patent Involving National 
Standardsﬂ was issued by SAC.  
While noting improvements, comments from international stakeholders 
again called attention to provisions in the draft which seemed to be at odds with 
provisions found in the policies of international SSOs and which failed to pro-

vide adequate protection to the rights of IPR owners, especially with regard to 
licensing terms and to com
pulsory licensing in the cas
e of mandatory standards 
(Willingmyre 2009, 2010). Shortly after the release of the ﬁProposed Regula-

tions,ﬂ in January, 2010, SAC™s China National Institute of Standardization 
(CNIS) released what became known as th
e ﬁDisposal Rules for the Inclusion of 
Patents in National Standards.ﬂ Although the Disposal Rules were seen as re-

moving some of the more troubling provisions of the Draft Regulations, some 
concerns remained such as a failure to distinguish between essential patents and 
essential patent claims, ambiguity over 
differences between patent declarations 
and actual licenses, and clarifications ov
er disclosure obligations, especially 
with regard to nonparticipants (Willingm
yre 2010). The draft policy again un-
derwent a careful review and, as disc
ussed below, a new draft ﬁRegulatory 
Measures on National Standards Involving Patents (Interim)ﬂ was released on 
December 18, 2012. 
As noted above, China™s approaches to strategies for standardization and 
intellectual property development seek to serve Chinese interests in national 
technological development while striving for consistency with international 

norms and accommodating the interests of
 international stakeholders. Some 
Chinese initiatives have been confusing and troubling in light of international 
norms. Both the American Chamber of
 Commerce in China (AmCham) and the 
European Chamber have regularly expres
sed their concerns about the evolution 
of China™s standardization and IP regimes. 
A recent report from the European Ch
amber on patenting behavior in Chi-
na also addresses a series of issues 
dealing with standard-setting procedures 
(Prud™homme, 2012). According to the report, in spite of greater opportunities 
for participation in Chinese standards organizations, foreign invested enterprises 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.129 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
(FIEs) are still denied access to some im
portant technical committees. As a re-
sult, they ﬁare unable to obtain inform
ation on the scope and requirements of 
patents to implement the standards that are frequently used in mandatory certifi-
cation schemes.ﬂ It goes on to note that (p. 11-12) 
 European IP holders have continued to experience great difficulties in en-
gaging the Chinese telecommunications industry in licensing discussions 
over ﬁessentialﬂ patents, i.e. those cont
aining one or more claims that are 
critical to the implementation of a 
technical specification or standard. 
 The report expresses a concern that Ch
inese approaches to standardization 
are being used to support indigenous technologies, often by using a standard that 
reflects the distinctive capabilities of Chinese enterprises. European companies 

report that they have difficulties in licensing discussions with Chinese counter-
parts over the determination of ﬁessentialﬂ patents. Foreign stakeholders have 
also been concerned over the implementation of China™s information security 

initiative, the Multi-Level Protection Sche
me (MLPS), which ﬁ... includes do-
mestic IP requirements that do not allow foreign companies to build a variety of 
Chinese infrastructure, whether as part
 of government procurement or commer-
cial initiatives.ﬂ
7  AmCham has also expressed its con
cerns about Chinese standardization 
policies.
8 As with the European Chamber, AmCham has been concerned about 
Chinese initiatives for developing information security standards to the exclu-
sion of international companies. It has 
also commented on Ch
inese reluctance to 
recognize as ﬁinternational standardsﬂ those standards developed by U.S.-based 

firms which have not been approved by ISO, ITU, and IEC in spite of the fact 
that they are often otherwise globally
 accepted and meet WTO requirements for 
international standards. Like the European Chamber, AmCham has also ex-

pressed concern about rights of participation in some Chinese technical commit-
tees in spite of SAC regulations intended to allow foreign invested enterprises 
registered in China to participate and vote in technical committees. 
AmCham also reports that its member
 companies are often concerned that 
Chinese standard-setting procedures do no
t adequately protect proprietary in-
formation, including concerns that the copyrights and patents of U.S. SSOs are 
not adequately protected against infringement.
9 AmCham has urged SAC to 
cooperate more fully with international SSOs in order to bring its IPR policies 

up to the best international practices, and to work more closely with the State 
                                                           
7See also the case studies of MLPS and re
lated policies in Ahrens (2012), Ernst 
(2011), and Ernst and Martin (2010). 
8See various white papers at AmCham Chin
a, available at http://www.amchamchina. 
org/whitepaper. 
9Thus, while foreign companies express a desire to participate more fully in Chinese 
standards bodies, they are also concerned 
that participation carries IPR risks. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.130                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Intellectual Property Office (SIPO) and the National Copyright Administration 
of China (NCAC) (AmCham, 2012, 2013). 
Questions about standard-essential patents in China are also shaped by the 
broader Chinese legal context. This includes provisions of the Patent Law re-
quiring compulsory licensing when the ﬁp
ublic interestﬂ (largely unspecified) is 
at stake and in cases where the patent owne
r fails to ﬁsufficiently exploitﬂ (again 
largely unspecified) the patent. China™s Antimonopoly Law has also been a mat-
ter of concern to foreign companies who fear that they could be held in violation 

of that law for failing to license technology that may be needed for the innova-
tion needs of a third-party, potentially establishing market dominance under 
Chinese definitions (AmCham, 2012). 
It is not entirely clear, as of this wr
iting, how fully the newly released SAC 
ﬁRegulatory Measures on National Standards Involving Patents (Interim)ﬂ will 

address these concerns.
10 The ﬁMeasuresﬂ document is quite brief and states prin-
ciples in rather general terms. Its shor
t provisions on disclosure require partici-
pants in working groups to declare essential patents, although the provision is 

vague as to timing and whether full patent 
searches are expected
. Participants are 
given three licensing options: choose FRAND, FRAND-RF, or state an unwilling-
ness to license according to the first two te
rms. If the last is chosen, the standard 
cannot be based on the patent(s) in question.
 This is consistent with similar provi-
sions in many western SSO IPR policies. The state reserves the right to suspend 
the use of the standard in cases where an 
undisclosed patent has been included in 
the standard. The provisions called for a transfer of obligations in the event of a 
change in the ownership of the patent. 
More specifically, where a patent holder 
that has made a licensing declaration transf
ers the declared patent, it must have the 
transferee agree to be bound by that declaration. Again, this is consistent with sim-
ilar provisions in ETSI, ITU and other SSO IPR policies. 
On the question of mandatory standard
s, the ﬁMeasuresﬂ 
skirt around the 
question of compulsory licensing by noting that mandatory standards and prin-
ciples should not incorporate patented
 technology. When they do, however, the 
policy calls for negotiations between the holder of the patent and the state, with 
a suspension of the publication of the standard until the issue has been resolved. 
In cases where a mandatory standard does 
involve patents, the state is expected 
to publish a text of the standard and information about the IPR for 30 days, dur-
ing which time stakeholders are encouraged to submit additional information. 
The draft ﬁRegulatory Measuresﬂ were 
issued with an invitation for com-
ments by stakeholders. As of this writing, a number of foreign groups have 
submitted views on the draft, including 
The U.S. China Business Council, the 
American Intellectual Property Law Associ
ation, the American Bar Association, 
and the Intellectual Property Owners Association. While most stakeholder 
groups expressed support for the SAC initiative, they also submitted a number 
                                                           
10An English translation is available at h
ttp://sunsteinlaw.com/wp/wp-content/uploads/ 
2013/01/2013_01_IP_Update_PRC.pdf. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.131 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
of suggestions concerning definitional clarity, disclosure requirements, licensing 
requirements, and additional procedural transparency. 
In addition to the new SAC ﬁRegulatory Measures,ﬂ there have also been 
recent reports that CESA and the Electroni
cs Industry Associa
tion are anxious to resolve uncertainties about policies for st
andard essential patents, and are work-
ing with the Intellectual Property Center of MIIT on the development of a train-
ing program using policy principles developed by ETSI. 
China™s evolving competition policy is also shaping the ways in which 
SEP issues are being approached. For in
stance, the State Administration for In-
dustry and Commerce (SAIC) has recently 
issued a sixth draft for comments on 
its ﬁProvision of the Administrative Authorities for Industry and Commerce on 
Prohibition of Abuse of Intellectual Prop
erty to Exclude or Restrict Competi-
tion,ﬂ a document intended to provide guidance for the administration of China™s 

Antimonopoly Law, and which includes refe
rence to standard-setting practices.  
In addition, in an important case decided by the Shenzhen Intermediate 
People™s Court on February 4, 2013, Huawei was awarded $US 3.2 million in 

damages in two suits against InterDigital. 
These suits alleged that the latter had 
used its dominant market position to deny licenses to Huawei on FRAND terms. 
In the first case, Huawei alleged that InterDigital had a dominant market posi-

tion in China and the United States in the market for the licensing of essential 
patents it owned and abused its market power by engaging in differentiated pric-
ing, tying, and refusal to deal.  
In connection with this suit, the Shen
zhen court held that InterDigital vio-
lated China™s Antimonopoly Law by (1) making proposals for royalties from 
Huawei that the court believed were excessive; (2) tying the licensing of essen-

tial patents to the licensing of non-essential patents; (3) requesting as part of its 
licensing proposals that Huawei provide a grant-back of certain patent rights to 
InterDigital; and (4) commencing a United States International Trade Commis-

sion (USITC) action against Huawei while still in discussions with Huawei for a 
license (InterDigital Annual Report
, 2012; Nylen and Swift, 2013).  
In the second suit, Huawei argued
 that the FRAND commitments Inter-
Digital made to ETSI obligated it under Chinese law to negotiate with Huawei 
on FRAND terms, and requested the cour
t to determine a FRAND rate for li-
censing SEPs to Huawei. The court rule
d that royalties for InterDigital patents 
essential to implementing 2G, 3G, and 4G standards should not exceed 0.019 
percent of the price of individual Huawei products, but has not yet made public 

the reasoning for deciding on this rate (InterDigital Annual Report, 2012).  
In both the Shenzhen court decision and the SAIC draft, we see how com-
petition policy may introduce a policy bias ag
ainst the interests of rights holders, 
a bias which would be troubling to some foreign corporations. But they also 
point to a still evolving situation, calling for the further clarification of the IPR 
policies of Chinese SSOs.  

 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.132                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Policy and institutional uncertainty 
 Over the past decade, Chinese appro
aches to standardization, including 
policies for essential patents in standards, have continued to evolve in ways that 
show sensitivity to international norms and the interests of international stake-

holders, including multinational companies in some circumstances, although in 
some instances have excluded foreign comp
any participation. At the same time, 
the commitment to building a standards regime to serve Chinese national inter-

ests remains powerful. Thus, the development of policies for standard-essential 
patents is still a work in progress and continues to reflect the problems of ac-
commodating the competing objectives noted at the outset. 
These problems are made more complex by ongoing institutional uncer-
tainty. The recent 18
th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party has brought 
into office a new group of leaders who express optimism over China™s future but 
also recognize the daunting challenges 
they face. The new party chairman, Xi 
Jingping, has celebrated China™s recent progress and referred to China as being 

in a period of ﬁnational revivalﬂ or ﬁrejuvenationﬂ (
fu xing
). National technolog-
ical development to enhance national capabilities for innovation is central to this 
revitalization in the minds of Chinese leaders. Yet in spite of aggressive policies 

to promote innovation, including rapidly increasing R&D expenditures, there is 
a widespread disappointment in actual achievements, and a recognition that ex-
isting institutions are not serving Chinese 
aspirations, witness the weak record of 
producing successful
 standards and high-quality e
xploitable patents. In recent 
months there have been growing discussions of further institutional reform. 
While detailed reform proposals have yet to appear, it is likely that a number of 

the institutions involved with standardization and intellectual property policies 
will be affected. 
In addition to this institutional uncertainty, approaches to standard-
essential patents may also be affected by changing attitudes towards intellectual 
property. As suggested above, Chinese in
terests in ICT standardization have 
been strongly influenced by concerns 
over licensing fees and the overall eco-
nomic benefits redounding to those controlling standards and owning the intel-
lectual property. In this sense, China has sought to secure what it considers to be 

a more equitable access to standards in 
order to better serve its manufacturing 
activities; monetizing IP and standards has not been the primary goal (Breznitz 
and Murphree, 2012). As China™s patent portfolio has expanded, however, so 

too has its patent litigation and there are signs that it may be moving towards a 
much greater concern for IP monetization. If so, we may see the further growth 
of new markets for IP and the emergence 
of new players such as non-practicing 
entities (NPEs). These developments would introduce significant new dynamics 
to issues of standards and IPR policy in China. 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.133 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
8.3 India 
 Like China, India has been concerned about the benefits flowing to West-
ern IP owners and the questions of equity
 concerning their distribution. Also like 
China, its standards regime has had to make adjustments in response to WTO 
imperatives. Unlike China, however, I
ndia had, until recently, shown less of a 
strategic orientation towards developing its own standards and intellectual prop-

erty, preferring instead to rely on established international standards, and on 

international practice for developing po
licies affecting patents in standards. 
More recently, though, awar
eness that its huge market 
and distinctive social and 
physical conditions present interesting technological opportunities has prompted 

much more attention to Indian standards development and the creation of Indian 
intellectual property. Indian thinking about a more strategic approach to stand-

ards development has also been influenced by concerns that imports from China 
are capturing market share from Indian firms.
 Further, India™s firms wish to raise 
quality and save testing and certification costs by complying with trusted stand-
ards, while public authorities tend to focus support policies on higher-quality 
enterprises. This is evident, for instance, in the Government of India National Telecom 
Policy, introduced in 2012, which focuses not only on a significant expansion of 

telecom services, but also calls attention to the need to stimulate innovation in 
Indian industry and develop new strategies for promoting Indian telecom tech-

nology. In language reminiscent of Chinese policy discourse, the new Policy 
calls for numerical targets for the growth
 and self-sufficiency of the industry, 
and the creation of ﬁ... a roadmap to align technology, demand, standards and 
regulations for enhancing competitiveness of domestic manufacturingﬂ (Gov-
ernment of India, 2012). It calls attention to the importance of procurement pref-
erences for ﬁ...domestica
lly manufactured telecommunication products...,ﬂ and 
the need to promote indigenous R&D and IPR creation as part of the current 12
th five-year plan period. As part of this effort, India should:  

 Develop and establish standards to meet national requirements, generate 

IPRs, and participate in international standardization bodies to contribute 

in (the) formulation of global standards, thereby making India a leading 
nation in the area of international telecom standardization. This will be 
supported by establishing appropriate linkages with industry, R&D institu-

tions, academia, telecom service providers and users.
 (Government of In-
dia, 2012) 
 
Key institutions
  The Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) 
is the Indian government™s main in-
stitution for standardization. Established in 1987, superseding the Indian Stand-
ards Institution established in 1947, BIS operates 14 industry related sectors, 
each of which is managed by a ﬁdivision 
council.ﬂ Of greatest relevance to this 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.134                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
study is the Electronics and Information Technology Division Council (LITD), 
created in 1977, which includes 21 ﬁsectional committeesﬂ covering various 

fields of IT, including computer communications, networks and interfaces. As 
with other BIS division councils, LITD committees have attempted to harmo-
nize their standards with those in ITU, IEC, and ISO.  
BIS reportedly has not yet developed its own IPR policies (Ramakrishna, 
et. al, 2012). Since many of its standard
s are technically equivalent to interna-
tional standards, the BIS position has been to rely on the IPR policies of the in-

ternational standards organizations that developed the standard. BIS leaves it to 
manufacturers wishing to use a standard to negotiate license terms if IPR is an 
issue. A second important government body is the Telecommunication Engineer-
ing Center (TEC) of the Department of Telecommunications of the Indian Min-

istry of Communications and Information 
Technology. TEC has a lead role in 
the development of standards for telecom equipment, services, and interopera-
bility. It maintains regular interaction with ETSI and the ITU and participates in 

a number of other international standards setting bodies, such as ITU-T, the 
WiMAX forum, IETF, IEEE, and the like. As with standards bodies under BIS, 
it appears that TEC also does not have a well-established IPR policy. A good bit 

of its work is to develop specifications for equipment to be used under Indian 
conditions, with most of this equipment conforming to ITU standards. Thus, 
TEC looks to the IPR policy of the ITU in developing its standards and specifi-

cations. TEC is also supporting the development of a new national telecom 
standards development organization, called for in the National Telecom Policy. 
In May 2013, the establishment of a new Telecom Standards Development Soci-

ety of India (TSDSI) was announced with membership drawn from diverse 
stakeholders including manufacturers, serv
ice providers, research and academic 
institutions and government organizations (Department of Telecommunications, 

2013). 
In addition to these two mainline governmental institutions, two non-
governmental standards bodies should be noted. The Global ICT Standardization 
Forum for India (GISFI), founded in 2008, seeks to provide greater coherence to 
ICT standardization in India in such em
erging fields as energy, telemedicine, 
wireless robotics, and biotechnology, and to integrate more fully Indian ICT 
standards initiatives with international trends. Its members include Indian and 
foreign firms and Indian research institutions, but it seeks participation from the 

full array of stakeholders.
11 It maintains working groups in the areas of infor-
mation security and privacy, future radio networks, the Internet, cloud and ser-
vice-oriented networks, green ICT, and spectrum. In December 2011, GISFI 
                                                           
11Corporate members include Niksun, NEC, Er
icsson, Tejas Networks, Motorola, Tata 
Consultancy Services Limited, Huawei, N
okia Siemens Networks, 
Veriserve, and Sam-
sung. For a complete list, see http://www.gisfi.org/membership.php. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.135 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
cooperated with the ITU in sponsoring a 
workshop on standards and intellectual 
property rights. 
GISFI maintains an IPR policy based on that of ETSI, but having its own 
features as well. The policy seeks to 
reduce economic and legal risks to stake-
holders and to balance the interests of rights holders and the needs of the public. 

It calls for timely disclosure but does not obligate members to engage in patent 
searches. When SEPs are brou
ght to the attention of GISFI, its Director General 
is expected to request from the patent owner an irrevocable commitment to grant 

licenses on FRAND terms. The owner is al
so expected to make reasonable ef-
forts to notify a new assignee of GISFI 
standards commitments 
in the event of a 
transfer. 
In the event that the patent owner refuses to license, GISFI will explore 
the availability of alternative technologies for the standard. If an alternative 

technology does not exist, and if the patent owner is a member of GISFI, the 
Director General will ask for a reconsider
ation of the licensing decision, and if 
the decision is upheld, a written explanation of the owner™s decision not to li-

cense within three months 
of the request. The explan
ation, and supporting in-
formation, will then be sent to the GISF
I General Assembly for consideration. If 
the patent owner is not a member, the Di
rector General shall contact the patent 
owner requesting an explanation for the licensing decision and requesting recon-
sideration. If the decision not to license is upheld, the matter will be referred to 
the General Assembly for reconsideration, with counsel, of whether the patent in 

question is essential for the standard. In
 cases where a license is not available 
after the publication of the standard, the Director General will again take the 
initiative to contact the patent owner with
 requests for an explanation and recon-
sideration. Thereafter, the matter will ag
ain be referred to th
e General Assembly 
for review, with members urged to use their good offices to find a solution. 
 A second non-governmental organization of interest is the Development 
Organization of Standards for Telecommunications in India (DOSTI), a 
private SDO committed to the develo
pment of telecom standards suitable 
for Indian conditions. It currently has eight working groups and a mem-
bership that includes both Indian entities and foreign companies.
12  DOSTI maintains an IPR bearing a resemblance to that of GISFI. It also 
calls for timely disclosure but carries no obligation for full patent searches. 

Owners of SEPs will be requested by th
e DOSTI Director General to grant ir-
revocable licenses on FRAND terms. In th
e event of transfers,
 the patent owner 
is expected to notify the assignee of
 any commitments made to DOSTI. The 
                                                           
12Members currently include Cellular Operators Association of India (COAI), Associ-
ation of Unified Telecom Service Providers 
of India (AUSPI), Tejas Networks, TCOE 
India, CEWiT, Ericsson, Qu
alcomm, Nokia Siemens Networks, IIT Bombay, IIM Ah-
medabad. Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.136                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
DOSTI policy provides for cases where tr
ansferability is disputed, including the 
conduct of an IPR policy search if reque
sted by the Department of Telecommu-
nications. 
In the event of non-availability of licenses, the DOSTI Executive Council 
will consider whether an alternative technology is available. If not, work on the 

standard will be discontinued and the Director General will ask the members to 
reconsider. If the decision not to license
 is maintained, the member will be asked 
to submit in writing the reasons for refusing to license within three months, after 

which the matter will be referred
 to the Executive Committee.  
In cases where the IPR owner is not a DOSTI member, the policy calls for 
efforts to be made through direct DOSTI contacts and through the good offices 
of members to have the owner reconsider
 or present in writing the reasons for 
refusing to license. If there is no recons
ideration or if the owner refuses to re-
spond within three months, the matter is referred to the Executive Committee for 
its consideration. This may lead to the referral of the matter to the appropriate 
working group to consider a technological workaround or to the Department of 

Telecommunications for appropriate action, including perhaps the non-
recognition of the standard. The DOSTI policy also provides for IPR owned by 
DOSTI itself, including FRAND licensi
ng provisions (Ramakrishna, et. al, 
2012). 
Most recently, the government of India announced the development of the 
Telecom Standards Developmen
t Society, India (TSDSI).
13 TSDSI will bring 
together stakeholders from industry, academia, and government organizations in 
ﬁ–an autonomous body which will drive consensus regarding standards to meet 
national requirements.ﬂ  

 e-Government and information security 
 Due to its diverse and often incompatible legacy government information 
systems, the government of India faces 
significant challenges in providing for 
effective e-government services. In its efforts to modernize e-government, it has 
introduced an open standards policy which includes a mandatory royalty-free 
approach to licensing, and requirements that the standard have a technology 

neutral specification and be adapted and maintained by a not-for-profit organiza-
tion. In the event that an open standard 
meeting these conditions is not available, 
the policy also provides for interim sta
ndards, the IPR of which can be licensed 
on a FRAND basis, and which relaxes the not-for-profit organization require-
ment (Government of India, 2010). The e-government policy also includes 
guidelines for information security. It establishes an e-Governance Security As-

surance Framework based on ISO 27001 consistent with the U.S. Information 
Security Program for Federal Informati
on Systems (Ramakrishna, et. al, 2012). 
                                                           
13http://www.tta.or.kr/include/Download.jsp?filename=externalDocument/GSC17-PLEN-
84_India_s_Statement_at_GSC_Korea.docx.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.137 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
India in transition 
 The growing importance of India in the global ICT industries, based on its 
market size and the growing technological capabilities of the Indian technical 

community, is, as in China, leading to new attention to standards and intellectual 

property rights. This has affected not only the behavior of Indian stakeholders, 
but has also led to the growth of standard-related activities involving interna-
tional standards bodies and 
corporations as well. IEEE, for instance, has estab-
lished a ﬁstandards interest groupﬂ (SIG) for India with the goal of stimulating 
greater Indian involvement 
in the IEEE global standa
rds process (IEEE, 2011). 
GISFI has been active in working with ITU. Interestingly, the Chinese firm 

Huawei, which has an active presence in 
India and is a GISFI member, recently 
sponsored a joint ITU-GISFI workshop on ﬁBridging the Standardization Gap.ﬂ 
It is notable that explicit attention to the development of an IPR policy for 
standardization is found more in India™s nongovernmental SSOs than in the gov-
ernment standards agencies. Indian appr
oaches to the development of policies 
for IPRs in standards have tended to follow those of established international 
standards bodies, and this is likely to continue. As indicated in the National Tel-
ecom Policy, however, there seems to be a growing appetite for government 

supported indigenous Indian standards development efforts incorporating Indian 
intellectual property. India is thus at an interesting transitional point where the 
reconciliation of emerging Indian industrial policy objectives and harmonization 

with international practices are likely to face new challenges. 
 8.4 Brazil 
 Like India and China, Brazil is an important emerging economy committed 
to moving up the value chain through greater attention to enhancing technological 
capabilities.
14 Also like India, however, it has shown less of a strategic orientation 
towards standards and IPR development than China and its standards regime is 

only gradually coming to grips with issues such as defining and licensing SEPs. It 
appears, as of this writing, that Braz
il does not have any well-developed policies 
for dealing with IPR in standards (Barbosa, 2012). 
 Key institutions 
 Brazil™s National System of Metrology, Standardization and Industrial Qual-
ity (SINMETRO) and its patent and trademark office (INPI), are both part of the 

Ministry of Development, Industry and Foreign Trade. The SINMETRO system 

includes the National Council of Metrology
, Standardization and Industrial Quali-
ty (CONMETRO), the National Institute of Metrology, Standardization, and In-

dustrial Quality (INMETRO) and the Brazilian Association of Technical Norms 
                                                           
14A key development was the passage 
of the 2004 Brazilian Innovation Law. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.138                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
(ABNT), which serves as Brazil™s main or
ganization for standardization. ABNT is 
a private organization but since 1940 has been officially recognized as the national 

standards body and receives p
ublic as well as private 
funding. It develops stand-
ards through its own technical committees 
and also accredits sectoral standardiza-
tion bodies. SINMETRO and ABNT policies call for the use of international 

standards to the extent possible and as re
ferences for local work on standardization 
and technical specifications. 
Although Brazil has yet to develop explicit policies for IPR in standards, the 
relationships between standard-setting a
nd intellectual property are becoming 
more prominent. Brazil™s 2010 public procurement law, for instance, allows for 
the consideration of technology and industrial policy objectives in procurement 
decisions, including purchasing decisions in support of the development of nation-
al standards in ICT and the promotion of open standards for e-government.
15  The Brazilian patent office, INPI, plays a role in IPR in standards issues. It 
is empowered to analyze and approve license payments, including those related 
to standards. Under Brazilian law, patents 
can only be transferred to new assign-
ees following specific action by the Patent and Trademark Office. Competition 
policy and the role of the Competition 
Administrative Court (CADE) are also 
significant in how IPR in standards is trea
ted, especially with regard to patent 
pools and royalty rates (Barbosa, 2012). 
 8.5 Conclusions and Recommendations 
 In a global economy where intellectual property has become an increas-
ingly valuable asset, it is not surprising that key emerging economies are taking 

the creation, protection, and utilization of that asset to be matters of national and 
corporate importance. Likewise, the grow
ing strategic importance of technical 
standards is also attracting national and firm-level policy attention. We should 

not be surprised, therefore, that the role of intellectual property in standard-
setting will assume a more central place in
 the evolution of the policy and legal 
systems of these three emer
ging countries as it clearly
 already has in China. 
Given the growing size and importance of these economies, the ways in which 
they approach the development of their domestic IPR and standards regimes will 

have important implications for the norms and institutions by which internation-
al standardization and IPR affairs are governed. 
In each of the countries reviewed, we see interesting tensions between 
tendencies toward harmonization with international norms and practices and 
tendencies towards more techno-nationalis
t agendas supporting the protection of 
national industries and the building of national champions. This tension is per-

haps most evident in China, where a se
nse of the strategic importance of stand-
ards and IPR is more developed, but it is certainly evident in the evolving indus-
trial policies of India and Brazil as well. 
                                                           
15Brazil, like China, has not joined the WTO Government Procurement Agreement. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.139 
IPR and Standards in Emerging Economies 
In short, these three emerging econom
ies are all working towards national 
regimes for managing the relationships between IPR and standards in ways that 

serve national interests but which also accord with international best practices. 
The integration of these objectives, in th
e first instance, will be affected by the 
evolution of government-industry relations, especially with regard to the role of 

the state, as opposed to industrial enterp
rises, in taking the lead in standard-
setting activities. This question, in turn, is
 a function of a deeper set of issues 
involving political traditions and state-society relations which are beyond the 

scope of this report. But, in addition, the evolution of these national regimes will 
also be strongly influenced by the development of the intellectual property as-
sets which stakeholders in these countries bring to domestic standard-setting and 
international standardization activities. The weak patent portfolios that, until 
recently, have been characteristic of most
 firms in these countries have ensured 
that they have in effect been ﬁstandards 
takersﬂ rather than ﬁstandards makers.ﬂ 
As technological development proceeds and domestic patent portfolios expand 
we can expect that this situation will ch
ange, and with it, more robust approach-
es to standardization will emerge along
 with more focused attention to the 
treatment of standard-essential IPR. 
In all three countries reviewed, the 
development of a modern technical 
standards regime is still a work in progress. This is true even for China, where 
its learning curve is notably steep and it has shown a far more robust approach 
to building a national standardization system than has India or Brazil. While 

there are limits to how much
 the U.S. government can contribute to the devel-
opment of these standards regimes, the fact 
that they are all in varying stages of 
formation suggests that there are possibilities for mutually beneficial interac-

tions, especially with regard to educatio
n, training and raising awareness as to 
the importance of developing IPR policies in the early stages of building SSO 
capabilities. As the AVS case illustrates, an
 awareness of international practices 
combined with good counsel from knowledgeable foreign experts can lead to the 
development of positive policies and proc
edures which avoid pitfalls experi-
enced by others.  
 Recommendation 8:1
  The U.S. government, should explore ways to promote awareness of the 
importance of developing IPR policies at an early stage of the development of 

SSOs in these and other emerging economies, and should, in conjunction with 
non-governmental standards entities, explore ways to offer training programs for 
those working to develop their organizations and the policies needed for suc-

cessful national standardization. 
 Recommendation 8:2
  In the meantime, agencies of the United States government, such as the 
United States Patent and Trademark Office,
 the Office of the United States Trade 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.140                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Representative, and the National Institu
te of Standards and Technology should 
closely monitor and report on continuing de
velopments in these countries and oth-
er major emerging economies regarding st
andard-setting and the management of 
intellectual property. 
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.141 
References  Adams, J., D. Pendlebury and B. Stembr
idge. 2013. Building Bricks: Exploring the 
Global Research and Innovation Impact of 
Brazil, Russia, India, China and South 
Korea. Thomson Reuters. Available: ht
tp://sciencewatch.com/sites/sw/files/sw-
article/media/grr-brick.pdf. 
Ahnrens, N. 2012. National Security and Chin
a™s Information Security Standards. Wash-
ington D.C.: Center for Strate
gic and International Studies. 
Almunia, J. 2012. Competition Policy fo
r Innovation and Growth: Keeping Markets 
Open and Efficient. Available: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-12-
172_en.htm?locale=en. 
AmCham China. 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013. White
 Papers Available: http://www.amcham 
china.org/whitepaper.  
American Bar Association. 2007. Standards 
Development Patent 
Policy Manual. Chica-
go: American Bar Association. 
American National Standards Institute. Rev 200
8. 3.1 ANSI Patent Policy - Inclusion of 
Patents in American National Standards. Washington, D.C.: ANSI. 
An, B. 2012. The Global Governance of Standardization: The Challenges of Conver-
gence. Research Center for Chinese Po
litics and Business Working Paper No. 32. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University. 
AVS. 2008. Intellectual Property Rights Polic
y of the Audio Video Coding Standard 
Working Group of China. Availabl
e: http://www.avs.org.cn/en.  
Barbosa, D. 2012. Intellectual Property and Standards in Brazil. Available: http://sites. 
nationalacademies.org/PGA/step/PGA_058712. 
Bekkers, R. and A. Martinelli. 2012. Knowledge
 positions in high-tech markets: trajecto-
ries, standards, strategies and true i
nnovators. Technological 
Forecasting & Social Change. 79:1192-1216. 
Bekkers, R. and A. Updegrove. 
2012. A Study of IPR Policies and Practices of a Repre-
sentative Group of Standards-Setting Or
ganizations Worldw
ide. Available: 
http://www.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=18510.  
Blind, K. 2011. Study on the Interplay betw
een Standards and Intellectual Property Rights 
(IPRs). Tender No: ENTR/09/015 OJEU S1
36 of 18/07/2009, Final Report. Availa-
ble: http://ec.europa.eu/enterp
rise/policies/european-standa
rds/files/standards_policy/ 
ipr-workshop/ipr_study_final_report_en.pdf.  
Breznitz, D. and M. Murphree. 2012. Shak
ing Grounds? Technology Standards in China. 
Available: http://s
ites.nationalacademies.org/PGA/step/PGA_058712. Chia, T. 2012. Fighting the smartphone pate
nt war with RAND-encumbered patents, 
Berkeley Tech. L.J. 27: 209-240. 
Clougherty, J. and M. Grajek. 2012. Internat
ional Standards and International Trade: 
Evidence from ISO 9000 Diffusion. Nationa
l Bureau Economics Research Work-
ing Paper 18132. Cambridge, MA.  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.142                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Contreras, J. 2013. Tec
hnical standards and ex ante disclo
sure: results and analysis of an 
empirical study. Jurimetrics J. 53:163-211. 
Contreras, J. 2013. Fixing 
FRAND: a pseudo-pool approach 
to standards-based patent 
licensing. Antitrust L.J. 79:1-43. 
Contreras, J. 2012. Survey of Bioinformatics
 Standards. Available: http://sites.national 
academies.org/PGA/step/PGA_058712. 
Contreras, J. and C. McMani
s. 2012. Materials Su
stainability Standa
rds and Intellectual 
Property. Available: http://sites.na
tionalacademies.org/PGA/step/PGA_058712. 
Damien Geradin, Anne Layne-Farrar, and 
A. Jorge Padilla, The Complements Problem 
Within Standard Setting: Assessing The Evidence On Royalty Stacking, 
B.U. J. 
Sci. & Tech. L
., Vol. 14:144-176. 
DeNardis, L. 2012. E-government Acquisition 
Processes in the U.S., EU, India and Ja-
pan. Available: http:/
/sites.nationalacademies.
org/PGA/step/PGA_058712.  
Department of Telecommunicat
ions. 2013. Statement of Inte
nt by India, Global Stand-
ards Collaboration Conf
erence, Jeju Island, Korea. Av
ailable: http://www.tta.or.kr/ 
include/Download.jsp?filename=externalDocument/GSC17-PLEN84_India_s_Stat 
ement_at_GSC_Korea.docx. 
Ernst, D. 2006. Innovation Offshoring: Asia™s
 Emerging Role in Global Innovation Net-
works. East-West Center Special 
Reports Number 10. Honolulu, HI. 
Ernst, D. 2011. Indigenous Innovation and 
Globalization: The Challenge for China™s 
Standardization Strategy. La Jolla, CA: University of California Institute of Global 
Conflict and Cooperation. Honolulu, HI. 
Ernst, D. and S. Martin. 2010. The Common 
Criteria for Information Technology Securi-
ty Evaluation Œ Implications for China™s Po
licy on Information Security Standards. 
East-West Center Working Paper No. 108. Honolulu, HI. 
European Telecommunications Standards Ins
titute Rules of Procedure. Annex 6: ETSI 
Intellectual Property Rights Policy. 2013
. Available: http://www.etsi.org/images/ 
files/IPR/etsi-ipr-policy.pdf. 
European Commission. Directorate-General 
for Competition Press Release. 2013. Anti-
trust: Commission sends Statement of Objections to Motorola Mobility on poten-
tial misuse of mobile phone standard essent
ial patents. Brussels. Available: http:// 
europa.eu/rapid/press
-release_IP-13-406_en.htm.
 European Commission, Directorate-General for Competition Press Release. 2012. Com-
mission Sends Statement of Objections to
 Samsung on potential misuse of mobile 
phone standard-essential patents. Brussels. 
Available: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-12-1448_en.htm. European Commission, Directorate-General for Competition Memo. 2012. Samsung Œ En-
forcement of ETSI Standards Essential Pate
nts (SEPs). Brussels. Available: http:// 
europa.eu/rapid/press-rele
ase_MEMO-12-1021_en.htm.  
European Commission, Directorate-General fo
r Competition Press Release. 2012. Commis-
sion Opens Proceedings Against Motorola. Br
ussels. Available: http://europa.eu/rapi 
d/press-release_IP-12-345_en.htm.  
European Commission. 2012. Google-Motorola Mobility Merger Procedure Article 6(1)(b) 
Decision. Case No. Comp/M. 6381. Luxembour
g. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/com 
petition/mergers/cases/decisions/m6381_20120213_20310_2277480_EN.pdf.  
European Commission. O.J. 2011. Communication from the Commission on Guidelines on 
the Applicability of Article 101 of the Treat
y on the Functioning of the EU to Hori-
zontal Co-operation Agreements. Availabl
e: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/ 
LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2011:011:0001:0072:EN:PDF. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.143
 References 
European Commission. 2010. Guidelines on the 
applicability of Article 101 of the Treaty 
on the Functioning of the European Union 
to horizontal co-operation agreements, 
SEC 528/2. Brussels. Available: http://e
c.europa.eu/competit
ion/consultations/20 
10_horizontals/guidelines_en.pdf. 
Executive Office of the President. 2013. Pate
nt Assertion and U.S. Innovation. The White 
House, Washington, D.C. Available: http
://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/ 
docs/patent_report.pdf.  
Farrell, J. J. Hayes, C. Shapiro, and T. Su
llivan. 2007. ﬁStandard se
tting, patents, and 
hold-up. Antitrust Law Journal. 74:603-670. 
Gallini, N. and B. D. Wright. 1990. Technol
ogy transfer under asymmetric information. 
RAND Journal of Economics. 21(1):147-160.  
Gilbert, R. 2011. Deal or no deal? licensi
ng negotiations in sta
ndard-setting organiza-
tions. Antitrust L. J. 77:855-888. 
Global ICT Standardisation Forum for India. GISFI Membership
 List. Available: 
http://www.gisfi.org/membership.php. Goudelis, M. 2012. Presentation on EPO Coope
ration with Standards Development Or-
ganisations. Available: http://sites.n
ationalacademies.org/PGA/step/PGA_072825. 
Government of India. Ministry of Comm
unication and Information Technology. Depart-
ment of Information Technology. 2010. Policy on Open Standards for e-Governance
. Available: http://egovernance.gov.in/polic
y/policy-on-open-standards-for-e-govern 
ance/Policy%20on%20Open%20Standards%20for%20e-Governance.pdf. 
Government of India. Ministry of Communi
cation and Information Technology. Depart-
ment of Information Technology. 2012. 
National Telecom Policy 2012. Available: 
http://www.dot.gov.in/ntp/NTP-06.06.2012-final.pdf. 
Hesse, Renata. 2012. Six ﬁSmallﬂ
 Proposals for SSOs Before Lunch (Remarks as Prepared 
for the ITU-T Patent Roundtable). United St
ates Department of Justice. Washington, 
D.C. Available: http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/speeches/287855.pdf.  
Huang, T. and C. Reader. 2013. China™s AB
S Intellectual Property Rights Policy - A New 
Approach for Developing Open Standards. Available: http://www.google.com/url? 
sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&
cd=1&sqi=2&ved=0CDEQFjAA&url=http
%3A%2F%2Fcdn.nbr.org%2Fdownloads%2FCS09_HUANG_slides_EN.ppt&ei=G
N_UUOfiMMjxigL6lYD4DQ&usg=AFQj
CNGq3lItnZaPOmBgV5Mxtyl2qMIqkw
&bvm=bv.1355534169,d.cGE&cad=rja. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engi
neers-Standards Association. 2011. IEEE An-
nounces Standards Interest Group (SIG) fo
r India: Move to Propel India™s In-
volvement in the IEEE Global Standards Pr
ocess. Available: http://standards.ieee. 
org/news/2011/sig.html.  International Telecommunications Union. 20
12. Guidelines for Implementation of the 
Common Patent Policy for ITU-T/ITU-R/IS
O/IEC 23/04/02. Available: http://www. 
itu.int/dms_pub/itu-t/oth/04/04/T04040000010003PDFE.pdf.  
International Telecommunications Union. 20
12. Joint ITU-GISFI Workshop on Bridging 
the Standardization Gap: Sustainable Rural Communications. Available: http://www. 
itu.int/en/ITU-T/Workshops-and-Se
minars/bsg/Pages/default.aspx.  
InterDigital, Inc. Invention Collaboration C
ontribution: InterDigital Annual Report. 2012. 
Delaware. Available: http://files.shar
eholder.com/downloa
ds/IDCC/2696817853x0x 657871/3375CC54-04CA-4694-83E4-DEBCB7508F97/2012_Annual_Report_and_ 
2013_Proxy_Statement.pdf. 
Ipeg. 2011 Nokia v. IPcom 
Ongoing UMTS Patent Litigation in Germany
. Available: 
http://www.ipeg.eu/nokia-vs-ipcom-ongoing-
umts-patent-litiga
tion-in-germany/. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.144                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Jillavenkatesa, A., H. Evans, and H. Wixon. 
2012. Patents and Intellectual Property Man-
agement in Nanotechnology: A NIST Perspective. Available: http://sites.national 
academies.org/PGA/step/PGA_072825.  
Kesan, Jay and C. Hayes. 2012.
 Patent Transfers in the Information Age: FRAND Com-
mitments and Transparency
. Available: http://sites.nationalacademies.org/PGA/step/ 
PGA_058712. 
Kai-Uwe K., F. Scott 
Morton, and H. Shelanski. 2013
. Standard Setting Organizations 
Can Help Solve the Standard Essential 
Patents Licensing Problem. Competition 
Policy International Antitru
st Chronicle. Available: 
https://www.competitionpoli 
cyinternational.com/assets/Free/Sc
ottMortonetalMar-13Special.pdf. 
Kramler, T. 2012. FRAND Co
mmitments and EU Competition Law. Available: www.itu. int/dms_pub/itu-t/oth/06/5B/T065B0000360016PPTE.ppt
. Layne-Farrar, A., J. Padilla, and R. Schmal
ensee. 2007. Pricing Patents for Licensing in 
Standard-Setting Organizations: Making Sense of FRAND Commitments. CEMFI 
Working Paper No. 0702. Madrid. Availa
ble: ftp://ftp.cemfi.es/wp/07/0702.pdf. 
Lemley, M. and C. Shapiro. 2007. Patent 
holdup and royalty stacking. Texas Law Re-
view 85:1991-2049. 
Lemley, M. 2002. Intellectual
 Property Rights and Standard-Setting Organizations. Calif. 
L. Rev. 90:1889-1980. 
Li, W. (n.d.). The Intellectual Property Issue in the Standardization Process: A Case 
Study From China™s Experience. Availa
ble: http://www.thebolingroup.com/unifi 
er_divider/powerpoint_slides/wenwenli.pdf.  
Majoras, D. 2012. Dissenting 
Statement of Chairman Majoras In the Matter of Negotiat-
ed Data Solutions, LLC, File No. 0510094.
 Federal Trade Commission, Washing-
ton: D.C. 
Majoras, D. 2005. Recognizing the Procompeti
tive Potential of Royalty Discussions in 
Standard Setting. Federal Trade Commission, Washington, D.C. 
Maskus, K. 2012. Private Rights and Public 
Problems: The Global Economics of Intellec-
tual Property in the 21
st Century, Washington, D.C.: 
Peterson Institute for Interna-
tional Economics. Merrill, T. and H. E. Smith. 2000. Optimal Standardization in the Law of Property: The 
Numerus Clausus Principle, Yale L.J. 110:1-70. 
Mock, V. 2012. Samsung Drops Injunc
tions Applications Against Apple. 
The Wall Street 
Journal. Available: http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324407504578 
187043081010804.html. 
Moenius, J. 2004. Information versus Produc
t Adaptation: The Role of Standards in 
Trade. Working Paper. Northwestern 
University Kellogg School, Evanston IL. 
Nylen, L. and M. Swift. 2013. Chinese Cour
t Eye Proper Royalty Rates for Patents Es-
sential to Industry Standards. Available: http
://www.mlex.com/US/content.aspx? 
ID=360997. 
Office of Management and Budget. 1998. OMB 
Circular A-119; Federal Participation in 
the Development and Use of Voluntary C
onsensus Standards and in Conformity 
Assessment Activities. Fina
l Revision. 63 FR 8546. Ava
ilable: http://www.white 
house.gov/omb/circulars_a119.  
Ono, N. 2012. Avoid Japanizat
ion: Lessons from Japanese 
Gridlock on Patent Assign-
ment Recordation System. Available:
 http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2015119. 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development. 2008. 
The Internationalisa-
tion of Business R&D: Evidence, Imp
acts and Implications. Paris: OECD. 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and 
Development. 2012. OE
CD Science, Indus-
try, and Technology Outlook. Paris: OECD. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.145
 References 
Prud™homme, D. 2012. Dulling the Cutting-Edge
: How Patent-Related Policies and Prac-
tices Hamper Innovation in China
. European Chamber. Available: http://www. 
europeanchamber.com.cn/documen
ts/confirm/en/52175d3bdf80f/en/pdf/14. 
Raes, S. 2010. Who needs standards related pa
tent registers and what should they look 
like? Presentation at the European Co
mmission Workshop on Tensions between 
IPR & Standards. Brussels. 
Ramakrishna, T., S.K. Murthy, and S. Makhotra
. 2012. Intellectual Property in ICT Stand-
ards in India Available: http://sites.nationalacademies.org/PGA/step/PGA_058712. 
Ramirez, E. 2012. Prepared Statement of the Federal Trade Commission before the United 
States Committee on the Judiciary Concerni
ng Oversight of the Impact on Competi-
tion Orders to Enforce Standard-Essentia
l Patents. Federal Trade Commission, 
Washington, D.C. Available: http://www.
ftc.gov/speeches/ramirez/120711sep-stmt 
offtc.pdf. 
Rizzolo, M. 2013. Essential Patent Blog. Huaw
ei, ZTE Seek Stay of InterDigital 3G/4G 
ITC Investigation. Available: http://essentialpatentblog.com/2013/02/huawei-zte-
seek-stay-of-interdigital-3g4g-itc-investigation/. 
Robinson, F. and A. Torello. 2011. 
Wall Street Journal
, 2nd Update: EU: Requested Apple, 
Samsung Mobile Patent Data.  
Robinson, G. 2004. Personal Property Se
rvitudes. U.Chi. L.Rev. 71(4):1449-1523. 
Salant, D.J. 2009. Formulas for Fair, Reas
onable, and Non-Discri
minatory Royalty De-
termination. International Journal of IT
 Standards and Standa
rdization Research. 
7(1): 66-75. Scott-Morton, F. 2012. The Role of Standards in
 the Current Patent Wars. U.S. Department 
of Justice, Washington: D.C. Available:
 http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/speeches/ 
289708.pdf. 
Shaohua, Shi. 2007. Introduction of the CESI
 IPR Policy Template. Standardization Devel-
opment Research Center, China Electronics
 Standardization Institute. Available: 
http://docbox.etsi.org/workshop/20
07/2007_IPR_Symposium/012.1%20EN%20-% 
20CESI_SHI%20SHAOHUA.pdf. 
Sharma, C. 2012. Global Mobile State of th
e Union 2012. Available: http://www.chetan 
sharma.com/research.htm.  
Spence, A. M. 1973. Job Market Signa
ling. Quarterly Journal of Economics
. 87: 355-374. 
Standards Administration of China. 2013. Re
gulatory Measures on National Standards In-
volving Patents (Interim). Available: h
ttp://sunsteinlaw.com/w
p/wp-content/uploads/ 
2013/01/2013_01_IP_Update_PRC.pdf. 
Suttmeier, R. and X. Yao. 2011. China™s IP 
Transition: Rethinking Intellectual Property 
Rights in a Rising China. National Bureau of Asian Research. Available: http:// 
www.nbr.org/publications/issue.aspx?id=232.  
Swanson, D. and W. Baumol. 2005. Reas
onable and Nondiscriminatory (FRAND) Roy-
alties, Standards Selection, and Control 
of Market Power. Antitrust Law Journal 
73(1):1-58. Tapia, C 2010. Industrial Property Rights, 
Technical Standards and Licensing Practices 
(FRAND) in the Telecommunications Indu
stry. Germany: Heymanns Verlag GmbH. 
Torrance, A. and L. Kahl. 2012. Synthetic Bi
ology Standards and Intellectual Property. 
Available: http://s
ites.nationalacademies.org/PGA/step/PGA_058712. U.S. Department of Justice. 2006. Business 
Review Letter to VMEbus International Trade 
Association. Available: http://www.jus
tice.gov/atr/public/busreview/219380.htm. 
U.S. Department of Justice. 2007. Business 
Review Letter to Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers. Available: http://
www.justice.gov/atr/public/busreview/222 
978.pdf. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.146                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
U.S. Federal Trade Commission. 2011. The E
volving IP Marketplace
: Aligning Patent Notice and Remedies with Competition. Available: http://www.ftc.gov/os/2011/ 
03/110307patentreport.pdf. 
U.S. Federal Trade Commissi
on Press. 2011. Press Release:
 FTC Order Restores Compe-
tition in U.S. Market for Equipment Used to Recharge Vehicle Air Conditioning 
Systems: Under Settlement, Bosch Agrees to Sell RTI Brand to Mahle Clevite, 
Inc. and to Make Certain Patents Availa
ble to Competitors. Available: http://www. 
ftc.gov/opa/2012/11/bosch.shtm. 
U.S. Department of Justice and Federal 
Trade Commission. 2007. Antitrust Enforcement 
and Intellectual Property Rights: Promo
ting Innovation and Competition. Availa-
ble: http://www.justice.gov/atr/
public/hearings/ip/222655.pdf.  
U.S. Department of Justice and United States
 Patent and Trademark Office. 2013. Policy 
Statement on Remedies for Standard-Esse
ntial Patents Subject to Voluntary 
F/RAND Commitments. Available: http://
www.uspto.gov/about/offices/ogc/Final_ 
DOJ-PTO_Policy_Statement_on
_FRAND_SEPs_1-8-13.pdf.  
USITO. 2007. Chinese ICT Standards Landscap
e. United States Information Technology 
Office, Beijing. Issue Paper No. 621. Available: http
://read.pudn.com/downloads 
141/doc/607628/chinese-ICT-standards.pdf. 
Ward, J. 2012. Revenue for Mobile Communic
ations Equipment to Climb in the Double 
Digits by Year End: Smartphones, Tablet
s, and 4G LTE Help Move Forward in Spite 
of Soft Global Economy. IHS iSuppli Mark
et Research. Available: http://www.isu 
ppli.com/Mobile-and-Wireless-Communications/MarketWatch/pages/Revenue-for- 
Mobile-Communications-Equipment-to-Climb-in-the-Double-Digits-by-Year-End.aspx. 
Wayland, J. 2012. Oversight of the Impact of Competition of Exclusion Orders to En-
force Standards-Essential Pate
nts. Department of Justi
ce, Washington, D.C. Avail-
able: http://www.justice.gov/atr/public/testimony/284982.pdf.  
Willingmyre, G. 2009. China™s Proposed Regulat
ions for Patent-Involving National Stand-
ards. Available: http://www.ip-watch.or
g/2009/12/21/take-two-china%E2%80%99s-
proposed-regulations-for-patent-involving-national-standards/. 
Willingmyre, G. 2010. China™s Latest Draft Prop
osal Rules for Patents in Standards a Step 
Forward? Available: http://www.ip-watch.org/2010/04/01/china%E2%80%99s-late 
st-draft-disposal-rules-for-pate
nts-in-standards-a-step-forward/. 
World Intellectual Property Organization. 
(as amended by the Law of July 31, 2009). 
Germany™s Patent Law Section 15 (3). Av
ailable: http://www.wi
po.int/wipolex/en/ 
text.jsp?file_id=238776. 
Yeh, B. 2012. Availability of Injunctive Reli
ef for Standard-Essential Patent Holders. 
Congressional Research Serv
ice, Washington, D.C. 
 JUDICIAL CASES 
 A.C. Aukerman Company v. R.
L. Chaides Construction Co
., 960 F.3d 1020, 1032 (Fed. 
Cir. 1992). 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc.
, 869 F. Supp. 2d 901 (N
.D. Ill. June 22, 2012). 
Apple Inc. v. Motorola, Inc.
, Nos. 2012-1548, 2012-1549 (Fed. Cir.).  
Association for Molecular Pathology et 
al. v. Myriad Genetics, Inc. et al. 
(Supreme Court no. 12-398, 2013). 
In re Dell Corporation
, Dell VESA case, No. C-3658. 121 F.T.C. 616 (May 20, 1996). 
eBay v. MercExchange, L.L.C.
, 547 U.S. 388 (2006). 
Fujitsu Ltd. v. Netgear Inc
., 2010 U.S. App. LEXIS 26722 (Fed. Cir., Nov. 1, 2010). 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.147
 References 
Georgia-Pacific Corp. v. Un
ited States Plywood Corp,
 318 F. Supp. 1116 (S.D.N.Y. 
1970). Huawei v. ZTE
, 2013, Regional Court of Düsseldorf, 
Federal Republic of Germany, Case 
No. 4b O 104/12. 
In re Proxim Corporation, et al.
, Debtors, In the United States Bankruptcy Court for the 
District of Delaware, Case No. 05-11639 (P
JW) (Jointly Administered) (Chapter 
11). Available: http://www.ftc.
gov/os/caselist/0511639/0511639.shtm. 
In the Matter of Google Inc.
, FTC File No. 121-0120. (Jan. 3, 2013). Separate Statement of 
Commissioner J. Thomas Rosch Regarding 
Google™s Standard-Essential Patents En-
forcement Practices. No. C-Available: h
ttp://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/1210120/1301 
03googlemotorolaroschstmt.pdf. 
Illinois Tool Works Inc., et al., Pe
titioners v. Independent Ink, Inc.,
 547 U.S. 126 (2006). 
IPCom v. Nokia and HTC
 (2012) EWCA Civ 56. 
Koninklijke Philips Electronics 
N.V. v. SK Kassetten GmbH & Co
. District Court The 
Hague, The Netherlands, 17 March 2010, Joint Cases No. 316533/HA ZA 08-2522 
and 316535/HA ZA 08-2524. 
KSR International. Co. v. Teleflex, Inc.
 550 U.S. 398 (2007). 
Motorola v. Microsoft
, Regional Court of Mannheim, 
Federal Republic of Germany, 
Case No. 2 O 240/11. (2012). 
Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc.
, No. C10-1823JLR, 2012 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 170587 
(W.D. Wash. Nov. 30, 2012). 
Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola, Inc.
, 871 F. Supp. 2d 1089 (W.D. Wash. 2012), 
aff™d
, 696 F.3d 872 (9th Cir. 2012). 
In the Matter of Motorola Mobility LLC
, FTC File No. 121-0120, No. C- (Jan. 3, 2013). 
http://www.ftc.gov/os/case
list/1210120/130103googlemotorolado.pdf. 
Motorola v. Apple,
 2012, Higher Regional Court of Ka
rlsruhe, Federal Republic of Ger-
many, Case No. 6 U 136/11. 
In re Negotiated Data Solutions LLC
, FTC File No. 051-0094. Avai
lable: http://www.ftc. 
gov/os/caselist/0510094/080122do.pdf. 
Pratt v. Wilcox Mfg. Co.
, 64 F. 589 (N.D. Ill. 1893). 
Qualcomm, Inc. v. Broadcomm, Inc., 
No. 2007-1545 (Fed. Cir. Dec. 1, 2008). 
Radio Systems Corp. v. Lalor,
 No 2012-123 (Fed. Cir. 2013). 
Rambus Inc. v. Infineon Tech. AG.
, 318 F. 3d. 1081, 1097 (Fed. Cir. 2003). 
Rembrandt Data Techs., LP v. AOL, LLC
 et al., Case No. 10-1002 (Fed. Cir. 2011). 
In the Matter of Robert Bosch GmbH
, No. C-4377 (Nov. 26, 2012). 
Samsung v. Apple, 
District Court of The Hague, 20 June 2012, case numbers/docket num-
bers 400367/HA ZA 11-2212, 400376/HA ZA 11-2213 and 400385/HA ZA 11-22 
15. Spindelfabrik Suessen-Schurr Stahlecker & Gr
ill v. Schubert & Salze
r Maschinenfabrik AG, 829 F.2d 1075 (Fed. Cir. 1987).
 SRI International Inc v. Inte
rnet Security Systems Inc., 
511 F.3d 1186 (Fed. Cir. 2008). 
TransCore LP v. Electronic Trans
action Consultants Corporation
, 563 F3d 1271(5th Cir 
2009). Wang Laboratories Inc. v. Mitsubishi Electronics America, Inc.
, 103 F.3d 1571 (Fed. Cir. 
1997). 
Case No COMP/M.6381 Google/Motorola M
obility, Regulation (EC) No 139/2004 Mer-
ger Procedure (2012) Available: http://ec.europa.eu/competition/mergers/cases/de 
cisions/m6381_20120213_20310_2277480_EN.pdf. Third Party United States Federal Trade Comm
ission™s Statement on the Public Interest. 
In 
the Matter of Certain Gaming and Entertainment Consoles, Related Software, and 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.148                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Components Thereof
, Recommended Determination on Remedy and Bonding (May 
18, 2012). Inv. No. 337-TA-752. Available: http://www.ftc.gov/os/2012/06/1206 
ftcgamingconsole.pdf
. Third Party United States Federal Trade Commission™s Statement on the Public Interest. 
In the Matter of Certain Wireless Communication Devices, Portable Music and 
Data Processing Devices, Co
mputers and Components Thereof
, Notice Regarding 
Initial Determination on Violation of Section 337. (April 24, 2012). Inv. No. 337-
TA-745. Available: http://www.ftc.gov/os/2012/06/
1206ftcwirelesscom.pdf. 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.149 
Appendix A   Acronyms  3GPP  Third Generation Partnership Project 
ABNT  Brazilian Association of Technical Norms 

ABS  Academy of Broadcasting Science (China) 
ADR  alternative dispute resolution 
AML  anti-monopoly law 

ANSI  American National Standards Institute 
AQSIQ General Administration of Quality Supervision,  
   Inspection, and Quarantine (China) 
AVS  Audio Video Coding Working Group of China 
BIS  Bureau of Indian Standards  
CADE  Competition Administrative Court (Brazil) 

CAS  China Associati
on for Standardization 
CATR  China Academy of Te
lecommunications Research  
CCSA  China Communications Standards Association 

CESA  China Electronics Standards Association 
CESI  China Electronic Standardization Institute  
CIPO  Chinese State Inte
llectual Property Office 
CJEU  Court of Justice of the European Union 
CNIS  China National Institute of Standardization 

CONMETRO National Council of Metrology, Standardization,  
   and Industrial Quality (Brazil) 
COSTIND Commission of Science, Technology and Industry for  
   National Defense (China) 
DOJ  Department of Justice 
DOSTI Development Organization of Standards for 
   Telecommunications in India  
EPO  European Patent Office 
ETSI  European Telecommunications Standards Institute  

FRAND  fair, reasonable and non-discriminatory  
FTC  Federal Trade Commission 
GISFI  Global ICT Standardization Forum for India 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.150                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
HDMI  High Definition Multimedia Interface  
IEC  International Electrotechnical Commission 

IEEE  Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers 
IEEE-SA Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers  
   Standards Association  
IETF  Internet Engineering Task Force 
ICT  information and communications technology 
INMETRO National Institute of Metrology, Standardization, Quality  
   and Technology (Brazil) 
INPI  Brazil Patent and Trademar
k Office, National Industrial  
     Property Institute (Brazil) 
ISO  International Organization for Standardization 
ITC  International Trade Commission 

ITU  International Telecommunications Union 
ITU-T  International Telecommunicat
ions Standardizations Sector 
ISO  International Organization for Standardization  

IPR  intellectual property rights 
LITD Electronics and Information Technology Division  
   Council (India) 
MIIT  Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (China) 
MII  Ministry of Information Industry (China) 
MOST  Ministry of Science and Technology (China) 

MOU  memorandum of understanding 
NCAC  National Copyright Administration of China 
NDRC  National Development and Reform Commission (China) 

NFC  Nearfield Communications Forum 
NIST  National Institute of Standards and Technology 
NPL  non-patent literature  

OASIS Organization for the Advancement of Structured  
   Information Standards  
RAND  reasonable and non-discriminatory  
RF  royalty free 
SAC  Standards Administration of China  

SAIC  State Administration fo
r Industry and Commerce (China) 
SANBFT State Administration fo
r Broadcasting, Film, and  
   Television (China) 
SARFT  State Administration for Radio, Film, and Television (China) 
SASTIND State Administration fo
r Science, Technology and  
   Industry (China) 
SCITO  State Council Inform
atization Office (China)  
SDO  standards development organization 
SEP  standard-essential patent  

SGIP  smart grid interoperability panel  
SIG  special interest group 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.151
 Appendix A 
SINMETRO National System of Metrology, Standardization, and  
   Industrial Quality (Brazil) 
SIPO  State Intellectual Property Office (China) 
SSO  standard-setting organization 
STIC  Scientific and Technical
 Information Center (U.S.) 
TBT  Technical Barriers to Trade 
TEC  Telecommunications Engineering Center (India)  
TRIPs  Trade-Related Inte
llectual Property Rights 
TSDSI  Telecommunications Standards Development Society (India) 
USITO  United States Information Technology Office 
USPTO  United States Patent and Trademark Office  
VITA  VMEBus International Trade Association 
WIPO  World Intellectual Property Organization 

WTO  World Trade Organization 
W3C  World Wide Web Consortium 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.153 
Appendix B   Symposium Agenda  Symposium on  
Management of Intellectual Propert
y in Standard-Setting Processes 
 October 3-4, 2012 
NAS Building, Lecture Room 
2101 Constitution Ave., NW, Washington, DC 
  Wednesday, October 3 

Part One: Institutional and National Diversity  
 8:30
 Welcome and Introduction:
 Keith Maskus, University of Colorado
  8:45
 Keynote:
 Stuart Graham, U.S. Pate
nt and Trademark Office  
 9:15
 Session 1: Policies, Practices
, and Experience of Leading  
Standards Organizations  
Chair
: Tim Simcoe, Boston University 
Presentation:
 Rudi Bekkers, Eindhoven University of Technology, 
Netherlands and Andy Updegrove, Gesmer Updegrove, LLP 

Discussants: 
Fiona Scott-Morton, U.S. Department of Justice 
Dirk Weiler, European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 

John Kelly, JEDEC Solid State Technology Association 
 10:45
 Break  11:00
 Session 2: Standards Processes and IP Treatment in  
Emerging Economies Chair
: Richard Suttmeier, University of Oregon, ret. 
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.154                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Presentations: 
China Œ Danny Breznitz, Georgia Institute of Technology 

India Œ Thammaiah Ramakrishna, National Law University,  
   Bangalore, India 
Brazil Œ Denis Barbosa, Catholic Univ
ersity of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 
Discussants: 
Julia Doherty, Office of the 
U.S. Trade Representative  
Mark Cohen, Fordham University Law School 

Kent Baker, Consultant  
 12:30
 Lunch  1:30
 Session 3: E-government Procureme
nt Policies in the US, EU,  
and Japan 
Chair
: Amy Marasco, Microsoft 
Presentation:
 Laura DeNardis, American University 
Discussants  
Naomi Voegtli, SAP 
Mary Saunders, National Institute of Standards and Technology 
 3:00
 Break  
Part Two: II. Structural and Poli
cy Issues in IP Management in  
the Standards Context 
 3:15
 Session 4: SDO-Patent Office Cooperation and  
Information Sharing Chair:
 Rudi Bekkers, Eindhoven University of  
   Technology, Netherlands 
Panelists:
 Michel Goudelis, European Patent Office 
Dirk Weiler, European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
George Willingmyre, GTW Associates 
 4:45 Session 5: Standards-Essentia
l Patents and USITC Litigation 
 Chair
: David Goodman, Polytechnic Institute of New York University 
Presentations:  
Colleen Chien, University of Santa Clara Law School 
Richard Gilbert, University 
of California at Berkeley 
Discussant
: Suzanne Munck, Federal Trade Commission 
 6:00 Adjourn  
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.155 
Appendix B 
Thursday, October 4, 2012 
 8:30 Introduction: Keith Maskus, University of Colorado 
Keynote: Howard Shelanski, Federal Trade Commission 
 9:00
 Session 6:
 Standards Development in Emerging Technologies
 Chair
: Richard Gilbert, 
University of California at Berkeley 
Presentations: 
Bioinformatics Œ Jorge Contreras, American University Law School 
Nanotechnology Œ Ajit Jillavenkatesa, National Institute of Standards  

   and Technology 
Synthetic biology Œ Andrew Torrance, University of Kansas 
Green building materials Œ Jorge C
ontreras, American University  
   Law School 
Discussant:  

Arti Rai, Duke University Law School 
 10:30
 Break 
 10:45
 Session 7: Transfer of Patents and Obligations
 Chair
: Sandy Block, IBM 
Presentation:
 Jay Kesan, University of Illinois Law School 
Discussants: 

Gil Ohana, Cisco 
Scott Peterson, Google 
Claudia Tapia, Research in Motion 
 12:15
 Open Forum
* Chair
: Ollie Smoot, Past President, International Organization  
for Standardization  
Comments
: Monica Barone, American Intellectua
l Property Law Association (AIPLA) 
Dan Bart, Valley View Corporation 
Carter Eltzroth, Helikon.net 

Keith Mallinson, WiseHarbor 
Tim Molino, Business Software Alliance (BSA) 
Ian McClure, Intellectual Property Exchange International (IPXI) 

Brian Pomper, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP 
*This session is intended to give
 stakeholders an opportunity  
to comment further on issues on the agenda or raise new issues  
regarding IP in standards for the committee™s consideration.   
 1:15
 Closing Remarks: 
Keith Maskus 
 1:30 Adjourn
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.157 
Appendix C   Biographies of Committee and Staff  Keith E. Maskus
, Chair,
 is Professor of Economics 
at the University of Colo-
rado, Boulder. He has been a Lead Ec
onomist in the Development Research 
Group at the World Bank. Dr. Maskus is 
also a Research Fellow at the Peterson 
Institute for International Economics, a 
Fellow at the Kiel Institute for World 
Economics, and an Adjunct Professor at th
e University of Adelaide. He has been 
a visiting professor at the University of Bocconi, and a visiting scholar at the 

Center for Economic Studies-Ifo Institute
 at the University of Munich and the 
China Center for Economic Research at Pe
king University. He also serves as a 
consultant for the World Bank, the World Health Organization, and the World 

Intellectual Property Organization. Dr. Ma
skus received his Ph.D. in Economics 
from the University of Michigan in 1981 and has written extensively about vari-
ous aspects of international trade. His 
current research focu
ses on the interna-
tional economic aspects of protecting intellectual property rights. He is the au-
thor of 
Intellectual Property Rights in the Global Economy
, published by the 
Institute for International Economics, and co-editor of 
International Public 
Goods and the Transfer of Technology under a Globalized Intellectual Property 
Regime, published by Cambridge University Press. He recently wrote a piece 
analyzing the need for reforms in U.S. patent policy, published by the Council 
on Foreign Relations.  
 Rudi Bekkers
 is a tenured faculty member at the Eindhoven University of 
Technology, Netherlands and specializes 
in the relationship between standardi-
zation and intellectual property rights. Over the last 15 years, he has published a 

number of papers on this topic in established journals. In addition, he performed 
more than a dozen commissioned studies 
and projects on standards for the Euro-
pean Commission, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develop-

ment (OECD), various national ministries, standards bodies such as the Europe-
an Standards Telecommunications Institute (ETSI), and for companies and other 
stakeholders. His recent projects includ
e a fact-finding study on intellectual 
property rights in standards, commissioned by the European Commission. Exe-
cuted in 2010-2011, this study included a quantitative study of disclosed intel-
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.158                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
lectual property rights for standards, and considered how design aspects of IPR 
policies affect an efficient and well pe
rforming market. Currently, Dr. Bekkers 
is collaborating with committee member Ti
mothy Simcoe, University of Boston, 
to create a comprehensive, a public data
base of IPR disclosures at standards 
bodies, a project that was first announced at the a National Bureau of Economic 

Research (NBER) preconference on Standards, Patents and Innovation in May 
2011.  
 
Marc Sandy Block
 is IP Counsel at IBM working in standards, bankruptcy, and 
IP policy. For a period, Sandy managed the corporation's Latin American patent 
portfolio and also managed several intellectual property law departments. For 
several years, Mr. Block was President of
 the International Intellectual Property 
Society (iipsny.org) and was a board memb
er for over ten years. He was a con-
tributor to the American Bar Association Manual on Standards and Develop-
ment and has been a member of th
e ANSI IPR Policy Committee, AIPLA 
Standards and Open Source Committee, a
nd IPO Standards Committee. He is 
also a guest lecturer at Cardozo Law 
School and has spoken and published arti-
cles in the fields of IP, standards, and 
bankruptcy. He recently participated as a 
panelist at the FTC Workshop on Patent Issues in Standards. Prior to IBM, he 

was a patent attorney at Hall, Myers an
d Rose in Potomac, Maryland, and Wash-
ington, DC. Also prior to IBM, a programmable implantable medication infu-
sion system patent that he prepared was named a 1984 Intellectual Property 

Owners (IPO) Invention of the Year. In a previous incarnation, he was an officer 
in a Special Forces Signal Company (
11th SF Group USAR) in Ft. Meade, Mar-
yland. Mr. Block earned a B.S. in Electrical Engineering from Lehigh Universi-

ty and a J.D. from the George Washington University Law School.  
 Jorge L. Contreras 
is an Associate Professor of 
Law at American University™s 
Washington College of Law where he teac
hes intellectual property and property 
law. Previously, he served as a Senior Lecturer and Acting Director of the Intel-
lectual Property Program at Washington Un
iversity in St. Louis, School of Law. 
His research focuses on the effects of 
intellectual property structures and gov-
ernmental regulation on the dissemination of scientific and technological inno-

vation. Professor Contreras also serves as
 co-chair of the American Bar Associa-
tion's Section of Science and Technology Law Committee on Technical 
Standardization and co-chair of the National Conference of Lawyers and Scien-

tists. Professor Contreras is the editor of
 the American Bar Association's Tech-
nical Standards Patent Policy Manual (ABA Publishing: Chicago, 2007) and has 
published numerous articles and book chap
ters relating to legal issues surround-
ing intellectual property, scientific research, and standards development. He has 
served as the principal legal counsel to the Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF), the leading developer of Internet
 architecture, tran
sport and security 
standards, since 1998 and is a Fellow of the American Bar Foundation. Prior to 
entering academia Professor Contreras 
was a partner at the international law 
firm Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP. Professor Contreras holds 
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.159 
Appendix C 
Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Sc
ience in Electrical Engineering degrees 
from Rice University and a Juris Doct
or degree from Harvard Law School. 
 Richard Gilbert
 is Emeritus Professor of Economics and Professor of the 
Graduate School at the University of Ca
lifornia at Berkeley. He was Chair of the 
Department of Economics at Berkeley from 2002 to 2005 and is currently Chair 
of the Berkeley Competition Policy Center. From 1993 to 1995, he was Deputy 
Assistant Attorney General in the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of 

Justice where he led the effort that developed joint Department of Justice and 
Federal Trade Commission Antitrust Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual 
Property. Before serving in the Department
 of Justice, Dr. Gilbert was the Direc-
tor of the University of California Energy Institute and Associate Editor of the 
Journal of Industrial Economics, the Journal of Economic Theory, and the Re-

view of Industrial Organization. He is 
a former President of
 the Industrial Or-
ganization Society. His research specialties are in the areas of competition poli-
cy, intellectual property, and research an
d development. He has lectured widely 
and testified in proceedings before state and federal courts, regulatory commis-
sions, the California Legislature, and the U.S. Congress. Dr. Gilbert holds a 
Ph.D. in Engineering-Economic Systems 
from Stanford University and Bachelor 
of Science and Master of Science degrees
 in Electrical Engineering from Cornell 
University. 
 David Goodman
 is a member of the National Academy of Engineering and a 
foreign member of the Royal Academy of Engineering, a Fellow of the Institute 
of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, and a Fellow of the Institution of Engi-

neering and Technology. He retired from 
his position as Professor of Electrical 
and Computer Engineering and Director of the Wireless Internet Center for Ad-
vanced Technology (WICAT) at Polytechnic Institute of New York University 

in June 2008. David™s research has made fundamental contributions to digital 
signal processing, speech coding, and wi
reless information networks. He re-
ceived the ACM/SIGMOBILE Award for "Outstanding Contributions to Re-
search on Mobility of Systems Users, Data, and Computing" in 1997 and the 
Avant Garde award from the Vehicular 
Technology Society of the IEEE in 
2003. In 1997, David served as Chairm
an of the National Research Council 
Committee studying The Evolution of Untethered Communications. He has also 
worked as Program Director in the Co
mputer and Network Systems Division of 
the National Science Foundation (2006-2007), Head of the Electrical and Com-
puter Engineering Department at Poly
technic Institute (1999-2001), and Re-
search Associate at the Program on In
formation Resources Policy at Harvard 
University (1995). He is author and co-editor of several other books on wireless 
communications. David received a Bachelor
's degree at Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute (1960), a Master's at New York 
University (1962), and a Ph.D. at Impe-
rial College, University of London (
1967), all in Electrical Engineering.  
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.160                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Amy Marasco
 is the General Manager for Standards Strategy and Policy at Mi-
crosoft. She leads a team 
that addresses strategic po
licy and engagement issues 
on a corporate-wide, global basis. Ms. Marasco regularly engages in policy dis-
cussions involving standards, intellectual property rights and competition law 
issues at numerous standards bodies and in many other forums. She is a rappor-

teur at the ITU-T IPR Ad Hoc Group, 
a co-Chairman of the Standards Policy 
Committee at the Intellectual Property Own
ers Association, and Chairman of 
Standards and Intellectual Property Rights Policy Committee at the Telecom-

munications Industry Association. She has testified or given presentations on 
standards-related policy issues upon request by the U.S Federal Trade Commis-
sion and U.S. Department of Justice (Antitrust Division), the European Com-
mission, the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI), China 
Electronic Standards Institute (CESI) and the China National Institute of Stand-

ardization (CNIS) in the People™s Repub
lic of China. Ms. Marasco joined Mi-
crosoft after serving as the Vice Presiden
t and General Counsel of the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) from 
1994-2004. Prior to joining ANSI, she 
was an attorney with the law firm of Cadwalader, Wickersham & Taft in its 
New York office. 
 
Timothy Simcoe
 is Assistant Professor of Strategy and Innovation at Boston 
University School of Management. He is
 also a Faculty Research Fellow at the 
National Bureau of Economic Research 
and an Associate Editor of Management 
Science. Dr. Simcoe™s research specia
lities are the economics of innovation, 
science and technology policy, intellectua
l property and corporate strategy. He 
has published numerous articles and book chapters on intellectual property and 

standards development. Dr. Simcoe recei
ved an A.B. in Applied Math from 
Harvard University, an M.A. in Economics from the University of California at 
Berkeley, and a Ph.D. in Business Admini
stration from the University of Cali-
fornia at Berkeley. 
 Oliver R. Smoot
 is a consultant on standards and intellectual property issues. 
He served as Chairman of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 
Board of Directors in 2001 and 2002, and past Chairman from 2003-2005. Be-

fore being elected as Chairman of the 
ANSI Board, Mr. Smoot served in numer-
ous ANSI leadership posts, including 
Chair of ANSI™s Finance Committee, Or-
ganizational Member Council, and Patent Group. In 2003-2004, Mr. Smoot was 

elected for a two-year term as Presiden
t of the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), a worldwide federation of national standards bodies with 
representatives from over 150 countries. From 2000-2005, Mr. Smoot served as 

Vice-President for External Voluntary Standards Relations of the Information 
Technology Industry Council (ITI). Prior to that appointment Mr. Smoot was 
ITI™s executive vice-president for 23 years.
 An active member 
of the American 
Bar Association for many years, Mr. Smoot
 served as chairman of the Section  
 Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.161 
Appendix C 
on Science and Technology Law and most 
recently as chairman of its Technical 
Standardization Law Committee. He has also served in numerous positions with 

the Computer Law Association (now th
e International Technology Law Asso-
ciation), culminating as Pr
esident. Mr. Smoot currently
 serves on the Executive 
Committee of the U.S. Policy Committee of
 the Association for Computing Ma-
chinery. He received a B.S. from MIT an
d a J.D. from Georgetown University. 
 Richard P. Suttmeier
 is a Professor of Political 
Science, Emeritus, at the Uni-
versity of Oregon. He has written widely on science and technology develop-
ment issues in China. His most recent p
ublications include: "China™s IP Transi-
tion: Rethinking Intellectual Property Rights in a Rising China" (with Yao 
Xiangkui) (National Bureau of Asian Research. July, 2011) and "Standards, 
Stakeholders, and Innovation: China™s Evolving Role in the Global Knowledge 

Economy" (with Scott Kennedy and Jun Su) (National Bureau of Asian Re-
search. September, 2008). Dr. Suttmeier ha
s served as Senior Analyst, Congres-
sional Office of Technology Assessment, 
and Director of the Beijing Office, 
National Academy of Sciences/Committee on Scholarly Communication with 
the People's Republic of China, and as
 a consultant to the World Bank, the 
UNDP, and the U.S. government. He recently completed several months service 

as Senior Visiting Scholar at the Institute of Policy and Management of the Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences.  
 Andrew Updegrove
 is a founding partner of Gesmer Updegrove LLP, a Bos-
ton-based technology law firm. He has a broad range of experience in represent-
ing both mature and emerging high technology companies of all types in all as-

pects of their legal affairs. Since 1988, he has also represented and helped 
structure more than 110 worldwide standard-setting, open source, research and 
development, promotional and advocacy co
nsortia, including some of the largest 
standard setting organizations in the world. In 2005 he was elected to the Boards 
of Directors of the American National 
Standards Institute (ANSI) and to the 
Free Standards Group (FSG). In 2007 he 
was elected to the 
Board of Directors 
of the Linux Foundation. He is a current member of the Board of Advisors of 
Open Source for America, and a Charte
r Fellow of the Op
enForum Academy. 
Mr. Updegrove has also provided testimony to the Department of Justice and 
Federal Trade Commission on standard-setting and intellectual property rights, 
and written and filed pro bono ﬁfriend of 
the courtﬂ briefs in major standards-
related litigation before the Federal Circuit Court, the Supreme Court, and the 
Federal Trade Commission. In 2002, he conceived and launched ConsortiumIn-
fo.org, an extensive website intended to provide the most comprehensive and 

detailed source of news and information on standard-setting, open source soft-
ware project development, and forming and maintaining consortia. Mr. Up-
degrove is a graduate of Yale University and the Cornell University Law 

School.  
  Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy: Lessons from Information and Communications TechnologyCopyright National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.162                  
Patent Challenges for Standard-Setting in the Global Economy 
Staff  Stephen A. Merrill, 
project director, has been Executive Director of the Na-
tional Academies™ Board on Science, T
echnology, and Economic Policy (STEP) 
since its formation in 1992. With the sponsorship of numerous federal govern-

ment agencies, foundations, multinational corporations, and international institu-
tions, the STEP program has become an important discussion forum and authori-
tative voice on innovation, competitiveness, intellectual property, human 

resources, statistical, and research and development policies. At the same time 
Dr. Merrill has directed many STEP projects and publications, including 
A Pa-tent System for the 21
st Century
 (2004), 
Innovation Inducement Prizes
 (2007), 
and Innovation in Global Industries
 (2008). For his work on patent reform he 
was named one of the 50 most influential people worldwide in the intellectual 

property field by 
Managing Intellectual Property 
magazine and earned the 
Academies™ 2005 Distinguished Service 
Award. He has been a member of the 
World Economic Forum Global Council on the Intellectual Property System. 

Previously, Dr. Merrill was a Fellow in International Business at the Center for 
Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), where he specialized in technology 
trade issues. He served on various congressional staffs including the U.S. Senate 

Commerce, Science, and 
Transportation Committee, where he organized the 
first congressional hearings on international competition in the semiconductor 
and biotechnology industries. Dr. Merrill holds degrees in political science from 

Columbia (B.A.), Oxford (MPhil), and Ya
le (M.A. and Ph.D.) Universities. He 
attended the Kennedy School of Government™s Senior Executives Program and 
was an adjunct professor of international affairs at Georgetown University from 

1989 to 1996.  
 Aqila Coulthurst 
has been Program Coordinator for STEP since the fall of 
2011. Prior to joining STEP, she spent over two years in the production and 
marketing divisions of the National Academies Press (NAP). Ms. Coulthurst 
was involved in several initiatives at NAP including: direct marketing and 
online outreach; facilitating the sale of intellectual property rights to publishers 
abroad, and general operational support. Over the years, Ms. Coulthurst has 
worked in various capacities at Smithsonian Enterprises, the National Communi-
ty Action Foundation, Kingsley Associates and the Center for Science, Technol-
ogy and Economic Development at SRI International. She has extensive experi-
ence conducting impact assessments and program evaluations. 
In addition to her interest in U.S. competitiveness and innovation policies, Ms. 
Coulthurst is interested in how these policies impact development abroad. She 
spent several years studying U.S. foreign policy and sustainable development at 
renowned institutions in Washington and while studying abroad in Central 
America. She has a B.A. in economics a
nd in Spanish, and a certificate in mar-
kets and management from Duke University. She also has a Master of Science in 
Foreign Service from Georgetown University. 
